MEMOIRS OF MARIE ANTOINETTE, CIDEVANT QUEEN OF FRANCE.

L'AMOUR TRIOMPHANT SUR LA RAISON
A whole host, a war of foes may sooner be subdued than love

Page 1st



MEMOIRS OF MARIE ANTOINETTE, CIDEVANT QUEEN OF FRANCE.

Il n'y a rien qui pousse tant a la virtue, que l'horreur et l'abhorrement du
vice.

BRANTOME. PARIS, PRINTED: UNITED STATES, translated, reprinted and published
according to Act of Congress. 1794.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. EARLY display of Antoinette's warmth of temperament -- the
publicity of the facts contained in these memoirs accounted for -- Cardinal de
Rohan enamoured with Antoinette -- his want of success at this time owing to a
previous engagement on her part Page. 9 CHAPTER II. Antoinette arrives in
France in 1768, in the seventeenth year of her age -- her beauty and personal
accomplishments incomparable -- Countess d'Artois becomes jealous of Antoinette
-- D'Artois considered by Antoinette the most proper person to supply the
impotence of Louis -- their mutual attachment much talked of -- Theresa, the
mother of Antoinette, writes to Rohan on this subject -- his reply Page. 13
CHAPTER III. Count Dillon attracts the attention of Antoinette -- indiscretion
of these two lovers alarms the king -- painful separation of Dillon and
Antoinette -- death of Louis XV. and succession of Louis XVI. Page. 24 CHAPTER
IV. Ceremony of consecration of Louis XVI. at Rheims, in 1775 -- licentiousness
of the queen on this occasion -- the island of love the favorite scene of her
nocturnal gambols -- her ingenious invention for the gratification of her taste
for variety -- lewd theatrical exhibitions patronized by Antoinette -- the
queen and d'Artois, returning from Trianon at a late hour, are refused
admittance by the sentinel Page. 28 CHAPTER V. Nocturnal promenades in
masquerade -- Antoinette's intrigue with a clerk of the secretary at war --
their connection suspected by d'Artois, who procures the assassination of the
clerk Page. 38 CHAPTER VI. The amors of the queen veiled with the most artful
secrecy, under the direction of la Bertin and Guimard -- great friendship
between the queen and madame la Polignac, but the frequent visits of the former
to Paris imputed to other motives Page. 43 CHAPTER VII. Characters of the
queen's privy counselors Page. 50 CHAPTER VIII. Second pregnancy of the queen
-- her artful address to M. Maurepas on this occasion, respecting the king's
impotence -- Maurepas persuades the monarch that he had a second time become a
parent Page. 54 CHAPTER IX. The queen causes large sums to be privately
transmitted to the emperor Page. 64 CHAPTER X All the queen's favorites forsake
her but d'Artois -- races at Vincennes patronized by the queen -- her excesses
at Trianon -- D'Artois accuses her of infidelity -- she confesses her fondness
for the handsome Fersenne Page. 67 CHAPTER XI. Correspondence of the queen and
Fersenne under fictitious names -- in consequence of which a meeting of the
parties ensues -- Countess de la Motte introduced to the queen -- Cardinal de
Rohan renews his suit -- the affair of the collar occasions the disgrace of la
Motte -- Vergennes poisoned by the queen -- political intrigues of the queen
and the emperor Page. 74 CHAPTER XII. The complaints of many wealthy citizens,
of whom the queen and d'Artois had borrowed money, are silenced by lettres de
cachet -- horrible conspiracy, of which Antoinette is named chief -- Necker, at
this time prime minister, is dismissed, through the intrigues of the queen --
the plot discovered, and d'Artois and many of the conspirators betake
themselves to flight Page. 94 CHAPTER XIII. Adventure of the queen and la
Fayette Page. 117 CHAPTER XIV. Reflections on the life of Antoinette, and the
evils resulting from the marriage of a king with a foreign princess Page. 119
TRANSLATOR's PREFACE.
BIOGRAPHY usually presents to view something to copy, and something to shun.
In the lives of eminent persons we sometimes find great virtues allied to great
vices; but the latter generally outweigh the former. The most exemplary
demonstrate the error of believing infallibility an attribute of human
greatness. None have been uniformly good, and, for the honor of human nature,
we wish it could be said, none have been uniformly bad. The History of MARIA
ANTOINETTE can be little else than an enumeration of licentious excesses and
unprecedented crimes. Such was the depraved morals of this extraordinary woman,
that her warmest panegyrists have scarce pointed out in her character, a single
virtue to snatch her memory from unmingled detestation. From the pencil,
therefore, of the impartial biographer, the reader must not expect to find
depicted in this work, the congregated virtues, smiling like descending
cherubs; but a groupe of monstrous intrigues and gigantic vices, which must
excite astonishment and horror.

Those who are of opinion that exalted rank should be a sacred protection from
the profane language of truth, may affect to revolt from what they will style
the indecency of this publication. But the man of independent spirit, the
philosopher, and the true republican, sees through the medium of reason, with
eyes undazzled by the glare of royalty, and rejoices when vice, though allied
to greatness, is detected and exposed.

It may also be alleged that when the guilty have expiated their crimes by
death, it is cruel and unjust to punish their memories with infamy. This
sentiment, however amiable it may appear, is not strictly just. It is the
province of Biography to show mankind what others have been, that they may
learn what themselves ought to be. It paints the beauty of chastity, and the
deformity of lubricity. It holds up virtue to allure, and vice to deter; the
good to be imitated, and the bad to be detested. The buoy which warns the
mariner to avoid the rock of danger, is not less useful than the beacon which
conducts him to the channel of safety.

The celebrated heroine of the following pages has lately expired on a
scaffold, the victim of an injured nation's just resentment. That amiable
propensity of the human breast, which, on such occasions, inclines mankind to
feel before they reason, has been attacked, in the critical moment, by every
enemy of the French republic and the RIGHTS OF MAN, with a design to throw an
odium on the French nation and the cause of liberty. The judges of Marie
Antoinette have been calumniated, as murderers and regicides; and she has been
pathetically represented as innocence suffering martyrdom by the sword of
audacious injustice and unrelenting cruelty. The atrocity of her crimes has
been caused insensibly to disappear from the eye which contemplated the
severity of her punishment; and the voice of reason has been drowned in the
sobbing of pity. It will, however, appear, from a perusal of this work, that
the death of Marie Antoinette was not inflicted by the sanguinary hand of
wanton barbarity, but by the sentence of justice, temperate, lenient justice,
which long protracted the exaction of a forfeited life.

To make the knowledge of this fact accessible to all; to wipe away the dust
which has been thrown in the public eye; and to render ineffectual some of the
vile artifices which are insiduously practiced among us; in order to alienate
our affections from regenerated France, a nation equally virtuous and brave;
for these purposes this publication makes its appearance. We are aware of the
malicious strictures it will be compelled to undergo, and we can also divine
from what quarter they will originate. But we have declared the motives by
which we are influenced; and shall rest satisfied in the conscious rectitude of
our intentions.

March, 1794.
MEMOIRS OF THE QUEEN OF FRANCE.
CHAPTER I.
THAT warmth of temperament, which afterward led Marie to an almost unequalled
extreme of libidinous excesses, began very early to display itself. At an age
when most children are strangers to sexual sensations, and all are ignorant of
their cause and tendency, Antoinette had become acquainted with the mysteries
of love. Before ten years had revolved over her head, she was often surprised
in giving practical lessons to her sisters, and in many other acts of juvenile
wantonness.

We cannot pretend to say with certainty on whom she deigned to bestow the
enjoyment of her virgin charms. Her first amors were probably conducted with a
circumspection which may have eluded discovery. It is, however, well known,
that, at the age of fourteen, beauty was not thought the only circumstance in
which she bore a resemblance to the goddess of love. Variety, even then, was
talked of in the German court, as pleasing to Antoinette, and it was generally
supposed not to have been wanting to her enjoyments.

What was suspected in Germany, was, afterward, when she resided in France,
fully established as a fact. Successively angered by what they considered an
unmerited dismission, or proud of having been encircled in the arms of royalty,
the favorites of Antoinette, from time to time, gratified their resentment or
their vanity, by discovering their connection with her.

The cardinal de Rohan was at this time ambassador at the court of Vienna. He
became enamoured with the charms of Antoinette. Unprincipled in his morals,
herculean and handsome in his person, he dared to love, and he dared to hope.
He improved the first opportunity of declaring his passion, and met with a
reception, of which he had no great reason to complain. He was gently chidden
for his presumption, and forbidden in the most unforbidding manner to persist;
while the artful glances of her eyes contradicted every word that fell from her
lips. This interview, as might be expected, added new heat to the ardent wishes
of this illustrious hypocrite. A flame was now kindled in his bosom, which
burnt till it produced his destruction. He now used every artifice of which he
was master, to bring his design on her to a consummation. But all his exertions
proved ineffectual; and he returned to France in disappointment, and almost in
despair.

His want of success, at this time, was chiefly owing to a previous engagement
on the part of Antoinette. A young German officer, with whom she accidentally
became acquainted, being possessed of a person with which (...) was delighted,
read his good fortune in her eyes, and instantly made some tender advances,
which were received in the kindest manner. From this moment, a voluptuous
intercourse commenced between this happy couple, that existed for a length of
time, far exceeding the duration of her subsequent amors. It was, however, at
last broken off by her departure for France; but she seemed, through life, to
entertain an increasing fondness for the delightful tactics, in which she had
been instructed by this military Adonis.

It was soon after the connection between Antoinette and this officer was
formed, that the cardinal made his declaration to her. We need not be surprised
at the mildness of the answer he received: it was such as might be expected
from such a woman. She was seldom displeased by solicitations of this kind,
and, possessed of too much humanity to exercise the cruelty of repulsion, even
when she did not grant, she hardly denied.

CHAPTER II.
IT is unnecessary here to detail the circumstances which led to an union of
the houses of Austria and Bourbon, by the marriage of Marie Antoinette with the
dauphin, since Louis XVI. king of France. This pretended reconciliation was
insincere on the Austrian side. When Antoinette was about to depart from Vienna
for France, she entered into a league with her brother, Joseph II. emperor of
Germany, against the liberty, property, and even the existence of the people of
France, solemnly swearing to accomplish, if possible, the destruction of that
nation, which she still viewed with the antipathy of a natural enemy. And to
this horrid engagement she proved faithful, as the sequel of these memoirs will
evince.

On her leaving Vienna, her mother, the great Maria Theresa, is said to have
been transported with joy at the idea of the evils impending over France, in
being subjected to a queen like Antoinette. Anticipating that ruin, which she
doubted neither the inclination nor the ability of her daughter to effect, she
exclaimed, Now am I revenged on France!

Marie Antoinette arrived in France in the year 1768. She was then in her
seventeenth year. Her beauty, at all times incomparable, was now at its acme.
By the plenitude of her health, and the vivacity of her desires, her cheeks
were flushed into a bloom, that, to the whiteness of a neck and bosom, which
seemed animated alabaster, formed a contrast the most captivating. With her
eyes she could do what she pleased; yet when left to themselves they beamed
nothing but innocent frankness, angelic benevolence, and mild dignity. Her
person, proportioned with the most striking symmetry, was tall and majestic.
She might, in short, have been taken as a perfect model, for another Venus de
Medicis. No one beheld her without admiration; and no one will read her history
without detestation. Possessed of such charms, had she not wandered into every
shameful excess, and committed every crime that could alienate affection, she
had been adored by the people of France, who had long distinguished themselves
by a blind attachment to their sovereigns.

Born for pleasures, and availing herself of that licentiousness of manners
which reigned at court, Marie Antoinette, on her arrival, sacrificed nothing to
etiquette. She entered alone, and whenever she judged proper, into the
apartment of Louis XV. And under the pretext of showing herself to a people,
whom, she said, she loved, and whose affections she wished to obtain, she
walked out ten times a day, without escort. Her first lady of honor, Madame de
Noailles, presumed to represent to her the impropriety of such conduct. Her
advice was, however, turned to ridicule, and procured her the nickname of
Madame Etiquette.

Even the dauphin grew uneasy at that licentious gaity, and contempt of
decorum, which were now daily exhibited in the conduct of Antoinette. Happy had
it been for France, if her conduct had excited in his breast that aversion
which she merited. But possessed of every artifice of her sex, as well as all
its charms, she knew how to captivate the most insensible; and she duped the
heart of Louis into the most extravagant fondness, and inspired his bosom with
the most implicit confidence.

Meanwhile, Madame, the cidevant countess of Provence, conceived the most
inveterate hatred against Antoinette. She beheld her beauty with all the pangs
and all the malevolence of envy; and equally hurt by the superiority of her
charms and her power, she secretly determined on revenge.

The countess d'Artois became also dissatisfied with Antoinette. The attentions
which the husband of the former lavished on the latter, were beheld with
jealous apprehension. The countess had indeed never been perfectly pleased with
his behavior. From their earliest connection, she had found herself under the
humiliating necessity of sharing his favors with the vilest of her sex.

Antoinette and these two women, whose dispositions bore a near resemblance to
her own, were ever meditating mischiefs. Their husbands were all equally
pusillanimous. Monsieur, the vainest and most pedantic man in the kingdom,
devoted all his moments to his favorite studies of literature. Destitute of
sensibility, and a stranger to every social passion, he seemed as incapable of
feeling as the moldy volumes, to pore over which was his only delight and
employment. Philanthropic speculations, and the philosophy of humanity, had
never gained admittance to his thoughts. The count d'Artois was continually
plunged in the most shameful debaucheries, and ran with unslackening pace the
round of excesses, in daily dissipation and nocturnal riot. The temper of the
dauphin was mild and phlegmatic; and his heart was fortunately incapable of
acute sensation. His genius early discovered itself to be a mechanical one; and
he always appeared to be happier in a forge than in a palace. While employed in
the former, a lively fancy might have imagined him fabricating chains for the
nation, which he was destined to govern. He, however, displayed less ingenuity
in his attempts to fix them on his subjects, than in manufacturing them.

Maurepas was at this time president of the council. Equally indifferent to all
political events, he knew no solicitude except for his stomach. He was the most
confirmed of epicures. Too careless for the ministry, and, at the same time,
too amiable to be excluded from society; while he neglected the former, he was
the delight and the soul of the latter.

The count d'Artois, who possessed an handsome figure, and a countenance full
of vivacity, now attracted the eyes of Marie Antoinette. The reputation which
he had acquired among women, had excited, in her breast, a wish to know the
validity of its foundation; and she determined to encourage the attentions
which he paid her. She had also another motive for favoring the advances of the
count. She had become solicitous to experience maternal feelings, which she
imagined must be delightful. She had also, on her departure from Germany,
received an injunction from Maria Theresa, to become, if possible, a mother. By
her cohabitation with Louis, her fertility had not been rendered apparent.
Whether this circumstance was owing to impotence on his part, or to some
physical contrariety of temperament, we are unable to determine. Be this as it
may, she considered d'Artois as the man, in the world, best adapted to the
gratification of all her wishes.

The assiduities of the count were now increased, and they were received with
the highest complacency. His attachment to the queen was now talked of as
having become mutual, and gave origin to much scandal. Nor were the reports
which were circulated on this occasion confined to the court of France; they
even reached the ears of the empress; and it may be well imagined that they
suffered no diminution by transportation. She was not surprised at the crime,
but she was alarmed by the imprudence of her daughter. In order, however, to
obtain more accurate information on this subject than could be derived from
common fame, she wrote to the cardinal de Rohan, requesting him to give her an
account of the conduct of Antoinette. The desires which the latter formerly
excited in his bosom, had yet suffered no abatement. He viewed the count
d'Artois as a dangerous and successful rival; and, anxious to effect a
dissolution of his connection with Antoinette, he wrote an answer to Theresa,
which rather magnified than palliated the fault of her daughter. Of this letter
we insert a copy.

Madam,
My zealous attachment to the illustrious house of Austria; the veneration with
which you have inspired me; and the generous reception with which I was
honored at your court, when I was sent thither by my king; all these induce me
to yield an obedience to your commands which deeply wounds my heart. Ah, why
have you not charged some other with the execution of this too painful
commission!

It is, alas! but too true, madam, that Antoinette, since her arrival in
France, has forgotten all those lessons of wisdom and virtue with which your
parental tenderness was pleased to enrich her at parting. My duty obliges me to
tell you the afflicting truth, that she has become a finished coquette, and
that she yields herself almost wholly up to excesses. A report is confidently
circulated, that she prefers her brother-in-law to her husband. May God avert
an event so dreadful! Yet appearances, in this unhappy affair, but ill agree
with our virtuous wishes.

Thus have I given your majesty all the information in my power. May it enable
you to conduct her again in the path of duty; and that my affectionate zeal may
have the felicity of cooperating with your majesty, is the most ardent wish of,

Madam, Your very obedient, And most respectful humble servant, (Signed) L. DE
ROHAN.


This letter, being afterward found among the papers of the empress, was sent
to Antoinette by her brother. This gave additional force to that resentment
which she had already conceived against its author: and in order to render her
vengeance complete, she solicited for him the most eminent places, to make his
fall the more humiliating

CHAPTER III.
AS variety was ever the passion of Antoinette, her connection with the count
now suffered an interval, which was occupied by a new and more pleasing object.
The count Dillon, (often called the handsome Dillon) now returned to court,
where he had formerly been a page. He now attracted every eye, and the queen
was not the last on whom he made an impression. He was not permitted long to
remain ignorant of the havoc he had made in the heart of his sovereign; nor
was the consummation of her ardent desires long postponed.

Destitute of wit, and unamiable in his manners, count Dillon was recommended
by nothing but beauty. Such is the portrait of the hero of the day. The
insinuating queen had, however, the art to make her unsuspecting husband the
friend of this unprincipled and ungrateful villain. When he played, the king
condescended to be his banker, and heaped on him many distinguishing favors. A
glaring indiscretion, however, between the lovers at length alarmed the king.
The queen gave a ball, at which she scarcely danced except with Dillon. At
length, pretending fatigue, she threw herself into a chair, and presently after
complained of a most intolerable palpitation of the heart. The count ran, in a
fright, to her assistance; and, unconscious of the presence of the company,
thrust his hand into her bosom, the seat of the complaint. As inattentive as
the count to the company which gathered round in mute astonishment at his
temerity, the queen forgot to remove the welcome intruder. The king at last
said something expressive of surprise and displeasure, and Dillon retired. She,
however, with an embrace, and a few tender words, appeased his indignation, and
removed his suspicions. Even Dillon himself was by her artful management, soon
reinstated in the favor and confidence of Louis. For some time subsequent to
this reconciliation, the lovers lived in the happiest and most secure
familiarity.

But the time when Dillon was to return to his regiment at length arrived, and
the lovers were forced to feel the pangs of separation. In vain did Antoinette
solicit a dispensation for the colonel, representing to M. Mayenne how
necessary this officer was in her balls and promenades. He was obliged to
depart, but madame de Guemenee soon dried the tears of Antoinette; and some
ladies of the camp as quickly consoled M. Dillon.

About this time happened the death of Louis XV. surnamed the Well-Beloved; and
the husband of Antoinette succeeded to the throne of France, by the title of
Louis XVI. Our heroine now found herself in possession of that sovereignty, for
which she had waited, from the first moment of her arrival in France, with the
most impatient expectation. Regardless of decorum, she made no effort to
conceal the joy which she felt at this event. The grateful tear of filial
affection could not indeed have been expected to flow from the eyes of such a
woman; but the appearance, at least, of grief would have been assumed on this
occasion, had she not lost all respect for decency. But far from that, her
balls and entertainments now became more gay, superb and frequent. The circle
of her pleasures was enlarged, and she daily plunged into new excesses. The
unparalleled license of her conduct excited the indignation of the virtuous,
and it scandalized even the least scrupulous. The princess de Marsan, and
madame de Maurepas, presumed to represent to Antoinette the impropriety of such
proceedings, and remonstrated against them in strong, though respectful terms.
This however produced only ridicule and resentment on the part of the queen.

CHAPTER IV.
IN 1775 the court went to Rheims, where the ceremony of the consecration of
Louis XVI. was performed. Notwithstanding the low situation of the finances,
and the remonstrances of her husband, who preached nothing but economy,
Antoinette caused the preparations for this journey to be of the most expensive
kind. The most magnificent equipages, with personal ornaments the most superb
and costly, were provided by her direction. And as the public treasury was
already too much exhausted to answer these enormities of expense, she had
recourse to a number of usurers, from whom very large sums were obtained, by
promises of most extravagant gratuities from the public coffers, as soon as
they should be filled by moneys extorted from the nation.

The evening previous to their departure, Louis, with tears of tenderness,
pathetically exhorted Antoinette to a conduct which should contradict all that
scandal which had been circulated in consequence of her levities and
misconduct. Ever prompt to dissemble, she embraced him with pretended
affection, and solemnly declared she would be guided by his counsel. Her
language appeared to be that of truth and sweetness; but her perfidious heart
was full of falsehood.

Behold our heroine now at Rheims, plunged into a sea of licentiousness. On her
arrival at this place, she wholly separated her court from that of the king's,
and rendered it a pantheon of pleasure. Here prudish modesty found no
admission; decency and sobriety were considered as impertinents, and the first
in merit was the first in vice. Feats of gallantry were the splendid
achievements of those who were most emulous of glory; and the business of all
was intrigue. Here Antoinette, instead of appearing like the august queen of an
amiable nation, became a Venus, in real life, surrounded with her nymphs and
votaries. Neither did she forget that her husband was a Vulcan, and as such he
was treated. The young due de Coigny was chosen as her favorite Mars; and, if
we except the circumstance of the net, the whole of this poetic fable, even to
the nudity of the happy couple, was realized.

Such was the state of Antoinette and her court, during her residence at
Rheims. Even that transparent veil, which she had earlessly thrown over her
adulterous amors at Versailles, was now laid aside; and the constraint of
secrecy was no longer considered as compatible with the dignity of royal
wantonness. All regard for reputation, all apprehension of publicity was now
dismissed; and even her loosest moments were scarce guarded from the general
eye by the umbrage of privacy.

L' Isle d' Amor, a small but delightful island, situated in the river near
Rheims, was the favorite scene of her anti-conjugal gambols. She indeed
rendered it the residence of the deity whose name it bears, and fixed
unequivocal propriety to its appellation. It became, in fact, another Cyprus;
and, as the presiding power was present to regulate her sacrifices, it may be
well presumed they were neither few nor small.

On the evening of the ninth of June, 1775, Antoinette gave a most brilliant
supper at this favorite Isle. The king received a slight invitation to this
nocturnal feast, but as she wished and expected, he refused to go. This
infamous night was destined to voluptuous excesses, to which she was
apprehensive his presence might have given some constraint. From this banquet
all ceremony and etiquette were banished; and every guest, of either sex,
followed the example of the queen, and drank like true Germans. Immediately
after supper the attendants were dismissed, and on a signal given by
Antoinette, the lights were extinguished. All now wandered at hazard in the
adjacent grove, in order to give, as chance might happen to pair them, a
promiscuous consummation to these bacchanalian orgies. Antoinette, who
undoubtedly should be recorded by the faithful historian as the original
inventor of this refined species of revelry, was not disappointed of that
pleasure which she expected to derive from the execution of this ingenious
project. By an artful address, she now tasted all the raptures of that sudden
variety, the enjoyment of which she had anticipated. The inexpressible
transports of this night are known to have afforded her a source of delightful
recollection, and to have long been the favorite topic of her confidential
conversations.

The king, although he did not suspect the infidelity of Antoinette,
disapproved these nocturnal riots. The next day he spoke of her conduct as
light and improper; and ended his sermon, so disagreeable to her, by an express
interdiction of her visits to the Isle d' Amor. She complained of this
tyranny, as she termed it, of her royal spouse; but the surly monarch was
peremptory, and she was obliged to yield obedience.

The pompous ceremony of consecration being over, the court returned to
Versailles. The celebrated Montansier, who was a manager of theatrical
exhibitions in this city, being overwhelmed with debt, had at this time formed
the plan of a fraudulent bankruptcy. This circumstance being communicated to
the queen, she undertook to patronize this retailer of licentious pleasure. She
extricated her from the labyrinth in which she was involved, by paying all her
debts; and she even extended her bounty so far as to enable la Montansier to
continue her business. The lewd and indecent plays which were introduced to the
public by this manager, were happily calculated to please the taste of
Antoinette; she became a constant attendant on them. She, on these occasions,
was usually accompanied by her assiduous brother-in-law, the count d'Artois.
The king beheld these irregularities with painful anxiety; and often besought
the queen, with tears in his eyes, to desist from courses of life so
destructive to domestic felicity, and so productive of public infamy. Finding
every remonstrance ineffectual, he at length determined to enforce a
reformation by different and more spirited means.

One night Antoinette and d'Artois, returning from Trianon, as usual, at a very
late hour, on presenting themselves at the gate of the castle, were refused
admittance (...)
by the sentinel. Enraged at this unexpected detention, the count had recourse
to execrations and menaces, both of which proved equally ineffectual. The guard
remained inflexible, alleging, in justification of his conduct, that he had
received his orders from the king's own mouth, and it was his duty and
determination to execute them. Antoinette then discovered herself, and in a
transport of rage, demanded, if he dared to oppose the passage of the queen?
The soldier answered, that orders had been given him indefinitely, and without
exception, to suffer no person whatever to enter the palace by that gate after
a certain hour; and those who should oppose his obedience to these orders,
would do it at the peril of their lives. In fine, the illustrious couple were
reduced to the necessity of returning to the theater of Montansier, in order to
avail themselves of a private passage leading from thence to the palace. They
were obliged even to solicit a light from the soldiers in the salle-des-gardes.
The next morning, Antoinette complained bitterly to the king, of the
unprecedented rudeness with which she had been treated by the audacious
sentinel. The surly monarch, shrugging up his shoulders, replied, that he
himself had given the guard his orders, not wishing his house to be disturbed
by profligate revellers after he was in bed.

Antoinette sighed for revenge on the author of this mortifying and ridiculous
adventure, and determined to avail herself of the surest means of procuring it,
by persevering in her licentious excesses.

About this time the queen was declared to be pregnant; and this event gave
birth to an infinite variety of opinions. The wise ones themselves knew not
with certainty where the suspicion ought to be fixed; but most circumstances
seem to have united to point out the duke de Coigny as a parental agent in this
affair. Her pregnancy was dated from a time when she was known to have had an
appointment with this healthy and handsome young nobleman. At a certain ball
she had been suddenly missed, and, as afterward appeared, was about the same
time seen to enter a retired apartment with him. The king, however, was the
greatest dupe. He indeed flattered himself that he was the father of the child,
and congratulated himself with rapturous delusion, on the expectation of the
offspring which was hastening to the world. The courtiers favored the
deception, and applauded the fond credulity of this father in imagination. The
delivery of the queen, when it arrived, was slow, painful, and dangerous.
Vermont her accoucheur, however, saved her life by a blood-letting, which he
performed in contradiction to the opinion of other gentlemen of the faculty,
who had been consulted on this occasion. Meantime her lovers, apprehensive that
in this state of agony she might make unfortunate discoveries, were filled with
the utmost confusion. The duke de Coigny particularly, showed marks of the
greatest anxiety, and made, in his distress, a spectacle at once diverting and
pitiable. The labor, however, at length ended happily; on which the king leaped
about in an ecstasy of joy, pressing the hand of Vermont, and calling him his
guardian angel. In imitation of the example of Henry IV. he exhibited the
infant to the assembly, with an air of inexpressible satisfaction, and
addressing himself to M. d'Algire, president of the parliament, exclaimed,
Behold this child, my dear friend, and acknowledge in it the semblance of its
father!

CHAPTER V.
WHEN the queen recovered from her illness, a different round of amusements was
introduced at Versailles. This consisted of balls and promenades, particularly
nocturnal ones. Every fine evening the court assembled on the terrace before
the palace. Here persons of all ranks were collected; even the vilest and
lowest women of Versailles were not excluded. In these scenes of riot, the
actors were generally in masquerade. This species of disguise, with the
security of night, often veiled transactions which might well retire from the
beams of day, and with which the historian declines to stain his page. The
gardes-francaises, were, on these occasions, instructed to play airs, which
being lasciviously tender, were happily calculated to influence the looser
passions. Biron, an officer in the gardes-du-corps, took particular pains to
acquaint himself with what passed at these meetings, and he afterward took
equal pains to make it public. It would be tedious to relate the various
adventures of Antoinette during this summer.

The next that we shall notice is her famous one with a clerk of the secretary
at war. He was natural son to a certain countess, who, if any credit be due to
fame, would have found it difficult to ascertain his father. By her patronage
he had obtained the place, which he now occupied under the secretary. The
desires of the queen were no sooner excited, than she resolved on (...)
immediate gratification. In order to effect this, one Campan, a valet de
chamber, to whom the office of the queen's confidential ambassador was not a
new one, was ordered to introduce the clerk into her closet. Accustomed to
transactions of this nature, this adroit procurer executed the orders of
Antoinette with expedition and success. An interview soon took place; the clerk
could not sufficiently congratulate himself on this unexpected felicity, and
Antoinette was but too happy in the possession of a lover, whom nature seemed
to have endowed with abilities suited to her desires. When the unthinking
ecstasy of their first interviews gave way to reflection, it occurred to the
queen, that by the frequent visits of this favorite scrivener to her apartment,
suspicions might be exolted, equally fatal to him and to her. On this occasion,
she had immediate recourse to the advice of her privy-counsellor Campan; and
the following artifice was finally determined to be put in practice. The clerk
was to be furnished from time to time with pieces of music, under a pretext of
copying which for the queen, he made her frequent and unsuspected visits. By
this ingenious contrivance, the happy couple continued their clandestine
meetings, for some length of time, in security; but, by some accident, the
count d'Artois was at length led to suspect their connection, and accused the
queen of it. It might be imagined, that on this occasion she would have had
recourse to those acts of deception, in which she had acquired an unrivalled
proficiency. But far from that, she frankly acknowledged her extravagant
fondness for this handsome Hercules; believing her gallant brother-in-law too
liberal in his sentiments to censure her with severity. She, at the same time,
expressed her apprehensions that the amor might be discovered by the king, and
requested the advice of fraternal friendship, concerning its future management.
D'Artois wholly disapproved the connection, and insisted on her never seeing
the clerk again. Such was her situation with the count at this time, that she
found herself under the necessity of consenting to a strict compliance with his
wishes. She therefore declared she would be entirely guided by his counsel, and
desired him to dispose of the young man at his own pleasure. The count was
pleased with this commission, which he executed but too faithfully. In a few
days afterward the clerk was assassinated on the road which leads from Paris
to Versailles.

CHAPTER VI.
THE winter which followed this adventure was, like the preceding, sacrificed
at the shrine of licentious dissipation. It was, however, if possible, more
luxurious and expensive. La Bertin and Guimard were now preferred to the
honorable place of the queen's private ministresses. La Bertin was a milliner,
and Guimard an opera girl. Of all the celebrated priestesses of Venus, never
were any more deeply versed in her arts and mysteries than these. Having
practiced with unremitting assiduity from early life, they had now attained to
almost unrivalled eminence. Antoinette, ever the patroness of this species of
merit, determined to reward that abundance of it which she discovered in this
virtuous couple. It appeared to her a kind of injustice, that talents worthy to
be subservient only to royal luxury, should be prostituted to plebeian
pleasure. She therefore raised them to the rank of her confidential friends.
Happy had it been for France, had Louis XVI. discovered as much sagacity as
Antoinette in the choice of his ministers. Sully, Colbert, and Richlieu, for
management and finesse, were scarce to be compared with La Bertin and Guimard.
While the amors of the queen were under the direction of these machiavelian
females, they were veiled from the public eye with the most artful secrecy. It
cannot therefore be expected, that we should give a particular account of them.

So capricious however was Antoinette, that even the most important services
could not long secure her favor. She soon grew tired of practicing what she
termed the timid caution of La Bertin and Guimard. Impatient of the restraints
of that secrecy to which they advised, she gradually cooled in her friendship
toward them, and at length dismissed them from her service.

About this time, Madame Jules de Polignac was brought to bed. The court, on
this occasion, passed several days in revelry and rejoicings. The queen was
supposed to pay the utmost attention to her friend la Polignac, to keep
continually at her bedside, and to become, in fact, her nurse. She was lodged
in an apartment of Vaudreuil, at Paris. Those who were unacquainted with the
intrigues of court, thought it very singular, that la Polignac had not been
lodged in the palace of Versailles, which would have appeared at once more
natural and decent. Let such be informed, that it was infinitely more
convenient that she should be with Vaudreuil. The daily visits of the queen to
Paris were owing to other motives than those of female friendship. Madame la
Polignac had been familiar with Vandreuil, and she had become the mother of a
son. La Polignac was however used with tenderness and generosity. The queen
made her a present of a box of jewels, valued at 80,000 livres, and the king,
influenced by her example, forgot his usual parsimony, and gave her an equal
sum in silver. She was also presented with the duchy of Mayenne, worth the
trifling sum of 1,400,000 livres. To this last piece of liberality Mr. Neckar
presumed to make some opposition. But he found this only gave displeasure, and
recollecting the fall of Mr. Turgot, he prudently determined to comply with the
royal whim of the moment. He therefore only advised that instead of the duchy
in question, the lady should be put in possession of nearly its value in ready
money. This proposal, being satisfactory to the parties concerned, was
immediately put in execution.

Meantime the very frequent passings and repassings of the queen from
Versailles to Paris which had taken place, gave much uneasiness to the
Parisians. Accustomed to respect the decency of majesty, and to view with awe
the splendour of sovereignty, they could not contemplate without indignation
such shameful degradations of royalty, and such a waste of favors on one so
undeserving. La Polignac became more than ever the object of public hatred. The
scandalous profusion with which the national treasury had been poured into her
lap, could not but excite the anger of those from whom it had been previously
extorted for very different purposes. The queen was surrounded by the family of
this favorite, and she had loaded all its members with innumerable favors. The
ascendency which la Polignac now acquired is at once surprising and incredible.
A few weeks after the birth of her child she was attacked by a dangerous
indisposition, on which occasion the queen discovered the utmost concern, and
caused some apartments near her own to be prepared in the most elegant and
expensive manner for the accommodation of la Polignac. She was immediately
removed thither, and till she recovered none could have access to her except
Vaudreuil and the queen. On the reestablishment of her health, it was thought
highly convenient, that she should still continue to occupy those apartments.
Here was found as convenient a rendezvous as could be wished, for the meetings
of the queen and her privy council. Here they assembled to debate on the most
important points of policy. Here were discussed and determined, in the last
resort, peace and war, finance, policy, the disgracing of ministers, or the
degree of confidence which might be placed in them, and, in short, all affairs
of state were agitated and managed in this cabinet. The king was sometimes
admitted into this assembly, to ratify their ridiculous decisions; but the
honor of entering into their consultations was never accorded to him. The queen
had acquired such an ascendency over him, that her solicitations were very
seldom ineffectual.

Sometimes the king, astonished at the propositions and decisions of this
female cabal, refused the sanction of his authority, till he should consult the
ancient Compte. On these occasions he was usually stopped, and imprisoned in
the arms of Antoinette, until he was forced to grant his consent; either being
melted into compliance by her affected tenderness, or apprehensive of being
stifled with embraces, if he persisted in his refusal. But, if he sometimes
escaped, the queen immediately caused something to be said to the mentor of her
royal lord, which induced him to give such advice alone as accorded with her
wishes.

Vaudreuil and Besenval, and some other men, were admitted to these
conferences. Madame Jules de Polignac, Madame de Grammont, and Madame Desmaine
were three principal female members; the latter of whom acted the part of
minister of foreign affairs.

It may not be improper in this place, to give a slight sketch of the
characters of some of those, who thus directed the movements of France, and
treated the most important affairs of state with as much levity, as the fold of
a garment, or the change of a fashion.

CHAPTER VII.
WE begin with Vaudreuil. Vaudreuil inherited nothing from his father, who was
a good man, but his name. He had been commandant of St. Domingo. Possessed of
an ambitious and intriguing disposition, but, at the same time, neither
sagacious nor active, he courted fortune long in vain. He, at length, grew
weary of the fruitless pursuit, entirely neglected business, and gave himself
up to pleasure. Fortune, as if softened by neglect, now loaded him with
favors, and placed him high in preferment. He was introduced at court by a
gentleman of the Helvetic cantons, not unknown in the catalogue of royal favors.

Besenval was one of those, whose minds are always governed by the
circumstances of the moment. Incapable of permanent ideas, or extensive views,
he varied with every variation of affairs, and traversed to every puff of air.
Ambitious, insensible, and vain, the meanest of sycophants, and the most
unblushing of hypocrites, he deserted entirely the urbanity of his
fellow-citizens, to practice knavery in courts. It is this Besenval, who, with
unparalleled effrontery, presumed to put his merit in competition with that of
the virtuous veteran d'Affry, whose place had excited his envy. Although his
ambition was in some measure disappointed, yet he succeeded so far as to
procure d'Affry, through the compte d'Artois, a multitude of mortifications,
which the honest old soldier felt the more sensibly, from his being conscious
that he did not merit them; and, at the same time, being unable either to
repulse or revenge them. They were inflicted by the authority of the queen, and
by the hand of d'Artois.

Dillon, Coigny, and Vermont, whom we have before mentioned, had a voice in
their councils. The illustrious Campan was also admitted; and he was indeed an
important member, although suspected to be the son of a footman, of the house
of Ventadour, of which even himself had once the honor of wearing the livery.
This hero, so worthy the favor of a great princess, was the perpetual secretary
of this honorable committee. To this second Bonneau, who was indeed more artful
than the first, the queen owed the new invention of giving her orders, and
managing her assignations, by music. This contrivance was considered by its
author, as a chef d'oeuvre. It was this chevalier of the order of St. Lazarus,
who used to carry music to be copied, to wait an answer at the staircase head,
introduce the copyist, and guard the door.

At length, some matters which had been agitated in this cabinet, by chance,
took air. This was wholly attributed to Madame de Chatillon, who was supposed
to have placed an improper confidence in the marquis d'Entragues, with whom she
had been familiarly acquainted at Besencon. This cunning courtier had
determined never to discover this intrigue; but some things which had
accidentally escaped him, had excited suspicions in the bosom of his friend the
prince de Montbarry. This minister, who had long showed his displeasure at the
licentiousness of the queen, and the treacheries of the compte d'Artois, was
now hated by the courtiers of both parties. He had taken the liberty of
criticizing with severity the ministerial measures of Maurepas, and his private
life was examined with as little ceremony as his public.

CHAPTER VIII.
THE queen was now a second time declared pregnant. This event was disclosed in
a manner surprisingly singular. The queen cordially detested M. de Maurepas;
nor was she fonder of the ancient countess, his wife, or their relations, the
abbe de Verry, and madame Seguin. Not ignorant of this circumstance, the
antique couple conducted themselves accordingly, aiming at that neutral tenor
of conduct which neither solicited the friendship of the queen, nor furnished
her with a pretense for anger. At the moment when the breach was imagined to be
wider than ever, Antoinette went to the house of the count, and caused herself
to be announced. Good morning, papa, cried she, on seeing the count, you are
undoubtedly astonished at this visit, but I flatter myself that when we part
you will not be dissatisfied with it.

Madame de Maurepas, who was in the apartment, now arose to withdraw, that she
might not incommode the business of that private interview with her husband,
which appeared to be the object of this visit. The queen, perceiving her
intention, prevented her departure. "My dear countess," said she, you must not
leave me. I have need of your friendship as well as that of your worthy
husband. The secret which I am about to confide to him, must also be entrusted
to you. I must on this occasion solicit you both to become my parents,
protectors and counselors. But before we proceed to my affairs, let us begin
by consigning our past animosities to eternal oblivion, and uniting ourselves
in the firmest bonds of amity. I must frankly acknowledge, that I have sometimes
conducted myself unworthily toward you; but this was wholly owing to the
disadvantageous impressions concerning you which were forced on my mind by your
unprincipled enemies. Here you behold the only origin of that unmerited
indifference, with which I have sometimes treated you. Had, I known you better,
I had esteemed you more, I am now undeceived, and I shall confide to you,
without reserve, the most important of secrets.

"Know then," continued she, I am pregnant!.... You appear to be rejoiced at
this event, but it fills my bosom with anxiety and alarm. I must explain
myself; it is painful to be explicit; but your goodness encourages me, and I
will proceed without reserve. -- The king, mistrustful of his own impotence,
has conceived unhappy suspicions concerning this event. These suspicions have
been strengthened and increased by the caustic raillery of Monsieur and Madame,
who have not spared their royal brother on this occasion. My husband, my
infant, and myself have been handled with equal severity by their unmerciful
wit. The countess d'Artois is also my enemy; and her stupid clamours may do me
much injury. But I may set all their malice at defiance, if you are my friends;
let me believe this, and my tortured bosom will recover its former
tranquillity. If you prove inflexible, and remain unmoved at my distress, I am
lost forever!

Versed in all the arts of dissimulation, and acquainted with every avenue to
the heart, Antoinette, as she uttered these last words, affected to faint, and
sunk apparently insensible from her chair. This completed her victory. The
count and his wife ran about the apartment like distracted persons, and
recovered not the use of their reason till the queen was restored to life by
the attendants, who had rushed in, on being alarmed by the cries of this pair
of reverend dupes. The attendants were then dismissed, and the count and
countess, drowned in tears, threw themselves at the feet of the queen,
declaring that they were entirely at her devotion, and swearing eternal
fidelity.

After these assurances, and not till then, Antoinette came entirely to
herself; and without quitting that melting modulation of voice, which she had
assumed in the former part of her narration, she thus continued it with all the
pathos of dissembled grief.

Believe me, my friends, I am the innocent victim of the falsehood of others,
and my own credulity. I am betrayed by the perfidious counsels of the artful
Besenval. He insinuated that the people of France were scandalized at my
levity, and dissatisfied with my sterility. He then intimated that the only
means of recovering their respect and conciliating their affection, was, to
present the people with a prince, and the throne with a successor. I at first
imagined these representations destitute of foundation; but he caused Vaudreuil
and Coigny, to whom he knew I sometimes entrusted my domestic chagrins, to
reason with me in the same manner. They never approached me without
representing my husband and my people displeased that I had you borne no son.
They painted to my view in colors the most alarming, the humility of divorce,
and the horrors of proscription. I was at length overcome. But, conscious as I
was of the inefficacy of conjugal endearments, I found myself compelled to have
recourse to infidelity. I was not led to the commission of this error by
wantonness; but driven, as I imagined, by necessity. It was therefore a mistake
of the judgment, not a crime of the heart. Your goodness will deem me not
wholly inexcusable, although I have been betrayed into a momentary weakness. I
have thus frankly told you the origin of my present situation You alone can
represent it in a proper light to the king; you alone can preserve me from
ruin!

Blessed be thy offspring, illustrious princess! exclaimed the countess, all
shall be well. We lament what has happened, but it is irrevocable. It is not
for as to censure so amiable a sovereign. It is rather our duty to guard her
reputation in the moment of danger. Go, my dear count, now is the time to avail
yourself of that ascendency, which you have acquired over the mind of the king.
Go, and make an effort to render yourself worthy of the confidence reposed in
you by our august queen.

Marie Antoinette was too cunning not to seize on this moment of enthusiasm.
Falling on the neck of the countess, she embraced her with tears of gratitude,
and insisted on her coming with the count her husband, to sup with her at court
that evening, when the count might have an opportunity of executing with the
king those friendly offices which he had promised in her favor. They accepted
the invitation, and appeared at court accordingly. During supper they were
treated with the most distinguishing attentions, and the warmest marks of
reconciliation and esteem. To the courtiers this unexpected event was an
astonishing and inscrutible paradox. All were ignorant of its cause, and the
presumptions formed concerning it, were all wide from reality.

When the rest of the court retired, the count remained with the king; and
after a most artful preface, for the fabrication of which he was well
qualified, announced the pregnancy of the queen. At first a frown appeared on
the monarch's brow; but the persuasive eloquence of Maurepas dissipated the
gathering storm, and at length prevailed on him to believe he had a second time
become a parent. In order to account for the conduct of Marie Antoinette on
this occasion, it is necessary to inform the reader, that Louis had been led to
entertain suspicions concerning her former pregnancy, which she had found it
difficult to obviate. Languishing with her own unsatisfied desires, and enraged
by the provoking temperance of her husband's passions, she had often reproached
him with want of sensibility, and intimated her conviction of his impotence. He
had been an eye witness to much of the levity of her conduct: and the busy
crowd by which he was surrounded had often filled his ears with insinuations,
that her career of licentiousness had not stopped short of the extreme of
infidelity. The scruples caused by these circumstances were, however, at length
overcome by the artful Maurepas.

The day succeeding this farce, the court assumed a new appearance. The
credulous monarch publicly declared the joyful news, nor did he attempt to
conceal the transports with which it inspired him. He no longer saluted the
gallants of his wife, with the malignant glances of silent jealousy; but in the
fullness of his heart embraced all he met, proclaiming, in a voice of ecstasy,
the glad tidings.

The Austrian heroine, being delivered from all her fears, pursued her ordinary
round of licentiousness with increased ardor. Wholly absorbed in his delightful
dream of paternity, the monarch no longer viewed her conduct with suspicious
vigilance; he was, besides, too grateful to offer the authoress of his felicity
the unkindness of constraint. He ceased to listen to the insinuations of the
enemies of Antoinette, and regarded their representations against her as the
offspring of falsehood and calumny. That strong aversion with which all men
turn from the idea of a deficient virility, strengthened his credulity, and
shut his ears against conviction. On all those glaring facts, which, armed in
all the energy of demonstration, from time to time, stood forth to encounter
his delusion, he obstinately closed his eyes.

CHAPTER IX.
THE pregnancy of the queen meantime advanced, which was not, however,
according to the etiquette of court, declared in the fifth month, on account of
the sarcasms which it was apprehended this event might produce. Madame,
particularly, spared nobody; and the most perfect hatred always existed between
her and the queen.

The joy occasioned by this pregnancy suffered some interruption from the
recurrence of an inconvenience to which the queen had long been subject. It
consisted in what is termed in medical language, a prolapsus uteri, caused by
the unbounded excess to which she gave herself up, in the enjoyment of her
favorite Tribades. This circumstance was attributed however to want of skill in
the queen's accoucheur, Vermond. He nevertheless kept in favor, as well as his
brother, the abbe de Vermond, who used to entertain, in his queen, the taste of
depravity and the privation of morals!

The duc de Nivernois, the gamblers of the court, the bankers Chalabre and
Poincot, the wanton Juers, the little Campan, with a number of musicians and
singers, composed the society to which Marie Antoinette gave the preference.
Such is the dignity which the throne of France was to receive from the daughter
of Maria Teresa.

The wicked counsels which had been given her by Joseph II. on her departure
from the German court, she kept constantly in mind. But, to render their
execution practicable, it was necessary to remove a minister who had always
been declared her enemy.

She was not, indeed, ignorant of the mean; of disembarrassing herself from a
refractory minister. -- By the death of the aged Maurepas, she had proved the
infallibility of the receipt. But suspicions had arisen; and a second use of
poison might have opened the eyes of France.

The troubles of the emperor, from day to day, increased; and he in vain
attempted to calm the minds of his subjects, who detested his oppression, and
seemed inclined to disengage their necks from the odious yoke of tyranny. His
treasury needed fresh supplies* but he had no other resource than the queen of
France. She, with the assistance of the comptroller Joliete-Fleury, caused a
number of very considerable sums to be privately transmitted to the emperor.

This minister being disgraced, Antoinette endeavored to get him replaced by
means of a creature who was one of her confidents; but her hopes could not be
accomplished. Dormesson proved intractable; and she found herself deprived of
the means of succouring her brother, at the very moment when the villain
Calonne was in possession of he tinances, and could squander them at pleasure.
This merciless blood-sucker, this soul of corruption, who was insensible to the
cries of pain, and sported with the public misery, was quite the proper person
to second her destructive schemes.

CHAPTER X.
CHARLES Philip d'Artois had, for some time, behaved with unusual coolness to
his sister-in-law. His passion for her became weakened by her intrigues. It was
not till fear removed her other lovers that he resumed his place. Impelled by
the most alarming apprehensions of discovery, they had successively forsaken
her; while she in vain employed wanton looks, and expressive touches, to
prevent their departure. Their ardor having abated, they shrunk away with
horror, at the idea of being caught in the arms of the queen. She therefore
clung to her brother-in-law, who, less fearful of the dangers of the
connection, supplied the place of Coigny, Dillon, Vaudreuil, etc.

The wife pretended, that of this return of tenderness the Dauphin was the
offspring. And this suspicion was even circulated in the ballads of the day.

The voluptuous d'Artois, a man of little refinement in his pleasures, was
intimately connected with the duc de Chartres, then Philip Capet, or d'Orleans.
They collected in their travels nothing except an ample stock of vices and
follies. English customs, manners, and fashions made such an impression on the
frivolous minds of these opera-knights of scandalous adventures, that, when
they returned to France, they made it their only business to ape the manners of
the people of Great Britain. The courtiers, those vile sycophants, in their
turn, copied d'Artois and de Chartres: and, in a short time, all became English
in the court and in the city; the king, and the egotist, Stanislaus-Xavier,
only excepted.

Every day, new races at Vincennes, on the plain of Sablons, added a new
varnish to the follies of these princes. The French people, whose morality is
pleasure, flocked in multitudes to these diversions, as if they went there to
be spectators of some important event: even mechanics universally deserted
their shops, to behold the ridiculous spectacle of princes dressed like English
grooms. On the vigor and intrepidity of these valiant Jockies hung the fate of
fortunes! These two unworthy branches of the blood of the Bourbons acquired as
much glory by such ruinous parties, as by their famous exploits at Gibraltar,
and in the affair of Ouessant.

Habited like an Amazon, and mounted on a superb palfry, Marie Antoinette
showed herself the friend of their pleasures, because they favored her own. But
before entering into particulars, I ought to give my readers an anecdote which
must forever establish the economical character of Louis XVI.

The French monarch, who now for once through complaisance left his forge, and
suffered himself to be conducted to a race, was supplied by his spouse with
wherewithal to interest himself in it. At first, however, he refused to bet;
but seeming at length to yield to the importunity of the queen, he answered
her, with that simplicity which characterised him, and an unmeaning smile, Is
it your wish? Well, so it shall be. I consent. I will bet a crown on my
brother's (...)
horse! This was, at that time, attributed to the parsimony of Louis. It was,
however, a discreet lesson to fools, who ruin themselves by being too deeply
interested in these amusements.

When the races were scarce finished, Antoinette used to depart, like a flash,
for Trianon, where she did not long wait to be joined by her voluptuous
brother-in-law; and these clandestine interviews usually terminated in the most
luxurious excesses. They both laid aside all reserve, and gave an unbounded
loose to every wantonness which their inflamed imaginations, and their
inebriated senses could suggest.

It will be imagined from the good understanding which now reigned between
these illustrious and incestuous lovers, that Charles Philip occupied all the
thoughts of his sister-in-law. But constancy was not the favorite virtue of the
queen of France.

In order to escape the prying vigilance of that surrounding suspicion which
continually watched her amorous adventures, our heroine frequently made a
specious pretense of indisposition. She now declared, that the air of a court
but ill agreed with her situation, and that solitude had become necessary, as
well to the health of her body, as the tranquillity of her mind. Her
physicians, being bribed for that purpose, publicly asserted, that a temporary
retirement into the country would be extremely proper, and that this removal
was rendered indispensable by its probable utility. Laden with this passport of
the faculty, to which Louis blindly subscribed, she fled from the dangers with
which she was surrounded at court, to revel in certain temples, where she
presided in quality of high priestess.

The comte d'Artois was certainly not addicted to jealousy. He never loved with
an ardor sufficient to give birth to this hateful passion. The appearance of
it, however, he was sometimes induced to assume, by his self-love. While
Antoinette was engaged in these shameful adventures, d'Artois, one day, accused
her of what he called infidelity. The queen, wholly ignorant of the female art
of blushing, heard him without the least emotion. She then, with that
effrontery which is so natural to her, discovered to the compte her peculiar
taste for variety, and particularly expatiated on her fondness for the charming
Fersenne; and, in fine, intimated that d'Artois had become indifferent to her.
This frankness of Antoinette was not displeasing to Charles Philip. There is
sometimes an astonishing harmony, between souls of congenial baseness.

CHAPTER XI.
THE handsome Fersenne, a colonel in the regiment of Royal Swedes, was now the
happy man. He had long been enamoured of the queen, and she had rewarded his
earliest advances with such tender and expressive glances, that he was
convinced he was not to languish a long time for the possession of the object
of his desires.

One day as Fersenne, absorbed in this tender and delightful reverie, sauntered
about the orange-grove of the chateau de Versailles, he was observed by
Antoinette. Their eyes soon met, and she looked a signal, which left him no
further room to doubt his happiness. Returning to her apartment, she meditated
only on the means of effecting an happy issue to this charming adventure; and,
for this purpose, she sent one of her pages to her favorite colonel, with a
small box, in which was enclosed the following billet.

FLORA TO ZEPHYR.
My dear Zephyr,
I HAVE for some time observed that you frequent the parterres, of which I am
mistress; and regard with attention the flowers which are under my dominion.
What are your designs, and what are your wishes? You have excited my
suspicions; and I am alarmed for the safety of my flowers. Ravish them not
ungenerously away; remember that I am their queen, and shall punish him who
steals my favorite treasure.

This evening at nine. I shall be at Trianon. If Zephyr should be touched by
the inquietude of Flora, let him be there to calm her fears, and sooth the
chagrin with which she is consumed. He will be introduced by the governor of my
gardens.


The queen did not wait long for an answer. The box was returned by the same
post. On opening it, the queen found the following.

ZEPHYR TO FLORA.
IT is with indifference that Zephyr views the flowers of Flora; when he visits
her parterres, it is in hopes of finding their queen, and it is her alone he
wishes to behold. Yet, when he is in her presence, his mouth is closed with
respect, and his eyes are the silent interpreters of his heart.

This evening at nine, love and gratitude will carry Zephyr to Trianon. Then
will he strive to banish the inquietude of Flora, and to convince her of the
sincerity of his professions.


Punctual to the moment, Fersenne was introduced to an apartment in which
Antoinette already waited his arrival with the most lively impatience. Her
intimate confidant, Bazin, was the Mercury of this interview. This vile and
cringing valet was accustomed to this office. Little did he think himself
disgraced by the title of pimp, provided it were to an illustrious personage.

From this period their interviews became frequent, and continued for a length
of time, which exceeded the usual duration of the amors of Antoinette. Her
taste for change, however, returned, and she sighed for a successor to the
exhausted Fersenne.

She was hesitating on whom to bestow this place, when the countess Valois de
la Motte was presented to the queen by la Misery, her first femme de chamber.
This unfortunate countess appeared at court, to solicit the possession of the
territory of Fontete, which had been enjoyed by her ancestors.

Antoinette affected to patronise her demand, guided, as she pretended, by a
principle of equity. It was, however, with a view of acquiring a claim to her
gratitude, that Antoinette interested herself in this affair. She therefore
used her influence with Colonne, to obtain a trifling augmentation of the
pension, which the countess already received from the court. By the addition of
700 livers to the 800, which had before been granted to enable her to support
with proper dignity the name of Valois, the queen hoped to accomplish her
designs.

The cardinal de Rohan had not yet renounced the projects which his passion for
Antoinette had formerly inspired. He still watched all her movements, and
intercepted all her looks. He early discovered her intentions respecting la
Motte, before they were even suspected by the latter. This he immediately
communicated to the countess, hoping, by this office of apparent friendship, to
render her subservient to his views.

In the progress of this affair, Antoinette was insensibly conducted toward
that vengeance which she had long secretly meditated against the cardinal. But
his destruction did not prove so complete as she wished it to have been. A
scaffold was the fate which her humanity intended him.

The collar on which the queen had so pertinaciously fixed her affections, was
at length obtained. Lexclaux, her secret messenger, was charged with its
delivery. She received it with transport; and, in that moment, swore to make it
the instrument of the cardinal's ruin. It was not her intention to have
involved the countess de la Motte in those misfortunes which afterward
overwhelmed her. These were produced by an unforseen concurrence of
circumstances. Concerning this event, there were, in Paris, almost as many
opinions as persons.

It is impossible to represent in their true colors, all the horrors which
were produced by this wicked action of Antoinette. One of its effects, however,
(dreadful as it is) must not be omitted. In consequence of this affair, the two
shoulders of the countess de la Motte were marked and branded with four
scandalous lines of verse, (with which we shall not disgrace our page) on the
10th of July, 1786, by virtue of a decree of the parliament.

It was necessary, in order to complete the purpose of Marie Antoinette, that
these diamonds should be entirely at her own disposal; and this was, in a short
time effected. The benefactions which she was now enabled to bestow on her
favorites appeared the more generous, because they were valuable; and they were
conferred with a better grace, as they cost her nothing.

By these benefactions was the unfortunate countess de la Motte afterward
conducted to an infamous post, to suffer that undeserved mark of ignominy which
she received from the hand of a public executioner.

The nicest artifice, and the most exquisite hypocrisy, were now necessary to
extricate our heroine from a situation so critical. Had the baseness of her
conduct been discovered, she would have been covered with shame and infamy. But
on this occasion, governed by her ordinary principles, she made a sacrifice of
innocence, to add a few moments to the existence of her already expiring honor.
She therefore availed herself of every precaution, and folded her atrocity in
the most impenetrable veil that the most unprincipled and artful of minds could
form.

Conscious that the smallest degree of confidence on this subject might prove
destructive, the queen conducted herself with the strictest reserve. In vain
did the crafty and sagacious baron de Breteuil endeavor to draw from her the
secret, by confident demands, or by insidious inquiries. With unshaken firmness
she persevered in denying that this toy had ever been in her possession. She
uniformly asserted that she knew as little of the matter as la Motte. These
declarations she continued to repeat, till la Motte was lost!

The queen thus escaped a process, the whole infamy of which was due to her
alone. Her name was no longer mentioned but as having been abused; and an
universal indignation was expressed against those supposed impostors, who had
dared to defame CARDINAL DE ROHAN AND ANTOINETTE.
Forget my rank when we (...) blisses prove:
For both are slaves, and sovereigns both in love.
their sovereign, in hopes to screen their guilty heads from justice.

A sentence, which violated every principle of law and equity, was now
pronounced, and innocence was its victim.

Notwithstanding the silence which was enjoined with regard to this affair by
the ministerial inquisition, the queen was not the less defamed in the opinion
of the public. She, however, lost nothing of her security. She still kept in
possession three hundred and fifty-six diamonds, of the collar which she had so
handsomely obtained; and from which she still hoped one day to display a set of
bracelets similar to those worn by the queen of England. The tricks and
intrigues of the count de Vergennes, in the course of this iniquitous affair,
taught the queen how necessary it was to beware of him. And, as crimes cost her
nothing, she now meditated one against him, the execution of which soon
followed.

The ill success of the emperor's own affairs, together with the turn which the
affair of the collar had taken in France, had now rendered him inconsolable.
All his projects were now disappointed. Although he had before received a
sufficient number of proofs of the wickedness of his sister, and of the
imbecility of the cardinal de Rohan; yet his false policy had persuaded him
that his ambition might be satisfied, and his views fulfilled by the assistance
of this minister, who would not have hesitated to second that confusion in the
state which the emperor meditated, and of which he knew how to profit.

Mean time the mind of Antoinette was wholly occupied by the most execrable of
designs; and anticipated the glory to be acquired by its execution. One of her
enemies was however yet alive. Plans were formed to bring about his expulsion
from court. Accusations, founded in truth, were in vain sought for, to occasion
his banishment; and the efforts of calumny served only to brighten his triumph.

She had in her possession the famous receipt of Catharine de Medicis. The aged
Maurepas had fallen a victim to its fatal effects; even in the moment, when the
queen professed a sincere reconciliation, and swore to receive his advise ever
after with the highest deference. But she embraced only that she might
strangle. She determined to bestow on Vergennes a similar dose; and the
execrable Polignac was fixed on as her assistant in the commission of this
crime. For this purpose, a reconciliation with this infamous woman became
necessary. This the artful Antoinette effected without difficulty. The fatal
poison was artfully prepared, and speedily given. The count de Vergennes was
seized with a mortal languor, and soon expired.

The reconciliation between the queen and Polignac furnished matter for much
slander. The infamous attachment of Antoinette became the subject of public
conversation and universal censure. But she laughed at sarcasm, and listened to
her own infamy without blushing.

The emperor still nourished the hope of effecting an intestine division in
France. He communicated his projects to his sister; and she seconded them with
all her influence.

Jules de Polignac became the favorite of Antoinette, and the soul of all her
pleasures. They were now inseparable companions, and all the moments which the
queen could snatch from the company of Louis were devoted to this libidinous
duchess. She punished the indolence of the king by the most abominable
commerce, which she now scarce took pains to conceal from him.

Sometimes the count d'Artois joined in their lewd orgies; but the queen feared
his approach. She knew that able gamesters do not play for nothing. The royal
family must already have been considerably augmented; but for the abortive
nostrums given to Antoinette by Polignac. And the queen determined that future
recourse to their aid should be unnecessary.

Her conduct in the meantime continued to be a subject of popular
animadversion; and from day to day epigrams, pasqui^ades, and ballads were
published, which proved the infamous depth to which she had sunk in the
estimation of France. Of this general censure she could not long remain
ignorant. When she discovered it, the hatred which she had conceived against
France was increased; and from that moment she swore its destruction.

The means were easy. The minister had long foretold the ruin which she had
meditated. One circumstance was now wanting, and this hastened to arrive.

Deluded by appearances, Louis slept in fancied security.

The princes of the blood royal of the house of Bourbon had given frequent
proofs of decided patriotism, and were in possession of the public esteem. But
she considered them as so many weathercocks which might be turned at pleasure
by the lightest wind. She thought nothing more easy than to discover their
sentiments, and subject them to her own management.

During this time she suffered much from the jealous, fierce, and impetuous
temper of the duchess de Polignac, which had now arisen to an insupportable
excess.

The time of Antoinette was at this period divided between the gratification of
her looser wishes, her services to the emperor, and her attentions to the
princes of the blood. The first of these occupations was always her highest
concern. Her brother now stood in need of immediate supplies, which she
undertook to procure him. And to make the princes subservient to her wishes, it
was necessary to flatter their ambition. The soul of Antoinette was alone
capable of executing a project so perfidious and so destructive as that in
which she was engaged.

D'Artois, without being envious of the crown, had lavished upon it all his
cares. But the birth of a duke of Normandy, which was indeed the effect of his
own exertions, caused him to shed tears of rage. And now was formed the most
horrid and detestable of triumvirates. The members mutually engaged their
several dependents, and swore the destruction of the people, and the total ruin
of France. The prince d'Artois entered fully and cordially into this plot. He
had peculiar reasons for becoming an enemy to his countrymen. On his return
from his glorious expedition to Gibraltar, they had unmercifully loaded him
with the most insupportable raillery. He still felt the disgraceful wounds
which his honor had received, and he sighed for revenge.

An unexpected resistance from a parliament, on whose assistance this league
had placed much dependence, caused the commencement of this enterprise to prove
abortive. The intractability of the parliament was at first supposed to be a
mere feint. The league persuaded the royal lion to roar, in order to frighten
this disobedient and ridiculous areopagus to its duty. But the parliament still
continued refractory; the Parisians also mutinied and invested the Palais. The
inregisterment of the extravagant edict which had been dictated by Louis, was
now entrusted to d'Artois, who began the business by giving the most
incontestible proofs of his ferocious and sanguinary character, and ended it
with the same paltroonery as at Gibraltar. He mounted the grand escalier,
swearing like a demoniac, his mouth foaming and his eyes flashing with rage.
But this ebullition of his spirits was soon cooled, and the hero descended
fearfully, precipitately, and shamefully. He flew to his carriage, but too
happy to have escaped the vengeance of an audacious hand which had been raised
against him.

On his return to Versailles, he assured the king that he in future might take
on himself the trouble of causing his will to be executed.

The capital remained in a state of agitation and alarm. The corpse de guard
were attacked and defeated; and soon after followed the famous genuflexion
before the statue of Henry IV. This spectacle drew tears from all who reflected
how much his reign differed from the present.

The league beheld with secret satisfaction these troubles and dissensions,
which presaged those calamities to the production of which they aspired.
Sensible, however, of the necessity of circumspection, they waited in silence
for the arrival of the first favorable occasion, of which they determined to
profit. During this interval Antoinette bestowed her time on a new species of
amusement.

As hobby-horses were fashionable at court, Antoinette now made choice of one
for herself, and hers was a buffoon. That illustrious punster, the Marquis de
Bievre, was elevated to this honorable post. He had recommended himself to the
queen by numerous insipid epigrams, which he had made at his leisure, and
distributed among the courtiers; a set of beings, who, as they were destitute
of learning and taste, were incapable of a just appreciation of literary merit,
and from whom it need not be surprising that his senseless performances
received the tribute of admiration and applause.

After the queen had made choice of this son of dullness for a president, she
selected from the herd of sycophants which surrounded her, a number of members,
qualified, in different degrees, by talents of a similar nature, and formed
what she denominated a cabinet of wit, or bureau d'esprit. The wit of this
society consisted wholly of puns; and it was in fact resolved at one of their
meetings, that any member who should speak a certain number of minutes without
making a pun, should be considered as having committed a crime, for which the
penalty of being styled leze-fantasie should be incurred. By the force of royal
example, the rage for punning became at length so prevalent, that it was
visible in public writings of the most serious and important kind. Puns might
be found in edicts, proclamations of the king, bills of taxation, and even in
arrets of the council. But the worst pun of all was the royal majesty itself.

The queen was for a while in raptures with this select society; and most of
its members shared the felicity of being led to Trianon by the allurements of
their royal patroness. But as nothing could boast the power of pleasing her for
any great length, she soon neglected this favorite coterie, and their meetings
became less frequent, and in fine were thought of no more.

CHAPTER XII.
ABOUT this time the minister, Calonne, became obnoxious to the queen. Being
either unable or unwilling to supply her with the enormous sums which she from
day to day demanded from the national treasury, he had ventured on giving a
denial to some requests of this nature. This audacious conduct excited her
resentment, and caused her to meditate his ruin. Versed in all the arts of
intrigue, and indefatigable in the pursuit of revenge, she scon discovered the
means of effecting his disgrace. She caused private information to be given
him, by some of her creatures, that a certain rival, anxious to obtain the
place in the ministry which Calonne occupied, had determined on his
assassination. This treacherous fiction was communicated in a manner which gave
it a face of probability, and carried with it a conviction that produced the
desired effect. The minister, prudently esteeming it a less misfortune to
resign his employment than to be deprived of his life, retired from office with
fearful precipitation.

Archbishop Brienne, an impious and unprincipled character, succeeded Calonne
as financier. His administration soon proved how destitute of discernment was
that sovereign who elevated him to this illustrious employment. He managed the
national treasury like a patrimony in which himself possessed a sole and
individual propriety. All his actions were devoted to one purpose, that of
increasing his own estate. Antoinette and d'Artois found him the most
inconvenient person in the world to have the management of the treasury; for
the sums which he embezzled from it were embezzled only for himself.

Louis, whose confidence in his minister was unbounded, submitted to his wife
and brother the whole management of the most important affairs of his council.
He, from time to time, without examination or thought, put the royal signature
to every decree which was presented to him. When he demanded if his people were
happy, he was always answered in the affirmative, and he gave himself no
further concern about the matter. Every murmur of the nation was intercepted in
its passage to the ears of the monarch; and as he did not hear the groans of
his subjects, he suspected not the pains they suffered. He was indeed sometimes
aroused to a little uneasiness when he contemplated the wretched situation of
his finances, of which he could not be kept wholly ignorant; but he was soon
lulled to sleep again by the artifices of those by whom he was surrounded.

As, during the administration of Briennes, Antoinette and d'Artois were denied
that access to the national treasury, by which their enormous expenditures had
before been supported, they now found themselves under the necessity of having
recourse to private frauds. There was in Paris at this time, one M. Pinet, who,
by a variety of scandalous means, had acquired immense riches. To him repeated
applications were made for large sums, which were not obtained without great
difficulty, and many promises, of which the queen was sufficiently lavish, of
most extravagant gratuities, to be paid, together with the principal, at a
short credit. These sums were quickly expended in riot and dissipation by
Antoinette and her beloved brother-in-law; and when the time of payment arrived
they had nothing to remit. But the mind or the queen, ever fertile in
expedients, soon devised the means of being extricated from this difficulty:
she gave the word, and Pinet suddenly disappeared, and was heard of no more.
Several others are said to have suffered a fate similar to that of Pinet; and
this inhuman traffic was carried on for some years. This pair of royal robbers
drained the purses of many citizens of Paris and Versailles, who had been
immensely rich. They began these negociations with smiles and promises of
favor, and usually ended them with death or the Bastille. Most of these deluded
money-lenders, after discovering how much they had been duped, complained, with
an imprudent bitterness, of the injuries they had suffered. Le Noir and his
cabal were at this time wholly at the devotion of the queen and her
brother-in-law. Le Noir was governor of the Bastille, and he hesitated not to
grant lettres de cachet whenever they were demanded for the purpose of
silencing audacious murmurs. The papers of the person imprisoned fell of course
into the hands of le Noir, and he, from time to time, disposed of them as
directed by his royal mistress.

This torrent of iniquity swelled to a most enormous height, and in its course
bore down compassion, humanity and justice; ruined many of the most valuable
citizens, and destroyed many of the first estates in France. This mode of
rasing money became, however, so notorious at length, that it could no longer
be practiced.

D'Artois, that illustrious knave, fertile in expedients, suggested one to our
heroine, which, in the event, proved very advantageous to this luxurious pair.
He put her in mind of the ascendency which she had over her husband, and the
advantages that might be derived from it. Infected by the inebriety of the
tumultuous passions of those by whom he was surrounded, the king had almost
lost sight of himself. He had become less severe in his economy, which he now
frequently relaxed in favor of good cheer. He had, in short, either to
dissipate the gloom of anxiety, or gratify a depraved appetite, contracted an
habit of drinking to considerable excess. In the moments of intoxication, his
fondness for his faithful Antoinette was redoubled, and in the ardor of
affection, inspired at once by love and wine, he could refuse nothing to the
idol of his soul. By the advice of d'Artois, Antoinette prevailed on her royal
spouse, in one of these paroxysms, to sign a paper containing a solemn
abdication of his kingdom. This, however, was extorted from him with great
difficulty, and the queen, in effecting it, brought into exercise every
artifice of which she was mistress. Tears, caresses and threats were
alternately employed for some time in vain; but at length Louis was overcome,
and suffered the pen to be put into his hand, which, being guided by
Antoinette, reluctantly made the important signature. When the king recovered
from his intoxication, he recollected with shame and distress the fatal folly
of which he had been guilty the preceding evening, and flew to the queen with
anxious haste, intending, if possible, to persuade her to resign the instrument
he had executed, almost in a state of insensibility. This was what she wished
and expected; she had now an opportunity of taking the advantage of his fears,
which she improved to its utmost bounds. She at first peremptorily refused to
part with the writing, and every argument of Louis proved ineffectual, till he
offered her an enormous sum of money to be paid from his treasury in exchange
for it. This proposal prevailed on her, and a compromise took place. The
stipulated sum was actually paid, and divided between Antoinette and the
contriver of this admirable plot. This event also operated in their favor with
Brienne, who now no longer remained intractable. He began, like Calonne, to
perceive that he could not enjoy the fruits of his villainies in safety without
consenting to a division of them. His ill-gotten treasure, while it secretly
delighted his archiepiscopal bosom, made him tremble with apprehensions of
discovery and punishment. He therefore cordially entered into the measures of
Antoinette and d'Artois, and paid from the treasury, without objection, the
enormous sums demanded, resting his hopes of impunity in case of extremity, on
the king's signature, which was given into his possession. It must have
appeared surprising to Louis, that the fondness of his wife should have
redoubled at the moment when he had least reason to expect it. This was in fact
the case; and his suspicions were from day to day increased by her frequent
solicitations for orders on the treasury, which were always enforced by a
profusion of caresses, and of these at other times she had of late been
sufficiently parsimonious. Being thus aroused to some vigilance, the monarch at
length discovered the collusion between the queen, d'Artois and Brienne. He was
now confirmed in his opinion, and immediately dismissed Brienne from office: he
also behaved to Antoinette for a while with unusual coldness; but he could
never prevail on himself to treat her with that contempt she deserved.

Our pair of royal libertines being now once more reduced to extremity, entered
upon the execution of a plot which they had often contemplated, and from which
human nature revolts. This had been attempted once before, but unsuccessfully,
at the time of the catastrophe of the Palais de Justice. D'Artois now made
every possible exertion to rally the malcontents. The moment that his
sister-in-law informed him that they could no longer have access to the
treasury, he employed himself, in compliance with her advice, in laying the
foundation of the most detestable of aristocracies. All the Polignacs, as will
readily be imagined, were imitated, and the favorite Jules was particularly
commissioned to bring over the princes of the blood, over whom she had much
influence. The pleasures of Maria Antoinette now suffered an interval. The
management of her creatures, the destruction of the throne, and the
establishment of that despotism for which she labored, occupied all her
thoughts. Besenval, Broglie, d'Autichamp, and many others, entered with ardor
into this infernal league. Madame Jules de Polignac neglected nothing that
could expedite the completion of this monstrous association. She promised
pensions, places, and dignities with unlimited profusion; nor did she hesitate
at prostitution where she imagined it would prove the most powerful bribe. By
these various means she added considerable numbers to the league. She persuaded
not only the princes of the blood royal, Conde, Conti, Bourbon, etc. but also a
great many malcontents of the clergy, several disgraced courtiers and
noblemen who had been displaced by the king.

Antoinette was unanimously named chief of this horrible conspiracy. There
could not indeed be a more proper leader than this inhuman woman, who might
well be styled a fourth fury. The prince de Lambisc was appointed general, and
Besenval his aid. D'Artois, Conde, Conti, and Bourbon were elected as a council
to advise with Antoinette in the regulation of measures, and the rest were to
act in obedience to their directions. After the cabal had, in the opinion of
Antoinette, d'Artois, and the council, become sufficiently numerous, the
following articles, being previously prepared for the purpose, were subscribed
and solemnly sworn to, at one of their meetings, by every member.

ARTICLE I.
An oath, the most solemn and inviolable that can be invented, shall be
pronounced by every member of this association before proceeding to business;
and the slightest infraction of this oath shall be punished with immediate
death.

ARTICLE II.
Every military officer who is a member of this association, shall use his
warmest endeavors to secure to our interest the subaltern officers, soldiers,
and foreigners in the several corpse to which they belong, (without, however,
entirely disclosing to them our designs) in such a manner that the troops under
their command may be ready, on the shortest notice, for any operations which
may be judged expedient.

ARTICLE III.
The prince de Lambisc, who has done this association the honor to become a
member thereof, obliges himself to bring into our service the Germans under his
command, and shall use every effort to induce them to serve us with inviolable
fidelity.

ARTICLE IV.
We name the prince de Lambisc generalissimo, and he shall be immediately
caused to take the oath of office in that quality.

ARTICLE V.
These articles being established, each prince of the blood royal shall from
that moment use every exertion to secure the aid of their dependants and
others, and shall endeavor to inspire them with those sentiments of hatred for
the French nation so necessary to the execution of our designs.

ARTICLE VI.
We proscribe the duke of Orleans, he being beloved by the people, and they in
return by him; and he consequently an enemy to our views.

ARTICLE VII.
As our interest requires vigilance, exactitude, promptness and fidelity; and
as it is highly important that our measures should be pursued with order,
decision and unanimity, all secret advices shall be communicated to the whole
association; questions arising on these or other occasions shall be determined
by a majority. The majority shall also determine the fate of ministers and
others whom it may be found necessary to remove.

ARTICLE VIII.
There shall be in this association a general and a particular committee; the
general committee shall consist of all the members, and the particular
committee of a certain number, to be chosen by a majority: the former shall
meet once a week, the latter every night.

ARTICLE IX.
A solemn oath shall be pronounced, that at the first signal of destruction the
lives of none, except our friends and those who join our standard, shall be
spared.

These articles being confirmed by oath, Antoinette and her counselors
employed themselves in appropriating to all concerned in the plot the different
parts they were to act. Particular attention was paid to securing those whose
fidelity was in any degree suspected. Measures were likewise taken to secure to
themselves the disposal of the throne, and to this end it was necessary to plan
the destruction of its heirs.

Breteuil had, with the interposition of the court, given up his place to the
ambitious Brienne. The latter was assisted in his iniquitous enterprises by le
Juigne, archbishop of Paris. About the same time Brienne was made a cardinal.
This was a striking proof of the complacency with which the Holy Father viewed
the abominations of the court of France. -- But to return to Juigne; he was
eminent in nothing but a connoisseur in champaigne; in every thing besides he
was stripped almost to idiocy. Necker, however, pretended to make grave
speculations with him on the disasters with which France was apparently
threatened. Yet, in the end, this shameless apostate exhibited in his conduct
an incontestible proof of his attachment to the views of Antoinette.

The Etats-Generaux were fortunately convoked at this time, and this
circumstance prevented the completion of the execrable design of the queen of
France. It had been her intention and expectation to see the inhabitants of
Paris massacred, and the city in flames at this time. The Tiers Etat, by their
conduct, on the 22d of June, 1789, proved that they were capable of acting with
firmness

During this crisis Villeduel, one of the creatures of Antoinette, arose from
an intendancy to the ministry. He had instilled into his party all the
principles of the logic of Richelieu and Saint Florentine: he knew how to
protect the one and destroy the other. He was particularly serviceable to our
illustrious heroine, by fabricating and circulating calumnies, at which he had
an unrivalled talent.

Part of the nation, seemingly plunged in a lethargy sleep, was at this time
insensible to the wounds of oppression and faction. If they were felt by
others, they were endured in painful silence, or lamented with secret sighs;
for the voice of complaint was constantly punished by new cruelties. Meantime
Antoinette, in the intervals of relaxation from her criminal labors, reposed on
the bosom of pleasures scarce less culpable.

She had not now for a long time visited her new acquisition, St. Cloud, and
she was inflamed with desire to offer some sacrifices to love within the walls
of that voluptuous palace. To this end, she made it a rendezvous for her
associates, and appointed assignations there with her more immediate favorites.
Her beloved brother-in-law, and the Duchess de Polignac, were often joined in
her assignations, and this illustrious trio, in these clandestine meetings,
gave a-loose to every wanton excess that their debauched minds could dictate.

Necker had often been tampered with, but he refused, with the firmness of a
stoic, to come into the measures of Antoinette. For this reason the faction
wished him to be dismissed from court; but the king could not at that time be
persuaded to consent to it.

Meantime the faction, from day to day, increased, and the fatal moment of
execution was at hand. The only thing which retarded its arrival was the great
confidence placed by the king in his minister Necker. It was necessary he
should be deprived either of his office or his life; and, in case the former
could not be effected, it was determined to have recourse to the latter. --
Juigne, the archbishop, one of the confederates, was considered by Antoinette
and her council as the properest person to be employed in this business, and
she undertook to commission and instruct him for the purpose. To this end she
sent for the ambitious prelate, and addressed him in the manner following: --
Is it not, my dear friend, unfortunate for us, that Necker, a man opposed to
all our measures, and inflexible to all persuasion, should continue in an
office which gives such influence in the state? we think he ought to be
removed; this, however, we find difficult to be effected. But assist us with
your services. Religion has placed in your hands arms which cannot fail of
success. Make use of them to crush this hydra who awes the nation, and would
destroy it. Avail yourself of that ascendency over the king which his weakness
has given you. You know him well. He may easily be deceived by that imposing
exterior which you wear to such advantage. Do this and we may expect every
thing from your assistance, and you, on the other hand, may be sure of
protection and reward.

Being thus instructed, the hypocritical prelate sought the king, and addressed
him in the following manner: -- Sire, art thou a king, and suffer irreligion
to reign, as it were, conjointly with thee? It is an atheist who gives laws to
France, under the title of a most Christian King! What dreadful consequences
may we not expect from such iniquities! Think thou that the Being who
instituted religion will protect its enemies? Expect rather to see the
vengeance of the Most High poured out on yourself, your family and people.
Behold the image, continued he, presenting a crucifix; behold the image of your
Savior, who commands you by my voice to proscribe Necker, that miscreant who
seeks the destruction of the nation, and injures the cause of our holy
religion, by treating the ministers thereof with contempt.

This insolent speech had the desired effect on Louis. Terrified with the
menaces of the priest, he seemed already to behold the pillars of heaven
descending to crush him. Unable to resist the fears that overwhelmed him, he
sent for the papers of Necker, and ordered him to retire from Paris in four and
twenty hours.

At length arrived the evening when the bloody tragedy was to be executed, the
evening of the 14th of July, 1789. The confederates were all prepared. The
queen enjoyed the most confident hopes of success, and anticipated the delights
which she expected would result from it. But, through some imprudence of
Lambisc, the plot took air, and the citizens of Paris were alarmed. The
disappointment, confusion and terror which took possession of the conspirators
when they learnt the Parisians had taken arms, cannot be described. La
Polignac, d'Artois, and several other members of the association, immediately
betook themselves to flight. The king repaired to the Hotel-de-ville, whither
Antoinette was, in fact, pleased to see him go, although she affected to be
much grieved at parting with him.

CHAPTER XIII.
A NEW constitution was, soon after, established by the people, and Antoinette,
although she secretly cursed the measure, had the policy to be apparently
pleased, and to comply with the wishes of the people. Her engagements in
political matters, however, caused no abatement in her fondness for riot,
luxury and dissipation. She found means to solace herself even under the
mortification of her greatest disappointments. Mothier and La Fayette were
successively the generals of the people. Antoinette found them both extremely
useful in affording an alleviation to the burden of her griefs; and each of
them performed the charitable task of giving consolation to this distressed
lady.

One day, as Antoinette and La Fayette were consulting on measures to
re-establish her in the opinion of the public, they wandered into the
Bosquet-de-Saint-Cloud. Warmed by the charms which the queen exposed to his
view, and emboldened by his political consequence, the marquis presumed to make
her some proposals of a tender nature. She recollected how much she owed to
Fayette, and she was too just to prove ungrateful. He, in short, found her as
condescending as he could expect, and was proceeding to the consummation of his
wishes, when they were most unseasonably interrupted by a page, who had
attended them on the walk, and now came to present the queen a nest of
beautiful young birds, which he had just found in the grove at some distance
from the happy scene. His arrival, as may be easily imagined, was not very
pleasing to either of the lovers, and he was ordered, with some severity, to
retire immediately. This command was instantly obeyed, and the scene soon
became too tender for description.

La Fayette and Antoinette
(...) rash boy! while I my homage pay,
Where joys (...) nestling Cupids play.


CHAPTER XIV.
ALL the enormous dilapidations of Antoinette, her innumerable amorous
intrigues, her vices, her haughtiness, and barbarity, all these obtained the
pardon of the French nation. In spite of the distressed situation to which they
had been reduced by the shameful irregularities and inhuman plots of their
queen, a queen who no longer deserved the title, she was yet suffered to live
unpunished. But the generosity of her people could make no impression on her
unfeeling heart. A stranger to every good, to every grateful sentiment, she was
unable to arrest herself in that headlong career of vice with which she had set
out in life, even when she found herself ready to plunge into the gulf of
ruin, which she had prepared for her subjects. The commission of every species
of crimes was so incorporated with her constitution, that she neither knew
compunction, nor was capable of repentance; and she persevered in guilt till
the eyes of her people were forced open. Such became the publicity of her
vices, and so conspicuous was the bitterness of her enmity to the nation to
which she ought to have performed the part of a parent and protectress, that
longer submission to so vile a sovereign would have forever characterised
France as the most abject and despicable of nations.

After the revolution, the dispotic club, of which Maria Antoinette was chief,
did not entirely neglect their operations: the members of which it was composed
continued to draw from her a contagion of sentiment, which was industriously
spread, and poisoned many.

To what period, unhappy people, do you procrastinate the day of your
tranquillity? How long will you suffer men, or rather demons, who, while they
style themselves the fathers of their country, aim the poniard of death at its
bosom, to enter your councils and legislatures? How long shall a Mauri, a
Casales, a Duval, insult your weakness, or rather your negligence, with
impunity? How long will ye continue blind in the choice of your leaders, and
gild the shoulders of those whose hearts are rotten? How long will you suffer
yourselves to be made beasts of burden by the dregs of your former government,
who wait but for a favorable opportunity to tear in pieces the hand that
reaches to them the bread of nourishment, or leads them to the heights of
preferment and office. Imitate the statuary, who at his pleasure breaks the
idol which he made. But in breaking yours, let it be so done that the scattered
pieces shall never become reunited.

One of those writers, who, through fear, or affected modesty, pretends to aim
at the greatest impartiality, speaks of Antoinette in the following manner: --

I shall say but little of Marie Antoinette. Once, perhaps, too much adored,
and now too much calumniated, she appears neither to merit the extravagant
eulogiums which have been lavished on the Dauphine, She was dauphine before she
was queen.
nor the atrocious imputations which have been heaped on the queen. This must,
however, be left for posterity to determine. I shall not examine particularly
into her attachment to a brother, to which, perhaps, may be owing some part of
the present exhausted state of our finances, and the new sacrifices which have
been made by France to the house of Austria. I shall only say, that it is
extremely difficult, not to say impossible, entirely to divest ourselves of
every sentiment of tenderness for the country where we are born; for the
parents who have caressed, protected and nourished us in our helpless infancy;
and for those who have earliest awakened in our bosoms those soft affections
which constitute the happiness of mankind. It is difficult to forget the tender
connexions of daughter, of sister, of parent, and even those who only owe their
birth to the same soil; and it seems, that, were it practicable, it would do no
honor to the soul capable of doing it. What then can be done to escape the
dangers to which a state is exposed by the marriage of its monarch to a foreign
queen? Let him choose a wife from his own nation. Such an alliance may at first
appear unworthy the blood royal, for there being but one sovereign, he must
marry a subject. But now that the king is no more than the first citizen, he
cannot dishonor himself by giving his hand and his heart to a free citizen, who
by her virtues and accomplishments merited the love of her nation. This would
undoubtedly excite the ambition of the family from which the queen might be
chosen. This to be sure is an evil, but far from being equal to those we have
always suffered from alliances with foreign families. In the former case, it is
easy to resist the machinations of a single family; but in the latter, we must
combat with empires.

The one sometimes gives occasions to domestic quarrels; the other frequently
to wars, and almost always to very ruinous sacrifices. In the former case, the
national assembly should confine the ambition of the family preferred: in the
latter, the influence of a queen, whose heart is inimical to the nation, must
always prove active and dangerous. I have thought it might be useful to render
this idea public. It is at least important enough to merit discussions. At the
time these observations were made, France was under the government of a limited
monarchy.


"Of Marie Antoinette I shall say nothing --." It is thus our impartial writer
sets off. -- As for me, I shall say all that ought to be said. I shall say,
that the shocks given to our empire by its earliest sovereigns were less
violent than those it has received from its more cruel enemy, Marie Antoinette.
I shall say, that it was by her hand that M. de Vergennes died empoisoned. It
was she who always aimed at the destruction of France, that, on its ruins, she
might enjoy the barbarous satisfaction of seeing her brother's empire enlarged.
It was she who forced the count d'Artois to become the assassin of his brother,
after having been the defiler of his bed. I shall say, that thousands have been
subservient to her pleasures, and have almost all of them been afterward
sacrificed by her own hand. It was she, who, during their nocturnal orgies,
blew up in their hearts the flame of civil war. It was she, who, laying aside
her aversion to the national habit, did not blush to grant her favors to
general Mothier, in order to concert with him her schemes of vengeance. It was
through her influence that the assassin Bouille was named to the expedition of
Nancy. It was she who cried, at the instant she contemplated the innumerable
victims of her barbarity, Why have not twenty-three millions suffered the same
fate, that this odious nation might be extirpated from the face of the earth?
Her own hand armed the chevaliers of the poniard. By her hand was prepared the
poison with which Mirabeau died. Her murderous insinuations inhumanized the
heart of her husband -- a weak prince, but naturally good. It was by her
pernicious counsels that the nuisance of the Chapelle was projected. In short,
all our intestine quarrels, the invasions which are preparing on all sides, and
in me word, all our calamities, past, present, and to come, derive their origin
from the righteous hand of Antoinette.

"It is," continues our impartialist, for posterity to judge. -- Was it then
for posterity to pronounce the fate of Mandrin, Cartouch, and la Lescombat,
whose crimes are the crimes of infancy compared with those of our heroine? Let
us, in this place, quote a trifling adage which proves the veracity of the
people, as much as it paints their weakness. Little villains are punished,
while great ones are respected. -- Let us follow this writer a little further
-- I shall not inquire whether some part of the present exhausted situation of
our finances be not owing, etc. He will not inquire whether those immense
quantities of gold and silver which have been transmitted to the same brother,
have contributed to exhaust our finances! In the name of common sense, if this
be not worthy of inquiry, what is!

Pursuing our impartial author a little further, we find, that in conformity
with his opinion, a woman ought to sacrifice to paternal affection, even the
duties of wife and mother! This is similar to the logic of our higher clergy,
who see nothing sacred in the Holy Evangelists when they correspond not with
their own inclinations. Yet an apostle, when speaking of the duties of the
marriage state, has formally declared, A man shall forsake his father and
mother, and cleave unto his wife. And have women received a dispensation from
what was prescribed to men? In order to favor the ambitious designs of her own
paternal family, shall a woman, with impunity, contrive the destruction of her
household, and those about her? Shall she, without being cited to the tribunal
of public opinion, betray her husband, and devote her children to ruin? No;
even the woman in private life, who is capable of such conduct, is a monster of
iniquity; and the queen, who hesitates not to soil the majesty of a throne, to
prostitue her own person, and plot the destruction of twenty-three millions of
people, is ten thousand times more criminal, and deserves to be extirpated from
that society whose ruin she contemplated. It is undoubtedly highly proper, that
the first magistrate of a free people choose his wife from among his
fellow-citizens.

Even now, while I write, there are commotions in every section of the capital.
Every soldier is flying to his arms. And why? I demand the reason why? It is
because General Bleuit solicits a dismission? And why does he solicit a
dismission from a place in which his self-love is so amply gratified? It is
because the people had the insolence to oppose the departure of the king for
St. Cloud, who from thence might have gone elsewhere. As the appetite sometimes
increases by eating, the desire of traveling may redouble with the sight of
different places. The people had then the insolence to despise the orders of a
general they had chosen, and the same people now present themselves in a body,
at his hotel, to beg he will have the goodness to continue to abuse them.
Perhaps this request, however, may be intended only to detain him in office
till the new constitution be fully established.

Here are hounded the principal events of the life of our heroine. Vigilant for
the information of our fellow citizens, we assure them that nothing of
importance in the future life of Antoinette shall escape our observation, and
so soon as we shall be furnished with sufficient matter, we will communicate it
to them in another volume.

THE END.
TRIAL OF MARIE ANTOINETTE, CIDEVANT QUEEN OF FRANCE.

[The American Publishers have not seen any Continuation of these Memoirs of
the Queen, but, having just received an authentic Account of her Trial, they
subjoin to this Work the following Extracts from it.]

TRIAL, WITH THE ACCUSATIONS AND INTERROGATORIES OF MARIE ANTOINETTE, of
Austria, CIDEVANT QUEEN OF FRANCE.
BEING interrogated as to her names, surnames, age, quality, place of birth and
abode, answered, That her name is Marie Antoinette Lorraine, of Austria, aged
about thirty-eight years, widow of the king of France, born at Vienna, finding
herself at the time of her arrest in the place of the sitting of the National
Assembly.

The Greffier read the act of accusation; which, among other things, stated,
That by a decree of the Convention, of the 1st of August last, Marie
Antoinette, widow of Louis Capet, has been brought before the Revolutionary
Tribunal, as accused of conspiring against France: -- That an examination being
made of all the pieces transmitted by the public accuser, it appears that she
had acted like Messaline, Brunchaut, Fredigonde, and Medicis, who were formerly
qualified with the titles of queens of France, whose names have ever been
odious, and will never be effaced from the page of history.

Marie Antoinette, widow of Louis Capet, has, since her abode in France, been
the scourge and the blood-sucker of the French; that even before the happy
Revolution which gave the French people their sovereignty, she had political
correspondence with a man called the King of Bohemia and Hungary; that this
correspondence was contrary to the interests of France; that not content with
acting in concert with the brothers of Louis Capet, and the infamous and
execrable Colonne, at that time minister of the finances; with having
squandered the finances of France (the fruit of the sweat of the people) in a
dreadful manner, to satisfy inordinate pleasures, and to pay the agents of her
criminal intrigues; it is notorious that she has at different times transmitted
millions to the Emperor, which served him, and still supports him to sustain a
war against the Republic, and that it is by such excessive plunder that she has
at length exhausted the national treasury.

That since the Revolution, the widow Capet has not for a moment withheld
criminal intelligence and correspondence with foreign powers; and in the
interior of the Republic, by agents devoted to her, whom she subsidized and
caused to be paid out of the treasury of the cidevant civil list; that at
various epochs she has employed every maneuver that she thought consistent
with her perfidious views to bring out a counter-revolution; first, having,
under a pretext of a necessary reunion between the cidevant Gardes-du-corps,
and the officers and soldiers of the regiment of Flanders, contrived a repast
between these two corpse on the 1st of October, 1789, which degenerated into an
absolute orgy as she desired, and during the course of which, the agents of the
widow Capet perfectly seconded her counter-revolutionary projects; brought the
greater part of the guests, in the moment of inebriety, to sing songs
expressive of their most entire devotion to the Throne, and the most marked
aversion for the people: of having excited them insensibly to wear the white
cockade, and to tread the national cockade under foot; and of having
authorized, by her presence, all the counter-revolutionary excesses,
particularly in encouraging the women who accompanied her, to distribute these
white cockades among the guests; and having, on the 14th of the same month,
testified the most immoderate joy at what passed during these orgies.

Secondly, having, in concert with Louis Capet, directed to be distributed very
plentifully throughout the kingdom, publications of a counter-revolutionary
nature, some of which were pretended to have been published by the conspirators
on the other side of the Rhine, (meaning, we suppose, at Coblentz) such as --
Petitions to the emigrants -- reply of the emigrants -- the emigrants to the
people -- the shortest follies are the best -- the order of march -- the return
of the emigrants, and other such writings: of having even carried her perfidy
and dissimulation to such a height, as to have circulated writings in which she
herself is described in very unfavorable colors, in order to cloak the
imposture; thereby to make it be believed by foreign powers that she was
extremely ill treated by Frenchmen, to instigate them to go to war with France.

The different charges ran to a prodigious length. The following is a short
abstract of the charges on which the trial turned:

Marie Antoinette was further accused, that being brought to Paris, she
immediately began to intrigue with the members of the legislature -- and held
nightly meetings with them.

That she was accessory in getting bad ministers appointed, in order that her
views might be assisted; -- that her creatures were placed in all the public
offices; men who were known to be conspirators to liberty; -- that she was
accessory in bribing the members of the Legisative Assembly to declare war
against the Emperor, her brother; -- that she gave intelligence to the enemy of
the plans of the campaign, as soon as they were determined by the council;
which was the cause of many failures which the French arms experienced; -- that
she combined with her agents in plotting the overthrow of the constitution on
the 10th day of August, 1792; -- that on the 9th of the same month, she got a
number of Swiss guards into the Thuilleries, encouraged them to make
cartouches, and annimated Louis Capet to order his soldiers to fire; -- that
the next day, the 10th of August, she pressed and solicited Louis Capet to go
to the Thuilleries at five in the morning, to review the real Swiss guards and
those who had assumed their uniform; and at his return she presented him with a
pistol, saying, 'This is the moment TO SHOW YOURSELF;' and on his refusing she
called him a coward; -- that, finally, the civil war which now rages in France,
has been produced by her intrigues.

The queen confessed in her interrogatory, that it was she who opened and
locked the door of the apartment through which the family made their escape in
June, 1791; that independent of the confession of the widow Capet in this
respect, it is confirmed, by the testimony of Louis Charles Capet, and by his
sister, that de la Fayette favored all the designs of the widow Capet, in the
same manner as Bailly did while he was Mayor of Paris, and that both were
present when the fugitives escaped, and favored their flight as much as lay in
their power.

This Princess suffered under the axe of the guillotine, on Wednesday, the 16th
of October, 1793, old style, after having been condemned by the Revolutionary
Tribunal, as guilty of having been accessory to, and having co-operated in
different maneuvers against the liberty of France; of having entertained a
correspondence with the enemies of the Republic; of having participated in a
plot tending to kindle civil wars in the interior of the Republic, by arming
citizens against each other.

The execution took place at a quarter past twelve, P. M. The whole armed force
in Paris was on foot, from the prison of the Conciergerie to the Place de la
Revolution, beyond the garden of the Thuilleries. The streets were lined by two
very close rows of armed citizens. Henriot, the commander in chief, attended
the queen in a private coach, with a guard of cavalry to the place of
execution. She was accompanied by the cidevant curate of St. Landry, a
constitutional priest; and on the scaffold preserved her natural dignity of
mind.

NOTE.
A Description of the guillotine, or fatal machine, by which the late king and
queen of France suffered, and which takes its name from the person; who brought
it into use, has been industriously handed the public, both through British and
American papers, with an apparent intention of heightening the horror of the
act; but, note well, the origin of the construction of it, and the intention of
the machine by the original projectors, have been as industriously concealed.
It is with pleasure, by the help of a patriotic correspondent (and to vindicate
the ways of God to man) that we undeceive the public with respect to this novel
piece of mechanism, by asserting, from good authority, that the guillotine was
constructed by the aristocrats at Paris; that the king and queen inspected it
with pleasure; and that it was intended to be used by the redoubtable duke of
Brunswick, (the valiant brother of George the IIId.) in the beheading of all
the convention of France, and others who should not have been murdered by the
sword, and other means of assassination, of the host who should oppose his
all-conquering manifesto. -- What a change is here! Louis and Marie Antoinette
dug a pit for tens of thousands; and by the direction, no doubt, of the
unerring hand of God, they themselves fell into it! Where, reader, is your
horror now! Change it into the other scale, cries the still voice of conscience
-- turn your face from monarchs -- support the rights of man!

FINIS.

