THE STUDENT AND PASTOR, OR DIRECTIONS HOW TO ATTAIN TO EMINENCE AND USEFULNESS
IN THOSE RESPECTIVE CHARACTERS.

BY John Mason. A. M.

Take heed to thyself and to thy doctrine.

St. PAUL. FROM THE Press OF Thomas Odiorne, EXETER. 1794.

PREFACE.
THESE papers were originally drawn up for the benefit of a young gentleman,
who was a candidate for the sacred ministry. I conceived that, if they were
made more public, they might be of more extensive use, not only to academics,
who study with a view to the pastoral office, but to those who have lately
entered upon it. What the more induced me, to make them so, was, that, though
we have many useful treatises on this subject, I do not remember to have seen
any thing in our own language, so comprehensive of the office of the Student
and Pastor, or which represents both in so short a view. Ostervald de
l'Exercise du Ministere, which a learned and valuable friend recommended to me
when I was collecting these thoughts, comes the nearest to my plan, both in
method and precision, of any thing I have seen. But as that is written in
French, and is confined to the duties of the ministerial function, without any
directions in the preparatory studies, I thought it not sufficient to supercede
the prosecution of my design.

The present low state of practical christianity in this nation, from the
prevalence of infidelity and libertinism on the one hand, and the power of
delusion and enthusiasm on the other, is never enough to be lamented by those,
who have the religion of the gospel at heart; and though we must expect a
divine power to introduce a better face of things amongst us, yet how far this
growing evil may be repelled or diminished, by the awakened zeal, vigilance,
and wisdom of pastors and preachers in their respective departments, it becomes
those, who have the honor to appear in that sacred character, seriously to
consider. At least this is a powerful argument to excite their efforts to see
what can be done; and to quicken them to greater diligence in the several parts
of their holy function, in dependence on the divine blessing for the desired
success.

Now, reader, if thou art a candidate for the sacred ministry, or already
entered upon it, I would with my sincere prayer for the divine blessing,
recommend the following sheets to thy perusal, not as a mere speculative
treatise, but as a practical ENCHIRIDION.

" -- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum."
THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. OF the right distribution and management of our time. Page. 11 CHAP.
II. How to read authors to advantage. Page. 19 CHAP. III. How to study to
advantage. Page. 27 CHAP. IV. The method of collecting and improving useful
thoughts from conversation. Page. 36 CHAP. V. Concerning the improvement of our
thoughts when alone. Page. 43
PART II.
CHAP. I. Of composing of sermons. Page. 49 CHAP. II. General rules relating to
preaching. Page. 62 CHAP. III. Of the duties immediately previous to the work
of the pulpit. Page. 74 CHAP. IV. Of pulpit elocution. Page. 79 CHAP. V. Of
prayer. Page. 88 CHAP. VI. Concerning the administration of the sacraments.
Page. 106 CHAP. VII. Of visiting the sick. Page. 118 CHAP. VIII, Concerning the
minister's conduct toward his people. Page. 128 CHAP. IX. Concerning the
difficulties a minister must expect to meet with in the execution of his
office; and his proper support and encouragement under them. Page. 153
THE STUDENT AND PASTOR. PART I.
HE that devotes himself to the work of the sacred ministry should be
continually intent on two things -- the improvement of his own mind, and the
mind of others, in the most important and useful knowledge.

This comprehends the whole office of a STUDENT and PASTOR.

The business of a STUDENT is to be so employed, as to be continually making
some valuable accessions to his own intellectual furniture. To which five
things are necessary.

1. A proper distribution and management of his time. 2. A right method of
reading to advantage. 3. The order and regulation of his studies. 4. The proper
way of collecting and preserving useful sentiments from books and conversation.
5. The improvement of his thoughts when alone.
CHAP. I. Of the right distribution and management of our time.
A STUDENT should be as frugal of his time, as a miser is of his money; should
save it with as much care, and spend it with as much caution. "To (...) careful
how we manage and employ our time is one of the first precepts that is taught
in the school of wisdom, and one of the last that is learnt. And it is a
prodigious thing to consider, that although, amongst all the talents which are
committed to our stewardship, time, upon several accounts, is the most
precious; yet, there is not any one of which the generality of men are more
profuse and regardless. Nay, it is obvious to observe, that even those persons
who are frugal and thrifty in every thing else, are yet extremely prodigal of
their best revenue, time; 'of which alone,' as Seneca nobly observed, 'it is a
virtue to be covetous.' It is amazing to think how much time may be gained by
proper economy;" Ad summa perveniet nemo, nisi tempore, quo nihil esse fugacius
constat, prudenter utarur.

Ringal de Rat. Stud. p. 100.
and how much good literature may be acquired, if that gain be rightly applied.
To this purpose, let the following rules be observed. --

I. TAKE particular notice of those things which are most apt to rob you of
your time. Upon such an inquest, you will probably detect the following
thieves. O fures, O latrones, O tyrannos crudelissimos quorum consilio mihi
unquam periit Hora!

Id. p. 104.
--

1. The bed. Never allow yourself above six hours sleep at most. Physicians all
tell you that nature demands no more, for the proper recruits of health and
spirits. All beyond this is luxury; no less prejudicial to the animal
constitution than intemperate meals; and no less hurtful to the powers of the
mind, than to those of the body. It insensibly weakens and relaxes both.

2. Ceremonious and formal visits. They may sometimes be necessary; but, if
they cannot be improved to some useful purpose, the shorter they are, the
better. Much of this time is spent to no purpose; and, it is to be feared, not
a little of it, to bad purpose.

3. Indolence is another thief of time; or indulging a slow, heavy, inactive
disposition; delaying or deferring, necessary business to a future time, which
ought to be set about immediately; idle musi^^, or indulging to vain,
chimerical imaginations. -- This is very natural to some, and as unnatural to
others; and commonly leads to another, and greater waste of time, namely --

4. Sloth and idleness. No man takes more pains than the slothful man.
Indolence and ease are the rust of the mind. No habit grows faster by
indulgence, exposes to more temptations, or renders a man more uneasy to
himself, or more useless to others. Quaedam tempora eripi^ntur (sc. (...))
nobis, quaedam subducuntur (amicis,) quaedam (...) turpis^ima tamen est jactura
(...)


5. Reading useless books; -- and those books may be called useless to you,
which you either do not understand; or, if you do, afford neither solid
improvement, nor suitable entertainment* and especially pernicious books, or
such as tend to give the mind a wrong turn, or bad tincture.

6. Much time is often lost by a wrong method of studying, and especially by
applying to those branches of learning which have no connection with the great
end you propose. Why should a divine affect the civilian? or dive into the
depths of politics? or be ambitious to excel in the obstrusest parts of
mathematical science? He has spent much time and labor in these disquisitions,
and, at last, gained his point. But, after all his expense, what is he the
better preacher, or the better man? In every undertaking, especially when we
enter upon a new course of study, we should remember the Cui Bono; and ask
ourselves, how far this is like to improve our usefulness, or to add to our
reputation, under that character we are about to sustain, and wherein we aim at
some degree of distinction.

7. Much time is lost by an unnatural bent of the mind to a study, to which it
is not disposed, or by which the faculties are already* fatigued. It will find
great relief by a change of employment. A man who rides post, to save time,
would not choose to be always spurring a jaded horse, but will rather change him
for a fresh one, wher^by he makes a speedier progress, with more ease to
himself. Nil invita Minerva. The activity of the mind is so great, that it
often finds more relief and refreshment, by turning to a new track of thinking
different from that in which it has grown tired, than it does from a total
relaxation of thought in mere bodily exercise; which shows that it is not
labor that tires it, so much as a dull uniformity of employment; since it is
more refreshed by variety than by rest. Post Lectione seu stylo defessus nihil
nitor repugnant^ natura; ^ed exercitii genus aliud quaero, quo t^di^m varietas
minuat.

Rin.


II. LET your most precious time, that wherein your thoughts are most composed
and free, be sacred to the most serious and important studies. Give the morning
to composition, or to the reading of some valuable author of antiquity, with
whom it is worth your while to be well acquainted. The afternoon will suffice
for history, chronology, politics, news, travels, geography, and the common run
of pamphlets; and let your books of entertainment amuse a dull hour, when you
are fit for nothing else. To apply your early time or fresh thoughts to these
is like drinking wine in the morning; and giving too much of your time and
thoughts to them, like drinking the same intoxicating liquor to excess, and
will have the same effect on the mind, as that has on the body.

III. REMEMBER to be always beforehand with your business -- Post est occasio
calva. Whatever must be done, and may be done now, as well as hereafter, for
this very reason, had better be done now. This is a prudent maxim in life,
applicable to a thousand cases; and of no less advantage to a student, than to
a tradesman. Defer nothing to the very last, lest some intervening accident
should prevent the execution of an important purpose, or put you into a hurry
in the prosecution of it; for what is done with precipitance and has^e seldom
succeeds so well, or is executed with that accuracy and discretion, as what is
the effect of more mature and deliberate thought. A traveller, who must reach
his home in a given time, would not be thought discreet, if, by loitering at
the beginning of his journey, he is forced to run himself out of breath at the
end.

IV. THAT time is not lost, but improved, which is spent in those exercises
which are necessary to invigorate and strengthen the faculties for harder work;
or to preserve a good state of health and spirits; as eating, drinking,
sleeping, physic, bodily exercise, recreations, and the like. Because, through
a neglect of these, a STUDENT may contract a bad habit of body, and mind; or so
far impair his constitution, as to render him a long time unfit for useful
service. But est modus in rebus, and excess of these things defeats their end,
and is as prejudicial to health, as a discreet and moderate use of them is
conducive to it. Such diversions, as the CLERGYMAN'S health or temper of mind
may render proper for him, ought to be manly, decent, and grave; and such as
may neither possess his mind or time too much, nor give a bad character of him
to others. His cheerfulness ought to be frank, but neither excessive nor
licentious. His friends and his garden ought to be his chief diversions; and
his study his chief employment.

Burnet's Disc.


V. ENTER upon nothing but what you are determined to pursue and finish. Much
time is often lost in vain attempts, and in leaving useful designs imperfect.
For, as he who begins to build a house, and never completes it, must set down
to his loss the greatest part of his money thus expended; so a STUDENT, who
desists from a work, re infecta, wherein he has taken much pains, is chargeable
with as fruitless an expense of his time, as the other is of his money. If you
are writing a book, or engaged in any work, which requires much time and pains
to execute, lay it down as a rule, to let no day pass without putting a hand to
it. Nulla dies sine linea will carry you, like a steady traveller, a vast
length in one year.


CHAP. II. How to read Authors to Advantage.
A STUDENT should be as careful what books he reads, as what company he keeps.
They both leave the same tincture on the mind.

I. Do not read indiscriminately; nor indulge a curiosity of perusing every new
book that comes out; nor desire to read it, until, from the known ability of
the author, or from the information of some judicious friend, you know it is
worth your reading. The curiosity of Vanillus, to be personally acquainted with
men and their characters, leads him into all company when he is at Bath; and,
when he hears of a stranger, he is uneasy till he knows him, and is able to
give others a description of his person, equipage, and family. By this turn of
temper, Vanillus loses much time, which would be more agreeably and profitably
spent in the conversation of a few select friends. He knows men, but not human
nature. There is a wide difference between a man of reading and a man of
learning. One cannot read every thing; and, if he could, he would be never the
wiser. The bad would spoil the good, fill the mind with a confused medley of
sentiments and desires, and the end of reading would be entirely defeated, for
want of time and power to improve and practice. A man that eats of every dish
at the table overloads his stomach, is sick, and digests nothing. He had better
have fasted. Distrahit animum librorum multitudo -- Fastidientis stomachi multa
degustare, quae ubi varia sunt et diversa inquinant, non alwit.

Sen.


II. LAY aside the fruitless inclination of reading a trifling author quite
through, in hopes of finding something better at the end. You are sure of
finding something better in another on the same subject; therefore lose not a
certainty for the sake of a mere possibility. Why should you confine yourself
to listen to the impertinence of one man, when, by only turning your back, you
may be entertained and improved by the more pleasing and instructive
conversation of another.?

III. OBSERVE the characteristical beauties of your author. Every good writer
has his peculiar felicity* his distinguishing excellence. Some excel in style;
entertain us with easy, natural language; or with an elegance and propriety of
expression; or delight us with their florid, smooth, and well turned periods.
Some love a figurative, diffuse, and flowing style. Others, quite a plain,
rational, discursive one. Each have their excellence; but the most elegant is
that which is the most natural, proper, and expressive. It cannot then be too
short and plain, both to delight and instruct; the two great ends of language.
A style, overloaded with studied ornaments, grows prolix; and prolixity always
weakens or obscures the sentiment it would express. No decorations of well
chosen words, or harmony of cadence, can atone for this fault. Such a style is
like a lady, who, in adorning her person, spoils a good shape by the tawdry of
her dress, and a fine face by paint and patches. Both proceed from the same
affectation, in preferring the embellishments of art to those of nature; whose
charms are infinitely more powerful and pleasing. Others excel in sentiments.
Those sent^ments strike us with most pleasure, which are strong, or clear, or
soft, or sublime, pathetic, just, or uncommon. Whatever has the most weight and
brevity finds the quickest way to the heart. Others excel in method; in a
natural disposition of the subject, and in an easy, free, familiar way of
communicating thoughts to the understanding. They afford nothing very striking;
you approve and are well pleased with your author, and scarce know for what.
This resembles the Ie ne scay quoy, tout agreeable, in the very humor, turn,
and air of some people we converse with. Others are very happy in their manner
and way of conveying clear, rational, solid arguments and instructions to the
mind, which, at once, arrest your attention, command your approbation, and
force your assent. You see every thing in broad day; in a fair, strong, and
proper light. A perfect writer has all th^se excellencies of style, sentiment,
method, and manner, united; and a judicious reader will observe, in which of
them his author most excels.

IV. FROM all your authors, choose one or two for your model, by which to form
your style and sentiments; and let them be your Enchiridia, your pocket
companions. Consult and imitate them every day, till you are not only master of
their style and sentiments, but imbibe their spirit. But be very cautious, both
in your choice and imitation, lest, with their excellencies, you adopt their
faults, to which an excessive veneration for them makes you blind. Certis
ingeniis immorari et innutriri oportet, si veli^ aliquid attrahere quod in
animo fideliter (...) -- pro^atos itaque femper lege, et siquando ad alios
divertere ^ibuerit, ad priores redi.

Sen.


V. IF your author has an established reputation, and you do not relish him,
suspect your own taste and judgment. Perhaps something has biassed your mind
against him; find it out, and compare it with those beauties, which charm his
other readers, more than all his blemishes offend them. -- ubi plura nitent in
carmine, non ego pau^is
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura.
Hor. de Art. Poet.
Or perhaps you do not understand him, and it is no wonder then you do not
admire him. If your judgment be good, it is a sure sign your author is so, when
the more you read him the more you like him. A good friend and a good book are
known by this -- They grow in your esteem, as you grow in acquaintance with
them.

When you meet with such an author on any subject, stick by him; make yourself
master of him. You will discover new beauties in him, every time you read him,
and regret not that you are unread in the common rubbish. Some books better
deserve to be read through ten times, than others once. -- d^cies repe^ita
placebun^. (...)


VI. BEFORE you sit down to a book* taste it; that is, examine the title page*
the preface, the contents, and the index; then turn to the place where some
important article is discussed; observe the author's diction, argument, method,
and manner of treating it; and if* after two or three such trials, you find he
is obscure, confused, pedantic, shallow, or trifling, depend upon it he is not
worth your reading.

VII. IF the book be your own, make marks at the margin against those passages
where the sentiment is well conceived or expressed, and worth your remembering
or retailing; or transfer it into your common place book, under the head your
author is treating of; or at least a reference to it. Inter legendum authorem
non oscitanter (...), siquod ^ucidat insigne verbum, si quod argumentum* aut
inv^ntum acute, aut tortum apt, si qua sententia digna quae memorae
commendetur: isque locus erit apta notula quapiam insigniendus.

Erasm. de Rat. S^ud.
-- In reading an ancient Latin or Greek author, it will be a help to the
memory to transcribe the passages that struck you most, in the spare leaves at
the beginning or end of the book, in English, and by thus skimming off the
cream, you will have it always ready for use. If you meet with a happy
expr^ssion, or even one well chosen word on any subject, which you may have
occasion to use, and wish it might occur to you, when you are at a loss for
expressions, mark it, and make it your own forever. Qu^^to pluris ^ece^is
exiguum proventum* tanto ad (...) do^^rinae vestigia es evasu^^s. Qui
vi^^ssimos quosque nummos admirantur, intuentur ^rebro, et servant accurate, ad
summas saepenumero divitias perveniunt; pari modo, si quis aptarit sudorum
metam been scribere, discar mirari been scripta, discar ga^dere, si vel nomina
duo conjunxerit venuste.
-- Thus you will read with taste and profit, and avoid the censure that falls
upon --

A bookish blockhead ignorantly read,
With loads of learned lumber in his head.
CHAP. III. How to Study to Advantage.
HERE we must consider both the subjects and method.

As to the subjects of your study --

Consider what will make you most eminent and useful in your profession;
Quisquis verbum Domini statuit sincere praedicare, perpetuus et assiduus sit
oportet in sancti propositi meditatione, ut sibi constent omnia vitae studia.

Eras. Eccl. p. 6, 7.

Quemadmodum enim non inscite dixit quidam, 'tum eruditum appelandum esse, non
qui didicerit plurima, sed qui optima maximaque necessaria;' ita non est
necesse ut futuris Ecclesiastes in quibuslibet consumat operam atque ae^atem --
sed ea primum ac potissimum discat quae ad docendi munus sunt accommodatissima.

Id. p. 92, 93.


This kind of study is to be your serious business, and daily and dilligently
prosecuted. In all your reading keep this point in view. A traveller should
have his right road and the end of his journey always in his eye, whatever
little diversions or excursions he may indulge by the way. You may sometimes
be, Nescio quid meditans nugarum, but do not be totus in illis. Hor. Sat. L. 1.
S. 9.


To an acquaintance with books join the study of human nature. Your own heart,
passions, temper, humor, habits and dispositions, will be the books you have
most need to consult on this subject. Vid. Self-knowledge. Part. 1. chap. 9 11.
For human nature, in the main strokes of it, is much the same in all the human
species Les hommes sont a peu pres tous faits de la meme maniere; et ainsi ce
qui nous a touch, les touchera aus^i.
-- Next to this, your observations on the ways and characters and tempers of
men, will be of great help to you; together with some books where human nature
is strongly and finely painted, in its various shapes and appearances.

It is not beneath the Christian philosopher to take some pains to be
acquainted with the world; or the humors, manners, forms, ceremonies*
characters and customs of men; at least so far, as is necessary to avoid
singularity and a disagreeable awkwardness, and to preserve a decorum, and an
easy address in all company.

A STUDENT should not think any thing unworthy his attention and notice, that
has a tendency either to make him more agreeable, or more useful to others.
Some regard is therefore due to dress, behavior, the usual forms of civility,
and whatever contributes to the art of pleasing. Among these I would
particularly recommend a habit of expressing his sentiments freely and properly
upon any subject. Let his style and language be studied principally with this
view.

As to the method of studying to advantage --

Pray for a divine blessing on your studies; that God would guide you into the
most useful knowledge and all important truths; direct your subjects, and
assist your meditations upon them.

Procure a collection of the best and most approved books, which treat of the
sciences you chiefly desire to cultivate, and make yourself master of them in
the way before prescribed.

Consult your own genius and inclination in the study you intend to pursue; You
will else row against the tide, and make no progress that is either
comfortable, or creditable to yourself.

Compose your spirits, fix your thoughts, and be wholly intent on the subject
in hand. Never pretend to study whilst the mind is not recovered from a hurry
of cares, or the perturbations of passion. Such abrupt and violent transitions
are a discipline to which it will not easily submit, especially if it has not
been well managed, and long accustomed to it. Aurora musis amica, necnon
vespera: Because the mind is then commonly most free and disengaged.

Let the scene of your studies, be a place of silence and solitude; where you
may be most free from interruption and avocation.

When you have a mind to improve a single thought, or to be clear ^n any
particular point, do not leave it till you are master of it. View it in every
light. Try how many ways you can express it, and which is the shortest and
best. Would you enlarge upon it, hunt it down from author to author; some of
which will suggest hints concerning it, which perhaps never occurred to you
before; and give every circumstance its weight. Thus, by being master of every
subject as you proceed, though you make but a small progress in reading, you
will make a speedy one in useful knowledge. To leave matters undetermined, and
the mind unsatisfied in what we study, is but to multiply half notions,
introduce confusion, and is the way to make a pedant, but not a scholar.

Go to the fountain head. Read original authors, rather than those who
translate or retail their thoughts. It will give you more satisfaction, more
certainty, more judgment, and more confidence, when those authors are the
subjects of conversation, than you can have by taking your knowledge of them at
second hand. It is trusting to translations, quotations and epitomies, that
makes so many half scholars so impertinently wise.

Finally* Be patient of labor. The more you accustom yourself to laborious
thinking, the better you will bear it. But take care the mind be not jaded.
Socrates ille non hominum modo, verum etiam Apollinis oraculo, sapientissimus
judicatus, et perennis Philosophiae Fons, dicere solet: Radicem quidem
eruditionis peramarum esse, sed fructum habere jucindissimum; initioque magnos
adferre labores, sed honestissimum sudantibus praemimum reponere. Ergo, O Tu*
quisquis es, cui ignea vis in pectore exarsit, cui flamma in praecordiis micat,
po^^ul absint mollia, lenia, facillia, blanda, quae animi impetum extinguere
solent. Dura petamus, etc.

Ringel


If divinity be your peculiar study, observe the following rules --

1. Be critically expert in the original scriptures of the bible, and read a
chapter in Hebrew, and another in Greek every day. And especially observe the
different senses in which the same original word is used by the same author.
This often throws a great light on his meaning.

2. When you have found what you take to be your author's own sense, keep to
that, and admit of no vague, uncertain or conjectural constructions, whatever
doctrine they may discountenance or favor.

3. Be sure to make the sacred scripture the scource, standard, and rule of all
your theological sentiments. Take them from it, bring them to it, and try them
by it.

4. Make yourself master of some short well chosen system of divinity, for the
sake of method and memory; but take care, Nullius in verbum jurare magistri,
that you be not swayed by the credit of any human names in matters of divine
faith. Let r^ason, evidence, and argument, be the only authorities to which you
submit. Remember it is truth you seek; and seek her, as you would do any thing
else, in the place where she is most likely to be found.

5. Divest yourself as much as possible of all prepossession in favor of* or
prejudice against, any particular party names and notions. Let the mind be
equally balanced, or it will never rightly determine the weight of arguments.
Prejudice in one scale will outweigh much solid truth in the other; and under
such a prepossession, the mind only observes which balance preponderates, not
what it is that turns it.

6. Cultivate a proper sense of the imbecility of the human mind, and its
proneness to error, both in yourself and others. This will guard you against a
dogmatical confidence in defense of your own opin^ons, and arm you against the
influence of ^t in others. And, on the contrary* endeavor after a meek,
humble* teachable temper; which, from the highest authority, we are sure, is
the best disposition of mind, to seek and receive divine truth.

7. Be not fond of controversy. Theological altercations have in all ages been
the bane of real religion, and the fatal scource of unknown mischief to true
christianity. It sours the temper, confounds the judgment, excites malevolence,
foments feuds, and banishes love from the heart: and in fine, is the devil's
most successful engine to depreciate and destroy the principals of vital piety.
-- Let the controversies you read be the most important, viz. those against the
Deists and Papists; and read only the best authors upon them. Among whom you
will find none to exceed the late bishop of London and Dr. Leland in the
former, and Dr. Tillotson and Chillingworth in the latter*

8. Avoid theological minutenesses. Lay no stress on trifles; as you see many
do, either from a wrong education, or a weak turn of mind. Reserve your zeal
for the most important subjects, and throw it not away upon little things.

Lastly. Let none but the best writers in divinity be your favorites; and
those are the best writers, who at once discover a clear head and a good heart,
solid sense and serious piety, where faith and reason, devotion and judgment,
go hand in hand.

CHAP. IV. The method of collecting and preserving useful thoughts from
conversation.
WHENEVER it can be done without affectation and pedantry, turn the
conversation on the subject you have been reading last, if you know it to be
suitable to your company; and introduce your maturest observations upon it.
This will fix it in your memory, especially if it becomes matter of debate.
Quicquid didiceris id confes^im doceas; sic et tu^ firmare, e^ prodesse aliis
potes. E^ doce quae noveris, eaque diversis horis, aliis ^que aliis conv^nient
inculcare. Satis sit, si quispiam te audiat, interia exercitio miram rerum
copiam tibi comparaveris.

Ringel.
For the mind is never more tenac^ous of any principles, than those it has been
warmly engaged in the defense of. And in the course of such debate you may
perhaps view them in a new light; and be able to form a better judgment of
them, and be excited to examine them with more care. Intercourse awakens the
powers, whets the mind, and rubs off the rust it is apt to contract by solitary
thinking. The pump for want of use grows dry, or keeps its water at the bottom,
which will not be fetched up unless more be added.

When you have talked over the subject you have read, think over what you have
talked of; and perhaps you will be able to see more weight in the sentiments
you opposed, than you were willing to admit in the presence of your antagonist.
And if you suspect you was then in error, you may now retract it without fear
of mortification. That you may at once improve and please in conversation,
remember the following rules. --

I. CHOOSE your company, as you do your books; and to the same end. The best
company, like the best books, are those, which are at once improving and
entertaining. Ille tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.

Hor. de Art. Poet.
If you can receive neither pleasure nor profit from your company, endeavor to
furnish it for them. If this can not bed one, and especially if there be danger
of receiving hurt from them, quit them, as decently as you can.

II. STUDY the humor of your company and their character. If they be your
superiors, or much inclined to talk, be an attentive hearer. If your
inferiors, or more disposed to hear, be an instructive speaker.

III. WHEN the conversation drops, revive it with some general topic, by
starting a subject on which you have some good things to say, or you know
others have. To which end it will not be amiss, to be a little prepared with
topics of conversation suitable to the company you are going into; and the
course of your own thoughts in conversation will be more free, than you
ordinarily find them to be in silent meditation.

IV. WHEN any thing occurs that is new, or instructive, or that you are willing
to make your own, enter it down in your minute or commonplace book, if you
cannot trust your memory; for in conversation all (...) free-booters; whatever
you lay your hand on that is worth keeping, is lawful prize, but take care that
you do not charge either the one or the other with trash.

V. NEVER stand for a cipher in company* by a total silence. It will appear
boorish and awkward, and give a check to the freedom of others. It Is ill
manners* Better say a trivial thing than nothing at all. Perhaps y^u hear a
deal of impertinence, uttered by some in the company, which you heartily
excuse; presume upon their candor, if you happen to talk in the same manner.
You have a right to claim it: You will readily receive it. -- Something trite
and low uttered with an easy, free, obliging air, will be better received than
entire silence; and indeed than a good sentiment delivered in a stiff,
p^dantick, or assuming manner. And many good things may arise out of a common
observation. However, after a dead silence, it will set the conversation a
going; and the company, who want to be relieved from it, will be obliged to
you. This is a secret that will never fail to please.

VI. JOIN not in the hurry and clamor of the talk, especially when a trifling
point is disputed, and several speak at once, but be a patient hearer, till you
have made yourself master of the subject and the arguments on both sides; and
then you may possibly find an opportunity to put in as mediator, with credit to
your judgment,

Repeat not a good thing in the same company twice, unless you are sure you are
not distinctly heard the first time.

VII. THOUGH you may safely animadvert upon, yet do no not oppose, much less
rally, the foibles or mistakes of any one in the company; unless they be very
notorious, and there be no danger of giving offense. But remember that he
himself sees the matter in a different light from what you do, and with other
eyes.

VIII. IF detraction or profaneness mingle with the conversation,
discountenance it by a severe, or a resolute silence, where reproof would be
thought indelicate. If this be not sufficient to put a stop to it, make no
scruple to withdraw. Possidonius relates of St. Austin, that this Latin dis^ich
was inscribed on the table where he entertained his friends. Quisquis amat
dictis absentem rodere amic^m,
Hank mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.



IX. AFFECT not to shine in conversation, especially before those who have a
good opinion of their own understanding.

The sure way to please them, is to give them opportunity to show their parts.
A monopoly of this kind will scarce ever be endured with patience. Conversation
is a sort of commerce, toward which every one ought to furnish his quota, i.
e. to hear and speak in his turn. It Is acting against the rules of honesly and
laws of commerce, to monopolize all, and deprive others of the share they have
in the gain. It Is in like manner, a kind of injustice in those who compose the
circle, always to usurp the talk. If your design by it is to make a show of
your parts, and to procure esteem, you quite mistake your interest; for you
exasperate those against you, whom you thus force to silence, who cannot bear
the ascendant you give yourself, and the degree of superiority you assume.
Reflect* upon ridriule, vol 1. p. 55.


X. BEAR with the impertinence of conversation. Something may be learned from
them* or some opportunity may be given you to put in a sentiment more apropos.
Besides, what appears low and flat to you, may not to another. That which makes
common conversation so nauseous, are the applauses bestowed on follies. Narrow
souls admire every thing, and cry up the least trifles that ought to be let
pass. That which becomes a well bred man, on these occasions, is to say
nothing. It would be a criminal complaisance to applaud offensive fooleries. It
would be likewise a faulty delicacy, to bear with nothing but what is
exquisite, and to express contempt for every thing that is flat and trivial.
Idem, p. 346.


XI. APPEAR perfectly free, friendly, well pleased, easy, and unreserved. This
will make others so; and draw out many a good thought from them. And is much
more pleasing than a studied politeness, and all the usual arts of common place
civility. However it is extolled as the great art of conversation, to appear
with the utmost openness and civility when you are most upon the reserve: Yet,
as it is not only the ordinary dress of courtiers, and travelers, but an art
that frequently belongs to the shops, the covering is much more transparent,
than they who act under it are apt to think. And besides, such an address is
really nauseous among friends; and the greatest masters of this artful
smoothness, seldom deceive others thereby, so much as themselves.

Vid. Advice to a Son, p. 31.


CHAP. V. Concerning the improvement of our thoughts when alone.
A STUDENT, like a philosopher, should never be less alone, than when alone.
Then it is, that, if it be not his own fault, he may enjoy the best of company.

Next to the regulation of the appetites and passions, the most imp^rtant
branch of self government is the command of our thoughts; which without a
strict guard will be as apt to ramble, as the other to rebel. The great
difficulty will be to keep them fixed and steadily employed upon your subject.
To this end let the mind be calm and dispassionate -- View your theme in every
light -- collect your best thoughts upon it -- Clothe those thoughts in words,
and consider how Mr. Addison, Mr. Melmoth, or other writer you admire, would
express the same. -- Cuard against a vagrancy or dissipation of your thoughts
-- recall them when they are rambling; and observe by what connection of ideas or
images they are enticed away from their work, and refix them more diligently.
-- If you have a pen and ink at hand, set down your best sentiments on paper.
-- If your subject be of a r^ligious nature, it may not be amiss to recollect
some proper text of scripture, as a standard to which you may recall your
vagrant forces.

Let the matter of your conversations be something seasonable, important, or
entertaining. Consult the temper your mind is in, or ought to be in at that
time; and let your subject be suitable to it.

Take care that nothing vain, or vicious ^^eal into your mind when alone.
Hereby you may make yourself a very bad companion to yourself; and become your
own tempter.

If the place or occasion will admit it, think viva voce, or utter your
thoughts aloud.

In your evening meditations, go over in your mind, the best things you have
read or heard that day, and recollect them the next morning.

The great advantage of being alone is, that you may choose your company; either
your books, your friend, your God, or yourself. There is another will be ready
to intrude, if not resolutely repelled. By the turn of your thoughts, you may
detect his entrance, and by what passage he stole in. You may know him by his
cloven foot; and you have the best precept, exemplified by the best precedent,
how to eject him. See James iv.7. compared with Matt. iv.10.


If books be your subject, or what you lately read and laid up in your memory.
your mental employment will be recollection and judgment. Recollection, to
recall to your mind the good things you have read; and judgment, to range them
under their proper class; and to consider upon what occasion, or in what
company it may be proper or useful to produce them.

If you choose a friend for the companion of your solitude, let it not be merely
for your own pleasure; but consider in what way you may improve or entertain
him; or what it is you would learn from him; and in what manner you may best
behave toward him* the next time you come into his company.

When you desire to have the great God for the object of your contemplation, as
you should always do in your religious retirements, your mind cannot be too
serious, composed, and free. Now it is that the thoughts will be most apt to
revolt and ramble; and the utmost efforts must be used to guard and guide them.
In this case two things you should never forget.

1. Earnestly implore his help, that you may think not only steadily, but
worthily of him.

2. Consider him as present with you; and as witness to all the employment of
your mind.

Lastly. If you are your own companion, and self meditation be your business,
you have a large field before you. But one thing be sure not to neglect, viz.
Sharply and impartially to reprove yourself, in case of any observable failure;
and resolve to amend your conduct in that particular, especially when the same
circumstances recur.

END OF PART FIRST.
THE STUDENT AND PASTOR. PART II.
THE business of a Pastor is to do all he can to promote the eternal interest
of the souls of men. And to keep his eye continually on this, the great object
of the sacred office, will be a good direction to him in the prosecution of it.

He is now to improve, regulate, digest, and apply that stock of knowledge he
has taken so much pains to acquire; and examine what part of it will be most
helpful to him in his great design.

The duties of the Pastor's office may be comprised under the six following
general heads.

Preaching. -- Praying. -- Administering the Seals. -- Visiting the sick. -- His
conduct toward his people in general. -- And toward persons of different
characters in particular. 1. Preaching. This may be divided into two parts;

Preparation, and elocution.

1. Preparation, which consists of composition, and the duties immediately
previous to preaching.

CHAP I. Of composing of sermons.
"BESIDES all the usual academical preparations, the study of languages,
sciences, divinity, etc., there is a particular art of preaching to which if
ministers (...) more seriously apply themselves, it would extremely facilitate
that service, and make it more easy to themselves, and more profitable to their
hearers." For acquiring which art the rules laid down in this and the three
following chapters may be helpful to those who are entering upon the sacred
employment.

1. The first thing, to be considered, is the choice of the subject. Here you
must consult your own genius, taste, and abilities; and choose those subjects
which have most impressed your own mind; for on those you are most likely to
succeed, and to produce the most mature and useful sentiments. Consult also the
temper, taste, and capacities of your audience. For the more suitable your
subject, style and sentiments are to them, the more likely you will be, both to
please, and improve them. And therefore a minister should never fix, nor choose
to preach, amongst a people, whose opinions are widely different from his own.
"Let the most useful and pertinent subjects be your most freequent choice Those
are the most useful, which are the most edifying* and those most pertinent,
which are most fitted to the capacities and necessities of the auditory. To
both which you ought to have a special regard." -- If you are at aloss for a
text, consult the contents of the severel volumes of sermons, you have by you.
That a man may form himself to preaching he ought judiciously to take some of
the best models, and try what he can do on a text handled by them without
reading them* and then compare his with theirs. This will more sensibly and
without putting him to the blush, model him to imitate, or, if he can, to excel
the best authors. -- Whatever particular text strikes your mind with more than
common force, in the course of your reading or meditating the scriptures, pen
it down with some useful strictures that may occur to you, for the foundation
of a future work. By this mean, you will have a good supply of suitable texts
at hand -- A sermon should be made for a text, and not a text found out for a
sermon. For, to give our discourses weight, it should appear that we are led to
them by our text. Such sermons will probably have much more effect than a
general discourse to which a text seems only to be added as a decent
introduction, but to which no regard is had in the progress of it. -- Affect
not an obscure, difficult, or barren text, to show your ingenuity in throwing
light upon it, or set others a wondering what you can make of it. Discourses
from such texts must be either unprofitable or unnatural. Many will remember
the text that remember nothing else; therefore such a choice should be made as
may at least put a weighty and speaking sentence of the scriptures upon the
memories of the people.

Burnet.


2. Having chosen your subject; your next care is, to be furnished with a store
of useful and pertinent thoughts upon it. Having fixed your spot on which to
build, you are now to prepare materials. To this purpose, carefully peruse your
text, both in the original and different translations. Attend to its connexions
and reference; and observe what is the principal subject it points to. Collect
from your concordance, or common place book to the bible, or from Mr. Clark's
Annotations, or from Wilson's Christian Dictionary, and others, all its
parallel places, or the several scriptures that have a reference to it. Pen
them down on loose paper, to be properly interwoven into the discourse under
any particular head or branch of it -- Consult other authors on the same
subject. Use their thoughts, but not their words, unless you quote them
expressly; which should never be done, unless your author be a writer of
eminence, and of good repute with your audience. And let it be a sentiment so
weighty, and well expressed, as deserves to be remembered by them; and then
they will remember it the sooner as coming from him, than from yourself.

3. Having thus provided materials, form your plan. Let your method, as well as
your subject, flow from your text. Let the division be easy and natural, and
such as the audience would expect. 'Let it arise from the subject itself; and
give a light and just order to the several parts. Such a division, as may
easily be remembered; and at the same time help to connect and retain the
whole. In fine, a division that shows at once the extent of the subject, and of
all its parts.' -- Avoid a tedious multiplication of particulars under every
general head of your discourse. Let your particlar heads be not only few, but
distinct; and affect not to conceal the number and order of them, if they be
distinct and natural, as some modern preachers do. It is a false delicacy to
aim at reducing a sermon to the form of a polite harangue. The other method of
expressing the number of heads, in their proper order, is not only more
pleasing to the common sort of hearers, but a help to their understanding and
memory; which a preacher should by all means carefully regard. It is but a bad
rule in Alsted, at least for vulgar auditories, when he advises to conceal and
alter the method for variety's sake. Crypsis dispositionis tollit fastidium
auditoris. This may be true of itching curious hearers, but not of such as
regard their own profit and edification.

Wilk. Eccles.
It will be proper, to draw your method or plan, on a loose piece of paper laid
before you, with the several particulars under their respective general heads;
and whatever place of scripture, or inferences, etc., you meet with in reading
or meditating, pertinent to any particular point you shall speak to, you may
then place them under that particular; for all things may not come to your mind
at once, and a thought is so quickly gone, let your memory be almost ever so
tenacious and retentive, that you will hardly retain it, unless it be in this
manner committed to paper. And whatever* place of scripture you make use of,
which you do not well understand, consult the ablest commentators on that
passage for the meaning of it; that you may not apply it to a wrong sense.

4. Having thus provided materials, and formed your plan, begin the
superstructure; which will now be raised and adorned with great ease, and be
continually improving upon your hands; for no man can talk well on a subject,
of which he is not entirely master. Etenim ex rerum cognitione efflorescent et
redundet oportet oration: Quae nisi subest res ab oratore percepta et cognita,
inanem quandam habet elocutionem, et ^ere puerilem.

Cicero.


"In the beginning you must endeavor to gain the favor of the audience, by a
modest introduction, a respectful address, and the genuine marks of candor and
probity." Sed haec adjuvant in oratore, lenitas vocis, vultu^, pudori^
significatio, verborum comitas.

Id.
Let your exordium be short, modest, grave, and striking; either by proposing
your method, and entering upon your subject directly; or by a few important
general observations, which are connected with, or naturally lead to it: Or by
some short unexpected remark on the words of the text. In your enlargement on
particulars, if you find your thoughts do not run freely on any point, do not
urge them too much; this will tire and jade the faculties too soon. But pursue
your plan. Better thoughts may occur afterward, which you may occasionally
insert.

Let your best sentiments stand in the beginning or end of a paragraph, and the
rest in the middle, which will pass very well in good company. And let every
head conclude with some striking sentence, or pertinent scripture.

As every complete sermon resembles a little book, the method of composing the
former, may be the same with what Ringelbergius tells us he used in composing
the latter.

"My first care, says he, is to form in my mind a perfect plan of the work
before me. Then in a large tablet, or sheet of paper, I set down the titles of
the chapters, or the several heads I am to dis^course on. Then I look over them
to see if they have their proper place, connection and coherence; and alter them
as I see occasion. Then whilst my mind is still warm with the subject, I take a
brief sketch of what is proper to be said under each head, which I write down
on a loose piece of paper; these I afterward transfer into my plan, and in a
fair hand transcribe under their proper heads. By these means, I have the whole
subject and method of the work under my eye at once. Then I every day
transcribe a chapter for the press, and add* or expunge, as I go along,
according as the matter requires. After this, when I see nothing deficient or
reduntant in the subject, I apply myself to revise the language." Let your
application be close, fervent, and animated. To which end, get your own heart
warmed and penetrated with your subject. For however drowsy, or inattentive
your hearers may be in the beginning, or middle of a discourse, they should be
always awakened, and warmed at the close. "It is oftentimes proper at the end
of a discourse, to make a short recapitulation, wherein the orator ought to
exert all his force and skill, in giving the audience a full, clear, concise
view of the chief topics he has enlarged upon." And let the last sentence of
the sermon, be either your text, or some pertinent scripture, or some weighty
thought well expressed and worth remembering.

5. Having thus raised your superstructure on the plan proposed, you must put
the finishing hand to the work by decently adorning it; which is the business
of a revisal, wherein you are to reexamine the method, matter, and style.

1. The method. Here perhaps you may see some small alterations necessary.
Example, this head may come in more naturally before that; such a sentiment
shine to more advantage at the conclusion of a paragraph; and this particular
head is not sufficiently distinct from that, and therefore both had better be
wrought into one.

2. With regard to the matter. Such a sentiment is expressed before, therefore
strike it out here; too much is said upon this part of the subject, too little
upon that; add here, retrench there; if any new thought, or pertinent scripture
occur to your mind, search out the proper place where to dispose of it.

3. With regard to your style. This thought is obscurely expressed, explain it;
this sentence is equivocal, be more determinate; this is too long, shorten it;
here is a jingle, correct it; this disposition of the words is harsh and hard
to be pronounced, alter it; this expression is too mean and vulgar, substitute
a better. Equidem in libris excudendis, cum speciosum aliquem vocum contextum,
aut verba duo, ornata invenio, laetitia ^xulto, majore, quam si aureum
reperissem.

Ringel.


I shall conclude this chapter with the following general rules relating to the
style of the pulpit.

1. Let it be plain, proper, and perspicuous; and then the shorter it is, the
better. A concise, full, and nervous style is always most striking, therefore
most pleasing. To obscure and weaken the sense by a studied ornament or flow of
words, is wrong oratory, and nauseous to every one of true taste.

"The words in a sermon must be simple and in common use, not favoring of the
schools, or above the understanding of the people. All long periods, such as
carry two or three different thoughts in them must be avoided; for few hearers
can follow or apprehend these. Niceties of style are lost before a common
audience."

2. Let your numbers be full and flowing; and carefully avoid all harshness and
dissonance in the choice and disposition of your words. This is a part of
rhetoric, which though carefully cultvated by the ancients, is too much
neglected by the moderns. See treatise on Prosaic numbers Numeros equidem vitam
vocaverim orationis; quod haud obscure apparebit, si senteniam numerosam
solveris, iisdem servatis et transpositis verbis. Quippe quae ante efficax
erat, ea soluta ridicula videbitur; quamobrem in omni opere, prima curarem esse
debet, ut res five membra cohereant; proxima, ut verba, seu modulatio numerorum.

Ringel.
"In reading over a discourse to ourselves, we must observe what words sound
harsh, and agree ill together; for there is a music in speaking, as well as in
singing, which a man though not otherwise critical in sounds, will soon
discover."

3. Observe a medium between a too short and too prolix a style. The
sententious style is apt to be defective. A prolix one, if the members of a
long sentence be not judiciously disposed, and fraught with a weight of
sentiment, tedious and disagreeable; and a low creeping style is as unbecoming
the dignity of the pulpit, as a high and turgid one. There is a decency to be
observed in our language, as well as our dress: Expression is the dress of
thought, and still
Appears more decent, as more suitable.
A low conceit in pompous words expressed,
Is like a clown in royal purple dressed;
For different styles with different subjects sort,
As several garbs, with country, town and court.
Some by old words to fame have made pretenc^*
Ancients in phraise, mere moderns in their sense*
Such labored nothings in so strange a style*
Amaze the unlearned, make the learned smile.
Pope.
With regard to both a prudent man will consid^er, not only what is decent in
itself, but what is most so at certain times. Omnique in re, posse quod deceat
facere, artis (...) naturae est; scire quid quandoque deceat, prudent^^*

Cicero.


4. An illustration of your subject by sensible images, and apt similies, will
always be agreeable.

Lastly. Let the conclusion of your periods be harmonious, and your concluding
thoughts the most memorable. Elocutio partibus quatuor consemmatur. Primum enim
si res tractetur magnifica, caveo ne particula usquam jaceat humi, infra
dignitatem orationis; tum etiam vide^ ne verbum idem, aut syllaba, si fieri
possit, bis ponatur ^ ad haec do operam, ut numerorum gratia, sive concentus
cohaereat, aut per omnes periodi parts, aut saltem in sine -- Postrema cura
est, ne multi sint sines sententiarum, (...) pedes easdem habeant.

Rin.


See more on this subject, Part II. C. 4.

CHAP. II. General rules relating to preaching.
2 IT were advisable for young preachers to pen down every sentence of their
sermons in short hand; and trust nothing to their memories, until they are
masters of a free, fluent, and proper style; and have acquired a good command
of their spirits, a free utterance, and a maturity of sentiments. Then they may
venture to leave something to the memory, by writing half sentences, until by
degrees they are able to trust to it a good part of the enlargment under every
head. This will be no great burden, provided they take care to be thoroughly
masters of their notes, before they go up into the pulpit; and will be a great
help to a free, decent, and natural elocution.

I would not advise any young minister, though ever so happy in a strength of
memory, entirely to lay aside his notes* it can answer no valuable end, and the
inconveniences of it are these; -- the thoughts may possibly wander; in that
case you are bewildered without a guide* This reflection will create a
confusion and perplexity in the mind, which the hearers will observe with pain;
and you will scarce ever be able to recover the right tract in that hurry of
spirits without many a trip and much trouble. This will throw a tremor, at
least a diffidence, on the mind, which will make it difficult to resume your
wonted courage. Besides, when so much attention is bestowed on the memory, you
will be apt to pay too little to the judgment and affections. You will not have
leisure to observe how much your own heart is affected, or how you may best
affect that of your hearers; who are never more pleased, than when they see
their preacher composed, free, and deeply impressed with his own suject; and
never more disgusted, than when they observe him confused, bewildered* or
unattentive to what he himself delivers. Besides, the inaccuracy of diction,
the inelegance, poverty, and lowness of expression, which is commonly observed
in extemporaneous discourses, will not fail to offend every hearer of good
taste.

2. Go to the bottom of your subject; and think of every thing that ought to be
said upon it; and consider what points, or parts of it, your hearers would be
glad to have cleared up, or most enlarged upon. To skim off only the surface,
is to put off your audience with froth. The weightiest sentiments often lie at
bottom; be at the pains then of diving deep to bring them up from thence. On
the other hand, --

3. Take care you do not torture your subject, by aiming to exhaust it. Do not
endeavor to say every thing that can be said, but every thing that ought to be
said upon it. A preacher's excellence is seen, not so much in saying a great
deal upon a text, as saying the best things in the best manner. Nolim te
sacere, quod prava quadam ambitione, vo^gus pro^estorum hodie facit, ut (...)
loco coneris omn^^ dicere, sed ea duntaxat, quae explicando praesenti loco
(...); nisi siquando, delectandi (...), pigrediend^^ v^ (...)

(...)


4. Do not crowd your thoughts too thick. This will but fatigue and perplex the
minds of your hearers, who should always have time to follow you. If you pour
water too fast into the funnel, it will run over.

5. Protract not your discourse to an undue length. The best sentiments will
not be attended to, whilst your hearers are impatiently waiting and wishing for
the conclusion. It were better to offend by the other extreme, provided your
matter be solid, well disposed and well digested. Better leave your audience
longing than loathing. Abstinence is less hurtful than repletion. I think Mr.
Luther says in his table talk, that one necessary qualification of a preacher
is, to know when to leave off.

6. In practical preaching, which should be your ordinary strain, remember that
you preach to christians; and let your chief motives to practice be drawn from
chaistian principles. "I is verily a fault in too many of the public teachers
of our times, that their sermons are moral harangues generally* and Tully's
Offices; and Seneca's Epistles serve them instead of the bible. They are
furnished with nothing but moral precepts, as if they were preaching at Old
Rome or Athens, and their auditors were all infidels."

7. Be sure to consult the capacity and understanding of your hearers. Remember
you are not declaiming in the academy* but preaching to an illiterate
congregation. Take care then that you be not too learned, or too logical; that
you do not shoot over the heads of your hearers, as they call it, either in
your doctrine or language. Condescend to their capacities; and let it be your
ambition and care whilst you are treating of the highest subjects, to be
comprehended by the lowest understanding; wherein archbishop Tillotson,
archbishop Sharp, and Dr. Sherlock will be your best patterns. -- It is not
easy to be conceived how much ignorance of divine things there is in the minds
of the greatest part of those you preach to.

It was the observation of a late celebrated divine in the church of Rome, That
there are always three quarters of an ordinary congregation, who do not know
those first principles of religion, in which the preacher supposes every one to
be fully instructed. It is to be hoped that matters are somewhat mended in our
Protestant assemblies; but still there is reason to fear, that they, who
compose the major part in our places of worship, are deplorably defective in
their knowledge of the true doctrines of christianity. And as the subject
should not be too deep for their conceptions, so neither should the style be
too high for their comprehension; and therefore all scholastic terms,
systematical phraises and metaphysical definitions should be for ever banished
from the pulpit.

8. Affect not to show your parts, by entering upon nice and curious
disquisitions, or by a strong protrait of general characters. This is shooting
beside the mark, or at least will but very seldom reach it. The chief end it
will produce, and which you will be thought to aim at, is your own applause,
and not your people's profit. Too close a thread of reason, too great an
abstraction of thought, too sublime and too metaphysical a strain, are suitable
to very few auditories, if to any at all. It is here that our preachers are
most defective. Most of their fine sermons contain only philosophical
reasonings* sometimes they preposterously quote scripture only for the sake of
decency and ornament. Their sermons are trains of fine reasoning about
religion, but they are not religion itself. We apply ourselves too much to the
drawing of moral characters, and inveighing against the general disorders of
mankind; but we do not sufficiently explain the precepts and principles of the
gospel.

Cam^ray*
I love a serious preacher, who speaks for my sake, and not for his own, why
seeks my salvation, and not his own vain glory. He best deserves to be heard,
who uses speech only to clothe his thoughts, and his thoughts only to promote
truth and virtue. Nothing is more despicable than a professed declaimer, who
retails his discourses as a quack does his medicines.

9. Endeavor to affect your own mind with what you deliver; and then you will
not fail to affect the minds of your hearers. There must be a life and power in
your delivery, to keep up the attention and fix the affection of those who hear
you; "for artificial eloquence, without a flame within, is like artificial
poetry; all its productions are forced and unnatural, and in a great measure
rediculous." -- "It is said of John the Baptist, that he was a burning and
shining light, ardere prius est, lucere posterius; ardor mentis, est lux
doctrinae. It is a hard matter to affect others with what we are not first
affected ourselves."

10. When you are called to touch upon controversy, which you should avoid as
much as possible in the pulpit, be candid, clear, short, and convictive. Be
sure that your arguments are solid, clear, and strong; and your answers at
least as clear as the objections; for, if these be plain, and those perplexed,
you will but confirm the error (...) mean to confute. Avoid all needless
censures, especially of persons by name. When a censorious spirit is kindled by
the preacher, nothing will sooner be catched by the hearers; and that unhallwed
flame will quickly be propigated far and wide. Dark debates in divinity are
like rocks, not only steep and craggy, but barren and fruitless, and not worth
the pains of climbing to the top; and what influence they have on the spirits
of men, is commonly a bad one. It is scarce to be imagined what harm these
theological subtili^s do us. As spirits extracted from bodies, are always hot,
heady, and inflamatory. So divine truths subtilized and too much sublimated,
heat, intoxicate, and discompose the minds of men* fire their tempers, and
kindle very hurtful and unruly passions, to the disturbance of their own peace
and that of others.

11. Let your great aim in every sermon be to please God and profit your
people, to do them good rather than gain their applause. Do not covet a
reputation for eloquence; it will turn you off from higher views. Besides an
excessive desire of popularity and fame will subject you to many secret
vexations. As well may you expect the sea to be undisturbed, as the mind of an
ambitious man to be long free from disquietude.

Lastly. Endeavor to get the great principles of christianity wrought into
your own heart; and let them shine in your temper and conversation. Ministers
have one great advantage beyond all the rest of the world in this respect, that
whereas the particular callings of other men prove to them great distractions,
and lay many temptations in their way to divert them from minding their high
and holy calling of being christians, it is quite otherwise with the clergy;
the more they follow their proper callings, they do the more certainly advance
their general one; the better priests they are, they become also the better
christians. Every part of their calling, when well performed, raises good
thoughts, and brings good ideas into their minds, and tends both to increase
their knowledge and quicken their sense of divine matters. Cicero, Quintilian,
and Horace, all made virtue a necessary qualification in a complete orator.
Quae, sc. eloqentia, quo major est, probitate jungenda, summaque prudentia;
quarum virtutum expertibus si dicendi copiam tradiderimus* non eos quidem
oratores officerimus, sed furentibus quaedam arma dederimus

Cic. Sit orgo nobis orator, quem instituimus, is qui a M. Cicerone finitur.
Vir bonus dicendi peritus; idioque non dicendi modo eximiam in eo facultat^m,
sed omnes a^im^ virtutes exigimus.

Quintil. Scribe^di recte sapere est et principium et fo^^.

Hor.
I am sure it is so in a christian preacher. It is required of a presbyter that
he be blameless. When a preacher has the great doctrines which he teaches
wrought into h^s temper, and he feels the influence of them on his own spirit,
he will reap from thence these three great advantages in his public
ministrations -- He will then speak from his own experience -- He will with
great confidence and assurance direct and counsel others -- He will more
readily gain belief to what he says. Without this experimental sense of
religion in the heart, and a steady practice of it in the life, all the
learning in the world will not make a person, either a wise man, a good
christian, or a faithful minister. Aliud enim est scire, aliud sapere. Sapiens
est, qui didicit non omnia, sed ea quae ad veram faelicitatem pertinent; et iis
quae didicit afficitur, ac transfiguratus est.

Eras. Eccles.
And to induce him to a wise circumspection in his conduct, he should often
consider the influence his own example will have upon his people, for whom he
must live, as well as for himself; and who will think themselves very
justifiable if they indulge to no other liberties than such as they see their
minister take himself. A bishop had need be sober and vigilant, and have all
his eyes about him, who lives not only for himself, but for so great a
multitude of people.

Crysostom.


Before I close this chapter, let me add one thing more, namely -- That a
minister, both with regard to his conduct and preaching, should take care not
to be too much affected with common fame. Though he is not to be absolutely
indifferent to the applauses and censures of others, yet he should arm himself
against the bad influene of both. He must expect to pass through good report
and evil report; and both are apt to make hurtful impressions on weak, unstable
minds -- As to evil report a stoic will tell you, that, in confidence of your
innocence, you ought absolutely to despise both it and its author.

I think Chrysostom's advice is more suited to the character of a christian
minister. "As for groundless and unreasonable accusations, says he, for such a
christian bishop must expect to meet with, it is not right either excessively
to fear them* or absolutely despise them. He should rather endeavor to stifle
them, though they be ever so false, and the author of them ever so despicable;
for both a good and bad report is greatly increased by passing through the
hands of the multitude, who are not accustomed to examine, but to blab out
every thing they hear, whether true or false. Therefore we are not to despise
them, but to nip those evil surmises in the bud, speak friendly to those who
raise them; be their characters ever so bad, and omit nothing that may remove
their wrong impressions of us. And if after all they persist to defame us, we
may then despise them."

CHAP. III. Of the duties immediately previous to the work of the pulpit.
TO prepare you for this service, the following directions may be useful.

I. Before you enter on the public worship of God in his house, be sure to
apply yourself to the throne of grace, for a divine blessing on your labors.
It was a usual saying of Mr. Luther* Been orasse, est been studuisse. Sub horum
concionis ecclesiasles d^t se prosundae deprecationi, et ab eo (...)
sapientiam, linguam, et orationis eventum, qui (...) infantium (...) disert^s.
Incredibile dictu quantum (...), quantum (...), quantum roboris and alacritatis
hinc accedat ecclesiast^.

(...). Eccles
And, in these your previous devotions, see that your heart be very sincere and
fervent. You must pray for yourself, and pray for your people.

1. You must pray for yourself -- that God would help you to bring your own
spirit into a frame suitable to the work you are about to undertake -- that the
word you deliver may affect your own heart, or that you may first feel the holy
flame you would communicate to others -- that a door of utterance may be opened
to you, and that you may speak as becomes the oracles of God -- that he would
direct you to speak to the consciences and particular cases of your hearers, or
that what you deliver, may be a word in season -- and that he would especially
assist you in prayer, and give you the spirit of grace and supplication.

2. You are to pray for your people -- that their attentions may be engaged
both to the evidence and importance of the things they are to hear -- that God
would open their hearts to give them a fair and candid reception, and that no
bad prejudice may prevent the good effect of the word -- that the grace of God
may cooperate with his appointed means, to set home divine truths with power on
their consciences -- that they be able to retain the good seed that is sown --
that it may bring forth its proper fruit in their future lives -- and finally,
that their prayers for you, and behavior toward you, may strengthen your
hands, and make you more serviceable to their souls.

II. Let your mind and countenance be very composed and serious* and your
gesture grave and decent. To this end, endeavor to bring your spirit into a
religious and devout frame, before you come into the house of God. Attend to
the real importance of the work you are called to, both when you are the mouth
of God to the people, and when you are the mouth of the people to God. Avoid
those objects, and avert those thoughts, which tend to discompose your mind, or
indispose it for the sacred service you are going to engage in. Clear your
heart of all vain and worldly cares, and especially of all vexatious and
disturbing thoughts before you enter on the public service of God. Endeavor to
attain a spiritual, holy, and heavenly frame of mind by previous prayer,
reading, and devout meditation. It will render your sacred work both more
agreeable and easy to yourself, and more beneficial to your hearers, if you
endeavor to carry into the house of God that serious temper of mind, which you
desire they should carry out of it.

III. Before you enter on your work, take time to premeditate and recollect
some of the most weighty, pertinent, and important sentiments and expressions
you may have occasion for either in prayer or preaching. This will be
especially necessary, if you give any thing in charge to the memory; that you
may not be at a loss for those sentiments when they are to be produced in their
proper place. The mind should be well seasoned with the discourse before it be
delivered. It is not enough to be master of your notes, but you must enter into
the spirit of your subject. Call in every thing that is proper to improve it,
and to raise and animate your mind in the contemplation of it.

IV. Affect your mind with the consideration of the solemnity and importance of
the business you are going about; and how much may depend on a faithful
execution of it. Few men had ever more natural courage than Mr. Luther, and yet
he was often heard to say, that even to the latest part of his life, he never
could conquer his fear when he mounted the pulpit. And St. Chrysostom used to
say, that that scripture, They watch for your souls, a^ those that must give an
account. Heb. xiii.17. struck his mind with constant awe.

Lastly. Keep up a self command, and a becoming presence of mind; and get above
a low servile fear of men. If you are master of your subject, and come well
furnished with suitable materials for their religious improvement, and produce
plain scripture and reason for what you advance, you have no cause to fear
either the critic or the censor; but may with modesty conclude, that you are at
least as good a judge of the subject you have taken so much pains to understand
and digest, as they are who perhaps never gave it so precise or extensive a
consideration.

CHAP. IV. Of pulpit elocution.
UNDER this phrase, I comprise the language, pronunciation, and action that are
most becoming the pulpit.

I. The language. This must be plain, proper, pure, concise and nervous.

1. Let your language be plain or perspicuous. Prima est eloquentiae, virtus
perspicuitas; et quoquisque ingenio minus valet, hoc se magis attollere et
dilatare conatur: ut statura breves in digitos eriguntur, et pl^^^ infirmi
minantur.

Quintilian.
It is a nauseous affectation to be fond of hard words, or to introduce terms
of art and learning into a discourse addressed to a mixed assembly of plain,
illiterate christians. The ridicule of it will appear, by supposing you were to
talk to them in that manner in common conversation. They who do not understand
you, will dislike you; and they who do, will see the affectation, and despise
you.

2. Let your words be well chosen, proper, and expressive; such as your hearers
not only understand, but such as are most fit to convey the sentiments you mean.

3. Aim at a purity of language. To this end, diversity your style, as far as
it is consistent with perspicuity and propriety; and avoid the frequent and
near repetition of the same word, unless it be very emphatical, and the
reiteration rhetorical -- Shun all harsh and jingling sounds -- Have an eye to
an easy cadence at the close of your periods, and conclude as often as you can
with an emphatical word -- Avoid dubious and equivocal expressions, or such as
leave the sense indeterminate -- and all low, vulgar, and barbarous words --
Let your phrase be like your dress; decent, unaffected, and free from gaudy and
studied ornaments -- and, in fine, let all your art be, to imitate nature.

4. A concise style very well becomes the pulpit; because long periods convey
not the sense either with so much ease, or force; especially to uncultivated
minds; but affect not to speak in proverbs. A short sententious style, if it be
expressive, full, and clear, will be always strong and universally agreeable.

5. Aim at a striking, nervous style, rather than a diffuse, flowing one; and
let the most emphatical words convey the sublimest thoughts; and if there be a
glow in the sentiment, it will seldom fail to shine in the expression.

II. The pronunciation.

1. Let this be quite free, natural and easy. "The whole art of good oratory
consists in observing what nature does, when unconstrained. You should address
yourself to an audience, in such a modest, respectful, and engaging manner,
that each of them should think you are speaking to him in particular." Every
sort of affected tone is to be carefully avoided. Suppose your whole auditory
to be but one person, and that you were speaking to him in your own parlour.
And let the nature of your subject direct the modulation of your voice. Be cool
in the rational, easy in the familiar, earnest in the persuasive, and warm in
the pathetical part of your discourse. Every passion requires a pronunciation
proper to itself.

2. Let the voice be always distinct and deliberate; and give every word its
full sound. Attend to your own voice. If it be not strong, full, and clear to
yourself, you may be sure it is not so to many of the audience. And to help
your voice, address yourself chiefly to the remotest part of the assembly, and
then they who are nearer will hear plainly enough -- Let your pronunciation be
very deliberate. You will be in little danger of speaking too slow, provided
your voice and action and the weight of the sentiment keep up your hearers'
attention.

3. Affect not to move the passions by a loud, clamorous voice. This is not
powerful preaching; and argues no excellence in the preacher, bu^ the strengh
of his lungs. It is unseemly in a christian minister to imitate the priests of
Delphos, who delivered their oracles with rage and foaming. This noisy,
blustering manner shocks a delicate hearer, and degrades the dignity of the
pulpit. To be a Boanerges, it is not necessary to become a Stentor. However,

4. Let your voice be always lively and awakening; though at sometimes it
should be more animated than at others.

5. Now and then a sudden change from a higher to a lower key, when something
remarkable occurs, will wonderfully catch the attention. This is what
Quintilian calls Ars variand, which, when well timed, is not only graceful in
itself, but pleasing to the ear, and gives no small relief to the preacher Ars
porro variandi, cum gratiam praebet, ac renovas aures, cum dicentem ipsa
laboris mutatione reficit.

Quintilian*
.

6. Repeat sometimes the most remarkable sentences with a free, decent, easy
manner.

7. Make a pause after some important thought. These pauses, especially near
the close of a discourse, will have a very good effect; not only as they render
the service more solemn, but give both yourself and your hearers time to
compose and recollect; and mightily awaken their attention to what follows:
which should therefore be always something worthy of it. "There are some
occasions, where an orator might best express his thoughts by silence; for if
being full of some great sentiment he continue immovable for a moment, this
surprising pause will keep the minds of the audience in suspense, and exp^ess
^n ^motion too big for words to utter." -- In a word, as Quintilian observes,
the great art of elocution, is no more than a proper and natural modulation and
variation of the voice, according to the nature ^f the subject. Secundum
rationem rerum, de quibus dicimus, con^ormanda

Quintil.


III. The action* This must always be adapted to the pronunciation, as that to
the passions. Here two extremes are to be avoided, viz. too much, and two
little action.

1. Let not your action be too much. "We have some at home that outdo the
French, and invent new ways of an apish and uncouth deportment. One is ready
every moment to throw himself out of the pulpit, and the people that sit below
him are in continual fear that he will be in good earnest. Another reckons up
all the heads and particulars on the tips of his fingers, which he exposes to
the gazing people. Others by odd and fantastic gestures of the like nature
delight to give the auditors diversion, and make good the primitive use of the
word pulpit, which was the higher part of the stage where the players and
comedians acted. But our serious preacher abhors all of this kind, and never
affects to be theatrical." --

To be more particular -- Your action should not be perpetual. The body or any
part of it must not be in constant motion. As the preacher should not be, like
the trunk of a tree, always immovable; so neither, like the boughs of it, in
continual agitation. -- Nor must the motion of the body be uniform and
unvaried. A steady vibrative swing of the body from the right to the left, like
the pendulum of a clock, is very unnatural and faulty. "As there is a monotony
in the voice; so there is a uniformity in the gesture, that is no less nauseous
and unnatural, and equally contrary to the good effect that one might expect
from decent action." -- Again, your action should not be mimical. The hands
should seldom stir, unless when some passion is to be expressed, or some
weighty sentiment pointed out. -- Nor too violent; as when it exceeds the force
of the expression, and the dignity of the sentiment. A fault we often see in
company among persons of a warm, impetuous temper. -- Nor theatrical, pompous,
and affected. This becomes neither the dignity of the pulpit, nor the solemnity
of the work. The chief action should be 1. in the eyes; which should be
commanding, quick, and piercing; not confined to your notes, but gently turning
to every part of your audience, with a modest, graceful respect. 2. The head;
which should always regularly turn with the eyes. 3. The hands. The right hand
should have almost all the action; at least the left hand is never to be used
alone. 4. The upper part of the body; it should always correspond with the
motion of the eyes, head, and hands; and should be for the most part erect.
Avoid a lazy lolling on the cushing, on which your elbows should rarely rest,
and when they do, that is, when you make a considerable pause, let it be with
an easy, graceful attitude. In a word, let all your pulpit actions be natural,
free, decent, and easy; which, by frequent practice and a careful observation
of these rules, will be soon attained.

2. The other extreme, to be avoided, is too little action. To stand like a
statue, stiff and motionless, when you are speaking to your people of the most
momentous and affecting things, is as unnatural and disagreeable, as a set,
uniform tone in pronunciation; and looks as if you were not in earnest
yourself, and cared not whether your people were so. How singularly would this
appear, if you were talking to a friend in private on any particular affair,
that very much concerned him, and to which you desire to excite his most
earnest attention. How will your hearers be able to keep from sleeping, if they
see you are scarce (...) yourself? Into this extreme the English preachers are
most apt to fall, as the French into the former. But after all let it be
remembered, that the end of a decent, just, and lively pronunciation and
action, is only to excite and fix the attention of your hearers. Let your chief
care be still directed to the propriety and importance of your sentiment, and
the dignity of your subject; for it will never ^ail to disgust your hearers, if
you rouse their attention by a solemnity of voice and action, and then put them
off with something low, trite, or unaffecting.

CHAP V. Of Prayer.
2. THE next most considerable part of the pastoral office is prayer; which is
commonly divided into the Grace and Gift of prayer.

I. The grace, or the spirit of prayer. This signifies either 1. praying with
the heart and spirit, with the intent engagement of all the mental powers,
understanding, will, and affections. Or 2. with the exercise of those christian
graces which are proper to enkindle a devout fervor of mind in that part of
worship; such as humility, self abasement, faith, love, delight, desire, trust
in God, hope and heavenly mindedness. Or 3. under the particular aid and
influence of the Holy Spirit who helps our infirmities, and teaches us to pray.
So says the apostle, We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the spirit
helps our informities, Romans viii.26. by composing our spirits, giving us a
greater abstraction from the w^rld, and a greater elevation of heart, and
calling into lively exercise the grace^ before mentioned. -- And this spiritual
prayer may be entirely mental, without the use of words; and it is this
spirituality which gives to our prayers all their effect and power; and without
it no prayer, though ever so properly composed or decently delivered, will be
acceptable to God, or available to ourselves; which therefore we should
frequently and earnestly ask at the throne of divine grace. -- But it is the
other kind of prayer which I am at present more particularly to consider, viz.

II. The gift of prayer; or an ability to perform this duty extempore, in a
decent and devout manner, publicly. And to this purpose three things are
required. 1. An enlargement of the mind. 2. A regulation or a^rangement of our
thoughts. 3. A freedom of expression, or ready utterance. These will take in
the matter, method, and manner of prayer.

I. An enlargement of the mind* which takes in the matter of prayer. Whatever
we want, or desire, or know we ought to desire, should be the subject matter of
our prayers. In order to an enlargement of mind in prayer, and a suitable
supply of matter,

We must (...) be well acquainted with the state of our souls* and attend to
our spiritual wants and weaknesses. The christian's own heart is his best (...)
book. The more we converse with that, the better shall we converse with God* It
may not be amiss to commit to writing those defects and blemishes* we chiefly
observe in our characters, the mercie^ we have received, especially any
particular mercies we have received by prayer, either deliverance from evil,
direction in difficulties, or the accomplishment of a desired end* each of
which will be a proper subject either of petition, confession, or thanksgiving.
-- 2. When you address yourself to the sacred work, see that the mind be free,
composed, and serious. Its conceptions and apprehensions will then be more
ready, and proper thoughts will more freely occur. -- 3. Possess your mind with
an awful reverence of the Divine Majesty, whom you address as the heart
searching God. -- 4. Let your expressions be very deliberate and solemn, that
the mind may have time not only to conceive, but to regulate and contemplate
its conceptions. -- 5. Daily study the word of God, with this (...) particular,
that you may be the better supplied with materials for devotion. -- 6.
Endeavou^ after a comprehensive view of things. Let the mind take a wide scope;
and let it freely run on those subjects that most affect it. -- 7. Let
practical divinity, and a right disposition of heart toward God, be your
principal care and study. -- 8. Take some time to premeditate and recollect the
chief topics of prayer, and commit some few well chosen expressions and
sentences to memory. -- Lastly. Let the subject you have preached upon, and
especially those you have found your mind most warmly affected with, and some
of the most striking sentiments and expressions in them, be wrought into the
composition of your future prayers, ranged under their proper heads. This in
time will greatly enrich your magazine of materials for prayer; and lead you to
proper thoughts and words on the most important occasions.

II. We should not only aim at a comprehension, but observe a method, in
prayer. The usual method is 1. Invocation; wherein we are to make a solemn
mention of some of the divine attributes. Nor should this be always confined to
the beginning of prayer. It may very properly be repeated by way of preface to
some of the principal petitions we put up to God; which, when pronounced with
seriousness and reverence, will have a good effect to awaken the devotion of
the heart. But always remember to invoke the Almighty under those attributes
ahd perfections, which are most suitable to the blessings you ask of him* that
is, when we pray for an accession of divine knowledge and wisdom, the address
may be in this form -- O Father and Fountain of light, in whom there is no
darkness at all, who give to man the wisdom he asks of thee, we beseech
thee to disperse the darkness of our minds, shine into our hearts, and
liberally bestow upon us that wisdom which thou know we want. 2. Confession
of sin. The transi^ion of this part of prayer will be natural and easy, by
taking particular notice of those moral perfections of the divine nature, in
which we ourselves are most defective; for example -- The righteousness and
holiness of God, as thus -- O holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who art of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity wherewith shall we, thine unholy creatures
presume to appear before thee, or lift up our eyes or thoughts to heaven which
our iniquities have reached before them! In public prayer, let these
confessions be general. In private* particularize as your own consciousness of
guilt suggests. 3. Petition. The connection here may be properly made by the
mention of the divine mercies, or the remembrance of Christ's mediatorship, and
the promise of pardon and grace to penitent sinners; and most properly begins
with petition for pardon; then, for a more perfect renovation; after which
proceed to beg for other spiritual blessings; as more light and knowledge, more
love to God, more faith and hope, more strength against temptation and sin,
more purity and heavenly mindedness, more indifference to the world, etc. Then
proceed to temporal blessings. 4. Particular intercessions. These it will be
best to precompose; and commit to memory the expressions and phrases that are
most proper to be used on particular occasions. But let the phrase and subject
be often varied, that it may not appear to be a form; and in all your prayers,
on any particular or special occasions there is great need of much
premeditation. Lastly -- Thanksgiving. The subjects of these are either general
or particular; and as various as our mercies.

This part of prayer may perhaps come in more properly after invocation; and
the transition, from thence to confession may be made by the mention of our
unworthiness of divine blessings.

Besides this general method, it would be proper to preserve in your mind a
particular method of the several blessings you are to pray for, the sins you
confess, and the mercies you commemorate. Let these be laid up in the mind, in
order to be produced in their proper places. -- But do not tie yourself down to
the invariable use of any method, whether general or particular; for a too
close application of the mind to the method or expression of prayer is apt to
obstruct the devout employment of the heart. Besides this will make the prayer
appear too formal, artificial, and studied, and bring a drowsiness on the minds
of those, whose devotion you are called to excite and lead; who are never more
pleased and edified in this part of worship, than when they observe us to be
affected with our own prayers. A heart inspired with warm devotion will not be
confined to exact method; and a lively turn of thought, and a strong,
surprising sentiment, uttered in its due place, will strike the minds of our
fellow worshipers so strongly, that they will not attend to the want of method,
or if they do, will readily excuse it. Enlarge mostly on that part of prayer,
with which you find your own mind most affected; and let not any occasional
deviations from your proposed method interrupt the fervent workings of your
spirit. It is good however to be master of a regular system of materials, and
of pertinent expressions under each head, which may serve instead of a form,
but still to be uttered in the most solemn and reverend manner, when the powers
of the mind happen to be heavy, inactive, or oppressed by the presence of
others, at a time we are called to the performance of this duty.

3. Next to the matter and method, we should have a regard to the manner of
prayer. This respects 1. the gesture of the body; which should be always
decent, grave, and humble, and expressive of the reverence of the heart; as
folding the hands, or putting the open palms together, sometimes erect,
sometimes declining with the body; sometimes lifted up with the eyes, according
as the pious or humble motions of the heart direct. Let the eyes be mostly
closed, or if open, steadily fixed; for nothing is more indecent than for the
eyes to wander in the performance of this duty. -- 2. The pronunciation. Let
this be slow, solemn, grave, distinct, and serious. -- Let not your words flow
faster than your thoughts; that the latter may have time to be maturely
conceived and well expressed; by which means, one thought will more naturally
rise out of another, and be in readiness to be produced whilst the other is
uttering. And when the conceptions are thus before hand with the expressions,
the mind will be free, composed and serious; and have time to feel the weight
of its own thoughts; which will be a great help to the true spirit of prayer.
"Due and proper (...) and stops will give the hearer time to conceive and
reflect on what you speak, and (...) heartily to join with you; as well as gi^e
you leave to breathe, and make the (...) more easy and pleasant to yourself.
(...) sides, when persons run on heedless with an incessant flow of words,
(...) as it were in a violent stream* (...) or pauses, they are in danger of
uttering things rashly before God; giving no time at all to their own
meditation but indulging their tongue to run sometimes too fast for their own
thoughts, as well as for the affections of such as are present with them. All
this arises from the hurry of the tongue into the middle of a sentence, before
the mind has conceived the full and complete sense of it."

Avoid the extremes of a too low and muttering voice, which some use; and a
clamorous, strong, noisy tone, which others affect; as if they expected to b^
(...) for their loud speaking; or as if the devotion of the heart consisted in
a strength of the lungs. This is improperly called powerful praying, and will
be very disgustful to many. -- 3. The expression. Here let the following rules
be observed.

1. Let your language be plain, but proper. Avoid all low, vulgar, and obsolete
phrases, but affect not an elegant or ^hetorical style; much less an obscure
and mystical one; for how can the mind feel the weight of that sentiment it
does not understand?

2. Scriptural expressions, if happily chosen, are very ornamental in prayer.
-- "It would be of excellent use to improve us in the gift of prayer, if in our
daily reading of the word of God, we did observe what expressions were suited
to the several parts of this duty; adoration, confession, petition, or
thanksgiving; and let them be wrought into our addresses to God that day." --
And to be furnished with a Copia of scriptural expressions to be used in
prayer, read Henry's Method of Prayer, Bishop Wilkin's discourse on the Gift of
Prayer; or Closet Devotions.

But here let the two following cautions be observed.

1. Let not your prayer be all in scripture words. Some conceive a prayer of
nothing but texts of scripture put together; which prevents the mind from
taking a proper scope, and leaves no room for the invention, or the utterance
of pious thoughts.

2. Avoid the dark, mystical expressions of scripture; which you have reason to
believe the greatest part of your hearers do not comprehend the sense of. --
"If we indulge the use of such dark sentences in our speaking to God, we might
as well pray in an unknown tongue, which was so much disapproved of by the
apostle, 1 Cor. xiv.9. Let not the pomp and ^ound of any hard Hebrew names, or
obscure phrase in scripture, allure us to be fond of them in social prayer,
even though we ourselves should know the meaning of them, lest we confound the
thoughts of our fellow worshipers."

3. If you have not the faculty of clothing your own ideas in proper and
pertinent words* borrow the phrases and expressions of others upon the same
subject. Make a collection of them from the best authors, but remember to pick
out those which come nearest to your own phraseology, or such as you best
approve, and would wish to have in readiness when you are speaking on that
particular subject. And when you are furnished with a store of such well chosen
expressions, turn them into the form of a prayer, and commit them to memory;
which expedient will not only facilitate your expression, but give room for
farther invention. -- "It is usual for young students to be very careful in
gathering common place books. It would be a much greater advantage, if they
were as diligent to collect, under proper references, any such particular
matter, or expressions in prayer, wherewith at any time they find themselves to
be more especially affected."

4. It is very proper and requisite that your prayer, after sermon, be formed
on the subject you have been treating of; wherein you may go over all the heads
of your discourse, and touch upon the most important sentiments, and repeat the
most striking expressions in it. But as the mind will be then sometimes
fatigued, and the powers exhausted and unfit to be put on the new labor of
invention, it may not be amiss to pen down the short concluding prayer
verbatim, to be repeated memoriter; but without confining yourself either to
the precise expressions, or method you had before conceived, if the mind be
able or disposed to enlarge.

5. Avoid those phrases and modes of expression which you know to be
disagreeable or disgustful to your hearers; and prefer those that will give the
least offense to any party or denomination of christians.

6. Throw your prayer out of a form as much as you can, by varying both method
and phrase, and by a fresh supply of sentiments and expressions; which will be
a great help both to your own devotion, and theirs, who join with you in this
part of worship.

7. Let your prayers as well as your sermons, be rather too short than too long.

8. Avoid preaching prayers. "Some persons, who affect long prayers, are
greatly faulty in this respect; they are speaking to the people and teaching
them the doctrines of religion, and the mind and will of God, rather than
speaking to God the desires of their mind. They wander away from God to speak
to men. But this is quite contrary to the nature of prayer.

Lastly. Be not too fond of a nice uniformity of words, nor of perpetual
diversity of expression in prayer. "We should seek indeed to be furnished with
a rich variety of holy language, that our prayers may always have something new
and entertaining in them; and not tie ourselves to express one thing always in
one set of words, lest this make us grow formal and dull, and indifferent in
those petitions. -- But on the other hand, if we are guilty of a perpetual
affectation of new words, which we never before used, we shall sometimes miss
our own best and most spiritual meaning, and many times be driven to great
impropri^^^ of speech; and at best our prayers by this mean will look like the
fruit of our fancy, and invention, and the labor of the head* more than the
breathings of the heart."

I shall conclude this chapter with a few general directions how to attain and
improve this useful gift.

1. Accustom yourself to a serious, devout, and decent discharge of this duty
every day in private; whereby a readiness of conception and expression will be
sooner acquired.

2. Spare no pains to gain so excellent a talent; for it is not to be had,
especially by some, without much application; but it is worth it all. And there
are few things on which the labor of one, who is a student for the sacred
ministry, can be more usefully employed.

3. Often pray for this gift of prayer.

4. Endeavor to get your spirit deeply impressed with the great things of
religion, and let those sentiments which most affected you in your most serious
frames, be wrought into your prayers.

5. Maintain a manly presence of mind, and use all proper means to conquer that
bashfulness and timidity of spirit, which young persons are subject to, and is
a great hindrance to a decent discharge of this duty.

6. Take every opportunity you can to hear others pray, and imitate them in
every thing you observe to be decent, graceful, and excellent.

Lastly. Vary your concluding doxologies; and that you may herein give no
offense to any, it may be proper to confine yourself to those of scripture,
which are very various, and such as follow.

Heb. xiii.21. -- Through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

Romans xvi.25, 27. -- Now to him that is of power to establish you according to
the gospel of Jesus Christ. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for
ever. Amen.

Romans ix.5. -- Through Jesus Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever.
Amen.

Gal. i.4, 5. -- Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from
this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father: To whom
be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Ephesians. iii.20, 21. -- Now unto him who is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, unto
him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without
end. Amen.

1 Timothy i.17. -- Now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

1 Pet. iv.11. -- Through Jesus Christ to whom be praise and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

2 Pet. iii.18. -- Through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
both now and for ever. Amen.

Jude ver. 24, 25. -- Now unto him that is able to keep us from falling, and to
present us faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to
the only wise God our Savior be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both
now and ever. Amen.

Rev. i.5, 6. -- Unto him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and has made us kings and priests to God even his Father: To him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Rev. v.1^. -- Blessing and honor, and glory and power be unto him that
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the administration of the sacraments.
I. OF Baptism.

"A minister ought to instruct his people frequently in the nature of baptism,
that they may not go about it merely as a ceremony, as it is too visible the
greater part do, but that they may consider it as the dedicating their children
to God, the offering them to Christ, and the holding them thereafter as his;
directing their chief care about them to the breeding them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord. -- In the administration of this ordinance it is
best to keep to the original institution as your rule and guide. -- The most
natural method to be used in the celebration of it, seems to be this:

1. Recite the express words of the institution. Matt. xxviii.28. Then*

2. It would not be amiss to say something in vindication of those two positive
institutions of christianity, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and to show the
excellency of the christian dispensation from its simplicity, and that it is
not encumbered with those numerous external ceremonies, which the Jewish
dispensation was.

3. Make a short discourse on the ordinance as a sacrament of the christian
church; wherein you may offer some useful remarks on the practice of infant
pabtism; then add some proper observations relating to the mode and manner in
which the ordinance is to be celebrated; laying this down as an undisputed
principle, that in the manner of performing divine worship it is always best
and safest to keep close the divine rule; so as neither to go beyond* nor fall
short of it; for in the former case* we know not whether human and arbitrary
additions will be approved of God* but this we are sure of, he will never
condemn us for not doing what he never commanded; and therefore the sign of the
cross may be safely om^t^ed, as no where ^njoined by God himself, and as to the
latter case, that is, neglecting (...) part of our rule, or those instructions
(...) has given us for the directory of our (...), this must certainly be
criminal, and derogatory to the honor of the divine institutor. But where the
circumstance or mode of any religious action is left undetermined in the form
and words of the institution that which is most decent and convenient is to be
preferred. Hence sprinkling or washing the face of the baptized person gently
with the hand, is to be preferred to plunging the body all over in water;
because the former is more safe and decent, and the latter no where commanded
as the standing universal mode of baptizing.

4. Be more particular in explaining the nature, end, and design of this
ordinance* and ^n opening the typical part of it. Here you may bring in the
doctrine of sanctification, and the purifying influences of the holy Spirit
figured by the water in baptism, and the relation this christian inst^tution
has to the baptizing of proselyte^* and to the Jewish ordinance of circumcision.

5. You may th^n briefly open the nature of the present duty of the parents; in
giving up their child to God, and what is implied therein, viz. their desire
that it should be received into the church of Christ, and brought up in the
christian faith. And be very particular in your address to the parents of the
infant which is to be baptized; pressing upon them the importance of their
charge, and the care they are to take in the education of their child;
especially in reference to its spiritual and eternal concerns. But this may be
either before, or after the ceremonial part of the ordinance is performed.

6. Proceed then to ask a blessing upon the ordinance; and pray for the infant
in particular.

7. Then take the infant, and washing it gently with water, baptize it in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Then, lastly, if the exhortation to the parents do not come in here, but was
addressed to them before, conclude with the thanksgiving prayer and the
benediction.

II. Of the sacrament of the Lord's supper.

1. Of the method of performing it.

2. Of taking in communicants.

I. Of the method of performing it. -- The most regular method seems to be this
1. Make a short preparatory discourse, tending to open the nature and design of
this sacrament, and the necessity and importance of its intention; or to excite
some devout affections in the minds of the communicants, especially relating to
the love of Christ, the design of his death and sufferings, and the necessity
of a frequent commemoration thereof in this sacred institution. But let the
address be very serious, and very solemn. -- Then 2. read distinctly the words
of the institution. -- Then 3. solemnly pray for the divine blessing and
presence; give thanks to God for the institution of the visible symbols to
affect your mind, and assist your faith; and earnestly pray that the great end
of this sacred solemnity may be visibly answered in every one of the
communicants, and be manifested in their growing love to the Redeemer, and more
steady attachment to his gospel, as their only rule of faith and life. -- Then
4. break the sacramental bread, and distribute either personally, or by the
hands of the deacons. To assist the devotion of the communicants, it is the
custom of some ministers to pronounce now and then some serious and weighty
sentences relative to the love and sufferings of Christ, or the benefits of his
death. But this is disused by others under an apprehension that, instead of
quickening the devotion of our fellow worshipers, it may interrupt it, by
diverting the course of their own meditations. -- 5. After the distribution of
the bread, make a short prayer to beg the continuance of the divine presence
and blessing, and that God would graciously forgive the infirmities of our
worship; and give thanks for the element you are about to p^^^ake of, and pray
that it may answer the design intended by it; which is all that protestants
me^n by the consecration of the elements. But it is the custom with some to
pray for a blessing on both the elements, in one single prayer. -- 6. Then
follows the distribution of the cup in the manner before mentioned. In some
churches it is the custom for the minister to partake of the elements last, and
in others first; speaking, with an audible voice, these or some such words, "In
obedience to Christ's command, and in remembrance of him, I take and eat this
bread, as the memorial of his body which was broken for sin." And so in
partaking of the cup, "I take and drink this cup, etc." -- After the
distribution of the elements, the minister sometimes makes a short exhortation
to the people, relating to the nature of their sacramental obligations, and
exhorting them to be faithful thereunto. -- After which a collection is made
for the poor by the deacon from pew to pew, or at the door when the
congregation breaks up. -- 7. Then follows a suitable hymn or psalm. -- Lastly.
Conclude with a short thanksgiving prayer. -- In order to furnish your mind
with suitable matter for your sacramental exhortations, and prayers, it is
requisite to read some proper devotional treatise on this ordinance, before you
enter on the celebration of it.

II. The method of admitting communicants to the Lord's table. This is
different in different churches. For direction in this affair these general
rules may be of service.

1. As every particular church is a select religious society, every member of
it has a right to be satisfied of the character and qualification of every new
member that is admitted into it. This is plain from the very nature and design
of such a society* and necessary to preserve the purity and discipline of the
church.

2. That the qualifications required in the candidates, should be no other than
what we have plain warrant from scripture to demand, and such as are necessary
to preserve purity and discipline; for herein, as well as in other parts of
Christian discipline and church government, we are strictly to adhere to
scripture as our rule, so far as it affords us any direction in this matter.
And therefore to require that the spiritual experiences of the candidate be
publicly declared by himself, or read by another, in the presence of the
church, before he is suffered to communicate with them, which is the practice
in some protestant dissenting congregations, is not only unnecessary, but
unwarrantable, and often attended with very bad effects; it is unnecessary,
because it is found not to answer the end principally designed, the greater
purity of the church; it is unwarrantable, because we have no shadow of a
precept or precedent for it in scripture, or primitive antiquity; and the bad
consequences of it, are 1. It bars the way to this ordinance, discourages meek,
humble, and modest persons from proposing themselves to the communion whilst it
is easily accessible to men of bold, forward, and confident tempers. 2. It is a
temptation to the candidates to declare more than they have really experienced,
lest the church should reject them; or to describe the animal passions as
divine influences, and the workings of the imagination as the operations of the
Spirit, which young and unexperienced Christians are too apt to do. 3. It
supposes and countenances some very mistaken principles, viz. that none have a
right to this ordinance b^t those whose hearts are really converted, nor even
they, until they are sensible of this, and are able to make others sensible of
it, by describing the time, means, manner and effects of that conversion. 4. It
attributes a power to the church, which they have no right to, viz. of judging
the hearts of others; and that by a very precarious rule, viz. from what they
say of themselves. For if they judge by the general character, life, and
conversation of the candidate, which is a much better rule, there is no
necessity for a public declaration of his experience. It likewise implies a
power in the church of excluding from this ordinance all that cannot produce
such evidence of their real conversion as will satisfy every member of the
church. Upon what foundation so extraordinary a claim is built it is hard to
say. Lastly. This practice tends to ^ake the members thus admitted, too
careless and confident after their admission; for when they have the testimony
of the whole church concurring with their own strong imagination that they are
true converted christians, and look upon the sins they commit after this only
as the weaknesses of God's children, they are in great danger of being betrayed
into a false and fatal peace. Therefore,

3. A creditable profession, and unblemished character and conversation may be
deemed as a necessary and sufficient qualification for* the holy communion.
This is necessary, in order to keep up the discipline, and preserve the purity
of the church; and it is sufficient, because we do not find that our sacred
rule requires any thing farther. And

4. As soon as the members of the church are satisfied of this general
qualification of the candidate, they have no right to refuse their assent to
his admission.

5. Provided they have this satisfaction, it is not material by what means they
receive it. Sometimes the elders of the church are deputed to confer privately
with the candidate, and inquire into his knowledge of the design and nature of
this ordinance; and whether his views and ends in desiring to join in it be
sincere and right. -- Sometimes this is left entirely to the minister, whose
business it more properly is; who, if he be satisfied in those points,
acquaints the church of it at the next ensuing sacrament; and thereupon
declares, that if any of the members present do not signify to him, before the
next sacrament, any objections against the candidate's admission, he will then,
by their consent, be admitted to the ordinance, as a member of that church. In
other churches, members are admitted by the minister only, without any notice
given to the church, till the very time of their admission; nor even then are
they apprized of it any other way, than by a few petitions in the minister's
prayer particularly, in behalf of the new admitted member.

Lastly. The church has an undoubted right to expel irregular and unworthy
members. This is generally done at first by suspension; when the minister
intimates his desire, and that of the church, to the delinquent member, that he
would refrain from coming to the sacrament, till he hears farther from him;
which is generally sufficient, without the solemnity of a formal and public
expulsion.

CHAP. VII. Of visiting the sick.
THIS is a very arduous and delicate office, and especially in some
circumstances; and a different method of address and conduct is requisite
according to the different characters of the persons you visit.

It will therefore be proper,

I. To lay down some general rules to be observed, in order to a right
execution of this part of your duty.

II. To specify some particular cases.

I. To lay down some general rules to be observed, in order to a right
execution of this part of your duty.

1. A previous preparation for it is very proper; by considering what kind of
address will be most necessary and suitable to the person you visit. It is
something strange, as a late judicious divine well observes, that ministers who
take so much pains to prepare for the work of the pulpit, should generally take
so little, to prepare for this, which is one of the most difficult, and most
important offices in the ministry.

2. It would be advisable to have in readiness a good store of scripture
expressions, adapted to the support and comfort of the afflicted; which may be
easily collected from the common place book to the bible; and, out of these,
choose such as are most applicable to the case of your friend.

3. Adapt yourself to his taste and understanding, as well as to the
circumstances of his case* by making such observations, and using such
expressions as you know are most familiar and agreeable to him: But take care
to explain the phrases you make use of, if you have reason to think he does not
understand them.

4. Let your deportment and address be very free, friendly, close, tender, and
compassionate.

5. Place yourself in the condition of the person before you, and consider in
what manner you wish a minister or friend to behave to you in those
circumstances.

6. Whilst you are tender, be sure to be faithful; and have respect to the
approbation of your conscience afterward. Remember that you are a minister of
the gospel, and must not sacrifice the cause of truth and godliness to a false
shame or tenderness.

Lastly. Let your prayer for the sick person be short, but very serious and
solemn, and adapted as much as may be to the state of his soul, and the danger
of his disease. In all which offices there is great need of much piety,
fidelity, and wisdom.

II. Let us now consider how a minister ought to behave in his visitation of
the sick, under some particular circumstances. And,

I. If you have reason to believe that the afflicted person you visit is a real
good christian, your work will not be very difficul^; it may be pleasant and
useful; and you may possibly receive more advantage from him, than he does from
you. For a christian's graces are at such a time commonly most lively, and
(...) tongue very faithful to the s^ntimen^^ (...) the heart; so that you will
presently (...) it is that lies most upon his mind. And as your present
business will be to administer consolation and solve his doubts,

Your topics of consolation may be taken 1. From his past experience. Direct
him to look back to the goodness of God to him, and the sensible experience he
has had of the divine love and presence. Bid him think of what God has done for
his soul, and thence draw David's conclusion, Because the Lord has been my
help, etc. -- 2. Refer his thoughts to the paternal character. And bid him
think of the compassions of a father to a weak and helpless child. -- 3. Open
the inexhaustible stores of the divine mercy in the gospel. -- 4. Insist on the
mighty efficacy of the Redeemer's blood. -- 5. The genuine marks of a true
faith and sincere repentance. -- Lastly. Endeavor to affect his mind with a
lively apprehension of the heavenly glory, to which he will shortly be received.

And as to his doubts, tell him, 1. That he is not a proper judge in his own
case, under the present weakness of his powers; that the lowness of his animal
spirits causes him to look too much upon the dark side, and to see every thing
through a wrong medium; that he has no reason to suspect ^^s case to be worse
now than it was when he ^ad better hopes concerning it. -- 2. That the best of
men have had their doubts, that if it be the sign of a weak faith, it is
however the sign of some true faith. -- 3. That it is much safer to be doubtful
than over confident. -- 4. That however variable be our frame, God's regards
for his own children are unchangeable. -- 5. Bid him examine his doubts to the
bot^om, and trace them up to the true source; and perhaps they may appear to
arise from the agency of Satan, who delights to disturb the tranquillity of
those he cannot destroy. -- 6. Ask him, if he has any hopes, and whether he
would part with the little hope he has, for the greatest treasures on earth.
Bid him examine the foundation of those hopes, as well as that of his fears;
for he can never judge aright 'till he looks on both sides. And often times a
christian's weak hope has a better foundation than his strongest fears. But,

II. Is the character of the sick person you visit doubtful? your business is
more difficult, your address must be (...) cautious.

If there be no apparent danger of death, 1. Endeavor to give him just notions
of a particular providence; that though men do not so often attend to it as
they ought, yet most certain it is, both from scripture and reason, that
whatever befalls every individual man on earth is under the immediate direction
of providence. And as to this affliction in particular persuade him to regard
and consider it as the hand of God. -- Then 2. discourse on the wisdom and
goodness of God in sending these occasional rebukes of his providence; which,
whatever we think, are sent for the best ends. Afflictions are the physic of
the soul, designed to purify and purge it. -- 3. Under this view of things
press upon him the exercise of patience, submission, and a total resignation to
the divine will; and direct him to look upon the present dispensation, though
grievous, as sent in mercy to him, and as what may hereafter produce the most
excellent effects -- 4. Tell him, that in the best of men there are sins and
follies sufficient to justify the severest dispensations of God's providence*
that many good christians have suffered worse; and what reason he has to be
thankful that his case is not more calamitous. -- 5. Remind him of the many
mercies mixed with the present affliction. -- 6. If it should please God to
restore him, exhort him faithfully to concur with the design of this
visitation, by his constant endeavor to amend what his conscience now smites
him for.

But if there be apparent symptoms of approaching death, exhort him 1.
seriously to review his past life, to call to mind the most remarkable
transgressions of it, for which he should now greatly humble his soul before
God, and sincerely renew his repentance. -- And that his repentance may be
sincere and unfeigned, 2. Endeavor to make him sensible of the evil and guilt
of sin from its contrariety to the holy nature of God, and the inevitable ruin
it exposes the soul unto. -- 3. When he is thus humble and penitent, revive him
with the consalations of the gospel; the amazing compassion and goodness of God
to a world of sinners, in sending his Son to redeem them by his death; and the
merits of the Redeemer's sufferings, whose blood cleanses from all sin. -- Then
4. open to him in a plain and easy manner the gospel method of salvation by
Jesus Christ, and the only terms of pardon there proposed, viz. Repentance,
faith, and a holy life. And tell him particularly, that saving faith in Christ
does not consist in a confident persuasion, that he died for him in particular,
but in the lively exercise of love to him, a desire to serve and please him,
and a humble dependence on his merits for justification and pardon. -- 5. In a
deep self abhorrence for his sins, and in such a lively faith in Christ. Advise
him to call upon the Father of mercies for pardon through Jesus Christ his Son.
-- 6. Remind him to settle his affairs in this world, as well as he can; and
then think no more of it for ever. And lastly, Leave with him some suitable
text of scripture which you apprehend most applicable to the state of his soul.
But,

III. If the sick man you visit has been notoriously wicked, and appears
ignorant, insensible, and hardened, your business then is the most difficult of
all.

To make any right impression on such a one, you must 1. Pray to God beforehand
that you may be enabled to say something that is suitable to his case, which
may be a mean of awakening him to a proper sense of his danger -- And then 2.
When you come into his room, appear deeply affected with his case. Let him see
that you are more concerned for him, than he is for himself; that you are more
sensible of his danger than he is of his own -- Then 3. In order to bring him
to a proper sense of his state and danger, put some close questions to him
relating to the holy and righteous nature of God; his infinite hatred of sin;
the absolute impossibility of being happy hereafter but in his favor; the
certainty of a future judgment, when God will render to every one according to
his works; and the unspeakable importance of the soul's being safe for
eternity. -- Then 4. Beg of him not to deceive himself with vain hopes; but be
willing to see the truth of his case, as it is represented to him in the
unerring word of God, however dangerous or dreadful it may appear to him; for
whilst he shuts his eyes against the danger, there is no possibility of
escaping it. -- 5. If his distemper is like to be fatal, let him know it; and
that all that can be done to escape everlasting misery, must immediately be
done; that there is as yet some hope though it be but small, that this possibly
may be done; that on this moment depends his future condition for ever: And beg
him not to lose this last and only cast he has for eternity. -- 6. If his
conscience by these means be awakened, and you observe some genuine relentings
of heart, take that occasion to assist its workings, to enforce its reproofs
and urge its convictions, until you see something like a true penitential
remorse -- Then 7. Earnestly pray with him, and for him; that God would
continue to give him a just sense of his sin and danger, and that his grace and
spirit may carry on those convictions until they issue in a real change of
heart. -- Then 8. Take your leave of him in a tender and affectionate manner,
not without giving him some hope that if the same sensible and penitent frame
continue, there may be mercy in reserve for him. But beg of him whilst he has
the use of his reason not to omit any opportunity of crying mightily to God for
mercy through the merits of Jesus Christ his Son. -- 9. In your next visit,
which should be soon after this, if you find him penitent, exhort him to
glorify God by making an ample confession of his sins in private, with all
their heinous aggravations, and not to be afraid to see the worst of himself;
and if he has in any matter injured or defrauded others, you must insist upon
it, as a mark of true repentance, that he immediately make restitution or
satisfaction, if it be in his power. -- Lastly. If his penitential sorrow still
continue, and you have reason to believe him sincere, you may begin to
administer the consolations of the gospel, and address him as you have been
directed in the case of the person before mentioned under the like
circumstances.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the minister's conduct toward his people.
HERE it will be proper, 1. to lay down some general rules to be observed at
all times. And, 2. some particular rules applicable to extraordinary occasions.

I. To lay down some general rules to be observed at all times.

Previous to these, I would desire you to observe these two things -- 1. Arm
yourself with resolution, and prepare to meet with difficulties and contempt.
The nature of your office implies the first* and all the dignity of it will not
secure you from the last. But if you behave prudently and faithfully in it, you
will meet with contempt from none but those who deserve it, and whose esteem
would be no honor. 2. Study the true nature of christian humility; and let
your mind be clothed with it as its greatest ornament. But distinguish between
that dastardly meanness and pusillanimity which makes you ashamed to look in
the face, and speak in the presence of your superiors, and may tempt you to an
abject compliance with all their humors, and that humility which arises from a
reverence of God, a consciousness of your defects, the difficulty of your work,
and the knowledge of your character. This will teach you to bear contempt with
dignity, and applause with decency; the latter perhaps you will find not less
difficult than the former. Let the knowledge of yourself be your guard against
that vanity of mind which will be apt to steal into it when you hear the
approbations or commendations of man. -- Thus armed with resolution and
humility, let your principal care be,

1. To be faithful to God and conscience* and take care that nothing betray you
into such a behavior upon any occasion, for which your own mind will reproach
you in secret. And a steady regard to this rule will lead you to decline the
most usual and dangerous temptations.

2. Let your conduct to all be inoffensive, beneficent and obliging. Make it
your practice, and it will be your pleasure, to do some kind office to every
one to whom you have a power and opportunity of doing it with prudence. And let
the Emperor Titus's rule of conduct be yours, Not to let one day pass, if
possible, without doing some good to one person or other.

3. Visit your people in a kind and friendly manner, as often as it suits with
your convenience and theirs. This is the business of the afternoon; for the
whole morning* and as much time as you can redeem at night, should be devoted
to study. Where your visits are most pleasant and profitable, and most expected
and desired, pay them most frequently. But where there is any prospect of doing
good to any in your flock, there you should sometimes pay your visits, though
it be to the poorest persons, and especially when they are in trouble. In all
your visits take some opportunity of making moral remarks* or dropping some
useful instructions, or leaving some good rule or religious observation for
their benefit. But this must be done not with a magisterial authority or
ministerial air, but with all the freedom and ease imaginable, en passant, and
when it rises naturally out of the subject of the conversation.

4. Throw off all affectation, parade, stiffness, morose conceit, reserve, and
self sufficiency. Let your ambition be, to be distinguished by nothing but real
holiness, wisdom, and benevolence. Be courteous, free, condescending, affable,
open, unreserved, and friendly to all. But amidst all your freedoms forget not
the dignity and decorum of your character.

5. Circumspectly avoid every thing that may give them unnessary offense,
whether by word or conduct, though it be in matters of indifference. You may
possibly in point of fidelity be obliged to give them offense in some important
things; in all others therefore you should endeavor to conciliate their esteem
and respect. It shows much weakness and little prudence and candor to be
obstinate and tenacious of little things, whether modes, customs, or phrases
offensive to others. It is not walking charitably, nor following things that
make for peace* and is a viol^t^^n of the apostle's rule of becoming all thin^s
to all men; but see that your charitable conformity transgress not the laws of
sincerity.

6. Above all, let your character be a fair copy of the virtues you preach* let
the documents of the pulpit be exemplified in the conduct of your life. (...)
minister should abstain from the appearance of evil; not only from things
criminal, but from those which may be interpreted to his dishonor, and
reported to his disadvantage.

Lastly. Be much in prayer for wisdom, strength, prudence, and capacity equal
to your work and difficulties. This you will find as necessary as your most
important studies. But take care that your private transactions with God be
very serious, solemn, and sincere; and let your endeavors go along with your
prayers.

II. To lay down some particular rules applicable upon extraordinary occasions;
or proper to regulate your conduct toward persons of different characters.

1. What is a right conduct toward those from whom you have received abuse,
contempt, or just cause of offense?

1. Your first care must be to guard your passions. Keep your temper, and
banish all vindictive resentment. If possible, never think of it; but be sure
not to harbor the tho'ts of it, which will but chaff and corrode the mind to
no purpose. Be satisfied with a consciousness of your innocence, and consider
the injurious person as an object of your pity rather than indignation. 2. As
you must endeavor to forget the offense; you must not only cease to think, but
forbear to talk of it, unless it be with an intimate friend to ask his advice.
3. You may lawfully decline the company of the person who has thus injured you,
and break off a familiar commerce with him, as you cannot look upon him as your
friend. But take every opportunity of doing him good that lies in your power.
4. Embrace the first opportunity and overture of reestablishing a good
understanding and renewing your former amity. And, lastly, in all cases of this
nature, let it be remembered that the misconduct of others toward you, will
not justify yours toward them, that you are still under the same obligations
to walk by the rules of that wisdom which is from abov^* which is first pure,
then peaceable, etc.

II. What is a right conduct toward narrow* bigoted, censorious christians,
who are fond of their orthodoxy, and zealously attached to party notions?

1. These persons must by no means be disputed with or opposed, because whilst
they have much more zeal than knowledge, they are very apt to be warm and angry
at any argument that is levelled against their favorite sentiments; and much
more if they cannot answer it. And whilst bigotry blinds their minds, they are
not capable of seeing the force of an argument; much less of being convinced by
it; they should therefore be treated like froward children, or persons in a
passion. -- 2. Take every opportunity of secretly undermining their false
notions, especially if they be dangerous, by hinting at their bad consequences;
or by setting the opposite doctrine of truth in a strong light from scripture.
But dwell not long upon it, lest they apprehend themselves particularly aimed
at, which they will not fail to resent. -- 3. Treat them with the utmost marks
of freedom, tenderness, and friendship, to convince them that your sentiments
of doctrine, though opposite to theirs, create in you no disaffection to them;
however theirs may render them disaffected to you. -- 4. Endeavor to make them
sensible of the much greater importance of those things in which you agree with
them, and press them powerfully on their consciences; and when they once come
to feel the weight and force of these, they will gradually abate of their zeal
for lesser things. And this is the only, at least, the best and safest way to
convince them, that these things on which they have misplaced their zeal are to
be reckoned amongst the minutiae of divinity; for nothing is more natural and
common, than for the mind to raise the importance of a subject, in proportion
to the zeal it expresses for it. Otherwise it would lie under the constant self
reproach of being governed by a blind irregular zeal. And as their zeal for any
particular doctrine has fixed the importance of it, before their understanding
has precisely weighed it, to go about to argue against that importance would be
to argue against their zeal, that is, their passions; which is a very unequal
encounter, and altogether vain. -- 5. Take occasion often to expose the effects
of bigotry in other instances to their view, whereby they may possibly become
sensible of their own, but let the instances be so distant* or, if near, so
artfully situated, that they may not be sensible of your design. -- 6. Come as
near to their sentiments as you possibly can, when, your subject leads you that
way, and show them the plain reason why you cannot come nearer -- Lastly, Refer
all to plain scripture, and resolve to adhere to that, both for the
confirmation of doctrine, and the confutation of error; and by removing their
mistaken sense of scripture, open to them the first source of the errors they
have imbibed.

III. What is a right conduct toward those that are inclined to infidelity?

1. As these are but bigots of another rank, they must be treated with the same
tenderness, caution, and prudence. The latitudinarian and narrow bigot will be
equally enflamed by a violent opposition; for they both lay an equal claim to
superior wisdom, and eagerly demand what, if you would keep them in humor you
must not be backward to pay, some compliment to their own understanding -- But
2. as these are the great champions of reason, and will admit of no other
weapon in the hand of their antagonist, be sure to be expert at that, and
insist upon it that your adversary uses no other; that is, that he do not put
you off with sophistry, paralogism, illusion, equivocation, ridicule,
buffoonery, clamor, confidence, passion, or grimace, instead of solid argument
and plain reason. Keep him to his point. Admit nothing but what you understand;
and nothing but what he understands himself: And take care he do not entangle
you in a wood of words, or blind your eyes with dust, or prevent your seeing
distinctly the point in hand by holding a cloud before it; or lead you from it
by diverting to another subject, when he is pinched and piqued by an argument
he cannot answer. 3. If your adversary be a person of sense, learning, and
ingenuity, the most effectual method to draw him to your opinion, is by a
strong appeal to those good qualities, whereby he will conceive himself. 4. If
his self conceit be unsufferable, and his ignorance ridiculous, it may not be
amiss sometimes to mortify the former by exposing the latter. 5. Insist upon
it, that if his regard and esteem for natural religion be sincere, that will
engage him to think favorably of the christian institution, which has refined
and exalted morality to its utmost perfection; that there is no honest deist,
whatever he believes, but would heartily wish christianity to be true. Lastly.
If you observe him capable of serious impressions, urge him to consider
seriously the dreadful risk he runs while he pawns his immortal soul upon it,
that christianity is only an imphsture; and how unavoidable his ruin, whilst he
continues wilfully to neglect it; because, if christianity be true, the
sentence of condemnation denounced against him, by the great Author of it, for
resolving not to believe it, must be also true.

IV. How should we conduct ourselves as faithful and judicious ministers
toward melancholy, dejected, and doubting christians; as this is a frequent
case and often attended with no small difficulty, I shall consider it more
particularty.

The 1. thing to be considered is the true source and original of this
melancholy gloom and dejection of mind; whether it arises from bodily
disorder,; worldly losses and afflictions; some grievous sin committed; or from
an extensive apprehensiveness and timidity of spirit. Perhaps the person
himself may impute it to none of these, but either to the divine desertion, or
the buffitings of Satan. But these must carefully be distinguished and
explained, because they are frequently mistaken; and then, according to the
true source of their spiritual trouble, must be your advice and address to them.

If you have reason to believe that the troubled state of their mind is owing
principally to a bodily disorder, or some obstruction, or dyscrasy of the
animal fluids, you should recommend to them a physician or prescribe them
physic, the cold bath, constant employment, or exercise in the air.

If their sorrow or settled melancholy of mind be the effect of some worldly
losses and afflictions, you must endeavor all you can to aleviate it, by
showing them how many ways God can, if he pleases, make up them the loss they
have sustained; how many wise and kind ends may be answered by it; that the
scenes of life are variable; after night comes the day. Beseech them to put
their hope and trust in God, as a gracious and indulgent Father; and urge every
topic of consolation proper to be used in a time of worldly adversity.

If the disconsolate state of their mind be the effect of a melancholy
constitution, the case is still more difficult, and belongs rather to the
physicians department, than that of the minister. The latter can have but small
hope of administering any proper relief, because the person is not capable of
reasoning or thinking justly, and there is something within him that obstructs
the avenues to his heart, which must first be removed before comfort can find
its way to it. All that can be done in this case, is to persuade him if you
can, of what he will find it very hard to believe, that he sees every thing in
a wrong light, and is not at present a competent judge in his own case;
therefore ought not to believe his thoughts. Ask him if he never judged more
favorably of his spiritual state heretofore than he does now; and whether he
was not a more capable judge of his case then, than he is now.

If the trouble of his mind arise from the reproaches of conscience for some
grievous sin committed, your way is then more direct and plain. If you have
reason to believe this sorrow of heart is the effect of a true penitential
remorse, you are then to lay before him every proper topic of consolation the
gospel admits, viz. the riches of the divine mercy, the merits of the blood of
Christ, the extent and efficacy of free grace, the precious promises of the
gospel, and the examples of God's mercy and wonderful compassion to humble
penitents; and conclude all with an earnest exhortation to trust his soul in
the hands of Christ, and to rely on the mercy of God in the way of a steady
conscientious obedience.

If it arises from an excessive apprehensiveness and timidity of spirit, and
you have cause to believe the person's state is much better than he fears, you
are then to fortify and encourage his heart, by referring him to his own past
experience of what God has done for his soul; the various tokens of his favor
to him in the former scenes of life, and in the several methods of his grace
and providence. Urge upon him the exercise of a lively faith encouraged by the
grace of the gospel; and convince him, that it is no less wrong and prejudicial
for a person to think too ill than to think too well of himself; that as he is
in no danger at all, of the latter, advise him for the honor of God, the
credit of religion, and his own peace and comfort, to guard against the former,
where his greatest danger lies. Again, If the melancholy and dejected soul have
a pious turn, and imputes his present darkness to what he calls divine
dereliction, or the hidings of God's face, explain that affair to him; and tell
him, that his want of that spiritual joy and comfort he once found in his soul
may be owing to other causes; the present low state of his spirits, a
distemperature of the animal frame, the influence of external objects and
accidents, or a concurrence of all these; that nothing is more variable than
the frame of the human mind; that we are not to think that God's regards to his
own children vary with that; this is a great mistake, and a mistake that is
greatly dishonorable to him; that whilst he sees them upright, sincere,
humble, obedient, and dependant, his regards to them are always the same,
whatever they may think of him; that God never hides his face from his people,
till they withdraw their hearts from him; that unless they forsake him he will
never depart from them; that the hidings of God's countenance, which the
Psalmist so often complains of, generaly if not always refer to the external
dispensations of God, or outward providential afflictions, not inward spiritual
desertions; when the distress of his circumstances was so great that God might
seem to have forgotten and forsaken him, and his enemies might be ready to put
that construction upon it.

Lastly, If the person imputes the trouble of his mind to the buffetings of
Satan, explain that affair to him. Let him know, that though in some cases that
evil spirit may have an agency in creating some spiritual troubles, yet he has
no more power over the mind than what it pleases God to give him; that his
influence, be it what it will, is controled and limited; that the most he can
do is, to suggest sinful and troublesome thoughts, which we may and ought to
repel; that the Holy Spirit has a counter agency to inspire good and holy
affections; that by indulging to excessive grief and gloomy apprehensions, we
give the devil the advantage over us, and even invite his temptations; and
finally we ought to take special care to distinguish between the agency of
Satan and the operation of natural causes; and not impute those to the devil,
which are owing to our own ^olly and weakness, or are the physical effects of
external objects.

V. What is a right conduct toward the licentious and profane?

1. Whilst you behave toward them with civility and discretion, it will be
advisable to decline a particular intercourse with them. A minister's
behavior toward men should in a good degree be regulated by their moral
characters -- 2. In case they seek your more intimate friendship and benevolent
offices, so that gratitude and good manners will not permit you to forbear your
visits, you will then have a fair opportunity of insinuating some necessary and
gentle admonitions; either by way of story, simile, repartee, railery, or
reproof suitable to the subject of the discourse or the temper they may be in;
which, if it take effect, will prepare your way for a more free and close
remonstrance -- 3. Always open a way to the heart on that side where you find
the easiest access. Some are most touched with a sense of honor, and a regard
to their reputation; others with a view to their interest; others must be
allured by an easy, gentle, rational address; and others will yield to nothing
but close and warm reproof; but take particular care to know the ruling passion
of the person you address, and, if possible, to bring that over to your side.
4. Beg of them to erect their hopes, and extend their views as rational beings
designed for an immortal existence, and not forget their connection with another
world* for to provide only for the present, and live from hand to mouth, is to
act far below the dignity and design of human nature. 5. If they have any taste
for reading, put into their hands such books as are most suited to their
capacity, taste, and character. -- Lastly, you should frequently address them
from the pulpit. But your public address while it is strong and animated, must
be general, and have nothing in it that is distinguished or appropriative; that
the audience may have no room to think that any one person is particularly
intended in the animadversion* for though they will bear to be preached to, yet
no man loves to be preached at.

VI. How are we to behave toward the grossy ignorant and careless?

1. Endeavor to rouse them to a sense of religion and their dependence on God,
by a seasonable improvement of some awakening providence; -- their own
sickness, or worldly disappointments; the death of a friend, or some public
calamity -- 2. Represent to them the most important and affecting subjects of
religion, in the strongest light and plainest language: -- the shortness of
time; the awfulness of eternity; the certainty and near approach of death; and
the terrors of the final judgment -- 3. If you find that your conversation is
agreeable to them* frequently visit them in a a free and friendly manner; and
take care that there be nothing dogmatical* or authoritative in the advice you
give them; but let all appear to proceed from a compassionate concern you have
for the interest of their souls -- 4. As they are but children in
understanding, they must be dealt with as such. Put the plainest and most
affecting books into their hands; and take care you do not feed them with
strong meat, when they stand in need of milk -- 5. It will not be amiss in some
part of your sermon especially, in the application, to adapt yourself in
particular to their capacity and condition, that they may not only understand,
but feel what you say; for these sort of hearers, both amongst the high and
low, perhaps make a much larger part of our audience than we imagine.

VII. What is a proper behavior toward those who are superior to us in rank
and fortune?

1. Readily pay them the respect due to their distinction and character. If
their temper and conduct be not altogether such as you could wish, yet that
will not excuse you from a civil, decent, and obliging behavior toward them.
You must remember your duty to others, however they may be deficient in theirs
to you. But if they treat you with kindness, friendship and affection, they
claim your gratitude, honor, and esteem; which will prompt your endeavors to
oblige and serve them every way you can -- But 2. be free, open, conversable,
and discreetly unreserved before them. Absence of mind, distance of behavior,
formality of address, stiffness of manner, or affected silence is always
ungenteel and disgustful; and especially in the presence of superiors -- 3.
Preserve a generosity and manliness of temper and address; and show nothing of
a mean, low, timid, servile spirit; that is not only dishonorable to your own
character, but infers a bad compliment on theirs. They are not tyrants; no^, if
they were, must you submit to be their slaves. And remember, that if they are
sensible and genteel, wise and good, they will consider their superiority to
you in one respect, as balanced by that of yours to them, in another* theirs
may be most showy, but perhaps yours may be most valuable -- 4. Forget not the
dignity and decorum of your character. There is something you owe to that, as
well as to the distinction and opulence of your friends. And while this is your
guard against incidental levities and a compliance with sinful customs, it is
by no means inconsistent with pure wit, innocent humor, and seasonable
cheerfulness; which, if attended with good sense and an obliging natural
behavior, will be no less agreeable in the company of your superiors, than in
that of your equals. -- 5. Do and say all the obliging and agreeable things you
can, consistent with truth and conscience and the honor of your function. And
then 6. -- Take every opportunity of insinuating something conformable to the
duty of your office, which may be serviceable to their spiritual interest, and
helpful to their moral character -- Lastly, make a prudent and seasonable use
of your interest in them, for the relief of your poor neighbors; whose
distresses may be better known to you, than they are to them.

VIII. What is the proper behavior of a minister toward the poor of his
congregation.

This must be regulated by their moral character. 1. If their character be
immoral or profane, as they will not be very fond of your company, they will
take no offense if you forbear to visit them; but they should not be wholly
neglected. Genteel, kind, and candid reproof, prudently and seasonably given,
may have a good effect when they come to reflect upon it coolly; and a
seasonable relief to them in their distress will add weight to your
admonitions, and will give them such impressions of your charity, as will
better dispose them to receive your instructions. -- But 2. if they be serious
and well-inclined, and you find yourself agreeable to them, you should
frequently call upon them; and though your visits be short, they should be
free, friendly, condescending and courteous; and always leave with them some
spiritual, moral, or religiou^ instruction, suited to their taste,
understanding, and circumstances. Be ready to advise and help them in every
thing you can. If you see a good heart at bottom, and especially a humble
spirit, make the greatest allowance for their ignorance, prepossession, or
infelicity of temper; and when th^re is need of reproof, let it be preceded by
the sincerest expressions of love, and by real acts of friendship. If they are
willing to open the state of their souls to you, attend to it with patience and
care, that you may administer the most suitable advice and comfort. -- Have a
particular regard to their capacity in your public exhortations. To the poor
the gospel was preached. And as these sometimes make up the bulk of a
congregation, and their souls stand as much in need of spiritual nourishment,
as those of greater knowledge and comprehension, they should be always fed with
food convenient for them.

Lastly. In what manner ought a minister to behave toward those who have
fallen into notorious sins?

This must be regulated by the disposition, character, and temper of the
offender. The sensible and penitent must be treated one way the obstinate and
impenitent another. The following method in general will perhaps be found to be
the most prudent and effectual.

1. Previous to all, reproof should be a circumstantial knowledge of the fact
you reprove. 2. Be sure that it be criminal or indiscreet, and that the person
guilty, is or ought to be sensible of it; for if you reprove him for what he is
not guilty of, or what he is not sensible there is any harm in, he will
probably retort upon you the charge of censoriousness. If there be guilt and
indiscretion in his conduct, and he not sensible of it, your business then is
to convince him of it; and how much injury he may do his character by
inadvertently allowing those things as fit and innocent, which are not so in
him. And let your arguments in proof of the guilt be taken from the
circumstances of the fact; the character and relation he bears in life; the
opinion of wise and judicious men; the nature of things; and the testimony of
scripture. And then 3. See that your reproofs be not too severe. I do not mean
more severe than the offender would choose, but more severe than the nature and
circumstances of the case require; or more severe than is necessary for the
justification of your fidelity, and the reformation of the sinner.

Too great severity toward tender minds does more harm than good. " Brethren
if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in
the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted." 4.
Take care ^est, through a fear of offendnig your brother, you do not offend God
by a want of faithfulness. "Faith^^^ are the wounds of a friend." It is the
greatest piece of friendship you can do him, and if he is wise he will think it
so, and more highly esteem you for it. -- "Let the righteous smite me, it shall
be a kindness." 5. Let your reproof appear to flow from your love to him, and
be administered with the utmost tenderness and wisdom. Lastly. Leave not your
offending brother without proper directions for a better conduct.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the difficulties a minister must expect to meet with in
the execution of his office; and his proper support and encouragement under
them.
SOME of these may arise,

1. From your own natural temper, which may render you indisposed or unapt to
some particular parts of the ministerial office. But the most difficult duties,
by becoming a habit, become easy.

2. No small difficulty may arise from the resolution and labor requisite to
put some of the before mentioned rules into execution. But this difficulty will
in like manner diminish as this course becomes habitual. "In all other
professions, those who follow them, labor in them all the year long; and are
heard at their business every day of the week; and shall ours only, that is the
noblest of all others, make the laboring in our business an objection against
any part of our duty?" And in proportion as our heart is engaged in the work,
the difficulty of it will grow less, and our delight in it greater.

3. Another discouragement may arise from the seeming singularity of this
character; and the general neglect which ministers of all denominations
discover of the duties belonging to the sacred function; what you do out of
conscience they may impute to affectation; which instead of procuring their
esteem, may create their envy. But it is a small matter to be condemned in the
day that man judges you, since you will be acquitted another day, when he that
judges you will be the Lord; which is the proper import of that passage.

4. From the little success you meet with, notwithstanding all your most
earnest endeavors to promote the spiritual interest, and eternal happiness of
mankind. But your future acceptance and reward will not be in proportion to the
success, but the sincerity of your endeavors.

5. Your own weakness and infirmities both of body and mind, may throw fresh
discouragements in your way. But these will be graciously allowed for; and God
requires of none more than they have received. If we have received but one
talent, he does not expect so much from us, as those on whom he has bestowed
ten.

6. The ministerial character itself may subject you to the contempt of some
profane men. But if you adorn it by the useful, upright conversation before
described, it is great odds but you secure their esteem and respect; if not,
their continued contempt is your real honor.

7. From the different tempers, tastes, dispositions, and opinions of the
people. But how you are to behave with regard to th^se has been shown before;
and no small degree of prudence is required in this case.

In a word every view of the nature, difficulty, and dignity of your office,
may furnish you with a proper motive and direction to a right behavior in ^t.
No valuable end can be pursued without some obstruction, nor obtained without
some difficulty. Your employment is truly honorable and important; and your
encouragement, advantage, and assistance, more than equal to the labor it
requires. If you be faithful you shall not fail of a distinguished recompense,
from the bountiful hand of that good master in whose service you are engaged.
And a careful observation and practice of those rules of pastoral conduct
before laid down, will, by the blessing of God, at once adorn your character,
increase your honor, exalt your present joy, and enhance your future reward.

FINIS.

