THE YANKEE SPY. Calculated for the religious Meridian of MASSACHUSETTS; but
will answer for NEW HAMPSHIRE, CONNECTICUT, and VERMONT, without any material
Alterations. By JACK NIPS.

BY THE LIFE OF PHARAOH, YOU ARE A SPY.

JOSEPH. BOSTON: Printed for JOHN ASPLUND.

THE YANKEE SPY.
Q. WHY are men obliged every year to pay their taxes?

A. To support government.

Q. What is government?

A. The government here intended, is the mutual compact of a certain body of
people, for the general safety of their lives, liberty, and property.

Q. Are all systems of civil government founded in compact?

A. No: successful robbers and tyrants have founded their systems in conquest
-- enthusiasts and priest-ridden people have founded theirs in grace -- while
men without merit have founded their system in birth; but the true principle,
that all Gentile nations should found their government upon, is, compact.

Q. Was civil government appointed by the Almighty from the beginning?

A. It was not; nor was it necessary until sin had intoxicated man with the
principle of self-love. The law was not made for a righteous man, but for the
disobedient.

Q. What form of government prevailed first among mankind?

A. Patriarchal. The father of a family used to exercise some sovereignty over
his successors, until they moved from the city of their father, and became
patriarchs themselves.

Q. How long did the world stand without any government in it but patriarchal?

A. There was no other kind before the flood (which was more than one thousand
six hundred and fifty-five years) nor afterward till Nimrod, two generations
after the flood.

Q. What was Nimrod?

A. He was the first that began to be a mighty one in the earth -- He was a
mighty hunter before the Lord; who hunted beasts to support his army with; and
hunted men to reduce them to his will.

Q. What form of government did he adopt?

A. A kingly form; for the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad,
and Calneh. He was the first of those pretty creatures, called kings, who
reduced others to subjection by hunting them like beasts.

Q. Did the Almighty ever give a code of political laws to any nation; or are
nations left to act at discretion in establishing forms of government and codes
of laws?

A. The Almighty did certainly give the nation of Israel a complete code of
laws on Sinai and in the wilderness, for their rule of conduct in religious,
civil, and military life.

Q. Were those laws obligatory on other nations?

A. Laws, that are in themselves just, are binding on all men, but the
particular form of many of those laws was peculiar to that nation. The
transgression of many of those precepts was criminal in that nation, which the
Gentiles were never accused of by their great apostle, PAUL.

Q. What did other nations do, in point of government, while Israel was in the
wilderness and under the regulation of judges?

A. When Nimrod usurped the monarch's crown, the spirit of domination ran
through the world like a raging plague. Ashur went out of the land of Shinar,
where Nimrod's seat was, and built Nineveh and founded the Assyrian monarchy;
and the contagion of having kings and being kings prevailed so greatly, that
every little village had a king. Abraham, with three hundred and eighteen
servants, conquered four of them and their hosts -- Joshua destroyed thirty-one
-- and Adonibezek cut off the thumbs and great toes of seventy -- Also eight
kings and eleven dukes reigned over Edom, before any in Israel.

Q. In what condition was the nation of Israel, after they left Egypt, before
Saul reigned over them, in regard to their police?

A. They were in a state of theocracy, the best of all states when people have
virtue enough to bear it.

Q. Were there no men among them who exercised dominion over the rest?

A. Moses and Aaron exercised divine orders among them; the princes of the
tribes and the officers bore authority, and the judges, of whom there were
thirteen, had some preeminence, but neither of them had the power of making
laws; when God appointed them, they were to execute his laws, and no other.

Q. Was the code of laws, ordained for the government of Israel, sufficient to
govern other nations by, in their very different circumstances?

A. It was not: Canaan was an inland country -- the people were forbidden to
trade with other nations; so that no laws were made for navigation, commerce,
or union; all of which are necessary in Gentile nations. And, beside, their
civil and religious laws were all blended together. The sabbath of the seventh
day -- seventh year and fiftieth year -- the three grand feasts, and a
multitude of sacrifices, ceremonies, and oblations were enjoined on that
people, which things Gentile nations have nothing to do with.

Q. Has the political part of that constitution ever been abused by Gentile
legislatures?

A. Abundantly so, among Gentile nations that have become Christian; for by
bringing Christian states upon the same footing of the commonwealth of Israel,
they have supposed that Christian nations have a just right to dispossess the
Heathen of their lands and make slaves of their persons, as Israel served the
Canaanites and Jebusites: for no better claim than this had the European nation
to make a seizure of America. Nor is this all: but civil rulers, in Christian
countries, have taken the liberty of adopting such precepts of the Mosaic
constitution as suited them; and punished those who would not submit, when, at
the same time, they have left unnoticed a great number of the precepts of
Moses, which were equally obligatory.

Q. Has the ecclesiastical part of the Mosaic constitution ever been abused as
well as the political part?

A. Yes, and that to a great degree. The church of Israel took the whole
nation, and none but that nation; whereas Christ's church takes no whole
nation, but those who fear God and work righteousness in every nation. But
almost all Christian nations and states (since the reign of Constantine) have
sought to establish national churches: in order to effect which, they have
brought in all the natural seed of the professors into the pales of the church,
making no difference between the precious and the vile; and from this
foundation they have appealed to the laws of state, instead of the laws of
Christ, to direct their mode of discipline. What a scandal it is to the
Christian name, to see church discipline executed in a courthouse, before the
judges of the police; to see censures given at the whipping-post and
excommunications at the gallows; The Baptists and Newlights have been
imprisoned, fined, and whipped, and witches and Quakers have been hung in
Massachusetts.
and for smaller breaches, to be admonished by a sheriff's seizing and selling
cows, etc. or wiping off the admonition by a pecuniary mulct! Yet such has
been, and still is the case, even in New England, that has made her boast of
religion and liberty. Seizing and selling, for ministerial tax, is still
practiced in many towns to this day.
Circumcision, as to its first institution, was not of Moses, but of the
fathers that lived before Moses, yet it was enjoined by Moses to be performed
on all the males of Israel. From this a great number of ecclesiastics have
changed blood for water, and sprinkle their children instead of bleeding of
them in order to make the gospel church as extensive as the church of Israel
was. Yet many of them will not admit a person to go back as far as John for the
origin of baptism, because (say they) John's administration was under the law;
yet they will run back two thousand four hundred years before John for a
precedent of baptism. A Rev. Gentleman in the county of Worcester, who, like
many of his brethren, views John's baptism under the law, contends for infant
baptism from Genesis ix. 27. That the law of Moses was in force while John
lived, and open to the death of Jesus, I do not deny; but that John baptized in
Jordan and Enon, such, and such only, as brought forth fruits of repentance, by
any order of the law, will be denied until it can be proved. If no institution
appointed before the death of Christ is imitable for Christians, the holy
Supper should be neglected.


Q. Was not circumcision to the church of Israel, the same that water baptism
is to the church of Christ?

A. If so, the following absurdities arise.

1. None but the males were circumcised; whereas both males and females are
sprinkled with water. To say that the females were virtually circumcised in the
males, is just as good sense as to say the females are virtually sprinkled in
the males.

2. None were ever circumcised under eight days old, which was the general time
appointed; but children are sprinkled sometimes before they are eight hours
old. Midwives have been empowered to do it in case death was nearer than a
priest.

3. Circumcision was never a priestly rite; but fathers, masters, mothers, and
friends did the work; but sprinkling is supposed to be a ministerial rite.

4. Whatever circumcision figured out, it was something that was wrought in the
spirit and done without hands; and as there is nothing done by men, that is
called baptism by water, either sprinkling, pouring, or dipping, that can
possibly change the spirit; so neither of them are effected without the hands
of men. The conclusion therefore is, that the first did not figure out the last.

5. None but those who were circumcised were to inherit Canaan; of course then,
none but those who are baptized with water can inherit heaven; which is a
consequence inadmissible.

Q. What do you think of the British constitution of government?

A. There is no constitution in Britain -- It is said, in England that there
are three things unknown, viz. The prerogatives of the crown -- The privileges
of parliament -- and the liberty of the people. These things are facts, for
although they consider the seventy-two articles of the Magna Charta as the
basis of their government, yet from that basis they have never formed a
constitution to describe the limits of each department of government. So that
precedents and parliamentary acts are all the constitution they have.

Q. How does government operate in England?

A. A hereditary king, of the Protestant faith, must always fill the throne,
whether he be a wise man or a dunce. A house of lords, of the hereditary mould,
must always check the house of commons.

Q. What is the house of commons?

A. It is a representative body of a small part of the nation, chosen once in
seven years. It is called the house of commons, because the house of lords is a
house of uncommons, supposed to be a species of beings, like the Genii of the
Mahometans, between angels and men, born only to rule, without having a fellow
feeling with those whom they rule over.

Q. What condition has that form of government reduced the people to?

A. It has sunk them in a debt of more than two hundred and eighty millions; so
that the interest of their debt, together with the support of the civil and
military lists, imposes an annual tax on the people equal to thirty shillings
sterling per soul, and at the expiration of the year the nation is a million
pounds more in debt than at the beginning.

Q. How stand religious concerns in England?

A. The thirty-nine articles and book of common prayer are established by law.
No man can fill any office in the civil or military departments without taking
an oath to support them, and upon receiving a commission he must seal his oath
with the eucharist: this is true of all, saving the members of parliament, who
are obliged only to take the oath of abjuration, curse Pope and Papistry.

Q. But are there none in England that dissent from the established religion?

A. Many of them, of various denominations.

Q. How do they fare?

A. They are deprived of such advantages as the Conformists enjoy: In addition
to all their proscriptions, the tenth part of all their income is taken from
them to support priests that they never hear, and in whom they place no
confidence.

Q. Is it supposed that the articles and forms of the church of England are so
perfect that they cannot be mended?

A. They are always perfect when Dissenters are handled. Edward Wrightman was
burnt to death at Litchfield, by a warrant from prince James, for saying that
the worship of God was not fully described in the thirty-nine articles and book
of common prayers; and nearly eight thousand lost their property, liberties and
lives in the reign of the merciful king Charles, because they could not, would
not say, that they believed what they could not believe, and so conform to the
established worship.

They are also always perfect when a candidate enters into holy orders; for all
of them do solemnly declare that they give their unfeigned assent and consent
to all and every thing contained in that book; and yet, from the first
formation of that book, it has past above six hundred alterations; and to this
day, many parts of it are complained of by many of the Episcopal clergymen.

Q. What have you to say about the Federal Constitution of America?

A. It is a novelty in the world: Partly confederate and partly consolidate.
Partly directly elective, and partly elective one or two removes from the
people; but one of the great excellencies of the Constitution is, that no
religious test is ever to be required to qualify any officer in any part of the
government. To say that the Constitution is perfect, would be too high an
encomium upon the fallibility of the framers of it; yet this may be said, that
it is the best national machine that is now in existence.

Q. What think you of the Constitution of Massachusetts?

A. It is as good a performance as could be expected in a state where religious
bigotry and enthusiasm have been so predominant.

Q. What is your opinion of having a bill of rights to a constitution of
government?

A. Whenever it is understood, that all power is in the monarch -- that
subjects possess nothing of their own, but receive all from the potentate; then
the liberty of the people is commensurate with the bill of rights that is
squeezed out of the monarch.

After the conquest of William, the government of England was completely
monarchical, until the reign of king John, when the Magna Charta was given to
the people: this has often been mentioned in America as a sufficient reason for
a bill of rights, to preface each constitution: but in republican,
representative governments, like those of America, where it is understood that
all power is originally in the people, and that all is still retained in their
hands, except so much as for a limited time is given to the rulers, where is
the propriety of having a bill of rights? In this view, no such bill is found
in the Federal Constitution.

But it is not my intention, at this time, to dispute the point of propriety or
impropriety of a bill of rights; but shall only add that the liberty of the
people depends more upon the organization of government, the responsibility of
rulers, and the faithful discharge of the officers, than it does upon any bill
of rights that can be named.

The illustrious patriots of Massachusetts, in framing their Constitution of
government in 1780, prepared a bill of rights, which is adopted in the state,
on which I shall make some remarks. The bill contains thirty articles, upon a
few of which I shall animadvert.

In the second article it is said, "It is the right and duty of all men
publicly and at stated seasons to worship the Supreme Being." This article
would read much better in a catechism than in a state constitution; and sound
more concordant in a pulpit than in a state-house.

Suppose there are in Massachusetts a number of Pagans and Deists: the Pagans,
upon hearing that it is their duty to worship one Supreme Being only, must
consequently renounce all other deities whom they have been taught to adore;
here their consciences must be dispensed with, or the constitution broken. The
Deist (who believes all religion to be a cheat) must either act the hypocrite,
or disregard the supreme law of the State. This duty is called a right: if
every man has this right, then he has a right to judge for himself, and will
hardly thank any body for turning his right into what they may call a duty.
That it is the duty of men, and women too, to worship God publicly, I heartily
believe; but that it is the duty or wisdom of a convention or legislature to
enjoin it on others, is called in question; and will be, until an instance can
be given in the New Testament, that Jesus or his apostles gave orders therefore
to the rulers of this world.

It is the duty of men to repent and believe: to worship God in their closets
and families as well as in public: and the reason why public worship is
enjoined by authority, and private worship is omitted, is only to pave the way
for some religious establishment by human law, and force taxes from the people
to support avaricious priests.

What leads legislators into this error, is confounding sins and crimes
together; making no difference between moral evil and state rebellion: not
considering that a man may be infected with moral evil, and yet be guilty of no
crime, punishable by law. If a man worships one God, three Gods, twenty Gods or
no God; if he pays adoration one day in a week, seven days or no day; wherein
does he injure the life, liberty or property of another? Let any or all these
actions be supposed to be religious evils of an enormous size; yet they are not
crimes to be punished by the laws of state; which extend no further (in
justice) than to punish the man who works ill to his neighbor.

When civil rulers undertake to make laws against moral evil, and punish men
for heterodoxy in religion, they often run to grand extremes. The eating of a
potatoe for food, and using emeticks for physic, were once considered in France
as religious evils. Galileo was once excommunicated and banished by the Pope's
bull, as a man of dangerous heresy, because he believed in the Copernican
system. The ancients were treated as heretics, who believed they had
antipodes. The court of Zurich made a law to drown Felix Mentz with water,
because he was baptized in water. In short, volumes might be written and have
been written to show what havoc among men, the principle of mixing sins and
crimes together has effected; while men in power have taken their own opinions
as infallible tests of right and wrong.

The third article of the bill of rights is similar to the second in its
structure. It is said, "The people of this commonwealth have a right to invest
their legislature with power to authorize and require, and the legislature
shall from time to time authorize and require the several towns, parishes, etc.
to make suitable provision, at their own expense, for the institution of the
public worship of God, and for the support and maintenance of public Protestant
teachers, in all cases where such provision shall not be made voluntarily."

If the legislature of this commonwealth have that power to institute and
establish that religion, which they believe is the best in the world, by the
same rule all the legislatures of all the commonwealths, states, kingdoms and
empires that are in the world, and that have been in the world, may claim the
same.

If dumb idols are called devils, and idolatry is the religion of the devil,
this claim of power brings all the Gentile nations under the government of the
devil. Idolatry was established by this pretended power in the Gentile nations,
when the Christian religion first was sent among them: now if that
establishment was right, then the Apostles were wrong in separating so many
thousands from the established religion. They were guilty of effecting a
schism, and government was innocent in inflicting such punishment upon them and
their adherents. In process of time the religion of Christ prevailed so far
that it was established in the empire of Rome; at which epoch it received a
deadly wound, which gradually reduced it to superstition, fraud and ignorance:
so that in the sixteenth century a number of kingdoms and principalities
protested against the church of Rome: But this was a grand piece of obstinacy,
if rulers have the power that the article under consideration says belongs to
the legislature of Massachusetts. These Protestants, especially in England,
retained so many of the Papal relics, that great numbers became
Nonconformists: Here they repeated their crime, rejecting the English
establishment, as well as that of Rome. Some of those Nonconformists came into
New England, and soon began to exercise that power which the bill of rights
says they have a right to.

Now, how shall all these evils be remedied? Answer -- All who have dissented
from the established religion of New England must return to that fold, and
confess their errors -- Then all must return to the church of England and
submit to that establishment -- Then, joining with the Episcopalians, all must
apply to the Pope for pardon, and submit to his uncontrolable authority --
Then, with the Papists, all must return to the Pagans, and submit to
Polytheism. If the power spoken of is right, then this mode of procedure is
right: and therefore, if it is not the natural consequence of religious
establishments by human law, to bring all men under the government and religion
of the devil, it is because there is neither devil nor devilish religion in the
world.

It is observed, that "The people of this commonwealth have a right to invest
their legislature with this power." But where do they get this right? The
universe is composed of a multitude of units; so this commonwealth is formed by
a number of individuals. The confederacy is the sovereign, and rulers are
agents; and how can the creature have more power than the Creator? Propter quod
unum quodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. Whatever is found in the
commonwealth, in aggregate, is found in small, essential particles among all
the individuals: if therefore this power is in the commonwealth, each
individual has a little of it in his own breast; and has a right to exercise it
toward his neighbor, and force him to worship God, when, where and in such a
manner as he himself shall choose; and if this be the case, what means the first
article in the bill of rights; where it is said, "all men are born free and
equal." To be consistent, either that clause should be erased, or the power
contended for given up.

This power is to be used to oblige people "to make suitable provision, at
their own expense, for the institution of the public worship of God." I have
long been of the belief that Jesus Christ instituted his worship; and if my
faith is well founded, then it is not left for rulers to do in these days: But
surely nothing more can be meant by it, than, that the legislature shall
incorporate religious societies, and oblige them to build houses for public
worship. Parishes, precincts, and religious societies politically embodied, are
phrases not known in the New Testament -- convey ideas contrary to the spirit
of the gospel, and pave the way for force and cruelty, inadmissible in Christ's
kingdom, which is not of this world. If a number of real saints are
incorporated by human law, they cannot be a church of Christ, (by virtue of
that formation) but a creature of state.

This power is further to be exercised to require the people to be at expense
"for the support and maintenance of public Protestant teachers."

Preaching by the day -- by the month -- by the year -- annual taxes for
preaching -- what strange sounds these are! not strange in these days; but such
strangers in the New Testament, that they are not to be found there. How
insignificant would the federal government be, if it was dependent on the laws
of the states to support its officers! That government that has not force
enough in it to support its officers will soon fall: Just so with the
government of Jesus. The author of our religion has appointed a maintenance for
his teachers; but has never told the rulers of this world to interfere in the
matter.

How much did John the Baptist, Jesus, Peter, James or John ask per year?
Answer. -- I know not. If a man preaches Jesus, he cannot ask enough for it;
the gold of Ophir cannot equal it: If he preaches himself, it is good for
nothing.

Strange it is, that men should pretend to be sent by God to preach to sinners;
and yet will not do the work of the Lord, unless they can get men to be legal
bondsmen for Jehovah.

To read in the New Testament that the LORD has ordained that those that preach
the gospel shall live by its institutions and precepts, sounds very harmonical;
but to read in a state constitution that the legislature shall require men to
maintain teachers of piety, religion and morality, sounds very discordant.

We may next observe, that the legislature of Massachusetts have not got power
to provide for any public teachers, except they are Protestant. Pagans, Turks
and Jews must not only preach for nothing; but Papists, those mavelous
Christians, cannot obtain a maintenance for their preachers by the laws of this
commonwealth. Such preachers must either be supported voluntarily, support
themselves, or starve. Is this good policy? Should one sect be pampered above
others? Should not government protect all kinds of people, of every species of
religion, without showing the least partiality? Has not the world had enough
proofs of the impolicy and cruelty of favoring a Jew more than a Pagan, Turk
or Christian; or a Christian more than either of them? Why should a man be
proscribed or any wise disgraced for being a Jew, Turk, Pagan, or a Christian
of any denomination, when his talents and veracity (as a civilian) entitle him
to the confidence of the public?

The next thing to be noticed is, that the legislature of Massachusetts is
invested with power and "authority to enjoin upon all the subjects an
attendance upon the instructions of the public teachers -- at stated times and
seasons." By which stated times, no doubt, is meant the days called Sabbaths,
Sundays, (Sondays) First-days or Lord's-days. I shall not dispute the point
about the holy day, whether it was enjoined on men from the beginning, or never
before the manna was given in the wilderness -- whether the fourth commandment
in the decalogue was of a moral or ceremonial nature -- whether it was binding
on all nations, or only on Israel -- whether the same day of the week is to be
kept to the end of the world -- whether the seventh part of time answers the
end of the law, or whether the seventh day is changed for the first; but shall
use the liberty of saying, that the appointment of such stated, holy days, is
no part of human legislation. I cannot see upon what principle of natural
right, the people of Massachusetts could invest their legislature with that
power; and as I cannot deduce it from the source of natural right, so neither
can I find a hint of it in the New Testament, that Jesus or his Apostles ever
reproved any for the neglect of that day; or that ever they called upon civil
rulers to make any penal laws about it. And it is curious to see what havoc
rulers make of good sense whenever they undertake to legalise said day. No
longer ago than 1791 the legislature of this commonwealth made a sabbatical
law; wherein, for the ground work, they say, that the seventh part of time is
to be kept holy: But how do they calculate time? A man on a journey may travel
until Saturday night, midnight, and begin again on Sunday at sundown: if
eighteen hours is the seventh part of a week, then their calculation is good;
but being conscious that it is not, they make it up (i. e. pay what they have
borrowed) out of recreation; for such exercise must cease on Saturday at the
going down of the sun, and continue to cease till Sunday midnight. It may
further be observed, that the law of God and the laws of men differ widely in
phrase: the law that enjoined the observance of the seventh day on the nation
of Israel, which came from JEHOVAH, did not except the works of necessity and
mercy; neither man, maid nor beast were to work -- but a little ways were they
to travel -- a bundle of sticks was not to be gathered and laid on the fire --
nor had they any orders to assemble on that day, in a stated manner, to read
the law of Moses. It was to be a day of rest, which gave it the name Sabbath:
but the laws of men have so many exceptions, that nothing and any thing are
done on said day.

But however these things are, the legislature of this state is to oblige the
people to assemble on these stated times, to hear the instructions of these
teachers of piety, religion and morality, if there be any on whose instructions
they can conscientiously and conveniently attend. Here is a gap wide enough for
any man to creep out. If neglecting to go to meeting is not justified by
pleading inconveniency, his conscience will soon do it; but whether he goes to
church or not, his pennies must go to the treasurer's purse.

It is true that on sect of Protestant Christians has as fair an opportunity to
be incorporated as another; but there are many who justly despise the idea of
religious incorporation by human law; and therefore those who do not, have an
undue advantage of others. Supposing, in France, the National Convention should
decree that all sects of Christians, that believed that kings, in certain
cases, might wear their heads and crowns upon them, should have equal
privileges in France; I ask, whether the Jacobin party would share equal
favors with the royalists? So in this case, all sects of Protestant Christians
that choose to be incorporated, may elect their own teachers and contract with
them for their maintenance, and assess it upon all within their respective
precincts; but those who cannot, in conscience, accord with this legal
religion, must pay their tax with the rest, and be at the trouble of drawing it
out of the treasury again, which sometimes occasions vexatious lawsuits.

Now, if it should be argued that a great many in this commonwealth believe, in
their consciences, that it is the best way to serve God, to have societies
incorporated by law, and levy a tax upon all to support their worship and
maintain their teachers, how easily the above evils might be prevented, and all
enjoy liberty of conscience. If those only, who are conscientious in legal
religion, are incorporated, and tax none but themselves, there will be no cruel
distraining from those whose consciences dictate another mode of worship. A man
can cheerfully work when he verily believes he is doing God service; a man
therefore who believes in religious incorporation, can joyfully give in his
name to be taxed* and he who believes that the law has nothing to do about
religious worship, can as joyfully stay at home. The last of these have as good
grounds to judge that the first plead conscience for cruelty, as the first have
to judge that the last plead conscience for covetousness.

But there is no need for a constitutional clause about things of this nature;
for if a number of men contract with a preacher for a year, or for life, the
bond which they give him, is as recoverable by law as any bond whatever; but
the poison of such contracts is, including those who do not act voluntarily,
and perpetuating them upon their successors or natural offspring.

The last clause of the third article reads thus:

"And every denomination of Christians, demeaning themselves peaceably, and as
good subjects of the commonwealth, shall be equally under the protection of the
law; and no subordination of any one sect or denomination to another, shall
ever be established by law."

On this section I have several remarks to make:

First. The first part of it is very liberal, to a certain degree; but if it
read all men instead of every denomination of Christians, it would be
unexceptionable.

When the Pagans were favored, by law, more than Christians, what devastation
it made in the empire of Rome, in the first introduction of the Christian
religion, until the reign of Constantine. In the three first centuries almost
two millions of lives were lost for conscience sake. These were men, women, and
children, who were as good subjects of state as any in the empire. After the
change in the empire, when the Christian religion became established by law,
the Pagans suffered in the same manner that the Christians had done in the ten
preceding persecutions. Who can read the history of their sufferings without
seeing the bad policy of establishing either of the religions in the empire!

Second. Although the clause now under consideration is somewhat liberal,
indeed entirely so among Christians, yet it no ways accords with a former
clause in the same article, where the legislature is forbidden to incorporate
any Christians but Protestants, at least, are not vested with power to do it.
Protestants only can be formed into religious societies and distrain for a
maintenance for their teachers.

One of two things must be granted; either that Papists are no Christians, or
that there is a partiality established. Among little-souled bigots, who believe
nobody right but themselves, who confine the Christian religion to their own
sect, and conclude that they have the exclusive right to monopolize salvation,
it would not be strange to hear that Papists, and all others who differed with
them in sentiment, were no Christians: but this cannot be the case here. The
framers of the constitution were men of information and acquaintance with the
world; the result is, then, that there is a contradiction in the two clauses of
the same article.

Such is the state of things in Massachusetts, that the legislature, according
to the power vested in them by the first part of the third article, have made
such laws as have effected a subordination of one sect to another, contrary to
the last clause in the same article.

On March 23, and June 28, 1786. two acts passed; the first respecting towns,
the other precincts, which effect the subordination just mentioned. These two
laws were somewhat uniform in structure, and therefore a quotation from one of
them may suffice in this place. Each inhabitant has the power of voting in town
or precinct affairs, who pays two thirds more in one tax than a poll tax; and
then follows, "That the freeholders and other inhabitants in each respective
town, qualified as aforesaid, at the annual meeting for the choice of town
officers, or at any other town-meeting regularly warned, may grant and vote
such sums of money as they shall judge necessary for the settlement,
maintenance, and support of the ministry, to be assessed upon the polls and
property within the same as by law provided."

Now if any Christians but Protestants are thus incorporated, the constitution
is violated; and if none but Protestants, what may the Catholics say? But this
is not all; by this act, property entitles a man to church privileges. A degree
of simony is contained in the act. The wisest man that was ever born of a woman
could not estimate wisdom, by all the gold and pearls on earth; but here a
little property procures it; at least an annual tax entitles a man to the
rights of it. Whether these voters are spiritual, moral, or profane, they have
an equal suffrage in the choice of spiritual teachers, who have (or should
have) the cure of souls at heart.

It is well known that there are a number of Baptists in this state; in some
towns they and their adherents form a majority; but in the greatest part of the
towns, those called the standing order are superior in number to all the rest.
As the Baptists are Protestants, where they form a majority, they might be
incorporated as well as others, and tax all in the town or precinct to part
with their money for religious uses. But it is well known that they are
principled against it. They do not believe that the legislature have any proper
authority (upon the scale of good policy) to make any laws to incorporate
religious societies and require a maintenance for the ministry. Now the
question is, Do their sentiments prevent their demeaning themselves as
peaceable subjects of state? Let those who differ with them in judgment answer.
Yet from their known and conscientious principles, how are they reduced to
subordination in various places?

In a town or precinct where the Baptists are a minority, the major part choose
and settle a minister; the expense is levied upon all according to poll and
property; the Baptists in this case must either part with their money to
support a religion that they do not fully believe in; or be subordinate enough
to get a certificate to draw it out of the treasurer's hand. Some have
condescended to the last mode, as being the best alternative they had* while
others have had such a disgust to submit to a power, belonging neither to the
kingdom of the Messiah, nor the civil government on earth, that they would not
bow let the consequences be what they would. The distraining law suits and
oppressions that have risen from this source, even since the ratification of
the present constitution, need not be mentioned at this time.

One observation more shall close my strictures on this article. It is well
noticed, that none shall be protected by law, but those who properly demean
themselves as peaceable subjects of the commonwealth. This, however, should be
extended to all men, as well as to Christian denominations.

For any man, or set of men, to expect protection from the law, when they do
not subject themselves to government, is a vain expectation. Let a man's motive
be what it may; let him have what object soever in view; if his practice is
opposed to good law, he is to be punished. Magistrates are not to consult his
motive or object, but his actions.

Without adverting to Bohemia, Munster, any part of Europe or Asia, for
instances, we shall pay attention to a few recent transactions of our own. A
Shaking-Quaker in a violent manner cast his wife into a mill-pond, in cold
weather; his plea was, that God ordered him so to do. Now the question is,
Ought he not to be punished as much as if he had done the deed in anger? Was
not the abuse to the woman as great? Could the magistrate perfectly know
whether it was God, Satan, or ill will, that prompted him to do the deed? The
answers to these questions are easy.

In the year 1784, Matthew Womble, of Virginia, killed his wife and four sons,
in obedience to a Shining One, (whom, he said, was the Son of God) to merit
heaven by the action; but if the court had been fearful of offending that
Shining One, and pitied Womble's soul, they would never have indicted that
punishment upon him which they did the October following. Neither his motive,
(which was obedience), nor his object, (which was the salvation of his soul)
had any weight on the jury.

Should magistrates or jurors be biassed by such protestations, the most
atrocious villains would always pass with impunity.

I shall here add, that in Scotland, two women were brought before the sessions
for fornication, one of them was a church member and the other was not. She who
was a daughter of Zion was pitied, and the man who had defiled her was judged a
vile seducer and severely fined; but she who was not a member of the church,
was judged a lewd flatterer and was driven out of the parish, that she might
not deceive honest men any more.

Should a man refuse to pay his tribute for the support of government, or
anywise disturb the peace and good order of the civil police, he should be
punished according to his crime let (...) religion be what it will; but when a
man is a peaceable subject of state, he should be protected in worshipping the
Deity according to the dictates of his own conscience.

It is often the case, that laws are made which prevent the liberty of
conscience; and because men cannot stretch their consciences, like a nose of
wax, these nonconformists are punished as vagrants that disturb the peace. The
complaint is, "These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble the city." Let any
man read the laws that were made about Daniel and the three children, and see
who were the aggressors, the law makers or the law breakers. The rights of
conscience should always be considered inalienable -- religious opinions as not
the objects of civil government, nor any ways under its jurisdiction; laws
should only respect civil society; then if men are disturbers they ought to be
punished.

Among the many beautiful traits of the constitution of Massachusetts, the
provision made for its revision shines with great effulgence.

Permanency and improvement should be mixed together in government. But few
nations have ever had patriotism sufficient to remove the radical deficiencies
of government without falling into convulsion and anarchy. There are certain
ebbs and tides in men, and bodies of men, which often break over all proper
bounds, without a proper check. To leave government therefore so mutable, that
a bare majority can alter it, when under some prevailing passion, exposes that
permanency that the good of the whole, and the confidence of allies, call for.
In this last view of things, some real, confessed evils had better be borne
with than to make government too fluctuating. In the federal government it
requires two thirds of the states, or two thirds of the members of congress, to
change the constitution. In Massachusetts the same, but not till after the
experiment of fifteen years. However this may appear to others, to me it
appears one of the fairest lines in the constitution; a signal of a patriotic
people, conscious of their liability of mistake, wishing to improve in policy,
attached to energy and freedom. And there is no doubt, but in the year 1795,
the citizens of this state may meet by their delegates and coolly improve upon
the constitution, and remove its defects that time and experience have
discovered, without the least danger of tumult or noise. Should that be the
case, it is hoped that some things, respecting religion, will be altered, which
is the chief end of the publishing of this small tract.

If the constitution should be revised, and any thing about religion should be
said in it, the following paragraph is proposed.

"To prevent the evils that have heretofore been occasioned in the world by
religious establishments, and to keep up the proper distinction between
religion and politics, no religious test shall ever be requested as a
qualification of any officer in any department of this government; neither
shall the legislature, under this constitution, ever establish any religion by
law, give any one sect a preference to another, or force any man in the
commonwealth to part with his property for the support of religious worship, or
the maintenance of ministers of the gospel."

THE END. 1794.
A CIRCULAR LETTER OF VALEDICTION, ON LEAVING VIRGINIA, IN 1791.
BY JOHN LELAND.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
IN leaving the state, where I have contracted a large acquaintance -- where I
have spent fourteen years of the prime of my life, in which time I have
baptized seven hundred persons (the chiefest of whom, God has graciously given
me as seals of my ministry) it may reasonably be supposed that I feel an
unusual perturbation of mind; especially when I consider the kind acceptance I
have found among the people, as well as the confidence which the Baptist
society have reposed in me. When all these endearing bonds present themselves
before me, they strangely agitate my throbbing breast. A total divestiture of
these sensations would render me an odious stoic, among men formed for
friendship; but an excess of these tender emotions, would appear too effeminate
for a man of business, and inadmissible for the hazardous voyage before me.

I cannot say that I had any particular call to come to Virginia, like Paul to
go to Macedonia; but came voluntarily, of my own accord; and hope kind
Providence has overruled it for the best. Now I meditate a return to my native
land, upon a principle as voluntary as I came. May Heaven send me good speed,
and prosper me in every lawful undertaking. The thoughts of death, in general,
are not (...) painful as the thoughts of living for nothing.

My friends in general, and those in particular who acknowledge my weak efforts
as the means of their salvation, will receive this final valediction as a proof
of my love; and as I cannot visit them all to take a formal parting, I hope
this letter will be as pleasing and more profitable. When I came first into
Virginia, I shared the common lot of strangers; many were afraid of me, that I
was not sincere; and some better characters than myself, seemed to defame; but
I always was prevented from retorting, by the words of David, "Who can stretch
forth his hands against the Lord's anointed and be innocent:" and amidst all my
troubles, these words were my support, "The Lord said, verily it shall be well
with thy remnant (of days,) verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well
in time of affliction and in time of evil." No man can conceive the difficulty
that a stranger in a strange land has to endure, but those who have tried it.
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; my head
has often been filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. The
love of my God, and the worth of immortal souls, has stimulated my heart and
borne me up under all the pressures of mobs, tumults, reproaches, and
contentions; and having obtained help of God, I remain until this very day.

The union that has taken place among the Baptists has been very pleasing to
me, and a continuation of the same, is an object that engrosses my desire. For
this desirable end, I have been willing to sacrifice a number of little
peculiarities, and think myself a gainer in the bargain.

Ye are not strangers, my dear brethren and children, of the difference of
opinions now subsisting among the Baptists in Virginia; some pleading for
predestination and others for universal provision, It is true, that the schemes
of both parties cannot be right; and yet both parties may be right in their
aims, each wishing to justify wisdom, and make God righteous when he judges.
He cannot be wrong, whose heart and life are right -- He cannot walk amiss who
walks in love. I have generally observed, that when religion is lively among
the people no alienation of affection arises from a difference of judgment; and
whoever considers that the devil is orthodox in judgment, and that the Bible is
not written in form of a system, will surely be moderate in dealing out hard
speeches toward his heterodox brother. I conclude that the eternal purposes of
God, and the freedom of the human will, are both truths; and it is a matter of
fact, that the preaching that has been most blessed of God, and most profitable
to men, is the doctrine of sovereign grace in the salvation of souls, mixed with
a little of what is called Arminianism. These two propositions can be tolerably
well reconciled together, but the modern misfortune is, that men often spend
too much time in explaining away one or the other, or in fixing the lock-link
to join the others together; and by such means, have but little time in a
sermon to insist on those two great things which God blesses. I do not plead
for implicit faith; let each man believe, speak, and act for himself; but when
it is confessed that nine tenths of the scripture is best explained without
descending to those cutting points, a man must appear contracted who spends all
his time in disputing about them; and more malevolent when he finds it tends,
not to promote love and union, but rather a rancorous spirit. Let us then
follow after the things that make for peace, and the things whereby one may
edify another, and strive who shall be the most humble and love over the
greatest affronts.

My children, I am afraid that after my departure, you will forget the weak
advice that I have given you; and (what is infinitely more) the instruction of
that gracious Redeemer who bought you with his blood. Wherefore watch, and
remember that for the space of fourteen years I ceased not to warn you night
and day, and taught you publicly, and from house to house. And now behold I go
(with submission to Providence) to New England, not knowing what things will
befall me there. Perhaps the faithless seas may be my tomb, or I may live to
experience more severe trials than ever I have sustained.

I know myself to be a feeble, sinful worm. A retrospective view of my past
conduct is not altogether pleasing, and perhaps it is owing to your partiality
that I have not been publicly exposed: for my own part, I have nothing to fly
to for defense, but the blood and righteousness of the dear Redeemer: but if my
conduct has been such as to escape the censure of those men, who know what it
is to struggle with a body of death; any calumny that may be cast on me after
my departure, will be unnoticed.

I have preached about three thousand sermons since I came to Virginia; all of
which have been too flat, and many of them so cold, that the sentences would
almost freeze between my lips; and yet, many times when I have attempted to
instruct and comfort others, I have found the same blessings for myself. And
now, brethren, I commend you to God and the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified;
hoping and praying that if we meet no more on earth; that we may meet in heaven
among all the redeemed of the Lord: though the company is large, yet there is
room -- Many mansions -- Places for you, my brethren, a place, I trust, for
worthless me.

Before I close, I wish to add a word in behalf of the poor unhappy negroes,
and speak a little for those who are not suffered to speak for themselves. I
have generally been quiet on this head, for the following reasons. First, I
have been a stranger among you, and therefore judged it indecent to meddle with
the customs of the country. Second, I have had no slaves of my own, and so
concluded that if I said any thing on that head, it would be construed to my
disadvantage, without doing any good. Third, It has ever appeared to me
difficult to form any plan (even in idea) for their manumission, and to expose
the evil without pointing out the way of escape, would be doing as the witch
did to Saul. Fourth, To say any thing about it would raise the passions of a
certain class of citizens, and from that they would abuse them worse than
before, and so eventually make those in misery more miserable. But as I am now
about leaving the state, I can speak with more freedom.

I am heartily glad, that I can say that the spirit of masters has greatly
abated since I have been in Virginia; it is now confessed by many, that negroes
can feel injuries, hunger, pain, and weariness, and I hope this spark of good
fire will be raised to a flame, in due time.

I confess, that I am not as much shocked to see them naked, gant, and
trembling, as I was when I first came into the state; the distance that they
are kept in, the abject subordination and things relative thereto do not affect
me as they once did (so fatal are bad customs) but I can never be reconciled to
the keeping of them; nor can I endure to see one man strip and whip another,
(as free by nature as himself) without the interference of a magistrate or any
being or thing to check his turbulent will. And as I am well convinced that
many of my dear brethren have the same feelings of myself, I can unbosom myself
with confidence. It is not my intention to drop the ministerial vest, and
assume the politician's garb today; but after adding, that slavery in its best
appearance, is a violent deprivation of the rights of nature, inconsistent with
republican government, destructive of every humane benevolent passion of the
soul, and subversive to that liberty (absolutely necessary to ennoble the human
mind) let me ask whether Heaven has nothing in store for poor negroes better
than these galling chains? If so, ye ministers of Jesus, and saints of the most
High -- ye wrestling Jacobs, who have power with God* and can prevail over the
angel; let your prayers, your ardent prayers, ascend to the throne of God
incessantly, that he may pour the blessing of freedom upon the poor blacks. If
public prayers of this kind would raise the anger of tyrants, or embolden the
slaves in insolence, let the sable watches of the night, in lonely solitude, be
witnesses to your sincere longings after the liberty of your fellow creatures.

How would every benevolent heart rejoice to see the halcyon day appear -- the
great jubilee usher in, when the poor slaves, with a Moses at their head,
should hoist up the standard, and march out of bondage! Or, what would be still
more elating, to see the power of the gospel so effectual that the lion and the
lamb should lie together -- all former insults and revenges forgotten -- the
names of master and slave be buried -- every yoke broken, and the oppressed go
free -- go free but not empty away.

And you, my black brethren, hear a word from your parting friend. It is not
only a general complaint, but a general truth, that but very few of you will do
your duty without a degree of severity. That your masters have right to
chastise you (while you are their servants) is undoubted. You cannot conceive
what pain, what distresses of soul your masters endure for your sake. How glad
many of them would be if you would bear good usage. Their rest forsakes them at
night, and their comforts by day, on account of your indolence and roguery.
There is no way you can honor your profession, do a good part for yourselves,
or move God to send you deliverance so effectually, as to obey those who have
the rule over you in the fear of God. Though our skins are somewhat different
in color, yet I hope to meet many of you in heaven; where your melodious
voices, that have often enchanted my ears and warmed my heart, will be
incessantly employed in the praise of our common Lord. In hope of this immortal
joy, you may well be patient in your hardships, and wait till your change comes.

And now may the peace of God, that passes all understanding, dwell richly in
all your hearts. -- Amen.


