Albert Durer.


Moncrief.


D. Johnson.


Shakespeare


Stern.


S. Clarke.


ESSAYS on PHYSIOGNOMY; for the Promotion of the KNOWLEDGE and the LOVE OF
MANKIND;

Written in the German Language By J. C. LAVATER, abridged from Mr Holcrofts
Translation.



BOSTON, Printed for William Spotswood and David West.

Advertisement. [Annexed to the MOST APPROVED LONDON EDITION of this work, from
which this FIRST AMERICAN EDITION has been reprinted.]
THE Essays on Physiognomy of M. Lavater, are now so universally known and
celebrated, that it is unnecessary to attempt their eulogium; even those who
consider the science they are written to support as visionary, cannot but
admire the lively force of imagination, and animated argument, with which the
author has explained and defended his favorite hypothesis. The reception the
work has met with from the public, has encouraged certain literary pirates to
seize almost the whole of it, and appropriate it to themselves, by the aid of a
pair of scissars; but in their eagerness to grasp their reward, they have in
some places so mangled and disfigured it by absurd errors, in copying or of the
press, that the author or translator (of whose labor they have availed
themselves, verbatim, with the utmost effrontery and without any
acknowledgment) would scarcely be able to discover the meaning, without having
recourse to the work they have so disgraced, by their mutilated and inaccurate
copy. In some places whole sentences absolutely necessary to the sense have
been omitted, and in others, words altered to a meaning diametrically opposite.
A list of all the errors, which totally destroy or change the sense of the
passage, without enumerating common typographical mistakes, would fill more
than a page. The publishers and proprietors, therefore, of the work thus
impudently stolen, and wretchedly mutilated, now present to the public an
abridgment carefully revised, correctly printed, and containing, in addition to
all that is to be found in the other, nearly a whole sheet of letter press, and
two additional copper plates, containing twelve heads.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. -- Physiognomy, a Science -- The Truth of Physiognomy -- The
Advantages of Physiognomy -- Its Disadvantages -- The Ease and Difficulty of
studying Physiognomy -- A Word concerning the Author 1 CHAP. II. -- On the
Nature of Man, which is the Foundation of the Science of Physiognomy --
Difference between Physiognomy and Pathognomy 20 CHAP. III. -- Signs of Bodily
Strength and Weakness -- Of Health and Sickness 25 CHAP. IV. -- Of the
Congeniality of the Human Form 31 CHAP. V. -- Description of Plates I. and II.
37 CHAP. VI. -- The universal Excellence of the Form of Man 40 CHAP. VII. -- Of
the Forehead 44 CHAP. VIII. -- Of the Eyes and Eyebrows 48 CHAP. IX. -- Of the
Nose 54 CHAP. X. -- Of the Mouth and Lips 57 CHAP. XI. -- Of the Teeth and Chin
60 CHAP. XII. -- Of Sculls 62 CHAP. XIII. -- Suggestions to the Physiognomist
concerning the Scull 66 CHAP. XIV. -- Of the Difference of Sculls, as they
relate to Sex, and particularly to Nations -- Of the Sculls of Children 71
CHAP. XV. -- Description of Plate III. 76 CHAP. XVI. -- The Physiognomist 78
CHAP. XVII. -- Lavater's own Remarks on National Physiognomy 86 CHAP. XVIII. --
Extracts from Buffon on National Physiognomy 89 CHAP. XIX. -- Some of the most
remarkable Passages from an excellent Essay on National Physiognomy, by
Professor Kant of Konigsberg 95 CHAP. XX. -- Extracts from other Writers on
National Physiognomy -- From Winkelmann's History of Art -- From the Recherches
Philosophiques sur les Americains, by M. de Pauw -- Observations by Lintz --
From a Letter written by M. Fuessly -- From a Letter written by Professor
Camper 98 CHAP. XXI. -- Extracts from the Manuscripts of a Man of Literature at
Darmstadt, on National Physiognomy 105 CHAP. XXII -- Description of Plate IV.
111 CHAP. XXIII. -- Resemblance between Parents and Children 113 CHAP. XXIV. --
Remarks on the Opinions of Buffon, Haller, and Bonnet, concerning the
Resemblance between Parents and Children 118 CHAP. XXV. -- Observations on the
Newborn, the Dying, and the Dead 123 CHAP. XXVI. -- Of the influence of
Countenance on Countenance 125 CHAP. XXVII. -- On the influence of the
Imagination on the Countenance 128 CHAP. XXVIII. -- The Effects of the
Imagination on the Human Form 130 CHAP. XXIX. -- Essay, by a late learned Man
of Oldenberg, (M. Sturtz), on Physiognomy, interspersed with short Remarks, by
the Author 134 CHAP. XXX. -- Quotations from Huart, with Remarks 145 CHAP.
XXXI. -- Remarks on an Essay on Physiognomy, by Professor Litchtenberg 149
CHAP. XXXII. -- Description of Plate V. 170 CHAP. XXXIII. -- General Remarks on
Women 171 CHAP. XXXIV. -- General Remarks on Male and Female -- A Word on the
physiognomonical Relation of the Sexes 175 CHAP. XXXV. -- On the Physiognomy of
Youth 178 CHAP. XXXVI. -- Physiognomonical Extracts from an Essay inserted in
the Deutschen Museum, a German Journal or Review 181 CHAP. XXXVII. -- Extracts
from Maximus Tyrius 189 CHAP. XXXVIII. -- Extracts from a Manuscript by Th --
191 CHAP. XXXIX. -- Extracts from Nicolai and Winkelmann 199 CHAP. XL. --
Extracts from Aristotle and other Authors concerning Beasts 203 CHAP. XLI. --
Of Birds, Fishes, Serpents, and Insects 214 CHAP. XLII. -- On Shades 218 CHAP.
XLIII. -- Description of Plate VI. 221 CHAP. XLIV. -- A Word to Travelers 222
CHAP. XLV. -- A Word to Princes and Judges 227 CHAP. XLVI. -- A Word to the
Clergy 230 CHAP. XLVII. -- Physiognomonical Elucidations of Countenances 231
CHAP. XLVIII. -- Physiognomonical Anecdotes 233 CHAP. XLIX. -- Miscellaneous
Extracts from Kaempf's Essays on the Temperaments, with Remarks 234 CHAP. L. --
Upon Portrait Painting 237 CHAP. LI. -- Description of Plate VII. 244 CHAP.
LII. -- Miscellaneous Quotations 246 CHAP. LIII. -- Miscellaneous Thoughts 248
CHAP. LIVE. -- Of the Utility between the Knowledge of the Heart and
Philanthropy -- Miscellaneous physiognomonical Thoughts from Holy Writ 252
CHAP. LV. -- Of the apparently false Decisions of Physiognomy. -- Of the
general Objections made to Physiognomy. Particular Objections answered 257
PHYSIOGNOMY.
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION.
Physiognomy a Science. -- The Truth of Physiognomy. -- The Advantages of
Physiognomy. -- Its Disadvantages. -- The Ease and Difficulty of studying
Physiognomy. -- A Word concerning the Author.

IT has been asserted by thousands, that though there may be some truth in
physiognomy, still it never can be a science. These assertions will be
repeated, how clearly soever their objections may be answered, and however
little they may have to reply. Physiognomy is as capable of becoming a science
as any one of the sciences, mathematics excepted. It is a branch of the
physical art, and includes theology and the belles lettres. Like these, it may,
to a certain extent, be reduced to rule, and acquire an appropriate character,
by which it may be taught.

Whenever truth or knowledge is explain ^^y fixed principles, it becomes
scientific, so far as it can be imparted by words, lines, rules, and
definitions. The question will stand simply thus: Whether it be possible to
explain the undeniable striking differences which exist between human faces and
forms, not by obscure and confused conceptions, but by certain characters,
signs and expressions? Whether these signs can communicate the strength and
weakness, health and sickness of the body; the folly and wisdom, the
magnanimity and meanness, the virtue and vice of the mind? This is the only
thing to be decided; and he who, instead of investigating the question, should
continue to declaim against it, must either be deficient in the love of truth,
or in logical reasoning.

The experimental philosopher can only proceed with his discoveries to a
certain extent; only can communicate them by words; can only say, Such and such
are my experiments, such my remarks, such is the number of them, and such are
the inferences I draw: pursue the track that I have explored. Yet, will he not
be unable, sometimes, to say thus much? Will not his active mind make a
thousand remarks, which he will want the power to communicate? Will not his eye
penetrate recesses, which he shall be unable to discover to that feebler vision
that cannot discover for itself? Is any science brought to perfection at the
moment of its birth? Does not genius continually, with eagle-eye and flight,
anticipate centuries? How long did the world wait for Wolf? Who, among the
moderns, is more scientific than Bonnet? Who more accurately distinguishes
falsehood from truth? Yet to whom would he be able to communicate his sudden
perception of the truth; the result or resources of those numerous, small,
indescribable, rapid, profound remarks? To whom could he impart these by signs,
tones, images and rules? Is it not the same with physic, theology, and all the
arts and sciences? Is it not the same with painting, at once the mother and
daughter of physiognomy*

How infinitely does he, who is painter or poet born, soar beyond all written
rule! But must he, who possesses feelings and power which are not to be reduced
to rule, be pronounced unscientific? So, physiognomonical truth may, to a
certain degree, be defined, communicated by signs and words, as a science. This
is the look of contempt, this of innocence. Where such signs are, such and such
properties reside.

There can be no doubt of the truth of physiognomy. All countenances, all
forms, all created beings, are not only different from each other in their
classes, races, and kinds, but are also individually distinct. Each being
differs from every other being of its species. However generally known, it is a
truth the most important to our purpose, and necessary to repeat, that "there
is no rose perfectly similar to another rose, no egg to an egg, no eel to an
eel, no lion to a lion, no eagle to an eagle, no man to a man."

Confining this proposition to man only, it is the first, the most profound,
most secure and unshaken foundation-stone of physiognomy, that however intimate
the analogy and similarity of the innumerable forms of men, no two men can be
found, who, brought together, and accurately compared, will not appear to be
very remarkably different. Nor is it less incontrovertible, that it is equally
impossible to find two minds, as two countenances, which perfectly resemble
each other.

Considerations like these will be sufficient to make it received as a truth,
not requiring farther demonstration, that there must be a certain native
analogy between the external varieties of the countenance and form, and the
internal varieties of the mind. Anger renders the muscles protuberant; and
shall not therefore an angry mind and protuberant muscles be considered as
cause and effect?

After repeated observation, that an active and vivid eye, and an active and
acute wit, are frequently found in the same person, shall it be supposed that
there is no relation between the active eye and the active mind? Is this the
effect of accident? Ought it not rather to be considered as sympathy, an
interchangeable and instantaneous effect, when we perceive that, at the very
moment the understanding is most acute and penetrating, and the wit the most
lively, the motion and fire of the eye undergo, at that moment, the most
visible alteration?

But all this is denied by those who oppose the truth of the science of
physiognomy. Truth, according to them, is ever at variance with herself:
Eternal order is degraded to a juggler, whose purpose it is to deceive.

Calm reason revolts when it is asserted, that the strong man may appear
perfectly like the weak, the man in full health like another in the last stage
of a consumption, or that the rash and irascible resemble the cold and
phlegmatic. It revolts to hear it affirmed, that joy and grief, pleasure and
pain, love and hatred, all exhibit themselves under the same traits, that is to
say, under no traits whatever, on the exterior of man. Yet such are the
assertions of those who maintain that physiognomy is a chimerical science. They
overturn all that order and combination by which Eternal wisdom so highly
astonishes and delights the understanding. It cannot be too emphatically
repeated, that blind chance and a^bitrary disorder constitute the philosophy of
fools, and that they are the bane of natural knowledge, philosophy, and
religion. Entirely to banish such a system, is the duty of the true inquirer,
the sage, and the divine.

It is indisputable that all men, absolutely all men, estimate all things
whatever by their physiognomy, their exterior temporary superficies. By viewing
these on every occasion, they draw their conclusions concerning their internal
properties. What merchant, if he be unacquainted with the person of whom he
purchases, does not estimate his wares by the physiognomy or appearance of
those wares? If he purchased of a distant correspondent, what other means does
he use in judging whether they are or are not equal to his expectation? Is not
his judgment determined by the color, the fineness, the superficies, the
exterior, the physiognomy? Does he not judge money by its physiognomy? Why does
he take one guinea, and reject another? Why weigh a third in his hand? Does he
not determine according to its color, or impression, its outside, its
physiognomy? If a stranger enter his shop, as a buyer or seller, will he not
observe him? Will he not draw conclusions from his countenance? Will he not,
almost before he is out of hearing, pronounce some opinion of him? and say,
This man has an honest look -- this man has a pleasing or forbidding
countenance. What is it to the purpose whether his judgment be right or wrong?
He judges, and, though not wholly, he depends, in part, upon the exterior form,
and thence draws inferences concerning the mind.

The farmer, walking through his grounds, regulates his future expectations by
the color, the size, the growth, the exterior; that is to say, by the
physiognomy of the bloom, the stalk or the ear of his corn, the stem and shoots
of his vine tree. -- This ear of corn is blighted -- that wood is full of sap
-- this will grow, that not, affirms he at the first or second glance. --
Though these vine-shoots look well, they will bear but few grapes. And
wherefore? He remarks in their appearance, as the physiognomist in the
countenances of shallow men, the want of native energy. Does he not judge by
the exterior?

Does not the physician pay more attention to the physiognomy of the sick, than
to all the accounts that are brought him concerning his patient? Zimmermann,
among the living, may be brought as a proof of the great perfection at which
this kind of judgment is arrived; and, among the dead, Kemp, whose son has
written a treatise on temperament.

I will say nothing of the painter, as his art too evidently reproves the
childish and arrogant prejudices of those who pretend to disbelieve
physiognomy. The traveller, the philanthropist, the misanthropist, the lover,
(and who not?) all act according to their feelings and decisions, true or
false, confused or clear, concerning physiognomy. These feelings, these
decisions, excite compassion, disgust, joy, love, hatred suspicion, confidence,
reserve, or benevolence.

By what rule do we judge of the sky, but by its physiognomy? No food, not a
glass of wine or beer, nor a cup of coffee or tea comes to table, which is not
judged by its physiognomy, its exterior, and of which we do not then deduce
some conclusion respecting its interior good or bad properties. Is not all
nature physiognomy, superficies and contents, body and spirit, exterior effect
and internal power, invisible beginning and visible ending?

Physiognomy, whether understood in its most extensive or confined
signification, is the origin of all human decisions, efforts, actions,
expectations, fears and hopes; of all pleasing and unpleasing sensations, which
are occasioned by external objects. From the cradle to the grave, in all
conditions and ages, throughout all nations, from Adam to the last existing
man, from the worm we tread on to the most sublime of philosophers, physiognomy
is the origin of all we do and suffer.

Every insect is acquainted with its friend and its so; each child loves and
fears, although it knows not why. Physiognomy is the cause: nor is there a man
to be found on earth who is not daily influenced by physiognomy; not a man who
cannot figure to himself a countenance, which shall to him appear exceedingly
lovely, or exceedingly hateful; not a man who does not, more or less, the first
time he is in company with a stranger, observe, estimate, compare, and judge of
him according to appearances, although he might never have heard of the word or
thing called physiognomy; not a man who does not judge of all things that pass
through his hands by their physiognomy, that is, their internal worth by their
external appearance.

The act of dissimulation itself, which is adduced as so insuperable an
objection to the truth of physiognomy, is founded upon physiognomy. Why does
the hypocrite assume the appearance of an honest man, but because that he is
convinced, though not perhaps from any systematic reflection, that all eyes are
acquainted with the characteristic mark of honesty?

What judge, wise or unwise, whether the criminal, confess or deny the fact,
does not sometimes in this sense decide from appearances? Who can, is, or ought
to be absolutely indifferent to the exterior of persons brought before him to
be judged? What king would choose a minister without examining his exterior,
secretly at least, and to a certain extent? An officer will not enlist a
soldier without thus examining his appearance, putting his height out of the
question. What master or mistress of a family will choose a servant without
considering the exterior? No matter that their judgment may or may not be just,
or that it may be exercised unconsciously.

I am weary of citing such numerous instances, which are so continually before
our eyes, to prove that men, tacitly and unanimously, confess the influence
which physiognomy has over their sensations and actions. I feel disgust at
being obliged to write thus, in order to convince the learned of truths which
lie within the reach of every child.

Let him see who has eyes to see; but should the light by being brought too
close to his eyes, produce phrensy, he may burn himself by endeavoring to
extinguish the torch of truth. I am not fond of using such expressions; but I
dare to do my duty, and my duty is boldly to declare, that I believe myself
certain of what I now and hereafter shall affirm; and that I think myself
capable of convincing all lovers of truth, by principles which are in
themselves incontrovertible. It is also necessary to confute the pretensions of
certain literary despots, and to compel them to be more cautious in their
decisions. It is therefore proved, it being an eternal and manifest truth,
that, whether they are or are not sensible of it, all men are daily influenced
by physiognomy; nay, there is not a living being, which does not, at least
after its manner, draw some inferences from the external to the internal; which
does not judge concerning that which is not, by that which is apparent to the
senses.

This universal though tacit confession, that the exterior, the visible, the
superficies of objects, indicate their nature, their properties, and that every
outward sign is the symbol of some inherent quality, I hold to be equally
certain and important to the science of physiognomy.

When each apple, each apricot, has a physiognomy peculiar to itself; shall
man, the lord of earth, have none? The most simple and inanimate object has its
characteristic exterior, by which it is not only distinguished as a species,
but individually; and shall the first, noblest, best harmonised, and most
beautiful being, be denied all characteristic?

Whatever may be objected against the truth and certainty of the science of
physiognomy, by the most illiterate or the most learned; how much soever he,
who openly professes faith in this science, may be subject to ridicule, to
philosophic pity and contempt; it still cannot be contested, that there is no
subject, thus considered, more important, more worthy of observation, more
interesting than man; nor any occupation superior to that of disclosing the
beauties and perfections of human nature.

I shall now proceed to inquire into the Advantages of physiognomy. Whether a
more certain, more accurate, more extensive, and thereby a more perfect
knowledge of man, be, or be not profitable; whether it be, or be not,
advantageous to gain a knowledge of internal qualities from external form and
feature? is a question most deserving of inquiry. This may be classed first as
a general question, Whether knowledge, its extension, and increase, be of
consequence to man?

Certain it is, that if a man has the power, faculties and will to obtain
wisdom, that he should exercise those faculties for the attainment of wisdom.
How paradoxical are those proofs, that science and knowledge are detrimental to
man, and that a rude state of ignorance is to be preferred to all that wisdom
can teach! I here dare assert, that physiognomy has at least as many claims of
essential advantage, as are granted by men, in general, to other sciences.

With how much justice may we not grant precedence to that science which
teaches the knowledge of men? What object is so important to man, as man
himself? What knowledge can more influence his happiness, than the knowledge of
himself? This advantageous knowledge is the peculiar province of physiognomy.

Whoever would wish perfect conviction of the advantages of physiognomy, let
him imagine but for a moment, that all physiognomical knowledge and sensation
were lost to the world. What confusion, what uncertainty and absurdity must
take place in millions of instances, among the actions of men! How perpetual
must be the vexation of the eternal uncertainty in all which we should have to
transact with each other! and how infinitely would probability, which depends
upon a multitude of circumstances, more or less distinctly perce^^ed, be
weakened by this privation! From how vast a number of actions, by which men are
honored and benefited, must they then desist!

Mutual intercourse is the thing of most consequence to mankind, who are
destined to live in society. The knowledge of man is the soul of this
intercourse, that which imparts animation to it, pleasure and profit. Let the
physiognomist observe varieties, make minute distinctions, establish signs, and
invent words, to express these his remarks; form general abstract propositions;
extend and improve physiognomical knowledge, language, and sensation; and thus
will the uses and advantages of physiognomy progressively increase.

Physiognomy is a source of the purest, the most exalted sensations; an
additional eye, wherewith to view the manifold proofs of Divine wisdom and
goodness in the creation, and, while thus viewing unspeakable harmony and
truth, to excite more ecstatic love for their adorable Author. Where the dark,
inattentive sight of the unexperienced perceives nothing, there the practical
view of the physiognomist discovers inexhaustible fountains of delight --
endearing, moral, and spiritual. With secret delight, the philanthropic
physiognomist discerns those internal motives which would otherwise be first
revealed in the world to come. He distinguishes what is permanent in the
character from what is habitual, and what is habitual from what is accidental.
He, thererefore, who reads man in this language, reads him most accurately.

To enumerate all the advantages of phsiognomy, would require a large treatise.
The most indisputable, though the most important of these its advantages, are
those the painter acquires, who, if he be not a physiognomist, is nothing. The
greatest is that of forming, conducting, and improving the human heart.

I shall now say something with respect to the Disadvantages of physiognomy.

Methinks I hear some worthy man exclaim: O thou, who have ever hitherto lived
the friend of religion and virtue! what is thy present purpose? What mischief
shall not be wrought by this thy physiognomy? Will thou teach man the unblessed
art of judging his brother by the ambiguous expressions of his countenance? Are
there not already sufficient of censoriousness, scandal, and inspection into
the failings of others? Will thou teach man to read the secrets of the heart,
the latent feelings, and the various errors of thought?

Thou dwell upon the advantages of the science; say thou shall teach men
to contemplate the beauty of virtue, the hatefulness of vice, and, by these
means, make them virtuous; and that thou inspirest us with an abhorrence of
vice, by obliging us to feel its external deformity. And what shall be the
consequence? Shall it not be, that for the appearance, and not the reality of
goodness, man shall wish to be good? that, vain as he already is, acting from
the desire of praise, and wishing only to appear what he ought determinately to
be, he will yet become more vain, and will court the praise of men, not by
words and deeds alone, but by assumed looks and counterfeited forms? Ought
thou not rather to weaken this already too powerful motive for human actions,
and to strengthen a better; to turn the eyes inward, to teach actual
improvement and silent innocence, instead of inducing him to reason on the
outward fair expressions of goodness, or the hateful ones of wickedness?

This is a heavy accusation, and with great appearance of truth. Yet how easy
is defense to me, and how pleasant, when my opponent accuses me from motives of
philanthropy, and not of splenetic dispute! The charge is twofold,
Censoriousness and Vanity. I will answer these charges separately; and now
proceed to reply to the first objection.

I teach no black art; no nostrum, the secret of which I might have concealed,
which is a thousand times injurious for once that it is profitable, the
discovery of which is therefore so difficult. I do but teach a science, the
most general, the most palpable, with which all men are acquainted; and state
my feelings, observations, and their consequences.

It ought never to be forgotten, that the very purport of outward expression is
to teach what passes in the mind, and that to deprive man of this source of
knowledge were to reduce him to utter ignorance; that every man is born with a
certain portion of physiognomical sensation, as certainly as that every man,
who is not deformed, is born with two eyes; that all men, in their intercourse
with each other, form physiognomical decisions, according as their judgment is
more or less clear; that it is well known, though physiognomy were never to be
reduced to a science, most men, in proportion as they have mingled with the
world, derive some profit from their knowledge of mankind, even at the first
glance, and that the same effects were produced long before this question was
in agitation. Whether, therefore, to teach men to decide with more perspicuity
and certainty, instead of confusedly; to judge clearly with refined sensations,
instead of rudely and erroneously with sensations more gross; and, instead of
suffering them to wander in the dark, and venture abortive and injurious
judgments, to learn them by physiognomical experiments, by the rules of
prudence and caution, and the sublime voice of philanthropy, to mistrust, to be
diffident and slow to pronounce, where they imagine they discover evil: whether
this, I say, can be injurious, I leave the world to determine.

I think I may venture to affirm, that very few persons will, in consequence of
this work, begin to judge ill of others, who had not before been guilty of the
practice.

The second objection to physiognomy is, that it renders men vain, and teaches
them to assume a plausible appearance. The men thou would reform are not
children, who are good, and know that they are so; but men who must, from
experience, learn to distinguish between good and evil; men who, to become
perfect, must necessarily be taught their own various, and consequently their
own beneficent qualities. Let therefore, the desire of obtaining approbation
from the good, act in concert with the impulse to goodness. Let this be the
ladder, or, if you please, the crutch to support tottering virtue. Suffer men
to feel that God has ever branded vice with deformity, and adorned virtue with
inimitable beauty. Allow man to rejoice when he perceives that his countenance
improves in proportion as his heart is ennobled. Inform him only, that to be
good from vain motives, is not actual good, but vanity; that the ornaments of
vanity will ever be inferior and ignoble; and that the dignified mien of virtue
never can be truly attained, but by the actual possession of virtue, unsullied
by the leven of vanity.

Let me now say a word or two as to the E^se and Difficulties attending the
study of physiognomy. To learn the lowest, the least difficult of sciences, at
first appears an arduous undertaking, when taught by words or books, and not
reduced to actual practice. What numerous dangers and difficulties might be
started against all the daily enterprises of men, were it not undeniable that
they are performed with facility! How might not the possibility of making a
watch, and still more a watch worn in a ring, or of sailing over the vast
ocean, and of numberless other arts and inventions, be disputed, did we not
behold them constantly practiced! How many arguments might be urged against the
practice of physic! and, though some of them be unanswerable, how many are the
reverse!

It is not just, too hastily to decide on the possible ease or difficulty of
any subject which we have not yet examined. The simplest may abound with
difficulties to him who has not made frequent experiments, and, by frequent
experiments, the most difficult may become easy.

Whoever possesses the slightest capacity for, and has once acquired the habit
of, observation and comparison, should he see himself daily and incessantly
surrounded by hosts of difficulties, yet he will certainly be able to make a
progress. There is no study, however difficult, which may not be attained by
perseverance and resolution.

We have men constantly before us. In the very smallest towns there is a
continual influx and reflux of persons, of various and opposite characters:
among these many are known to us without consulting physiognomy; and that they
are patient or choloric, credulous or suspicious, wise or foolish, of moderate
or weak capacity, we are convinced past contradiction. Their countenances are
as widely various as their characters, and these variety of countenances may
each be as accurately drawn as their varieties of character may be described.

There are men, with whom we have daily intercourse, and whose interest and
ours are connected. Be their dissimulation what it may, passion will frequently
for a moment, snatch off the mask, and give us a glance, at least a side-view,
of their true form.

Has Nature bestowed on man the eye and ear, and yet made her language so
difficult, or so entirely unintelligible? and not the eye and ear alone, but
feeling, nerves, internal sensations, and yet has rendered the language of the
superficies so confused, so obscure? She who has adapted sound to the ear, and
the ear to sound; she who has created light for the eye, and the eye for light;
she who has taught man so soon to speak, and to understand speech; shall she
have imparted innumerable traits and marks of secret inclinations, powers, and
passions, accompanied by perception, sensation, and an impulse to interpret
them to his advantage; and, after bestowing such strong incitements, shall she
have denied him the possibility of quenching this his thirst of knowledge? She
who has given him penetration to discover sciences still more profound, though
of much inferior utility; who has taught him to trace out the paths, and
measure the curves of comets; who has put a telescope into his hand, that he
may view the satellites of the planets, and has endowed him with the capability
of calculating their eclipses through revolving ages; shall so kind a mother
have denied her children (her truth-seeking pupils, her noble philanthropic
offspring, who are so willing to admire and rejoice in the majesty of the Most
High, viewing man his masterpiece) the power of reading the ever present, ever
open book of the human countenance; of reading man, the most beautiful of all
her works, the compendium of all things, the mirror of the Deity?

Awake! view man in all his infinite forms! Look, for thou may eternally
learn; shake off thy sloth, and behold. Meditate on its importance; take
resolution to thyself, and the most difficult shall become easy.

Let me now mention the Difficulties attending this study. There is a peculiar
circumstance attending the starting of difficulties. There are some who possess
the particular gift of discovering and inventing difficulties, without number
of limits, on the most common and easy subjects. I shall be brief on the
innumerable difficulties of physiognomy; because, it not being my intention to
cite them all in this place, the most important will occasionally be noticed
and answered in the course of the work. I have an additional motive to be
brief, which is, that most of these difficulties are included in the
indescribable minuteness of innumerable traits of character, or the
impossibility of seizing, expressing, and analyzing certain sensations and
observations.

Nothing can be more certain than that the smallest shades, which are scarcely
discernible to an unexperienced eye, frequently denote total opposition of
character. How wonderfully may the expression of countenance and character be
altered by a small inflexion or diminishing, lengthening or sharpening, even
though but of a hair's breadth!

How difficult, how impossible, must this variety of the same countenance, even
in the most accurate of the arts of imitation, render precision! How often does
it happen, that the seat of character is so hidden, so enveloped, so masked,
that it can only be caught in certain, and perhaps uncommon positions of the
countenance; which will again be changed, and the signs all disappear, before
they have made any durable impression! or, supposing the impression made, these
distinguishing traits may be so difficult to seize, that it shall be impossible
to paint, much less to engrave, or describe them by language.

It is with physiognomy as with all other objects of taste, literal or
figurative, of sense, or of spirit. How many thousand accidents, great and
small, physical and moral; how many secret incidents, alterations, passions;
how often will dress, position, light and shade; and innumerable discordant
circumstances, show the countenance so disadvantageously, or, to speak more
properly, betray the physiognomist into a false judgment on the true qualities
of the countenance and character! How easily may these occasion him to overlook
the essential traits of character, and form his judgment on what is wholly
accidental! How surprisingly may the smallpox, during life, disfigure the
countenance! How may it destroy, confuse, or render the most decisive traits
imperceptible!

We will therefore grant the opposer of physiognomy all he can ask, although we
do not live without hope, that many of the difficulties shall be resolved,
which, at first, appeared to the reader and to the author inexplicable The
following lines, to the end of the Introduction, contain M^ Lavater's own
remarks on himself.


It is highly incumbent upon me that I should not lead my readers to expect
more from me than I am able to perform. Whoever publishes a considerable work
on physiognomy, gives his readers apparently to understand, that he is much
better acquainted with the subject than any of his cotemporaries. Should an
error escape him, he exposes himself to the severest ridicule; he is contemned,
at least by those who do not read him, for pretensions which probably they
suppose him to make, but which in reality he does not make.

The God of truth, and all who know me, will bear testimony, that from my whole
soul I despise deceit, as I do all silly claims to superior wisdom and
infallibility, which so many writers, by a thousand artifices, endeavor to
make their readers imagine they possess.

First, therefore, I declare, what I have uniformly declared on all occasions,
although the persons who speak of me and my works endeavor to conceal it from
themselves and others, that I understand but little of physiognomy; that I have
been, and continue daily to be, mistaken in my judgment: but these errors are
the most natural and most certain means of correcting, confirming, and
extending my knowledge.

It will probably not be disagreeable to many of my readers, to be informed, in
part, of the progress of my mind in this study.

Before I reached the twenty-fifth year of my age, there was nothing I should
have supposed more improbable, than that I should make the smallest inquiries
concerning, much less that I should write a book on, physiognomy. I was neither
inclined to read nor make the slightest observations on the subject. The
extreme sensibility of my nerves occasioned me, however, to feel certain
emotions at beholding certain countenances. I sometimes instinctively formed a
judgment according to these first impressions, and was laughed at, ashamed, and
became cautious. Years passed away before I again dared, impelled by similar
impressions, to venture similar opinions. In the mean time, I occasionally
sketched the countenance of a friend, whom by chance I had lately been
observing. I had, from my earliest youth, a propensity to drawing, and
especially to drawing of portraits, although I had but little genius or
perseverance. By this practice my latent feelings began partly to unfold
themselves. The various proportions, similitudes, and varieties of the human
countenance became more apparent. It has happened that, on two successive days,
I have drawn two faces, the features of which had a remarkable resemblance.
This awakened my attention; and my astonishment increased when I received
certain proofs that these persons were as similar in character as in feature.

I was afterward induced by M. Zimmermann, physician to the court of Hanover
to write my thoughts on this subject. I met with many opponents; and this
opposition obliged me to make deeper and more laborious researches, till at
length the present work on physiognomy was produced.

Here I must repeat the full conviction I feel, that my whole life would be
insufficient to form any approach toward a perfect and consistent whole. It is
a field too vast for me singly to till. I shall find various opportunities of
confessing my deficiency in various branches of science, without which it is
impossible to study physiognomy with that firmness and certainty which are
requisite. I shall conclude by declaring, with unreserved candor, and wholly
committing myself to the reader who is the friend of truth,

That I have heard, from the weakest men, remarks on the human countenance,
more acute than those I had made; remarks which made mine appear trifling.

That I believe, were various other people to sketch countenances, and write
their observations, those I have hitherto made would soon become of little
importance.

That I daily meet an hundred faces, concerning which I am unable to pronounce
any certain opinion.

That no man has any thing to fear from my inspection, as it is my endeavor to
find good in man, nor are there any men in whom good is not to be found.

That since I have begun thus, to observe mankind, my philanthropy is not
diminished, but, I will venture to say, increased.

And that now (January 1783), after ten years daily study, I am not more
convinced of the certainty of my own existence, than of the truth of the
science of physiognomy, or than that this truth may be demonstrated: and that I
hold him to be a weak and simple person, who shall affirm, that the effects of
the impressions made upon him by all possible human countenances are equal.

CHAPTER II.
On the Nature of Men, which is the Foundation of the Science of Physiognomy --
Difference between Physiognomy and Pathognomy.

MAN is the most perfect of all earthly creatures, the most imbued with the
principles of life. Each particle of matter is an immensity, each leaf a world,
each insect an inexplicable compendium. Who, then, shall enumerate the
gradations between insect and man? In him all the powers of nature are united.
He is the essence of creation. The son of earth, he is the earth's lord: the
summary and central point of all existence, of all powers, and of all life, on
that earth which he inhabits.

There are no organized beings with which we are acquainted, man alone
excepted, in which are so wonderfully united these different kinds of life, the
animal, the intellectual, and the moral. Each of these lives is the compendium
of various faculties, most wonderfully compounded and harmonised.

To know, to desire, to act, or accurately to observe and meditate, to perceive
and to wish, to possess the power of motion and resistance -- these combined,
constitute man an animal, intellectual, and moral being.

Endowed with these faculties, and with this triple life, man is in himself the
most worthy subject of observation, as he likewise is himself the most worthy
observer. In him each species of life is conspicuous; yet never can his
properties be wholly known, except by the aid of his external form, his body,
his superficies. How spiritual, how incorporeal soever his internal essence may
be, still is he only visible and conceivable from the harmony of his
constituent parts. From these he is inseparable. He exists and moves in the
body he inhabits, as in his element. This threefold life which man cannot be
denied to possess, necessarily first becomes the subject of disquisition and
research, as it presents itself in the form of body, and in such of his
faculties as are apparent to sense.

By such external appearances as affect the senses, all things are
characterised; they are the foundations of all human knowledge. Man must wander
in the darkest ignorance, equally with respect to himself and the objects that
surround him, did he not become acquainted with their properties and powers by
the aid of their externals; and had not each object a character peculiar to its
nature and essence, which acquaints us with what it is, and enables us to
distinguish it from what it is not.

We survey all bodies that appear to sight under a certain form and
superficies; we behold those outlines traced which are the result of their
organisation. I hope I shall be pardoned the repetition of commonplace truths,
since on these is built the science of physiognomy, or the proper study of man.

The organisation of man peculiarly distinguishes him from all other earthly
beings; and his physiognomy, that is to say, his superficies, and outlines of
this organisation, show him to be infinitely superior to all those visible
beings by which he is surrounded. We are unacquainted with any form equally
noble, equally majestic with that of man; and in which so many kinds of life,
so many powers, so many virtues of action and motion unite as in a central
point. With firm step he advances over the earth's surface, and with erect body
raises his head to heaven. He looks forward to infinitude; he acts with
facility and swiftness inconceivable, and his motions are the most immediate
and the most varied. By whom may their varieties be enumerated? He can at once
both suffer and perform infinitely more than any other creature. He unites
flexibility and fortitude, strength and dexterity, activity and rest. Of all
creatures he can the soonest yield, and the longest resist. None resemble him
in the variety and harmony of his powers. His faculties, like his form, are
peculiar to himself.

The make and proportion of man, his superior height, capable of so many
changes, and such variety of motion, prove to the unprejudiced observer his
superior eminent strength, and astonishing facility of action. The high
excellence and physiological unity of human nature are visible at the first
glance. The head, especially the face, and the formation of the firm parts,
compared to the firm parts of other animals, convince the accurate observer,
who is capable of investigating truth, of the greatness and superiority of his
intellectual qualities. The eye, the look, the cheeks, the mouth, the forehead,
whether considered in a state of entire rest, or during their innumerable
varieties of motion, -- in fine, whatever is understood by physiognomy -- are
the most expressive, the most convincing picture of interior sensation,
desires, passions, will, and of all those properties which so much exalt moral
above animal life.

Although the physiological, intellectual, and moral life of man, with all
their subordinate powers, and their constituent parts, so eminently unite in
one being; although these three kinds of life do not, like three distinct
families, reside in separate parts or stories of the body, but co-exist in one
point, and by their combination form one whole; yet it is plain, that each of
these powers of life has its peculiar station, where it more especially unfolds
itself and acts.

It is beyond contradiction evident, that, though physiological or animal life
displays itself through all the body and especially through all the animal
parts, yet it acts more conspicuously in the arm, from the shoulder to the ends
of the fingers.

It is not less evident, that intellectual life, or the power of the
understanding and the mind, make themselves most apparent in the circumference
and form of the solid parts of the head, especially the forehead; though they
will discover themselves, to an attentive and accurate eye, in every part and
point of the human body, by the congeniality and harmony of the various parts.
Is there any occasion to prove, that the power of thinking resides neither in
the foot, in the hand, nor in the back, but in the head, and in its internal
parts?

The moral life of man particularly reveals itself in the lines, marks and
transitions of the countenance. His moral powers and desires; his irritability,
sympathy, and antipathy; his facility of attracting or repelling the objects
that surround him: these are all summed up in, and painted upon his countenance
when at rest. When any passion is called into action, such passion is depicted
by the motion of the muscles, and these motions are accompanied by a strong
palpitation of the heart. If the countenance be tranquil, it always denotes
tranquillity in the region of the heart and breast.

This threefold life of man, so intimately interwoven through his frame, is
still capable of being studied in its different appropriate parts; and, did we
live in a less depraved world, we should find sufficient data for the science
of physiognomy.

The animal life, the lowest and most earthly, would discover itself from the
rim of the belly to the organs of generation, which would become its central or
focal point. The middle or moral life would be seated in the breast, and the
heart would be its central point. The intellectual life, which of the three is
supreme, would reside in the head, and have the eye for its center. If we take
the countenance as the representative and epitome of the three divisions, then
will the forehead to the eyebrows be the mirror or image of the understanding;
the nose and cheeks, the image of the moral and sensitive life; and the mouth
and chin, the image of the animal life; while the eye will be to the whole as
its summary and center.

All that has been hitherto advanced is so clear, so well known, so universal,
that we should blush to insist upon such commonplace truths, were they not
first the foundation on which we must build all we have to propose; and, again,
had not these truths (can it be believed by futurity?) in this our age been so
many thousand times mistaken and contested with the most inconceivable
affectation.

The science of physiognomy, whether understood in the most enlarged or most
confined sense, indubitably depends on these general and incontrovertible
principles; yet, incontrovertible as they are, they have not been without their
opponents. Men pretend to doubt of the most striking, the most convincing, the
most self-evident truths; although, were these destroyed, neither truth nor
knowledge would remain. They do not profess to doubt concerning the physiognomy
of other natural objects; yet do they doubt the physiognomy of human nature --
the first object, the most worthy of contemplation, and the most animated the
realms of nature contain.

We have already hinted to our readers, that they are to expect only fragments
on physiognomy from us, and not a perfect system. However, what has been said,
may serve as a sketch for such a system. We shall conclude this chapter with
snowing the difference between Physiognomy and Pathognomy.

Physiognomy is the science or knowledge of the correspondence between the
external and internal man, the visible superficies and the invisible contents.
Physiognomy, opposed to pathognomy, is the knowledge of the signs of the power
and inclinations of men -- Pathognomy is the knowledge of the signs of the
passions. Physiognomy therefore teaches the knowledge of character at rest, and
pathognomy of character in motion. Character at rest is taught by the form of
the solid and the appearance of the moveable parts while at (...) Character
impassioned is manifested by the moveable parts in motion.

Physiognomy may be compared to the sum-total of the mind; pathognomy, to the
interest which is the product of this sum-total. The former shows what man is
in general, the latter what he becomes at particular moments; or, the one what
he might be, the other what he is. The first is the root and stem of the
second, the soil in which it is planted. Whoever believes the latter and not
the former, believes in fruit without a tree, in corn without land.

CHAPTER III.
Signs of Bodily Strength and Weakness -- Of Health and Sickness.

WE call that human body strong, which can easily alter other bodies, without
being easily altered itself. The more immediate it can act, and the less
immediately it can be acted upon, the greater is its strength; and the weaker,
the less it can act, or withstand the action of others. There is a tranquil
strength, the essence of which is immobility; and there is an active strength,
the essence of which is motion. The one has motion, the other stability, in an
extraordinary degree. There is the strength of the rock, and the elasticity of
the spring.

There is the Herculean strength of bones and sinews; thick, firm, compact, and
immovable as a pillar.

There are heroes less Herculean, less firm, sinewy, large; less set, less
rocky; who yet, when roused, when opposed in their activity, will meet
oppression with so much strength, will resist weight with such elastic force,
as scarcely to be equalled by the most muscular strength.

The elephant has native, bony strength. Irritated or not, he bears prodigious
burdens, and crushes all on which he treads. An irritated wasp has strength of
a totally different kind: but both have compactness for their foundation, and
especially the firmness of construction. All porosity destroys strength.

The strength, like the understanding of a man, is discovered by its being more
or less compact. The elasticity of a body has signs so remarkable, that they
will not permit us to confound such body with one that is not elastic. How
manifest are the varieties of strength between the foot of an elephant and a
stag, a wasp and a fly!

Tranquil, firm strength is shown in the proportions of the form, which ought
rather to be short than long. In the thick neck, the broad shoulders, and the
countenance, which, in a state of health, is rather bony than fleshy. In the
short, compact, the knotty forehead; and especially when the sinus frontales
are visible, but not too far projecting; flat in the middle, or suddenly
indented, but not in smooth cavities. In horizontal eyebrows, situated near the
eye. Deep eyes, and steadfast look. In the broad, firm nose, bony near the
forehead, especially in its straight, angular outlines. In short, thick, curly
hair of the head and beard. In short, broad teeth, standing close to each
other. In compact lips, of which the under rather projects than retreats. In
the strong, prominent, broad chin. In the strong, projecting os occipitis. In
the bass voice, the firm step, and in sitting still.

Elastic strength, the living power of irritability, must be discovered in the
moment of action; and the firm signs must afterward be abstracted, when the
irritated power is once more at rest. This body, therefore, which at rest was
capable of so little, acted and resisted so weakly, can, thus irritated, and
with this degree of tension, become thus powerful. We shall find on inquiry,
that this strength, awakened by irritation, generally resides in thin, tall,
but not very tall, and bony, rather than muscular bodies; in bodies of dark or
pale complexions; of rapid motion, joined with a certain kind of stiffness; of
hasty and firm walk; of fixed penetrating look; and with open lips, but easily
and accurately to be closed.

Signs of weakness are, disproportionate length of body; much flesh; little
bone; extension; a tottering frame; a loose skin; round, obtuse, and
particularly hollow outlines of the forehead and nose; smallness of nose and
chin; little nostrils; the retreating chin; long, cylindrical neck; the walk
very hasty or languid, without firmness of step; the timid aspect; closing
eyelids; open mouth; long teeth; the jaw bone long, but bent toward the ear;
whiteness of complexion; teeth inclined to be yellow or green; fair, long, and
tender hair; shrill voice.

I shall now proceed to consider Medicinal Semeiotics, or the Signs of Health
and Sickness. -- Not I, but an experienced physician ought to write on the
physiognomonical and pathognomonical semeiotica of health and sickness, and
describe the physiological character of the body, and its propensities to this
or that disorder. I am beyond description ignorant with respect to the nature
of disorders and their signs; still may I, in consequence of the few
observations I have made, declare, with some certainty, by repeatedly examining
the firm parts and outlines of the bodies and countenances of the sick, that it
is not difficult to predict what are the diseases to which the man in health is
most liable.

Of what infinite importance would such physiognomonical semeiotics, or
prognostics of possible or probable disorders, be, founded on the nature and
form of the body! How essential were it, could the physician say to the
healthy, You naturally have, some time in your life, to expect this or that
disorder. Take the necessary precautions against such or such a disease. The
virus of the smallpox slumbers in your body, and may thus or thus be put in
motion: thus the hectic, thus the intermittent, and thus the putrid fever. Oh,
how worthy, Zimmermann, would a treatise on physiognomonical Diaet^tice (or
regimen) be of thee!

Whoever shall read this author's work on Experience, will see see how
characteristically he describes various diseases which originate in the
passions. Some quotations from this work, which will justify my wish, and
contain the most valuable semeiotical remarks, cannot be unacceptable to the
reader.

The observing mind examines the physiognomy of the sick, the signs of which
extend over the whole body; but the progress and change of the disease is
principally to be found in the countenance and its parts. Sometimes the patient
carries the marks of his disease: in burning, bilious, and hectic fevers; in
the chlorosis; the common and black jaundice; in worm cases. -- I, who know so
little of physic, have several times discovered the disease of the tape-worm in
the countenance.

In the furor uterinus, the least observant can read the disease. The more the
countenance is changed, in burning fevers, the greater is the danger. A man
whose natural aspect is mild and calm, but who stares at me, with a florid
complexion, and wildness in his eyes, prognosticates an approaching delirium. I
have likewise seen a look indescribably wild, accompanied by paleness, when
nature, in an inflammation of the lungs, was coming to a crisis, and the
patient was becoming excessively cold and frantic. The countenance relaxed, the
lips pale and hanging, in burning fevers, are bad symptoms, as they denote
great debility; and if the change and decay of the countenance be sudden, the
danger is great. When the nose is pointed, the face of a lead color, and the
lips livid, inflammation has produced gangrene.

There is frequently something dangerous to be observed in the countenance,
which cannot be known from other symptoms, and which yet is very significant.
Much is to be observed in the eyes. Boerhaave examined the eyes of the patient
with a magnifying glass, that he might see if the blood entered the smaller
vessels. Hippocrates held, that the avoiding of light, involuntary tears,
squinting, one eye less than the other, the white of the eye inflamed, the
small veins inclined to be black, too much swelled, or too much sunken, were
each and all bad symptoms.

The motion of the patient, and his position in bed, ought likewise to be
enumerated among the particular symptoms of disease. The hand carried to the
forehead, waved or groping in the air, scratching on the wall, and pulling up
the bed-clothes, are of this kind. The position in bed is a very significant
sign of the internal situation of the patient, and therefore deserves every
attention. The more unusual the position is, in any inflammatory disease, the
more certainly may we conclude that the anguish is great, and consequently the
danger. Hippocrates has described the position of the sick, in such cases, with
an accuracy that leaves nothing to be defined. The best position in sickness is
the usual position in health.

I shall add some other remarks from this physician and physiognomist, whose
abilities are superior to envy, ignorance and quackery. Swift was lean while he
was the prey of ambition, chagrin, and ill-temper; but, after the loss of his
understanding, he became fat. His description of Envy, and its effects on the
body, is incomparable. The effects of Envy are visible, even in children. They
become thin, and easily fall into consumptions. Envy takes away the appetite
and sleep, and causes feverish motion; it produces gloom, shortness of breath,
impatience, restlessness, and a narrow chest. The good name of others, on which
it seeks to avenge itself by slander, and feigned but not real contempt, hangs
like the sword suspended by a hair over the head of Envy, that continually
wishes to torture others, and is itself continually on the rack. The laughing
simpleton becomes disturbed as soon as Envy, that worst of fiends, takes
possession of him, and he perceives that he vainly labors to debase that merit
which he cannot rival. His eyes roll, he knits his forehead, he becomes morose,
peevish, and hangs his lips. There is, it is true, a kind of envy that arrives
at old age. Envy in her dark cave, possessed by toothless furies, there hoards
her poison, which, with infernal wickedness, she endeavors, to eject over each
worthy person and honorable act. She defends the cause of vice, endeavors to
confound right and wrong, and vitally wounds the purest innocence.

CHAPTER IV.
Of the Congeniality of the Human Form.

THE same vital powers that make the heart beat, give motion to the finger;
that which roofs the skull, arches the finger-nail. Art is at varience with
herself: not so Nature. Her creation is progressive. From the head to the back,
from the shoulder to the arm, from the arm to the hand, and from the hand to
the finger; from the root to the stem, the stem to the branch, the branch to
the twig, the twig to the blossom and fruit, each depends on the other, and all
on the root: each is similar in nature and form. There is a determinate effect
of a determinate power. Through all nature each determinate power is productive
only of such and such determinate effects. The finger of one body is not
adapted to the hand of another body. Each part of an organized body is an image
of the whole. The blood in the extremity of the finger, has the character of
the blood in the heart. The same congeniality is found in the nerves, in the
bones. One spirit lives in all. Each member of the body is in proportion to
that whole of which it is a part. As from the length of the smallest member,
the smallest joint of the finger, the proportion of the whole, the length and
breadth of the body may be found; so also may the form of the whole from the
form of each single part. When the head is long, all is long, or round when the
head is round, or square when it is square. One form, one mind, one root
appertain to all: therefore is each organized body so much a whole, that,
without discord, destruction, or deformity, nothing can be added or diminished.

Every thing in man is progressive; every thing congenial; form, stature,
complexion, hair, skin, veins, nerves, bones, voice, walk, manner, style,
passion, love, hatred. One and the same spirit is manifest in all. He has a
determinate sphere, in which his powers and sensations are allowed, within
which they may be freely exercised, but beyond which he cannot pass. Each
countenance is, indeed, subject to momentary change, though not perceptible,
even in its solid parts; but these changes are all proportionate: each is
measured, each proper and peculiar to the countenance in which it takes place.
The capability of change is limited. Even that which is affected, assumed,
imitated, heterogeneous, still has the properties of the individual,
originating in the nature of the whole, and is so definite, that it is only
possible in this, but in no other being.

I almost blush to repeat this in the present age. What, Posterity! will thou
suppose, thus to see me so often obliged to demonstrate to pretended sages,
that nature makes no emendation? She labors from one to all. Here Is is not
disjointed organization, not mosaic work. The more there is of the mosaic in
the works of artists, orators, or poets, the less are they natural; the less do
they resemble the copious streams of the fountain; the stem extending itself to
the remotest branch.

The more there is of progression, the more there is of truth, power, and
nature; the more extensive, general, durable, and noble is the effect. The
designs of nature are the designs of a moment; one form, one spirit, appear
through the whole. Thus nature forms her least plant, and thus her most exalted
man. I shall have effected nothing by my physiognomical labors, if I am not
able to destroy that opinion, so tasteless, so unworthy of the age, so opposite
to all sound philosophy, that nature patches up the features of various
countenances, in order to make one perfect countenance; and I shall think them
well rewarded, if the congeniality, uniformity, and agreement of human
organization be so demonstrated, that he who shall deny it, will be declared to
deny the light of the sun at noonday.

The human body is a plant, each part of which has the character of the stem.
Suffer me to repeat this continually, since this most evident of all things is
continually controverted, among all ranks of men, in words, deeds, books, and
works of art. I therefore find the greatest incongruities in the heads of the
greatest masters. I know no painter, of whom I can say he has thoroughly
studied the harmony of the human outline, not even Poussin, no not even Raphael
himself. Let any one class the forms of their countenances, and compare them
with the forms of nature. Let him, for instance, draw the outlines of their
foreheads, and endeavor to find similar outlines in nature, and he will find
incongruities, which could not have been expected in such great masters.

Chodowiecki, excepting the too great length and extent, particularly of his
human figures, perhaps had the most exact feeling of congeniality in
caricature, that is to say, of the relative propriety of the deformed, the
humorous, or other characteristical members and features. For as there is
conformity and congeniality in the beautiful, so is there also in the deformed.
Every cripple has the distortion peculiar to himself, the effects of which are
extended to his whole body. In like manner, the evil actions of the evil, and
the good actions of the good, have a conformity of character; at least, they
are all tinged with this conformity of character.

Little as this seems to be remarked by poets and painters, still is it the
foundation of their art; for wherever emendation is visible, there admiration
is at an end. Why has no painter yet been pleased to place the blue eye beside
the brown one? Yet, absurd as this would be, no less absurd are the
incongruities continually encountered by the physiognomical eye -- The nose of
Venus on the head of Madona. -- I have been assured by a man of fashion, that,
at a masquerade, with only the aid of an artificial nose, he entirely concealed
himself from the knowledge of all his acquaintance. So much does nature reject
what does not appertain to herself.

I have never yet met with one Roman nose among an hundred circular foreheads
in profile. In an hundred other square foreheads, I have scarcely found one in
which there were not cavities and prominences. I never yet saw a perpendicular
forehead with strongly arched features in the lower part of the countenance,
the double chin excepted.

I meet no strong-bowed eyebrows combined with bony perpendicular countenances.

Wherever the forehead is projecting, so in general are the under lips,
children excepted.

I have never seen gently arched, yet much retreating foreheads, combined with
a short snub nose, which, in profile, is sharp and sunken.

A visible nearness of the nose to the eye, is always attended by a visible
wideness between the nose and mouth.

A long covering of the teeth, or, in other words a long space between the nose
and mouth, always indicates small upper lips. Length of form and face is
generally attended by well drawn fleshy lips.

I shall at present produce but one more example, which will convince all who
possess acute physiognomical sensation, how great is the harmony of all
nature's forms, and how much she hates the incongruous.

Take two, three, or four shades of men remarkable for understanding; join the
features so artificially that no defect shall appear, as far as relates to the
act of joining; that is, take the forehead of one, add the nose of a second,
the mouth of a third, the chin of a fourth, and the result of this combination
of the signs of wisdom shall be folly. Folly is perhaps nothing more than the
emendation of some heterogeneous addition. But let these four wise countenances
be supposed congruous. Let them so be supposed, or as nearly so as possible,
still their combination will produce the signs of folly.

Those therefore who maintain that conclusion cannot be drawn from a part, from
a single section of the profile, to the whole, would be perfectly right, if
unarbitrary Nature patched up countenances like arbitrary Art; but so she does
not. Indeed, when a man, being born with understanding, becomes a fool, there
expression of heterogeneousness is the consequence. Either the lower part of
the countenance extends itself, or the eyes acquire a direction not conformable
to the forehead, the mouth cannot remain closed, or the features of the
countenance, in some other manner, lose their consistency: all becomes discord;
and folly, in such a countenance, is very manifest. Let him who would study
physiognomy, study the relation of the constituent parts of the countenance:
not having studied these, he has studied nothing.

He only is an accurate physiognomist, and has the true spirit of physiognomy,
who possesses sense, feeling, and sympathetic proportion of the congeniality
and harmony of nature; and who has a similar sense and feeling for all
emendations and additions of art and constraint. He is no physiognomist who
doubts of the propriety, simplicity, and harmony of nature, or who has not this
physiognomical essential; who supposes nature selects members to form a whole,
as a compositor in a printing house does letters to make up a word; who can
suppose the works of nature are the patch-work of a harlequin jacket. Not the
most insignificant of insects is so compounded, much less man, the most perfect
of organized beings. He respires not the breath of wisdom, who doubts of this
progression, continuity, and simplicity of the structure of nature. He wants a
general feeling for the works of nature; consequently of art, the imitator of
nature. I shall be pardoned this warmth. It is necessary. The consequences are
infinite, and extend to all things. He has the master-key of truth, who has
this sensation of the congeniality of nature, and, by necessary induction, of
the human form.

All imperfection in works of art, productions of the mind, moral actions,
errors in judgment; all skepticism, infidelity, and ridicule of religion,
naturally originate in the want of this knowledge and sensation. He soars above
all doubt of the Divinity and Christ, who has them, and who is conscious of
this congeniality. He also who, at first sight, thoroughly understands and
feels the congeniality of the human form, and that from the want of this
congeniality arises the difference observed between the works of nature and of
art, is superior to all doubt concerning the truth and divinity of the human
countenance.

Those who have this sense, this feeling, call it which you please, will
attribute that only, and nothing more, to each countenance, which it is capable
of receiving. They will consider each according to its kind, and will as little
seek to add a heterogeneous character, as a heterogeneous nose to the face.
Such will only unfold what nature is desirous of unfolding, give what nature is
capable of receiving, and take away that with which nature would not be
incumbered. They will perceive in the child, pupil, friend, or wife when any
discordant trait of character makes its appearance; and will endeavor to
restore the original congeniality, the equilibrium of character and impulse, by
acting upon the still remaining harmony, by cooperating with the yet unimpaired
essential powers. They will consider each sin, each vice, as destructive of
this harmony; will feel how much each departure from truth, in the human form,
at least to eyes more penetrating than human eyes are, must be manifest, must
distort, and must become displeasing to the Creator, by rendering it unlike his
image. Who, therefore, can judge better of the works and actions of man, who
less offend or be offended, who more clearly develop cause and effect, than the
physiognomist, possessed of a full portion of this knowledge and sensation?

CHAPTER V.
Description of Plates I. and II.

WE shall occasionally introduce some figures, in order to support and
elucidate those opinions and propositions which may be advanced. These plates
refer to objects that have been already alluded to in the preceding pages.

Description of Plate I. Number 1. See the Frontispiece.
This is a boldly sketched portrait of ALBERT DURER. Whoever examines this
countenance, cannot but perceive in it the traits of fortitude, deep
penetration, determined perseverance, and inventive genius. At least, every one
will acknowledge the truth of these observations, when made.

Number 2. MONCRIEF.
There are few men capable of observation, who will class this visage with the
stupid. In the aspect, the eye, the nose especially, and the mouth, are proofs,
not to be mistaken, of the accomplished gentleman, and the man of taste.

Number 3. JOHNSON.
The most unpractised eye will easily discover, in this sketch of Johnson, the
acute, the comprehensive, the capacious mind, not easily deceived, and rather
inclined to suspicion than credulity.

Number 4. SHAKESPEARE.
How deficient must all outlines be! Among ten thousand can one be found that
is exact? Where is the outline that can pourtray genius? Yet who does not read,
in this outline, imperfect as it is, from pure physiognomonical sensation, the
clear, the capacious, the rapid mind, all conceiving, all embracing, that, with
equal swiftness and facility, imagines, creates, produces?

Number 5. STERN.
The most unpractised reader in physiognomy will not deny to this countenance
all the keen, the searching penetration of wit, the most original fancy, full
of fire, and the powers of invention. No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
Who is so dull as not to view, in this countenance, somewhat of the spirit of
poor Yorick?

Number 6. S. CLARKE.
Perspicuity, benevolence, dignity, serenity, dispassionate meditation, the
powers of conception and perseverance, are the most apparent characteristics of
this countenance. He who can hate such a face, must laboriously counteract all
those physiognomonical sensations with which he was born.

Description of Plate II.
Hitherto we have beheld nature in the most perfect of her productions; we must
now view the reverse: we must proceed to contemplate her in her deformity. In
this also how intelligibly does she speak to the eyes of all, at the first
glance!

Number 1.
Who does not here read reason debased, and stupidity almost sunken to
brutality? This eye, these wrinkles of a lowering forehead, this projecting
mouth, the whole position of the head, do they not all denote manifest dullness
and debility?

Number 2. A fool.
From the small eyes in this figure, the open mouth, particularly from the
under part of the countenance, no man whatever will expect penetration,
reasoning, or wisdom.

Number 3.
True or false, nature or caricature, this countenance will, to the common
sensations of all men, depict an inhuman and brutal character. It is impossible
that brutality should be overlooked in the nose and mouth, or in the eye,
though still it deserves to be called a human eye.

Number 4.
Let us proceed to the characters of passion, which are intelligible to every
child; so that concerning these there can be no dispute, if we are in any
degree acquainted with their language. The more violent the passion is, the
more apparent are its signs. The effect of the stiller passions is to contract,
and of the violent to distend the muscles. Every one will perceive, in this
countenance, fear mingled with abhorrence.

Number 5.
No man will expect cheerfulness, tranquillity, content, strength of mind, and
magnanimity, from this countenance. Fear and terror are here strongly marked.

Number 6.
Terror, heightened by native indocility of character, is here strongly marked.

Such examples might be produced without end; but to adduce some of the most
decisive of the various classes is sufficient. We shall give some farther
specimens hereafter.

CHAPTER VI.
The Universal Excellence of the Form of Man.

EACH creature is indispensable in the immensity of God's creation; but each
creature does not known it is thus indispensable. Of all earth's creatures, man
alone rejoice in his indispensability. No man can render any other man
dispensable. The place of no man can be supplied by another.

This belief of the indispensability and individuality of all men, and in our
own metaphysical indispensability and individuality, is one of the
unacknowledged, the noble fruits of physiognomy; a fruit pregnant with most
precious seed, whence shall spring lenity and love. Oh, may posterity behold
them flourish! may future ages repose under their shade! The most deformed, the
most corrupt of men is still indispensable in this world of God, and is more or
less capable of knowing his own individuality and unsuppliable
indispensability. The wickedest, the most deformed of men, is still more noble
than the most beauteous and perfect animal. Contemplate, O man! what thy nature
is, not what it might be, not what is wanting. Humanity, amid all its
distortions, will ever remain wondrous humanity!

Incessantly might I repeat doctrines like this: Art thou better, more
beauteous, nobler, than many others of thy fellow creatures? If so, rejoice,
and ascribe it not to thyself, but to Him who, from the same clay, formed one
vessel for honor, another for dishonor; to Him who, without thy advice,
without thy prayer, without any desert of thine, caused thee to be what thou
art.

Yea, to Him! for what have thou, O man! that thou did not receive? Now, if
thou did receive, why do thou glory as if thou had not received? -- Can
the eye say to the hand, I have no need of thee? -- He that oppresses the
poor, reproacheth his Maker. -- God has made of one blood all nations of men.
-- Who more deeply, more internally, feels all these divine truths than the
physiognomist? the true physiognomist, who is not merely a man of literature, a
reader, a reviewer, an author, but -- a man!

I am ready to acknowledge, that the most humane physiognomist, he who so
eagerly searches whatever is good, beautiful, and noble in nature; who delights
in the ideal; who duly exercises, nourishes, refines his taste, with humanity
more improved, more perfect, more holy; even he is in frequent danger, at least
is frequently tempted to turn from the common herd of depraved men; from the
deformed, the foolish, the apes, the hypocrites, the vulgar of mankind; in
danger of forgetting that these misshapen forms, these apes, these hypocrites,
also are men; and that notwithstanding all his imagined or his real excellence,
all his noble feelings, the purity of his views (and who has cause to boast of
these?) all the firmness, the soundness of his reason, the feelings of his
heart, the powers with which he is endowed, still he is, very probably from his
own moral defects, in the eyes of his superior beings, in the eyes of his much
more righteous brother, as dis^^^ted as the most ridiculous, most depraved
moral or physical monster appears to be in his eyes.

Liable as we are to forget this, reminding is necessary both to the writer and
reader of this work. Forget not, that even the wisest of men are men. Forget
not how much positive good may be found even in the worst, and that they are as
necessary, as good in their place as thou art. Are they not, equally
indispensable, equally unsuppliable? They possess not, either in mind or body,
the smallest thing exactly as thou do. Each is wholly, and in every part, as
individual as thou art. Consider each as if he were single in the universe;
then will thou discover powers and excellencies in him, which, abstractedly of
comparison, deserve all attention and admiration. Compare him afterward with
others, his similarity, his dissimilarity to so many of his fellow creatures.
How must this incite thy amazement! How will thou value the individuality, the
indispensability of his being! How will thou wonder at the harmony of his
parts, each contributing to form one whole; at their relation, the relation of
his million-fold individuality, to such multitudes of other individuals! Yes,
we wonder at and adore the so simple, yet so infinitely varied expression of
Almighty power inconceivable, so especially and so gloriously revealed in the
nature of man.

No man ceases to be a man, how low soever he may sink beneath the dignity of
human nature. Not being beast, he still is capable of amendment, of approaching
perfection. The worst of faces still is a human face. Humanity ever continues
the honor and ornament of man.

It is as impossible for a brute animal to become man, although he may in many
actions approach, or almost surpass him, as for man to become a brute, although
many men indulge themselves in actions which we cannot view in brutes without
abhorrence.

But the very capacity of voluntarily debasing himself, in appearance even
below brutality, is the honor and privilege of man. This very capacity of
imitating all things by an act of his will, and the powers of his
understanding, this very capacity man only has, beasts have not. The
countenances of beasts are not susceptible of any remarkable deterioration, nor
are they capable of any remarkable amelioration or beautifying. The worst of
the countenances of men may be still more debased; but they may also, to a
certain degree be improved and ennobled.

The degree of perfection, or degradation, of which man is capable, cannot be
described. For this reason, the worst countenance has a well-founded claim to
the notice, esteem, and hope of all good men. Again, in every human
countenance, however debased, humanity is still visible, that is, the image of
the Deity.

I have seen the worst of men, in their worst of moments, yet could not all
their vice, blasphemy, and oppression of guilt, extinguish the light of good
that shone in their countenances, the spirit of humanity, the ineffaceable
traits of internal, external perfectibility. The sinner we would exterminate,
the man we must embrace. O physiognomy, what a pledge are thou of the
everlasting clemency of God toward man! O man, rejoice with whatever rejoices
in its existence, and contemn no being whom God does not contemn!

CHAPTER VII.
Of the Forehead.

I SHALL appropriate this and some of the following chapters to remarks on
certain individual parts of the human body. The following are my own remarks on
foreheads.

The form, height, arching, proportion, obliquity, and position of the skull,
or bone of the forehead, show the propensity, degree of power, thought and
sensibility of man. The covering or skin of the forehead, its position, color,
wrinkles, and tension, denote the passions and present state of the mind. The
bones give the internal quantity, and their covering the application of power.

Though the skin be wrinkled, the forehead bones remain unaltered; but this
wrinkling varies according to the various forms of the bones. A certain degree
of flatness produces certain wrinkles; a certain arching is attended by certain
other wrinkles; so that the wrinkles, separately considered, will give the
arching; and this, vice versa, will give the wrinkles. Certain foreheads can
only have perpendicular, others horizontal, others curved, and others mixed and
confused wrinkles. Cup-formed (smooth) cornerless foreheads, when they are in
motion, commonly have the simplest and least perplexed wrinkles.

I consider the peculiar delineation of the outline and position of the
forehead, which has been left unattempted by ancient and modern physiognomists,
to be the most important of all the things presented to physiognomical
observation. We may divide foreheads, considered in profile, into three
principal classes, the retreating, the perpendicular, and the projecting. Each
of these classes has a multitude of variations, which may easily again be
classed, and the chief of which are rectilinear; half round, half rectilinear,
flowing into each other; half round, half rectilinear, interrupted; curve
lined, simple; the curve lined, double and triple.

I shall add some more particular remarks, which I apprehend will not be
unacceptable to my readers:

1. The longer the forehead, the more comprehension, and less activity.

2. The more compressed, short, and firm the forehead, the more compression,
firmness, and less volatility in the man.

3. The more curved and cornerless the outline, the more tender and flexible
the character; the more rectilinear, the more pertinacity and severity.

4. Perfect perpendicularity, from the hair to the eyebrows, want of
understanding.

5. Perfect perpendicularity, gently arched at the top, denotes excellent
propensities of cold, tranquil, profound thinking.

6. Projecting -- imbecility, immaturity, weakness, stupididity.

7. Retreating, in general, denotes superiority of imagination, wit, and
acuteness.

8. The round and prominent forehead above, straight lined below, and on the
whole perpendicular, shows much understanding, life, sensibility, ardour, and
icy coldness.

9. The oblique, rectilinear forehead, is also very ardent and vigorous.

10. Arched foreheads appear properly to be feminine.

11. A happy union of straight and curved lines, with a happy position of the
forehead, express the most perfect character of wisdom. By happy union, I mean,
when the lines insensibly flow into each other; and by happy position, when the
forehead is neither too perpendicular, nor too retreating.

12. I might almost establish it as an axiom, that right lines, considered as
such, and curves, considered as such, are related as power and weakness,
obstinacy and flexibility, understanding and sensation.

13. I have hitherto seen no man with sharp projecting eye-bones, who had not
great propensity to an acute exercise of the understanding, and to wise plans.

14. Yet there are many excellent heads which have not this sharpness, and
which have the more solidity, if the forehead, like a perpendicular wall, sink
upon the horizontal eyebrows, and be greatly rounded on each side toward the
temples.

15. Perpendicular foreheads, projecting so as not immediately to rest upon the
nose, which are small, wrinkly, short and shining, are certain signs of
weakness, little understanding, little imagination, little sensation.

16. Foreheads with many angular, knotty protuberances, ever denote much
vigorous, firm, harsh, oppressive, ardent activity, and perseverance.

17. It is a sure sign of a clear, sound understanding, and a good temperament,
when the profile of the forehead has two proportionate arches, the lower of
which projects.

18. Eyebones with defined, marking, easily delineated, firm arches, I never
saw but in noble and in great men. All the ideal antiques have these arches.

19. Square foreheads, that is to say, with extensive temples and firm
eyebones, show circumspection and certainty of character.

20. Perpendicular wrinkles, if natural to the forehead, denote application and
power; horizontal wrinkles, and those broken in the middle, or at the
extremities, in general negligence, or want of power.

21. Perpendicular, deep indentings, in the bones of the forehead, between the
eyebrows, I never met with but in men of sound understanding, and free and
noble minds, unless there were some positively contradictory feature.

22. A blue vena frontalis, in the form of a Y, when in an open, smooth,
well-arched forehead, I have only found in men of extraordinary talents, and of
an ardent and generous character.

23. The following are the most indubitable signs of an excellent, a perfectly
beautiful and significant, intelligent, and noble forehead.

An exact proportion to the other parts of the countenance. It must equal the
nose or the under part of the face in length, that is, one-third.

In breadth, it must be either oval at the top (like the foreheads of most of
the great men of England) or nearly square.

A freedom from unevenness and wrinkles, yet with the power of wrinkling when
deep in thought, afflicted by pain, or from just indignation.

Above it must retreat, project beneath.

The eyebones must be simple, horizontal, and, if seen from above, must present
a pure curve.

There should be a small cavity in the center, from above to below, and
traversing the forehead so as to separate into four divisions, which can only
be perceptible by a clear descending light.

The skin must be more clear in the forehead than in the other parts of the
countenance.

The forehead must every where be composed of such outlines as, if the section
of one third only be viewed, it can scarcely be determined whether the lines
are straight or circular.

24. Short, wrinkled, knotty, regular, pressed in one side, and sawcut
foreheads, with interesting wrinkles, are incapable of durable friendship.

25. Be not discouraged so long as a friend, an enemy, a child, or a brother,
though a transgressor, has a good, well proportioned, open forehead* there is
still much certainty of improvement, much cause of hope.

CHAPTER VIII.
Of the Eyes and Eyebrows.

BLUE Eyes are generally more significant of weakness, effeminacy, and
yielding, than brown and black. True it is, there are many powerful men with
blue eyes; but I find more strength, manhood, and thought, combined with brown
than with blue. Wherefore does it happen, that the Chinese, or the people of
the Philippine Islands, are very seldom blue-eyed; and that Europeans only, or
the descendants of Europeans, have blue eyes in those countries? This is the
more worthy inquiry, because there are no people more effeminate, luxurious,
peaceable or indolent than the Chinese.

Choleric men have eyes of every color, but more brown, and inclined to green,
than blue. This propensity to green is almost a decisive token of ardour, fire,
and courage.

I have never met with clear blue eyes in the melancholic, seldom in the
choloric; but most in the phlegmatic temperament, which, however, had much
activity.

When the under arch described by the upper eyelid is perfectly circular, it
always denotes goodness and tenderness, but also fear, timidity, and weakness.

The open eye, not compressed, forming a long acute angle with the nose, I have
but seldom seen, except in acute and understanding persons.

Hitherto I have seen no eye, where the eyelid formed a horizontal line over
the pupil, that did not appertain to a very acute, able, subtle man; but be it
understood, that I have met with this eye in very worthy men, but men of great
penetration and simulation.

Wide, open eyes, with the white seen under the apple, I have often observed in
the timid and phlegmatic, and also in the courageous and rash. When compared,
however, the fiery and the feeble, the determined and the undetermined, will
easily be distinguished. The former are more firm, more strongly delineated,
have less obliquity, have thicker, better cut, but less skinny eyelids.

ADDITION, From the Gotha Court Calendar, 1771, or rather from Buffon.
"The colors most common to the eyes are, the orange, yellow, green, blue,
gray, and gray mixed with white. The blue and orange are most predominant, and
are often found in the same eye. Eyes supposed to be black are only yellow,
brown, or a deep orange; to convince ourselves of which, we need but look at
them closely; for when seen at a distance, or turned toward the light, they
appear to be black; because the yellow-brown color is so contrasted to the
white of the eye, that the opposition makes it supposed black. Eyes also of a
less dark color pass for black eyes, but are not esteemed so fine as the
other, because the contrast is not so great. There are also yellow and light
yellow eyes, which do not appear black, because the colors are not deep enough
to be overpowered by the shade.

"It is not uncommon to perceive shades of orange, yellow, gray, and blue, in
the same eye; and whenever blue appears, however small the tincture, it becomes
the predominant color, and appears in streaks over the whole iris. The orange
is in flakes, round, and at some little distance from the pupil; but it is so
strongly effaced by the blue, that the eye appears wholly blue, and the mixture
of orange is only perceived when closely inspected.

"The finest eyes are those which we imagine to be black or blue. Vivacity and
fire, which are the principal characteristics of the eyes, are the more emitted
when the colors are deep and contrasted, rather than when slightly shaded.
Black eyes have most strengh of expression, and most vivacity; but the (...)
most mildness, and perhaps are more arch. In the former there is an ardour
uninterruptedly bright, because the color, which appears to us uniform, every
way emits similar reflections. But modifications are distinguished in the light
which animates blue eyes, because there are various tints of color, which
produce various reflections.

"There are eyes which are remarkable for having what may be said to be no
color. They appear to be differently constituted from others. The iris has
only some shades of blue, or gray, so feeble, that they are, in some parts,
almost white; and the shades of orange which intervene are so small that they
scarcely can be distinguished from gray or white, notwithstanding the contrast
of these colors. The black of the pupil is then too marking, because the
color of the iris is not deep enough, and, as I may say, we see only the pupil
in the center of the eye. These eyes are unmeaning, and appear to be fixed and
aghast.

"There are also eyes, the color of the iris of which is almost green; but
these are more uncommon than the blue, the gray, the yellow, and the
yellow-brown. There are also people whose eyes are not both of the same color.

"The images of our secret agitations are particularly painted in the eyes. The
eye appertains more to the soul than any other organ; seems affected by, and to
participate in, all its motions; expresses sensations the most lively, passions
the most tumultuous, feelings the most delightful, and sentiments the most
delicate. It explains them in all their force, in all their purity, as they
take birth; and transmits them by traits so rapid, as to infuse into other
minds the fire, the activity, the very image with which themselves are
inspired. The eye at once receives and reflects the intelligence of thought,
and the warmth of sensibility. It is the sense of the mind, the tongue of the
understanding."

Again, "As in nature, so in art, the eyes are differently formed in the
statues of the gods, and in heads of ideal beauty, so that the eye itself is
the distinguishing token. Jupiter, Juno, and Apollo, have large, round, well
arched eyes, shortened in length, in order that the arch may be the higher.
Pallas, in like manner, has large eyes; but the upper eyelid, which is drawn
up, is expressive of attraction and languishment. Such an eye distinguishes the
heavenly Venus Urania from Juno; yet the statue of this Venus bearing a diadem,
has for that reason often been mistaken, by those who have not made this
observation, for the statue of Juno. Many of the modern artists appear to have
been desirous of excelling the ancients, and to give what Homer calls the
ox-eye, by making the pupil project, and seem to start from the socket. Such an
eye has the modern head of the erroneously supposed Cleopatra, in the Medicean
villa, and which presents the idea of a person strangled. The same kind of eye
a young artist has given to the statue of the Holy Virgin in the church St.
Carlo al Torso."

I shall quote one more passage from Paracelsus, who, though an astrological
enthusiast, was a man of prodigious genius:

"To come to the practical part, and give proper signs, with some of their
significations, it is to be remarked, that blackness in the eyes generally
denotes health, a firm mind not wavering, but courageous, true, and honorable.
Gray eyes generally denote deceit, instability, and indecision. Short sight
denotes an able projector, crafty and intriguing in action. The squinting, or
falsesighted, who see on both sides, or over and under, certainly denotes a
deceitful, crafty person, not easily deceived, mistrustful, and not always to
be trusted; one who willingly avoids labor where he can, indulging in
idleness, play, usury, and pilfering. Small and deep sunken eyes are bold in
opposition; not discouraged, intriguing, and active in wickedness; capable of
suffering much. Large eyes denote a covetous greedy man, and especially when
they are prominent. Eyes in continual motion, signify short or weak sight, fear
and care. The winking eye denotes an amorous disposition, foresight, and
quickness in projecting. The downcast eye shows shame and modesty. Red eyes
signify courage and strength. Bright eyes, ^low of motion, bespeak the hero,
great acts, audacious, cheerful, one feared by his enemies."

It will not be expected I should subscribe to all these opinions, they being
most of them ill founded, at least ill defined.

The Eyebrows.
Eyebrows regularly arched are characteristic of feminine youth; rectilinear
and horizontal, are masculine; arched and the horizontal combined, denote
masculine understanding, and feminine kindness.

Wild and perplexed, denote a corresponding mind, unless the hair be soft, and
they then signify gentle ardour.

Compressed, firm, with the hairs running parallel, as if cut, are one of the
most decisive signs of a firm, manly, mature understanding, profound wisdom,
and a true and unerring perception.

Meeting eyebrows, held so beautiful by the Arabs, and by the old
physiognomists supposed to be the mark of craft, I can neither believe to be
beautiful, nor characteristic of such a quality. They are found in the most
open, honest, and worthy countenances. It is true, they give the face a gloomy
appearance, and perhaps denote trouble of mind and heart.

Sunken eyebrows, says Winkelmann, impart something of the severe and
melancholy to the head of Antinous.

I never yet saw a profound thinker, or even a man of fortitude and prudence,
with weak, high eyebrows, which in some measure equally divide the forehead.

Weak eyebrows denote phlegm and debility, though there are choloric and
powerful men who have them; but this weakness of eyebrows is always a deduction
from power and ardour.

Angular, strong, interrupted eyebrows, ever denote fire and productive
activity.

The nearer the eyebrows are to the eyes, the more earnest, deep and firm the
character.

The more remote from the eyes, the more volatile, easily moved, and less
enterprising.

Remote from each other, warm, open, quick sensation.

White eyebrows signify weakness; and dark brown, firmness

The motion of the eyebrows contains numerous expressions, especially of
ignoble passions, pride, anger, and contempt.

CHAPTER IX.
Of the Nose.

I HAVE generally considered the Nose as the foundation o^ abutment of the
brain. Whoever is acquainted with the Gothic arch will perfectly understand
what I mean by this abutment: for upon this the whole power of the arch of the
forehead rests, and without it the mouth and cheeks would be oppressed by
miserable ruins.

A beautiful nose will never be found accompanying an ugly countenance. An ugly
person may have fine eyes, but not a handsome nose. I meet with thousands of
beautiful eyes before one such nose; and wherever I find the latter, it denotes
an extraordinary character. The following is requisite to the perfectly
beautiful nose:

Its length should equal the length of the forehead. At the top should be a
gentle indenting. Viewed in front, the back should be broad, and nearly
parallel, yet above the center something broader. The button, or end of the
nose, must be neither hard nor fleshy, and its under outline must be remarkably
definite, well delineated, neither pointed nor very broad. The sides seen in
front must be well defined, and the descending nostrils gently shortened.
Viewed in profile, the bottom of the nose should not have more than one third
of its length. The nostrils above must be pointed; below, round, and have in
general a gentle curve, and be divided into two equal parts, by the profile of
the upper lip. The sides, or arch of the nose, must be a kind of wall. Above,
it must close well with the arch of the eyebone, and near the eye must be at
least half an inch in breadth. Such a nose is of more worth than a kingdom.
There are, indeed, innumerable excellent men with defective noses, but their
excellence is of a very different kind. I have seen the purest, most capable,
and noblest persons, with small noses, and hollow in profile; but their worth
most consisted in suffering, listening, learning, and enjoying the beautiful
influences of imagination; provided the other parts of the form were well
organized. Noses, on the contrary, which are arched near the forehead, are
capable of command, can rule, act, overcome, destroy. Rectilinear noses may be
called the key-stone between the two extremes. They equally act and suffer with
power and tranquillity.

Boerhaave, Socrates, Lairesse, had, more or less, ugly noses, and yet were
great men; but their character was that of gentleness and patience.

I have never yet seen a nose with a broad back, whether arched or rectilinear,
that did not appertain to an extraordinary man. We may examine thousands of
countenances, and numbers of portraits, of superior men, before we find such a
one.

These noses were possessed, more or less, by Raynal, Faust^^ Socinus, Swift,
Caesar Borgia, Clepzecker, Anthony Pagi, John Charles von Enkenberg (a man of
Herculean strength), Paul Sarpi, Peter de Medices, Francis Caracci, Cassini,
Lucas van Leyden, Titian.

There are also noses that are not broad backed, but small near the forehead,
of extraordinary power; but their power is rather elastic and momentary than
productive.

The Tartars generally have flat indented noses; the negroes broad, and the
Jews hawk noses. The noses of Englishmen are seldom pointed, but generally
round. The Dutch, if we may judge from their portraits, seldom have handsome or
significant noses. The nose of the Italian is large and energetic. The great
men of France, in my opinion, have the characteristic of their greatness
generally in the nose: to prove which, examine the collection of portraits by
Perrault and Morin.

Small nostrils are usually an indubitable sign of unenterprising timidity. The
open, breathing nostril, is as certain a token of sensibility, which may easily
degenerate into sensuality.

CHAPTER X.
Of the Mouth and Lips.

THE contents of the mind are communicated to the mouth. How full of character
is the mouth, whether at rest or speaking, by its infinite powers!

Whoever internally feels the worth of this member, so different from every
other member, so inseparable, so not to be defined, so simple, yet so various;
whoever, I say, knows and feels this worth, will speak and act with divine
wisdom. Oh! wherefore can I only imperfectly and tremblingly declare all the
honors of the mouth -- the chief seat of wisdom and folly, power and debility,
virtue and vice, beauty and deformity, of the human mind -- the seat of all
love, all hatred, all sincerity, all falsehood, all humility, all pride, all
dissimulation and all truth?

Oh! with what adoration would I speak, and be silent, were I a more perfect
man! Oh! discordant, degraded humanity! Oh! mournful secret of my misinformed
youth! When, Omniscience, shall thou stand revealed? Unworthy as I am, yet do I
adore. Yet worthy I shall be; worthy as the nature of man will permit: for he
who created me, gave me a mouth to glorify him!

Painters and designers, what shall I say that may induce you to study this
sacred organ in all its beauteous expressions, all its harmony and proportion?

Take plaster impressions of characteristic mouths, of the living and the dead;
draw after, pore over them; learn, observe, continue day after day to study one
only; and, having perfectly studied that, you will have studied many. Oh!
pardon me; my heart is oppressed. Among ten or twenty draughtsmen, to whom for
three years I have preached, whom I have instructed, have drawn examples for,
not one have I found who felt as he ought to feel, saw what was to be seen, or
could represent that which was evident. What can I hope?

Every thing may be expected from a collection of characteristic plaster
impressions, which might so easily be made, were such a collection only once
formed. But who can say whether such observations might not declare too much?
The human machine may be incapable of suffering to be thus analyzed. Man,
perhaps, might not endure such close inspection; and, therefore, having eyes,
he sees not. -- I speak it with tears; and why I weep, thou know, who with
me inquirest into the worth of man. And you, weaker, yet candid, though on this
occasion unfeeling readers, pardon me!

Observe the following rules: Distinguish in each mouth the upper lip singly;
the under lip the same; the line formed by the union of both when tranquilly
closed, if they can be closed without constraint; the middle of the upper lip,
in particular; and of the under lip; the bottom of the middle line at each end;
and, lastly, the extending of the middle line on both sides. For, unless you
thus distinguish, you will not be able to delineate the mouth accurately.

As are the lips, so is the character. Firm lips, firm character; weak lips,
and quick in motion, weak and wavering character.

Well defined, large, and proportionate lips, the middle line of which is
equally serpentine on both sides, and easy to be drawn, though they may denote
an inclination to pleasure, are never seen in a bad, mean, common, false,
crouching, vicious countenance.

A lipless mouth, resembling a single line, denotes coldness, industry, a love
of order, precision, housewifery; and if it be drawn upwards at the two ends,
affectation, pretension, vanity, and, which may ever be the production of cool
vanity, malice.

Very fleshy lips must ever have to contend with sensuality and indolence: the
cut-through, sharp-drawn lip, with anxiety and avarice.

Calm lips, well closed, without constraint, and well delineated, certainly
betoken consideration, discretion, and firmness.

A mild overhanging upper lip generally signifies goodness. There are
innumerable good persons also with projecting under lips: but the goodness of
the latter is rather cold fidelity, and well-meaning, than warm active
friendship.

The under lip, hollowed in the middle, denotes a fanciful character. Let the
moment be remarked, when the conceit of the jocular man descends to the lip,
and it will be seen to be a little hollow in the middle.

A closed mouth, not sharpened, not affected, always denotes courage and
fortitude; and the open mouth always closes where courage is indispensible.
Openness of mouth speaks complaint; and closeness, endurance.

Though Physiognomists have as yet but little noticed, yet much might be said
concerning the lip improper, or the fleshy covering of the upper teeth, on
which anatomists have not, to my knowledge, yet bestowed any name, and which
may be called the curtain, or pallium, extending from the beginning of the nose
to the red upper lip proper.

If the upper lip improper be long, the proper is alwas short; if it be short
and hollow, the proper will be large and curved -- another certain
demonstration of the conformity of the human countenance. Hollow upper lips are
much less common than flat and perpendicular: the character they denote is
equally uncommon.

CHAPTER XI.
Of the Teeth and Chin.

NOTHING is more striking, or continually visible, than the characteristics of
the teeth, and the manner in which they display themselves. The following are
the observations I have made thereon:

Small, short teeth, which have generally been held by the old physiognomists
to denote weakness, I have remarked in adults of extraordinary strength; but
they seldom were of a pure white.

Long teeth are certain signs of weakness and pusillanimity. White, clean,
well-arranged teeth, visible as soon as the mouth opens, but not projecting,
nor always entirely seen, I have never met with in adults, except in good,
acute, honest, candid faithful men.

I have also met foul, uneven, and ugly teeth, in persons of the above good
character; but it was always either sickness, or some mental imperfection,
which gave this deformity.

Whoever leaves his teeth soul, and does not attempt to clean them, certainly
betrays much of the negligence of his character, which does him no honor.

As are the teeth of man, that is to say, their form, position, and cleanliness
(so far as the latter depends on himself), so is his taste.

Wherever the upper gum is very visible at the first opening of the lips, there
generally much cold and phlegm.

Much, indeed, might be written upon the teeth, though they are generally
neglected in all historical paintings. To be convinced of this, we need but
observe the teeth of an individual during the course of a single day, or
contemplate an apartment crowded with fools. We should not then, for a moment,
deny that the teeth, in conjunction with the lips, are very characteristic; or
that physiognomy has gained another token, which triumphs over all the arts of
dissimulation.

The Chin.
I am, from numerous experiments, convinced that the projecting chin ever
denotes something positive, and the retreating something negative. The presence
or absence of strength in man is often signified by the chin.

I have never seen sharp indentings in the middle of the chin but in men of
cool understanding, unless when something evidently contradictory appeared in
the countenance.

The pointed chin is generally held to be a sign of acuteness and craft, though
I know very worthy persons with such chins. Their craft is the craft of the
best dramatic poetry.

The soft, fat, double chin, generally points out the epicure; and the angular
chin is seldom found but in discreet, well disposed, firm men.

Flatness of chin speaks the cold and dry; smallness, fear; and roundness, with
a dimple, benevolence.

CHAPTER XII.
Of Sculls.

HOW much may the anatomist see in the mere scull of man! How much more the
physiognomist! And how much the most the anatomist who is a physiognomist! I
blush when I think how much I ought to know, and of how much I am ignorant,
while writing on a part of the body of man which is so superior to all that
science has yet discovered -- to all belief, to all conception!

I consider the system of the bones as the great outline of man, and the scull
as the principal part of that system. I pay more attention to the form and
arching of the scull, as far as I am acquainted with it, than all my
predecessors; and I have considered this most firm, least changeable, and far
best defined part of the human body, as the foundation of the science of
physiognomy. I shall therefore be permitted to be particular in my observations
on this member of the human body.

I confess that I scarcely know where to begin, where to end, what to say, or
what to omit. I think it advisable to premise a few words concerning the
generation and formation of human bones.

The whole of the human foetus is at first supposed to be only a soft
mucilaginous substance, homogeneous in all its parts; and that the bones
themselves are but a kind of coagulated fluid, which afterward becomes
membraneous, then cartilaginous, and at last hard bone.

As this viscous congelation, originally so transparent and tender, increases,
it becomes thicker and more opaque, and a dark point makes its appearance
different from the cartilage, and of the nature of bone, but not yet perfectly
hard. This point may be called the kernel of the future bone, the center round
which the ossification extended.

We must, however, consider the coagulation attached to the cartilage as a mass
without shape, and only with a proper propensity for assuming its future form.
In its earliest, tenderest state, the traces of it are expressed upon the
cartilage, though very imperfectly.

With respect to the bony kernels, we find differences which seem to determine
the form of the future bones. The simple and smaller bones have each only one
kernel; but, in the more gross, thick, and angular, there are several, in
different parts of the original cartilage; and it must be remarked, that the
number of the joining bones is equivalent to the number of the kernels.

In the bones of the scull, the round kernel first is apparent, in the center
of each piece; and the ossification extends itself, like radii from the center,
in filaments, which increase in length, thickness, and solidity, and are
interwoven with each other like network. Hence these delicate, indented
features of the scull, when its various parts are at length joined.

We have hitherto only spoken of the first stage of ossification. The second
begins about the fourth or fifth month, when the bones, together with the rest
of the parts, are more perfectly formed, and, in the progress of ossification,
include the whole cartilage, according to the more or less life of the
creature, and the original different impulse and power of motion in the being.

Agreeable to their original formation through each succeeding period of age,
they will continue to increase in thickness and hardness. But on this subject
anatomists disagree -- So let them. Future physiognomists may consider this
more at large. I retreat from contest, and will travel in the high road of
certainty, and confine myself to what is visible.

Thus much is certain, that the activity of the muscles, vessels, and other
parts which surround the bones, contribute much to their formation, and gradual
increase in hardness.

The remains of the cartilaginous in the young bones, will, in the sixth and
seventh month, decrease in quantity, harden, and whiten, as the bony parts
approach perfection. Some bones obtain a certain degree of firmness in much
less time than others; as, for example, the scull bones, and the small bones
within the ear. Not only whole bones, but parts of a single bone, are of
various degrees of hardness. They will be hardest at the place where the kernel
of ossification began, and the parts adjacent; and the rigidity increases more
slowly and insensibly, the harder the bones are, and the older the man is. What
was cartilage will become bone; parts that were separate will grow together,
and the whole bones be deprived of moisture.

Anatomists divide the form into the natural or the essential, which is
generally the same in all bones in the human body, how different soever it may
be to other bodies; and into the accidental, which is subject to various
changes in the same individual, according to the influence of external objects,
or, especially, of the gradations of age.

The first is founded in the universality of the nature of parents, and the
circumstances which naturally and invariably attend propagation. Anatomists
consider only the designation of the bones individually; on this, at least, is
grounded the agreement of what they call the essential form, in distinct
subjects. This, therefore, only speaks to the agreement of human countenances,
so far as they have each two eyes, one nose, one mouth, and other features thus
or thus disposed.

This natural formation is certainly as different as human countenances
afterward are; which difference is the work of Nature, the original
destination of the Lord and Creator of all things. The physiognomist
distinguishes between original form and deviations.

Each bone has its its original form, its individual capacity of form. It may,
it does continually alter; but it never acquires the peculiar form of another
bone, which was originally different. The accidental changes of bones, however
great, or different from the original form, are yet ever governed by the nature
of this original individual form; nor can any power of pressure ever so change
the original form, but that, if compared to another system of bones that has
suffered an equal pressure, it will be perfectly distinct. As little as the
Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leopard his spots, whatever be the
changes to which they may be subject, as little can the original form of any
bone be changed into the original form of any other bone.

Vessels every where penetrate the bones, supplying them with juices and
marrow. The younger the bone is, the more are there of these vessels --
consequently the more porous and flexible are the bones, and the reverse. The
period when such or such changes take place in the bones cannot easily be
defined; it differs according to the nature of men and accidental circumstances.

Large and long and multiform bones, in order to facilitate their ossification
and growth, at first consist of several pieces, the smaller of which are called
supplemental. The bone remains imperfect till these become incorporated. Hence
their possible distortion in children, by the rickets, and other diseases.

CHAPTER XIII. Suggestions to the Physiognomist concerning the Scull.
THE scientific physiognomist ought to direct his attention to the distortion
of the bones, especially those of the head. He ought to learn accurately to
remark, compare and define the first form of children, and the numerous
relative deviations. He ought to have attained that precision that should
enable him to say, at beholding the head of a newborn infant, of half a year,
a year, or two years old, Such and such will be the form of the system of the
bones, under such and such limitations; and on viewing the scull at ten,
twelve, twenty, or twenty-four years of age, Such or such was the form, eight,
ten, or twenty years ago; and such or such will be the form, eight, ten, or
twenty years hence, violence excepted. He ought to be able to see the youth in
the boy, and the man in the youth; and, on the reverse, the youth in the man,
the boy in the youth, the infant in the boy, and, lastly, the embryo in its
proper individual form.

Let us, O ye who adore that Wisdom which has framed all things! contemplate, a
moment longer, the human scull. There are, in the bare scull of man, the same
varieties as are to be found in the whole external form of the living man.

As the infinite varieties of the external form of man is one of the
indistructible pillars of physiognomy, no less so, in my opinion, must the
infinite varieties of the scull itself be. What I have hereafter to remark
will, in part, show that we ought particulary to begin by that, if, instead of
a subject of curiosity or amusement, we would wish to make the science of
physiognomy universally useful.

I shall show that from the structure, form, outline, and properties of the
bones, not all, indeed, but much may be discovered, and probably more than from
all the other parts.

Objection and Answer.
What answer shall I make to that objection, with which a certain
anti-physiognomist has made himself so merry?

"In the catacombs near Rome (says he) a number of skeletons were found, which
were supposed to be the relics of saints, and, as such, were honored. After
some time, several learned men began to doubt whether these had really been the
sepulchers of the first christians and martyrs, and even to suspect that
malefactors and banditti might have been buried there. The piety of the
faithful was thus much puzzled; but if the science of physiognomy be so
certain, they might have removed all their doubts by sending for Lavater, who
with very little trouble, by merely examining and touching them, might have
distinguished the bones of the saints from the bones of the banditti, and thus
have restored the true relics to their just and original pre-eminence."

"The conceit is whimsical enough (answers a cold and phlegmatic friend of
physiognomy); but, having tired ourselves with laughing, let us examine what
would have been the consequence had this story been fact? According to our
opinion, the physiognomist would have remarked great differences in a number of
bones, particularly in the sculls, which, to the ignorant, would have appeared
perfectly similar; and, having classed his heads, and shown their immediate
gradations, and the contrast of the two extremes, we may presume, the attentive
spectator would have been inclined to pay some respect to his conjectures on
the qualities and activity of brain which each formerly contained.

"Besides, when we reflect how certain it is that many malefactors have been
possessed of extraordinary abilities and energy, and how uncertain it is
whether many of the saints who are honored with red-letter days in the
calendar, ever possessed such qualities, we find the question so intricate that
we should be inclined to pardon the poor physiognomist were he to refuse an
answer, and leave the decision to the great infallible judge."

Further Reply.
Let us endeavor farther to investigate the question; for, though this answer
is good, it is insufficient. Who ever yet pretended absolutely to distinguish
saints from banditti, by inspecting only the scull?

To me it appears, that justice requires we should in all our decisions
concerning books, men, and opinions, judge each according to their pretensions,
and not ascribe pretensions which have not been made to any man.

I have heard of no physiognomist who has had, and I am certain that I myself
never have had, any such presumption. Notwithstanding which I maintain as a
truth most demonstrable, that, by the mere form, proportion, hardness, or
weakness of the scull, the strength or weakness of the general character may be
known with the greatest certainty. But, as has been often repeated, strength
and weakness are neither virtue nor vice, saint nor malefactor.

Power, like riches, may be employed to the advantage or detriment of society,
the same as wealth may be in the possession of a saint or a demon; and as it is
with wealth, or arbitrary positive power, so is it with natural innate power.
As in an hundred rich men there are ninety-nine who are not saints, so will
there scarcely be one saint among an hundred men born with this power.

When, therefore, we remark in a scull great original and percussive power, we
cannot indeed say this man was a malefactor; but we may affirm there was this
excess of power, which, if it were not qualified and tempered during life,
there is the highest probability it would have been agitated by the spirit of
conquest, would have become a general, a conqueror, a Caesar, a Cartouch. Under
certain circumstances he would probably have acted in a certain manner, and his
actions would have varied according to the variation of circumstances; but he
would always have acted with ardour, tempestuously, always as a ruler and a
conqueror.

Thus, also, we may affirm of certain other sculls, which, in their whole
structure and form, discover tenderness, and a resemblance to parchment, that
they denote weakness; a mere capability of perceptive, without percussive,
without creative power. Therefore, under certain circumstances, such persons
would have acted weakly. They would not have had the native power of
withstanding this or that temptation, of engaging in this or that enterprise.
In the fashionable world, they would have acted the fop, the libertine in a
more confined circle, and the enthusiastic saint in a convent.

Oh! how differently may the same power, the same sensibility, the same
capacity, act, feel, and conceive, under different circumstances! And hence we
may, in part, comprehend the possibility of predestination and liberty in one
and the same subject.

Take a man of the commonest understanding to a charnel-house, and make him
attentive to the differences of sculls; in a short time he will either perceive
of himself, or understand when told, here is strength, there weakness; here
obstinacy, and there indecision.

If shown the bald head of Caesar, as painted by Rubens or Titian, or that of
Michael Angelo, what man would be dull enough not to discover that impulsive
power, that rocky comprehension, by which they were peculiarly characterised;
and that more ardour, more action must be expected, than from a smooth, round,
flat head?

How characteristic is the scull of Charles XII! How different from the scull
of his biographer Voltaire! Compare the scull of Judas with the scull of
Christ, after Holbein, discarding the muscular parts, and I doubt, if asked
which was the wicked betrayer, which the innocent betrayed, whether any any one
would hesitate.

I will acknowledge, that when two determinate heads are presented to us, with
such striking differences, and the one of which is known to be that of a
malefactor, the other that of a saint, it is infinitely more easy to decide;
but he who can distinguish between them, should not therefore affirm he can
distinguish the sculls of saints from the sculls of malefactors.

To conclude this chapter. Who is unacquainted with the anecdote in Herodotus,
that is was possible, many years afterward, on the field of battle, to
distinguish the sculls of the effeminate Medes from those of the manly
Persians? I think I have heard the same remark made of the Swiss and the
Burgundians. This at least proves it is granted that we may perceive, in the
scull only, a difference of strength and manners, as well as of nations.

CHAPTER XIV.
Of the Difference of Sculls, as they relate to Sex, and particularly to
Nations. -- Of the Sculls of Children.

AN essay on the difference of bones, as they relate to sex, and particularly
to nations, has been published by M. Fischer, which is well deserving of
attention. The following are some thoughts on the subject, concerning which
nothing will be expected from me, but very much from M. Kamper.

Consideration and comparison of the external and internal make of the body, in
male and female, teaches us, that the one is destined for labor and strength,
and the other for beauty and propagation. The bones particularly denote
masculine strength in the former; and, so far as the stronger and the prominent
are more easy to describe than the less prominent and the weaker, so far is the
male skeleton and the scull the easiest to define.

The general structure of the bones in the male, and of the scull in
particular, is evidently of stronger formation than in the female. The body of
the male increases, from the hip to the shoulder, in breadth and thickness;
hence the broad shoulders and square form of the strong: whereas the female
skeleton gradually grows thinner and weaker from the hip upwards, and by
degrees appears as if it were rounded.

Even single bones in the female are more tender, smooth, and round; have fewer
sharp edges, cuting and prominent corners.

We may here properly cite the remark of Santorinus, concerning the difference
of sculls, as they relate to sex. "The aperture of the mouth, the palate, and
in general the parts which form the voice, are less in the female; and the more
small and round chin, consequently the under part of the mouth correspond."

The round or angular form of the scull may be very powerfully and essentially
turned to the advantage of the physiognomist, and becomes a source of
innumerable individual judgments. Of this the whole work abounds with proofs
and examples.

No man is perfectly like another, either in external construction or internal
parts, whether great or small, or in the system of the bones. I find this
difference, not only between nations, but between persons of the nearest
kindred; but not so great between these, and between persons of the same
nation, as between nations remote from each other, whose manners and food are
very different. The more confidently men converse with, the more they resemble
each other, as well in the formation of the parts of the body, as in language,
manners, and food; that is, so far as the formation of the body can be
influenced by external accidents. Those nations, in a certain degree, will
resemble each other, that have commercial intercourse, they being acted upon by
the effect of climate, imitatation and habit, which have so great an influence
in forming the body and mind; that is to say, the visible and invisible powers
of man; although national character still remains, and which character in
reality, is much easier to remark than to describe.

We shall leave more extensive inquiries and observations concerning this
subject to some such person as Kamper, and refrain as becomes us; not having
obtained sufficient knowledge of the subject to make remarks of our own of
sufficient importance.

Differences with respect to strength, firmness, structure, and proportion of
the parts, are certainly visible in all the bones of the skeletons of different
nations; but most in the formation of the countenance, which every where
contains the peculiar expression of nature, of the mind.

The scull of a Dutchman, for example, is in general rounder, with broader
bones, curved, and arched in all its parts, and with the sides less flat and
compressed.

A Calmuc scull will be more rude and gross; flat on the top, prominent at the
sides; the parts firm and compressed, the face broad and flat.

The scull of the Ethiopian is steep, suddenly elevated; as suddenly small,
sharp, above the eyes; beneath strongly projecting; circular, and high behind.

In proportion as the forehead of the Calmuc i^ ^at and low, that of the
Ethiopean is high and narrow; while the back part of an European head has a
much more protuberant arch, and spherical form behind, than that of a negro.

Of the Sculls of Children.
The scull, or head, of a child, drawn upon paper without additional
circumstance, will be generally known, and seldom confounded with the head of
an adult. But, to keep them distinct, it is necessary the painter should not be
too hasty and incorrect in his observations of what is peculiar, or so
frequently generalize the particular, which is the eternal error of painters,
and of so many pretended physiognomists.

Notwithstanding individual variety, there are certain constant signs proper to
the head of a child, which as much consist in the combination and form of the
whole as in the single parts.

It is well known that the head is larger in proportion to the rest of the
body, the younger the person is; and seems to me, from comparing the scull of
the embryo, the child, and the man, that the part of scull which contains the
brain is proportionably larger than the parts that compose the jaw and the
countenance. Hence it happens that the forehead in children, especially the
upper part, is generally so prominent.

The bones of the upper and under jaw, with the teeth they contain, are later
in their growth, and more slowly attain perfect formation. The under part of
the head generally increases more than the upper, till it has attained full
growth. Several processes of the bones, as the processus mamillares, which lie
behind and under the ears, form themselves after the birth; as do also, in a
great measure, various hidden sinusses, or cavities, in these bones. The
quill-form of these bones, with their various points, ends and protuberances,
and the numerous muscles which are annexed to them, and continually in action,
make the greater increase and change more possible and easy than can happen in
the spherical bony covering of the brain, when once the futures are entirely
become solid.

This unequal growth of the two principal parts of the scull must necessarily
produce an essential difference in the whole, without enumerating the obtuse
extremities, the edges, sharp corners, and single protuberances, which are
chiefly occasioned by the action of the muscles.

As the man grows, the countenance below the forehead becomes more protuberant;
and as the sides of the face, that is to say, the temple-bones, which are also
slow in coming to perfection, continually remove farther from each other, the
scull gradually loses that pear form which it appears to me to have had in
embryo.

The sinus frontales first form themselves after birth. The prominence at the
bottom of the forehead, between the eyebrows, is likewise wanting in children.
The forehead joins the nose without any remarkable curve. This latter
circumstance may also be observed in some grown persons, when the sinus
frontales are either wanting or very small; for these cavities are found very
different in different subjects.

The nose, during growth, alters exceedingly; but I am unable to explain in
what manner the bones contribute to this alteration, it being chiefly
cartilaginous. Accurately to determine this, many experiments on the heads and
sculls of children, and grown persons, would be necessary; or, rather, if we
could compare the same head with itself at different ages, which might be done
by the means of shades, such gradation of the head or heads would be of great
utility to the physiognomist.

CHAPTER XV. Description of Plate III.
Number 1.
THIS outline, from a bust of Cicero, appears to me an almost perfect model of
congeniality. The whole has the character of penetrating acuteness, an
extraordinary, though not a great profile. All is acute; all is sharp:
discerning, searching, less benevolent than satirical, elegant, conspicuous,
subtle.

Number 2.
Another congenial countenance. Too evidently nature, for it to be mistaken for
ideal, or the invention and emendation of art. Such a forehead does not betoken
the rectilinear, but the nose thus bent. Such an upper lip, such an open,
eloquent mouth. The forehead does not lead us to expect high poetical genius;
but acute punctuality, and the stability of retentive memory. It is impossible
to suppose this common countenance.

Number 3.
The forehead and nose not congenial. The nose show^ the very acute thinker.
The lower part of the forehead, on the contrary, especially the distance No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5
N^^ F^^^^cius de Peires^ No. 6.
between the eyebrow and eye, do not betoken this high degree of mental power.
The stiff position of the whole is much at variance with the eye and mouth, but
particularly with the nose. The whole, the eyebrow excepted, speaks a calm,
peaceable, mild character.

Number 4.
The harmony of the mouth and nose is self-evident. The forehead is too good,
too comprehensive, for this very limited under part of the countenance. The
whole bespeaks a harmless character; nothing delicate, nor severe.

Number 5.
We have here a high bold forehead, with a short-seeming blunt nose, and a fat
double chin. How do these harmonise! It is almost a general law of nature,
that, where the eyes are strong drawn, and the eyebrows near, the eyebrows must
also be strong. The countenance, merely by its harmony, its prominent congenial
traits, is expressive of sound, clear understanding: the countenance of reason.

Number 6.
The perfect countenance of a politician. Faces which are thus pointed from the
eyes to the chin, always have lengthened noses, and never possess large, open,
powerful, and piercing eyes. Their firmness partakes of obstinacy, and they
rather follow intricate plans than the dictates of common sense.

CHAPTER XVI.
The Physiognomist.

ALL men have talents for all things; yet we may venture to assert, that very
few have the determinate and essential talents. All men have talents for
drawing: they can all learn to write, well or ill; yet not an excellent
draftsman will be produced in ten thousand. The same may be affirmed of
eloquence, poetry, and physiognomy. All men who have eyes and ears, have
talents to become physiognomists; yet not one in ten thousand can become an
excellent physiognomist.

It may, therefore be of use to sketch the character of the true physiognomist,
that those who are deficient of the requisite talents may be detered from the
study of physiognomy. The pretended physiognomist, with a foolish head and a
wicked heart, is certainly one of the most contemptible and mischievous
creatures that crawls on the face of the earth.

No one whose person is not well formed, can become a good physiognomist. Those
painters were the best, whose persons were the handsomest. Reubens, Vandyke,
and Raphael, possessing three gradations of beauty, possessed three gradations
of the genius of painting. The physiognomists of the greatest symmetry are the
best. As the most virtuous can the best determine on virtue, and the just on
justice; so can the most handsome countenances on the goodness, beauty, and
noble traits of the human countenance, and consequently on its defects and
ignoble properties. The scarcity of human beauty is the reason why physiognomy
is so much decried, and finds so many opponents.

No person, therefore, ought to enter the sanctuary of physiognomy, who has a
debased mind, an ill-formed forehead, a blinking eye, or a distorted mouth.
"The light of the body is the eye: if, therefore, thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light; but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body
shall be full of darkness: if, therefore, that light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness!"

Any one who would become a physiognomist, cannot meditate too much on this
text. O single eye! that beholdest all things as they are, see nothing
falsely, with glance oblique nothing overlookest! O most perfect image of
reason and wisdom! -- Why do I say image? Thou art reason and wisdom
themselves! Without thy resplendent light, would all that appertains to
physiognomy become dark!

Whoever does not, at the first aspect of any man, feel a certain motion of
affection or dislike, attraction or repulsion, never can become a physiognomist.

Whoever studies art more than nature, and prefers what the painters call
manner to the truth of drawing; whoever does not feel himself moved almost to
tears, at beholding the ancient ideal beauty, and the present depravity of men
and imitative art; he who views antique gems, and does not discover enlarged
intelligence in Cicero, enterprising resolution in Caesar, profound thought in
Solon, invincible fortitude in Brutus, in Plato godlike wisdom; or, in modern
medals, the height of human sagacity in Montesquieu, in Haller the energetic
contemplative look and most refined taste, the deep reasoner in Lock, and the
witty satirist in Voltaire, even at the first glance; never can become a
physiognomist.

Whoever does not dwell with fixed rapture on the aspect of benevolence in
action, supposing itself unobserved; whoever remains unmoved by the voice of
innocence, the guileless look of unviolated chastity, the mother contemplating
her beauteous sleeping infant, the warm pressure of the hand of a friend, or
his eye swimming in tears; whoever can lightly tear himself from scenes like
these, and turn them to ridicule, might much easier commit the crime of
parricide than become a physiognomist.

If such be the case, what then is required of the physiognomist? What should
his inclination, talents, qualities, and capabilities be?

In the first place, as has been in part already remarked, his first of
requisites should be a body well proportioned, and finely organized; accuracy
of sensation, capable of receiving the most minute outward impressions, and
easily transmiting them faithfully to memory; or, as I ought rather to say,
impressing them upon the imagination, and the fibers of the brain. His eye, in
particular, must be excellent, clear, acute, rapid, and firm.

Precision in observation is the very soul of physiognomy. The physiognomist
must possess a most delicate, swift, certain, most extensive spirit of
observation. To observe is to be attentive, so as to fix the mind on a
particular object, which it selects, or may select, for consideration, from a
number of surrounding objects. To be attentive, is to consider some one
particular object, exclusively of all others; and to analyze, consequently to
distinguish what is similar, what dissimilar, to discover proportion and
disproportion, is the office of the understanding.

If the physiognomist has not an accurate, superior, and extended
understanding, he will neither be able rightly to observe, nor to compare and
class his observations, much less to draw the necessary conclusions.
Physiognomy is the highest exercise of the understanding, the logic of
corporeal varieties.

To the clearest and profoundest understanding, the true physiognomist unites
the most lively, strong, comprehensive imagination, and a fine and rapid wit.
Imagination is necessary to impress the traits with exactness, so that they may
be renewed at pleasure; and to range the pictures in the mind as perfectly as
if they still were visible, and with all possible order.

A keen penetration is indispensable to the physiognomist, that he may easily
perceive the resemblance that exists between objects. Thus, for example, he
sees a head or forehead possessed of certain characteristic marks: these marks
present themselves to his imagination, and a keen penetration discovers to what
they are similar. Hence greater precision, certainty, and expression, are
imparted to his images. He must have the capacity of uniting the approximation
of each trait that he remarks, and be able to define the degree of this
approximation. No one who is not inexhaustibly copious in language, can become
a physiognomist; and the highest possible copiousness is poor, comparatively
with the wants of physiognomy. All that language can express, the physiognomist
must be able to express. He must be the creator of a new language, which must
be equally precise and alluring, natural and intelligible.

Every production of art, taste, and mind; all vocabularies of all nations, all
the kingdoms of nature must obey his command, must supply his necessities.

The art of drawing is indispensable, if he would be precise in his
definitions, and accurate in his decisions. Drawing is the first, most natural,
and unequivocal language of physiognomy; the best aid of the imagination, the
only means of preserving and communicating numberless peculiarities, shades,
and expressions, which are not by words, or any other mode, to be described.
The physiognomist, who cannot draw hastily, accurately, and characteristically,
will be unable to make, much less to retain, or communicate, innumerable
observations.

The knowledge of anatomy is indispensable to him; as also is physiology, or
the science of the human body in health; not only that he may be able to remark
any disproportion, as well in the solids as in the muscular parts, but that he
may likewise be capable of naming these parts in his physiognomical language.
He must also be acquainted with the temperament of the human body: not only its
different colors and appearances, occasioned by the mixture of the blood; but
also the constituent parts of the blood itself, and their different
proportions. Still more especially must be understood the external symptoms of
the constitution, relative to the nervous system, for on this depends more than
even on the knowledge of the blood.

What an extensive knowledge ought he to have of the human heart, and the
manners of the world! How thoroughly ought he to inspect, to feel himself! That
most essential, yet most difficult of all knowledge to the physiognomist, ought
to be possessed by him in all possible perfection. In proportion only as he
knows himself, will he be enabled to know others.

Not only is this self-knowledge, this studying of man by the study of his own
heart, with the genealogy and consanguinity of inclinations and passions, their
various symptoms and changes, necessary to the physiognomist, for the foregoing
causes, but also for an additional reason.

"The peculiar shades (I here cite the words of one of the critics on my first
essay), the peculiar shades of feeling which most affect the observer ^f any
object, frequently have relation to his own mind, and will be soonest remarked
by him in proportion as they sympathize with his own powers. They will affect
him most according to the manner in which he is accustomed to survey the
physical and moral world. Many, therefore, of his observations are applicable
only to the observer himself; and, however strongly they may be conceived by
him, he cannot easily impart them to others. Yet these minute observations
influence his judgment. For this reason, the physiognomist must, if he knows
himself, which he in justice ought to do before he attempts to know others,
once more compare his remarks with his own peculiar mode of thinking, and
separate those which are general from those which are individual and appertain
to himself." I shall make no commentary on this important precept. I shall here
only repeat, that an accurate and profound knowledge of his own heart, is one
of the most essential qualities in the character of the physiognomist.

Reader, if thou have not often blushed at thyself, even though thou should
be the best of men, for the best of men is but man; if thou have not often
stood with downcast eyes, in presence of thyself and others; if thou have not
da^ed to confess to thyself, and to confide to thy friend, that thou art
conscious the seeds of every vice are latent in thy heart; if, in the gloomy
calm of solitude, having no witness but God and thy own conscience, thou have
not a thousand times sighed and sorrowed for thyself; if thou want the power
to observe the progress of the passions from their very commencement, to
examine what the impulse was which determined thee to good or ill, and to avow
the motive to God and thy friend, to whom thou may thus confess thyself, and
who also may disclose the recesses of his soul to thee; a friend who shall
stand before thee the representative of man and God, and in whose estimation
thou also shall be invested with the same sacred character; a friend, in whom
thou may see thy very soul, and who shall reciprocally behold himself in
thee: if, in a word, thou art not a man of worth, thou never can learn to
observe or know men well; thou never can be, never wilt be, worthy of being a
good physiognomist. If thou wishest not that the talent of observation should
be a torment to thyself, and an evil to thy brother, how good, how pure, how
affectionate, how expanded ought thy heart to be! How may thou ever discover
the marks of benevolence and mild forgiveness, if thou thyself art destitute of
such gifts? How, if philanthropy does not make thine eye active, how may
thou discern the impressions of virtue, and the marks of the sublimest
sensations? How often will thou overlook them in a countenance disfigured by
accident! Surrounded thyself by mean passions, how often will such false
observers bring false intelligence! Put far from thee self-interest, pride and
envy, otherwise thine eye will be evil, and thy whole body full of darkness.
Thou will read vices on the forehead whereon virtue is written, and wilt accuse
others of those errors and failings of which thine own heart accuses thee.
Whoever bears any resemblance to thine enemy, will by thee be accused of all
those failings and vices with which thy enemy is loaded by thy own partiality
and self-love. Thine eye will overlook the beauteous traits, and magnify the
discordant. Thou will behold nothing but caricature and disproportion.

But, to draw to a conclusion, the physiognomist should know the world; he
should have intercourse with all manner of men, in all various ranks and
conditions; he should have traveled, should possess extensive knowledge, a
thorough acquaintance with artists, mankind, vice, and virtue, the wise and the
foolish, and particularly with children; together with a love of literature,
and a taste for painting, and the other imitative arts. I say, can it need
demonstration, that all those, and much more, are to him indispensable? To sum
up the whole: to a well formed, well organized body, the perfect physiognomist
must unite an acute spirit of observation, a lively fancy, an excellent
judgment, and, with numerous propensities to the arts and sciences, a strong,
benevolent, enthusiastic, innocent heart; a heart confident in itself, and free
from the passions inimical to man. No one, certainly, can read the traits of
magnanimity, and the high qualities of the mind, who is not himself capable of
magnanimity, honorable thoughts, and sublime actions.

I have pronounced judgment against myself in writing these characteristics of
the physiognomist. Not false modesty, but conscious feeling, impels me to say,
that I am as distant from the true physiognomist as heaven is from earth. I am
but the fragment of a physiognomist, as this work is but the fragment of a
system of physiognomy.

CHAPTER XVII.
Lavater's own Remarks on National Physiognomy.

IT is undeniable, that there is national physiognomy, as well as national
character. Whoever doubts of this can never have observed men of different
nations, nor have compared the inhabitants of the extreme confines of any two.
Compare a Negro and an Englishman, a native of Lapland and an Italian, a
Frenchman and an inhabitant of Terra del Fuego. Examine their forms,
countenances, characters, and minds. Their difference will be easily seen,
though it will sometimes be very difficult to describe it scientifically.

It seems to me probable, that we shall discover what is national in the
countenance, better from the sight of an individal at first, than of a whole
people; at least so it appears to me, from my own experience. Individual
countenances discover more the characteristic of a whole nation, than a whole
nation does that which is national in individuals. The following, infinitely
little, is what I have hitherto observed from the foreigners with whom I have
conversed, and whom I have noticed, concerning national character.

The French I am least able to characterise. They have no traits so bold as the
English, nor so minute as the Germans. I know them chiefly by their teeth and
their laugh. The Italians I discover by the nose, small eyes, and projecting
chin. The English by their foreheads and eyebrows. The Dutch by the rotundity
of the head, and the weakness of the hair. The Germans by the angles and
wrinkles round the eyes and in the cheeks. The Russians by the snub nose, and
their light-coloured or black hair.

I shall now say a word concerning Englishmen in particular. Englishmen have
the shortest and best arched foreheads; that is to say, they are arched only
upwards, and, toward the eyebrows, either gently decline, or are rectilinear.
They very seldom have pointed, but often round, full, medullary noses; the
Quakers and Moravians excepted, who, wherever they are found, are generally
thin lipped. Englishmen have large, well defined, beautifully curved lips. They
have also a round full chin; but they are peculiarly distinguished by the
eyebrows and eyes, which are strong, open, liberal, and steadfast. The outline
of their countenance is, in general, great; and they never have those numerous,
infinitely minute traits, angles, and wrinkles, by which the Germans are so
especially distinguished. Their complexion is fairer than that of the Germans.

All English women whom I have known personally or by portrait, appear to be
composed of marrow and nerve. They are inclined to be tall, slender, soft, and
as distant from all that is harsh, rigorous, or stubborn, as heaven is from
earth.

The Swiss have generally no common physiognomy or national character, the
aspect of fidelity excepted. They are as different from each other as nations
the most remote. The French Swiss peasant is as distinct as possible from the
peasant of Appenzel. It may be that the eye of a foreigner would better
discover the general character of the nation, and in what it differs from the
French or German than that of a native.

In each canton of Switzerland I find characteristic varieties. The inhabitants
of Zurich, for instance, are middle sized, more frequently meagre than
corpulent, but usually one or the other. They seldom have ardent eyes, and the
outline is not often grand or minute. The men are seldom handsome, though the
youth are incomparably so; but they soon alter. The people of Bern are tall,
straight, fair, pliable, and firm, and are most distinguished by their upper
teeth, which are white, regular, and easily to be seen. The inhabitants of
Basle (or Basil) are more round, full, and tense of countenance, the complexion
tinged with yellow, and the lips open and flaccid. Those of Schafhausen are
hard boned. Their eyes are seldom sunken, but generally prominent. The sides of
the forehead diverge over the temples, the cheeks fleshy, and the mouth wide
and open. They are commonly stronger built than the people of Zurich, though in
the canton of Zurich there is scarcely a village in which the inhabitants do
not differ from those of the neighboring village, without attending to dress,
which, notwithstanding, is also physiognomical.

Round Wadenschweil and Oberreid I have seen many handsome, broad-shouldered,
strong, burden bearing men. At Weiningen, two leagues from Zurich, I met a
company of well-formed men, who were distinguishable for their cleanliness,
circumspection, and gravity of deportment.

An extremely interesting and instructive book might be written on the
physiognomical character of the peasants of Switzerland. There are considerable
districts where the countenances, the nose not excepted, are most of them
broad, as if pressed flat with a board. This disagreeable form, wherever found,
is consistent with the character of the people. What could be more instructive
than a physiognomical and characteristic description of such villages, their
mode of living, food, and occupation?

CHAPTER XVIII.
Extracts from Buffon on National Physiognomy.

TRAVERSING the surface of the earth, and beginning in the north, we find, in
Lapland, and on the northern coast of Tartary, a race of men small of stature,
singular of form, and with countenances as savage as their manners.

These people have large flat faces, the nose broad, the pupil of the eye of a
yellow brown inclining to a black, the eyelids retiring toward the temples,
the cheeks extremely high, the mouth very large, the lower part of the face
narrow, the lips full and high, the voice shrill, the head large, the hair
black and sleek, and the complexion brown or tanned. They are very small, and
squat, though meagre. Most of them are not above four feet, and hardly any
exceed four feet and an half. The Borandians are still smaller than the
Laplanders. The Samoiedes more squat, with large heads and noses, and darker
complexions. Their legs are shorter, their knees more turned outward; their
hair is longer, and they have less beard. The complexion of the Greenlanders is
darker still, and of a deep olive color.

The women, among all these nations, are as ugly as the men; and not only do
these people resemble each other in ugliness, size, and the color of their
eyes and hair, but they have similar inclinations and manners, and are all
equally gross, superstitious, and stupid. Most of them are idolaters; they are
more rude than savage, wanting courage, self-respect, and modesty.

If we examine the neighboring people of the long slip of land which the
Laplanders inhabit, we shall find they have no relation whatever with that
race, excepting that of the Ostiacks and Tongusians. The Samoiedes and the
Borandians have no resemblance with the Russians, nor have the Laplanders with
the Finlanders, the Goths, Danes, or Norwegians. The Greenlanders are alike
different from the savages of Canada. The latter are tall and well made; and
though they differ very much from each other, yet they are still more
infinitely different from the Laplanders. The Ostiacks seem to be Samoiedes,
something less ugly, and dwarfish, for they are small and ill formed.

All the Tartars have the upper part of the countenance very large and
wrinkled, even in youth; the nose short and gross, the eyes small and sunken,
the cheeks very high, the lower part of the face narrow, the chin long and
prominent, the upper jaw sunken, the teeth long and separated, the eyebrows
large, covering the eyes, the eyelids thick, the face flat, their skin of an
olive color, and their hair black. They are of a middle stature, but very
strong and robust; have little beard, which grows in small tufts, like that of
the Chinese; thick thighs, and short legs.

The Little or Nogais Tartars have lost a part of their ugliness, by having
intermingled with the Circassians, As we proceed eastward, into free or
independent Tartary, the features of the Tartars become something less hard,
but the essential characteristics of their race ever remain. The Mogul Tartars,
who conquered China, and who were the most polished of these nations, are, at
present, the least ugly and ill made; yet have they, like the others, small
eyes, the face large and flat, little beard, but always black or red, and the
nose short and compressed.

Among the Kergisi and Tcheremisi Tartars there is a whole nation, or tribe,
among whom are very singularly beautiful men and women. The manners of the
Chinese and Tartars are wholly opposite, more so than are their countenances
and forms. The limbs of the Chinese are well proportioned, large, and fat.
Their faces are round and capacious, their eyes small, their eyebrows large,
their eyelids raised, and their noses little and compressed. They only have
seven or eight tufts of black hair on each lip, and very little on the chin.

The natives of the coast of New Holland, which lies in sixteen degrees fifteen
minutes of south latitude, and to the south of the isle of Timor, are perhaps
the most miserable people on earth, and of all the human race most approach the
brute animal. They are tall, upright and slender. Their limbs are long and
supple, their heads great, their forehead round, their eyebrows thick, and
their eyelids half shut. This they acquire by habit in their infancy, to
preserve their eyes from the gnats, by which they are greatly incommoded; and
as they never much open their eyes, they cannot see at a distance, at least not
unless they raise the head as if they wished to look at something above them.
They have large noses, thick lips, and wide mouths. It should seem that they
draw the two upper fore teeth, for neither man nor woman, young nor old, have
these teeth. They have no beard; their faces are long, and very disagreeable,
without a single pleasing feature; their hair not long and sleek, like that of
most of the Indians, but short, black, and curly, like the hair of the Negroes.
Their skin is black, and resembles that of the Indians of the coast of Guinea.

If we now examine the nations inhabiting a more temperate climate, we shall
find, that the people of the northern provinces, of the Mogul empire, Persia,
the Armenians, Turks, Georgians, Mingrelians, Circassians, Greeks, and all the
inhabitants of Europe, are the handsomest, wisest, and best formed of any on
earth; and that, though the distance between the Cachemire and Spain, or
Circassia and France, is very great, there is still a very singular resemblance
between people so far from each other, but situated in nearly the same
latitude. The people of Cachemire are renowned for beauty, are as well formed
as the Europeans, and have nothing of the Tartar countenance, the flat nose,
and the small pig's eyes, which are so universal among their neighbors.

The complexion of the Georgians is still more beautiful than that of
Cachemire; no ugly face is found in the country, and nature has endowed most of
the women with graces which are no where else to be discovered. The men also
are very handsome, have natural understanding, and would be capable of arts and
sciences, did not their bad education render them exceedingly ignorant and
vicious* yet, with all their vices, the Georgians are civil, humane, grave, and
moderate* they seldom are under the influence of anger, though they become
irreconcil^able enemies having once entertained hatred.

The Circassians and Mingrelians are equally beautiful and well formed. The
lame and the crooked are seldom seen among the Turks. The Spaniards are meagre,
and rather small; they are well shaped, have fine heads, regular features, good
eyes, and well arranged teeth; but their complexions are dark, and inclined to
yellow. It has been remarked, that in some provinces of Spain as near the banks
of the river Bidassoa, the people have exceedingly large ears.

M. Lavater here m^^^s this digression. Can large ears hear better than small?
I know one person with large, rude ears, whose sense of hearing is acute, and
who has a good understanding; but, him excepted, I have particularly remarked
large ears to betoken folly; and that, on the contrary ears inordinately small
appertain to very weak, effeminate characters, or persons of too great
sensibility. -- Thus far Lavater: let us now return to Buffon.

Men with black or dark-brown hair begin to be rather uncommon in England,
Flanders, Holland, and the northern provinces of Germany; and few such are to
be found in Denmark, Sweden, and Poland. According to Linnaeus, the Goths are
very tall, have sleek, light-coloured, silver hair, and blue eyes. The
Finlanders are muscular and fleshy, with long and light yellow hair, the iris
of the eye a deep yellow.

If we collect the accounts of travelers, it will appear, that there are as
many varieties among the race of Negroes as the Whites. They also have their
Tartars and their Circassians. The Blacks on the coast of Guinea are extremely
ugly, and emit an insufferable scent. Those of Sofa^a and Mozambique are
hansome, and have no ill smell. These two species of Negroes resemble each
other rather in color than features. Their hair, skin, the odor of their
bodies, their manners and propensities, are exceedingly different. Those of
Cape de Verd have by no means so disagreeable a smell as the natives of Angola.
Their skin also is more smooth and black, their body better made, their
features less hard, their tempers more mild, and their shape better.

The Negroes of Senegal are the best formed, and best receive instruction. The
Nagos are the most humane, the Mondongos the most cruel, the Mimes the most
resolute, capricious, and subject to despair.

The Guinea Negroes are extremely limited in their capacities. Many of them
appear to be wholly stupid; or, never capable of counting more than three,
^emain in a thoughtless state if not acted upon, and have no memory; yet,
bounded as is their understanding, they have much feeling, have good hearts,
and the seeds of all virtue.

The Hottentots have all very flat and broad noses; but these they would not
have, did not their mothers suppose it their duty to flatten the nose shortly
after birth. They have also very thick (...), especially the upper; the teeth
white, the eyebrows thick, the head heavy, the body meagre, and the limbs
slender.

The inhabitants of Canada, and all these confines, are rather tall, robust,
strong, and tolerably well made; have black hair and eyes, very white teeth,
tawny complexions, ^ittle beard, and no hair, or almost none, o^ any other part
of the body. They are hardy and indefatigable in marching, swift of foot, alike
support the extremes of hunger, or excess in feeding; are daring, courageous,
haughty, grave and moderate. So strongly do they resemble the eastern Tartars
in complexion, hair, eyes, the almost want of beard, and hair, as well as in
their inclinations and manners, that we should suppose them the descendants of
that nation, did we not see the two people separated from each other by a vast
ocean. They also are under the same latitude, which is an additional proof of
the influence of climate on the color, and even on the form of man.

CHAPTER XIX.
Some of the most remarkable Passages from an excellent Essay on National
Physiognomy, by Professor Kant of Konigsberg.

THE supposition of Maupertuis, that a race of men might be established in any
province, in whom understanding, probity, and strength, should be hereditary,
could only be realized by the possibility of separating the degenerate from the
conformable births; a project which, in my opinion, might be practicable, but
which, in the present order of things, is prevented by the wiser dispositions
of nature, according to which the wicked and the good are intermingled, that by
the irregularities and vices of the former, the latent powers of the latter may
be put in motion, and impelled to approach perfection. If nature, without
transplantation or foreign mixture, be left undisturbed, she will after many
generations, produce a lasting race that shall ever remain distinct.

If we divide the human race into four principal classes it is probable that
the intermediate ones, however perpetuating and conspicuous, may be immediately
reduced to one of these. 1. The race of Whites. 2. The Negroes. 3. The Huns,
(Monguls, or Calmucs). 4. The Hindoos or people of Hindostan.

External things may well be the accidental, but not the primary causes of what
is inherited or assimilated. As little as chance, or physico-mechanical causes,
can produce an organized body, as little can they add any thing to its power of
propagation; that is to say, produce a thing which shall propagate itself by
having a peculiar form or proportion of parts.

Man was undoubtedly intended to ^e the inhabitant of all climates, and all
soils. Hence the feeds of many internal propensities must be latent in him,
which shall remain inactive, or be put in motion, according to his situation on
the earth. So that, in progressive generations, he shall appear as if born for
that particular soil in which he seems planted.

The air and the sun appear to be the causes which most influence the powers of
propagation, and effect a durable developement of germ and propensities; that
is to say, the air and the sun may be the origin of a distinct race. The
variations which food may produce, must soon disappear on transplantation. That
which affects the propagating powers, must not act upon the support of life,
but upon its original source, its first principle, animal conformation, and
motion.

A man transplanted to the frigid zone must decrease in stature, since, if the
power or momentum of the heart continues the same, the circulation tion must be
performed in a shorter time, the pulse become more rapid, and the heat of the
blood increased. Thus Crantz found the Greenlanders not only inferior in
stature to the Europeans, but also that they had a remarkably greater heat of
body. The very disproportion between the length of the body and the shortness
of the legs, in the northern people, is suitable to their climate; since the
extremes of the body, by their distance from the heart, are more subject to the
attacks of cold.

The prominent parts of the countenance, which can less be guarded from cold,
by the care of nature for their preservation, have a propensity to become more
slat. The rising cheek-bone, the half-closed, blinking eyes, appear to be
intended for the preservation of ^^ght against the dry, cold air, and the
effusions of light from the snow (to guard against which the Esquimaux
snow-spectacles), though they may be the natural effect of the climate, since
they are found only in a smaller degree in milder latitudes. Thus gradually are
produced the beardless chin, the flatted nose, thin lips, blinking eyes, flat
countenances, red-brown complexion, black hair, and, in a word, the face of the
Calmuc. Such properties, by continued propagation, at length form a distant
race, which continues to remain distinct, even when transplanted into warmer
climates.

The red-brown or copper color appears to be as natural an effect of the
acidity of the air in cold climates, as the olive-brown of the alcaline and
bilious quality of the juices in warm; without taking the native disposition of
the American into the estimate, who appears to have lost half the powers of
life which may be regarded as the effect of cold.

The growth of the porous parts of the body must increase in the hot and moist
climates. Hence the thick short nose and projecting lips. The skin must be
oiled, not only to prevent excessive perspiration, but also the imbibing the
putrescent particles of the moist air. The surplus of the ferruginous or iron
particles, which have lately been discovered to exist in the blood of man, and
which, by the evaporation of the phosphoric acidities, of which all Negroes
smell so strong, being cast upon the retiform membrane, occasions the blackness
which appears through the cuticle; and this strong retention of the ferruginous
particles seems to be necessary, in order to prevent the general relaxation of
the parts. Moist warmth is peculiarly favorable to the growth of animals, and
produces the Negro, who, by the providence of nature, perfectly adapted to his
climate, is strong, muscular, agile; but dirty, indolent, and trifling.

The trunk, or stem of the root may degenerate; but this having once taken
root, and stifled other germs, resists any future change of form, the character
of the race having once gained a preponderance in the propagating powers.

CHAPTER XX.
Extracts from other Writers on National Physiognomy. -- From Winkelmann's
History of Art. -- From the Recherches Philosophiques sur les Americains, by M.
de Pauw. -- Observations by Lintz. -- From a Letter written by M. Fuessli. --
From a Letter written by Professor Camper.

From Winkelmann's History of Art.
OUR eyes convince us, with respect to the form of man, that the character of
nation, as well as of mind, is visible in the countenance. As nature has
separated large districts by mountains and waters, so likewise has she
distinguished the inhabitants by peculiarity of features. In countries far
distant from each other, the difference is likewise visible in other parts of
the body, and in stature. Animals are not mere varied, according to the
properties of the countries they inhabit, than men are; and some have pretended
to remark, that animals even partake o^ the propensities of the men.

The formation of the countenance is as various as languages, nay, indeed, as
dialects, which are thus or thus various in consequence of the organs of
speech. In cold countries, the fibers of the tongue must be less flexible and
rapid than in warm. The natives of Greenland, and certain tribes of America,
are observed to want some letters of the alphabet, which must originate in the
same cause. Hence it happens, that the northern languages have more
monosyllables, and are more clogged with consonants, the connecting and
pronouncing of which is difficult, and sometimes impossible, to other nations.

A celebrated writer has endeavored to account for the varieties of the
Italian dialects, from the formation of the organs of speech. "For this reason
(says he) the people of Lombardy, inhabiting a cold country, have a more rough
and concise pronunciation. The inhabitants of Florence and Rome speak in a more
measured tone; and the Neapolitans, under still warmer sky, pronounce the
vowels more open, and speak with more fullness."

Persons well acquainted with various nations, can distinguish them as justly
from the form of their countenance, as from their speech. Therefore, since man
has ever been the object of art and artists, the latter have constantly given
the forms of face of their rep^ctive nations; and that art, among the ancients,
gave the form and countenance of man, is proved by the same effect having taken
place among the moderns. German, Dutch, or French, when the artists neither
travel nor study foreign forms, can be known by their pictures as perfectly as
Chinese or Tartars. After residing many years in Italy, Rubens continued to
draw his figures as if he had never l^^t his native land.

Another Passage from Winkelmann.
The projecting mouths of the Negroes, which they have in common with their
monkies, is an excess of growth, a swelling, occasioned by the heat of the
climate; like as our lips are swelled by heat or sharp saline moisture, and
also, in some men, by violent passion. The small eyes of the distant northern
and eastern nations are in consequence of the imperfection of their growth.
They are short and slender. Nature produces such forms the more she approaches
extremes, where she has to encounter heat or cold. In the one she is prompter
and exhausted, and in the other crude, never arriving at maturity. The flower
withers in excessive heat, and, deprived of sun, is deprived of color. All
plants degenerate in dark and confined places.

Nature forms with greater regularity the more she approaches her center, and
in more moderate climates. Hence the Grecian and our own idea of beauty, being
derived from more perfect symmetry, must be more accurate than the idea of
those, in whom to use the expression of a modern poet, the image of the Creator
is half defaced.

From the Recherches Philosophiques sur les Americaines, by M. de Pa^w.
The Americans are most remarkable, because that many of them have no eyebrows,
and none have beards; yet we must not infer that they are enfeebled in the
organs of generation, since the Tartars and Chinese have almost the same
characteristics. They are far, however, from being very fruitful, or much
addicted to love. True it is, the Chinese and Tartars are not absolutely
beardless. When they are about thirty, a small penciled kind of whisker grows
on the upper lip, and some scattered hairs at the end of the chin.

Exclusive of the Esquimaux, who differ in gait, fo^m, features, and manners,
from other savages of North America, we may likewise call the Akansans a
variety, whom the French have generally named the handsome men. They are tall
and straight, have good features, without the least appearance of beard, have
regular eyelids, blue eyes, and fine fair hair; while the neighboring people
are low of stature, have abject countenances, black eyes, the hair of the head
black as ebony, and of the body thick and rough.

Though the Peruvians are not very tall, and generally thick set, yet they are
tolerably well made. There are many, it is true, who, by being diminutive, are
monstrous. Some are deaf, dumb, blind, and idiots; and others want a limb when
born. In all probability, the excessive labor to which they have been
subjected by the barbarity of the Spaniards, has produced such numbers of
defective men. Tyranny has an influence on the very physical temperament of
slaves. Their nose is aquiline, their forehead narrow, their hair black,
strong, smooth, and plentiful; their complexion an olive red, the apple of the
eye black, and the white not very clear. They never have any beard, for we
cannot bestow that name on some short straggling hairs which sprout in old age;
nor have either men or women the downy hair which generally appears after the
age of puberty. In this they are distinguished from all people on earth, even
from the Tartars and Chinese. As in eunuchs, it is the character of their
degeneracy.

Judging by the rage which the Americans have to mutilate and disfigure
themselves, we should suppose they were all discontented with the proportions
of their limbs and bodies. Not a single nation has been discovered in this
fourth quarter of the globe, which has not adopted the custom of artificially
changing, either the form of the lips, the hollow of the ear, or the shape of
the head, by forcing it to assume an extraordinary and ridiculous figure.

There are savages whose heads are pyramidal, or conical, with the top
terminating in a point. Others have flat heads, with large foreheads, and the
back part flattened. This caprice seems to have been the most fashionable, at
least it was the most common. Some Canadians had their heads perfectly
spherical. Though the natural form of the head really approaches the circular,
these savages, who, by being thus distorted, acquired the appellation of bowl
or bullet-head, do not appear less disgusting, for having made the head too
round, and perverted the original purpose of nature, to which nothing can be
added, from which nothing can be taken away, without some essential error being
the result, which is destructive to the animal.

In fine, we have seen, on the banks of the Maragnon, Americans with square or
cubical heads; that is to say, flattened on the face, the top, the temples, and
the occiput, which appears to be the last stage of human extravagance.

It is not easy to conceive how it was possible to compress and mould the bones
of the scull into so many various forms, without most essentially injuring the
seat of sense, and the organs of reason, or occasioning either madness or
idiotism, since we so often have examples, that violent contusions in the
region of the temples have occasioned lunacy, and deprived the sufferers of
intellectual capacity. For it is not true, as ancient narratives have affirmed,
that all Indians with flat or sugar loaf heads were really idiots. Had this
been the case, there must have been whole nations in America either foolish or
frantic, which is impossible even in supposition.

Observation by Lintz.
To me it appears very remarkable, that the Jews should have taken w^^h them
the marks of their country and race to all parts of the world; I mean their
short, black, curly hair, and brown complexion. Their quickness of speech,
haste and abruptness in all their actions, appear to proceed from the same
causes. I imagine the Jews have more gall than other men.

Extract from a Letter written by M. Fuessli, dated at Presburg.
My observations have been directed (says this great designer and
physiognomist) not to the countenance of nations only; being convinced, from
numberless experiments, that the general form of the human body, its attitude
and manner, the sunken or raised position of the head between or above the
shoulders, the firm, the tottering, the hasty, or slow walk, may frequently be
less deceitful signs of this or that character, than the countenance separately
considered. I believe it possible so accurately to characterize man, from the
calmest state of rest, to the highest gradation of rage, terror, and pain,
that, from the carriage of the body, the turn of the head, and gestures in
general, we shall be able to distinguish the Hungarian, the Sclavonian, the
Illyrian, the Wallachian; and to obtain a full and clear conception of the
actual, and in general, the prominent characteristics of this or that nation.

Extract of a Letter from Professor Camper.
It would be very difficult, if not impossible, to give you my particular rules
for delineating various nations and ages with mathematical certainty,
especially if I would add all that I have had occasion to remark concerning the
beauty of the antiques. These rules I have obtained by constant observations on
the sculls of different nations, of which I have a large collection, and by a
long study of the antiques.

To draw any head accurately in profile, takes me much time. I have dissected
the sculls of people lately dead, that I might be able to define the lines of
the countenance, and the angle of these lines with the horizon. I was thus led
to the discovery of the maximum and minimum of this angle. I began with the
monkey, proceeded to the Negro and the European, till I ascended to the
countenances of antiquity, and examined a Medusa, an Apollo, or a Venus de
Medicis. This concerns only the profile. There is another difference, in the
breadth of the cheeks, which I have found to be largest among the Calmucs, and
much smaller among the Asiatic Negroes. The Chinese, and inhabitants of the
Molucca and other Asiatic islands, appear to me to have broad cheeks, with
projecting jaw-bones; the under jaw bone, in particular, very high, and almost
forming a right angle, which, among Europeans, is very obtuse, and still more
so among the African Negroes.

I have not hitherto been able to procure a real scull of an American, and
therefore can say nothing on that subject.

I am almost ashamed to confess that I have not yet been able accurately to
draw the countenance of a Jew, although they are so very remarkable in their
features; nor have I yet obtained precision in delineating the Italian face. It
is generally true, that the upper and under jaw of the European is less broad
than the breadth of the scull, and that among the Asiatics they are much
broader; but I have not been able to determine the specific differences between
European nations.

I have very frequently, by physiognomonical sensations, been able to
distinguish the soldiers of different nations; the (...), the Irishman, and the
native of England; yet have I never been able to delineate the distinguishing
traits. The people of our provinces are a mixture of all nations; but, in the
remote and separated cantons, I find the countenance to be more flat, and
extraordinarily high from the eyes upward.

CHAPTER XXI.
Extracts from the Manuscript of a Man of Literature at Darmstadt, on National
Physiognomy.

ALL tribes of people who dwell on uncultivated countries, and consequently are
pastoral, not assembled in towns, would never be capable of an equal degree of
cultivation with Europeans, though they did not live thus scattered. Were the
shackles of slavery shaken off, still their minds would eternally slumber;
therefore whatever remarks we can make upon them, must be pathognomonical (I
suspect physiognomonical), and we must confine ourselves to their receptive
powers of mind, not being able to say much of their expression.

People who do not bear our badges of servitude, are not so miserable as we
suspect. Their species of slavery is very supportable in their mode of
existence. They are incomparably better fed than German peasants, and have
neither to contend with the cares of providing, nor the excesses of labor. As
their race of horses exceeds ours in strength and size, so do their people
those among us who have, or suppose they have, property. Their wants are few,
and their understanding sufficient to supply the wants they have. The Russian
or Polish peasant is, of necessity, carpenter, tailor, shoemaker, mason,
thatcher, etc. and, when when we examine their performances, we may easily
judge of their capacities. Hence their aptitude at mechanical and handicraft
professions, as soon as they are taught their principles. Invention of what is
great they have no pretensions to; their mind, like a machine, is at rest, when
the necessity that set it in motion ceases.

Of the numerous nations subject to the Russian scepter, I shall omit those of
the extensive Siberian districts, and confine myself to the Russians, properly
so called, whose countries are bounded by Finland, Eastland, Livonia, and the
borders of Asia. These are distinguishable by prodigious strength, firm sinews,
broad breast, and colossal neck, which, in a whole ship's crew, will be the
same, resembling the Farnesian Hercules; by their black, broad, thick, rough,
strong hair, head and beard; their sunken eyes, black as pitch; their short
forehead, compressed to the nose, with an arch. We often find thin lips, though
in general they are pouting, wide, and thick. The women have high cheek-bones,
hollow temples, snub noses, and retreating arched foreheads, with very few
traits of ideal beauty. At a certain period of life both sexes frequently
become corpulent. Their power of propagation almost exceeds belief.

In the center dwell the Ukranians, of whom most of the regiments of Cossacs
are formed. They are distinguished among the Russians almost as the Jews are
among Europeans. They generally have aquiline noses; are nobly formed; amorous,
yielding, crafty, and without strong passions; probably because, for some
thousands of years, they have followed agriculture, have lived in society, had
a form of government, and inhabit a most fruitful country, in a moderate
climate, resembling that of France. Among all these people, the greatest
activity and strength of body are united. They are as different from the German
boor, as quicksilver is from lead; and how our ancestors could suppose them to
be stupid, is inconceivable.

Thus too the Turks resemble the Russians. They are a mixture of the noblest
blood of Asia Minor with the more material and gross Tartar. The Natolian, of a
spiritual nature, feeds on meditation; will for days contemplate a single
object, seat himself at the chess-board, or wrap himself up in the mantle of
taciturnity. The eye, void of passion or great enterprise, abounds in all the
penetration of benevolent cunning; the mouth eloquent; the hair of the head and
beard, and the small neck, declare the flexibility of the man.

The Englishman is erect in his gait, and generally stands as if a stake were
driven through his body. His nerves are strong, and he is the best runner. He
is distinguished from all other men by the roundness and smoothness of the
muscles of his face. If he neither speak nor move, he seldom declares the
capability and mind he possesses in so superior a degree. His silent eye seeks
not to please. His hair, coat, and character, are alike smooth. Not cunning,
but on his guard; and, perhaps, but little coloring is necessary to deceive
him on any occasion. Like the bull-dog, he does not bark; but, if irritated,
rages. As he wishes not for more esteem than he merits, so he detests the false
pretensions of his neighbors, who would arrogate excellence they do not
possess. Desirous of private happiness, he disregards public opinion, and
obtains a character of singularity. His imagination, like a sea-coal fire, is
not the splendor that enlightens a region, but expands genial warmth.
Perseverance in study, and pertinacity, for centuries, in fixed principles,
have raised and maintained the British spirit as well as the British
government, trade, manufactures, and marine. He has punctuality and probity,
not trifling away his time to establish false principles, or making a parade
with a vicious hypothesis.

In the temperament of nations, the French class is that of the sanguine.
Frivolous, benevolent, and ostentatious, the Frenchman forgets not his
inoffensive parade till old age has made him wise. At all times disposed to
enjoy life, he is the best of companions. He pardons himself much; and
therefore pardons others, if they will but grant that they are foreigners, and
he is a Frenchman. His gait is dancing, his speech without accent, and his ear
incurable. His imagination pursues the consequences of small things with the
rapidity of the second-hand of a stop-watch, but seldom gives those loud,
strong, reverberating strokes which proclaim new discoveries to the world. Wit
is his inheritance. His countenance is open, and, at first sight, speaks a
thousand pleasant, amiable things. Silent he cannot be, either with eye, tongue
or feature. His eloquence is often deafening; but his good humor casts a veil
over all his failings. His form is equally distinct from that of other nations,
and difficult to describe in words. No other man has so little of the firm or
deep traits, or so much motion. He is all appearance, all gesture; therefore
the first impression seldom deceives, but declares who and what he is. His
imagination is incapable of high flights, and the sublime in all arts is to him
offense. Hence his dislike of whatever is antique in art or literature, his
deafness to true music, his blindness to the higher beauties of painting. His
last, most marking trait is, that he is astonished at every thing, and cannot
comprehend how it is possible men should be other than they are at Paris.

The countenance of the Italian is soul, his speech exclamation, his motion
gesticulation. His form is the noblest, and his country the true ^eat of
beauty. His short forehead, his strong, marked eyebones, the fine contour of
his mouth, give a kindred claim to the antiquities of Greece. The ardour of his
eyes denotes, that the beneficent sun brings forth fruit more perfect in Italy
than beyond the Alps. His imagination is ever in motion, ever sympathising with
surrounding objects, and, as in the poem of Ariosto the whole works of creation
are reflected, so are they generally in the national spirit. That power which
could bring forth such a work, appears to me the general representative of
genius. It sings all, and from it all things are sung. The sublime in arts is
the birthright of the Italian. Modern religion and politics may have degraded
and falsified his character, may have rendered the vulgar faithless and crafty,
but the superior part of the nation abounds in the noblest and best of men.

The Dutchman is tranquil, patient, confined, and appears to will nothing. His
walk and eye are long silent, and an hour of his company will scarcely produce
a thought. He is little troubled by the tide of passions, and he will
contemplate unmoved the parading streamers of all nations sailing before his
eyes. Quiet and competence are his gods; therefore those arts alone which can
procure these blessings, employ his faculties. His laws, political and
commercial, have originated in that spirit of security which maintains him in
the possession of what he has gained. He is tolerant in all that relates to
opinion, if he be but left peaceably to enjoy his property, and to assemble at
the meeting house of his sect. The character of the ant is so applicable to the
Dutch, that to this literature itself conforms in Holland. All poetical powers,
exerted in great works or small, or foreign to this nation. They endure
pleasure from the perusal of, but produce no poetry. I speak of the United
Provinces, and not of the Flemings, whose jovial character is in the midway
between the Italian and French. A high forehead, half-open eyes, full nose,
hanging cheeks, wide open mouth, fleshy lips, broad chin, and large ears, I
believe to be characteristic of the Dutchman.

A German thinks it disgraceful not to know every thing, and dreads nothing so
much as to be thought a fool. Probity often makes him appear a blockhead. Of
nothing is he so proud as of honest, moral understanding. According to modern
tactics, he is certainly the best soldier, and the teacher of all Europe. He is
allowed to be the greatest inventor, and often with so little ostentation, that
foreigners have, for centuries, unknown to him, robbed him of his glory. From
the age of Tacitus, a willing dependant, he has exerted faculties for the
service of his masters, which others only exert for freedom and property. His
countenance does not, like a painting in fresco, speak at a distance; but he
must be sought and studied. His good nature and benevolence are often concealed
under apparent moroseness, and a third person is always necessary to draw off
the veil, and show him as he is. He is difficult to move, and, without the aid
of old wine, is silent. He does not suspect his own worth, and wonders when it
is discovered by others. Fidelity, industry, and secrecy, are his principal
characteristics. Not having wit, he indulges his sensibility. Moral good is the
coloring which he requires in all arts. His epic and lyric spirit walk in
unfrequented paths. Hence his great, and frequently gigantic sense, which
seldom permits him the clear aspect of enthusiasm, or the glow of splendor.
Moderate in the use of this world's delights, he has little propensity to
sensuality and extravagance; but he is therefore formal, and less social than
his neighbor.

No. 1.


Phlegmatic. 2.


Choleric. 3.


Sanguine. 4.


Melancholic. 5.


No. 6.


CHAPTER XXII.
Description of Plate IV.

Number 1.
WE may certainly call noses arched and pointed like this, witty; but the wit
is restrained and moderated by the acute understanding of the forehead, the
sincere religion of the eye, and the phlegm of the chin.

Number 2.
The descent from the nose to the lips in the phlegmatic countenance is
unphlegmatic, and heterogeneous; nor does the curvature of the upper eyelid
sufficiently agree with the temperament. The outlines of the phlegmatic are
relaxed, obtuse, and hanging; the outline of the eyes, oblique. Be it
understood, there are other tokens, and that all phlegmatic persons have not
these signs, although whoever has them is certainly phlegmatic. If the
projecting under lip, which is itself a sign of phlegm, since it is evidently a
superabundance and not a want of matter, be angular, and sharply delineated,
then it is a sign of choloric phlegm; that is to say, of the ebullition of
humidity. If it be flexible, obtuse, powerless, and drooping, it is then pure
phlegm. The forehead, nose, chin, and hair, are here very phlegmatic.

Number 3
The choleric ought to have a more angularly pointed nose, and lips more
sharply delineated. The character of choler is much contained in the drawing of
the eyes, either when the pupil projects, and much of the under part of the
white is visible, or when the upper eyelid retreats so that it scarcely can be
perceived; when the eyes open, or when the eye is sunken, and the outlines are
very definite and firm, without much curvature. In this example, the forehead,
eyebrows, nose, chin, and hair, are very choleric; but the upper part of the
countenance more so than the under.

Number 4.
The sa^guine needs but little correction, except that the nose ought to be a
little farther from the mouth and the eye not so choleric. The levity of the
sanguine temperament waves, flutters upon the lip, which, however, at the
bottom, is too phlegmatic.

Number 5.
There ought to be a deeper cavity above the nose, and also of the jaw bone,
beside the ear, in this melancholic countenance. I have observed, in many
melancholic persons, that the nose declines toward the lips; nor have I seen
this in any who were not sometimes inclined to the melancholic, who likewise
have projecting under lips, and small, but not very round, nor very fleshy
chins.

There are melancholy persons with very sanguine temperaments; men of fine
irratibility, and moral feelings, who are hurried into vices which they deeply
abhor, and which they have not the power to withstand. The gloomy and
dispirited character of such is perceptible in the eye that shuns examination,
and the wrinkles of the forehead standing opposite to each other. Persons of a
real melancholic temperament generally have their mouths shut, but the lips are
always somewhat open in the middle. Many melancholic persons have small
nostrils, and seldom well arranged, clean, white teeth.

Number 6.
Strength and ardour, enterprise, courage, contempt of danger, fortitude of the
irritated and irritable. This strength is rather oppressive than patient and
enduring; it proclaims its own qualities, respectable in a state of rest,
terrible when roused.

CHAPTER XXIII.
Resemblance between Parents and Children.

THE resemblance between parents and children is very commonly remarkable.
Family physiognomy is as undeniable as national. To doubt this, is to doubt
what is self-evident; to wish to interpret it, is to wish to explore the
inexplicable secret of existence. Striking and frequent as the resemblance
between parents and children is, yet have the relations between the characters
and countenances of families never been inquired into. No one has, to my
knowledge, made any regular observations on this subject. I must also confess,
that I have myself made but few with that circumstantial attention which is
necessary. All I have to remark is as follows:

When the father is considerably stupid, and the mother exceedingly the
reverse, then will most of the children be endued with extraordinary
understanding.

When the father is good, truly good, the children will in general be
well-disposed; at least most of them will be benevolent.

The son generally appears to inherit moral goodness from the good father, and
intelligence from the intelligent mother; the daughter partakes of the
character of the mother.

If we wish to find the most certain marks of resemblance between parents and
children, they should be observed within an hour or two after birth. We may
then perceive whom the child most resembles in its formation. The most
essential resemblance is usually afterward lost, and does not perhaps appear
for many years; or not till after death.

When children, as they increase in years, visibly increase in the resemblance
of form and features to their parents, we cannot doubt but there is an
increasing resemblance of character. How much soever the characters of children
may appear unlike that of the parents they resemble, yet will this
dissimilarity be found to originate in external circumstances; and the variety
of these must be great indeed, if the difference of character is not at length
overpowered by the resemblance of form.

I believe, that from the strongly delineated father, the firmness and the kind
(I do not say the form, but the kind) of bones and muscles are derived; and
from the strongly delineated mother, the kind of nerves and form of the
countenance; if the imagination and love of the mother have not fixed
themselves too deeply in the countenance of the man.

Certain forms of countenance, in children, appear for a time undecided whether
they shall take the resemblance of the father or of the mother; in which case I
will grant, that external circumstances, preponderating love for the father or
mother, or a greater degree of intercourse with either, may influence the form.

We sometimes see children who long retain a remarkable resemblance to the
father, but at length change, and become more like the mother. I undertake not
to expound the least of the difficulties that occur on this subject; but the
most modest philosophy may be permitted to compare uncommon cases with those
which are known, even though they were inexplicable; and this, I believe, is
all that philosophy can and ought to do.

We know that all longings, or moth^^^ marks, and whatever may be considered as
of the same nature, which is much, do not proceed from the father, but from the
imagination of the mother. We also know that children most resemble the father
only when the mother has a very lively imagination, and love for, or fear of
the husband. Therefore, as has been before observed, it appears that the matter
and quantum of the power and of the life, proceed from the father; and from the
imagination of the mother, sensibility, the kind of nerves, the form, and the
appearance.

There are certain forms and features of countenance which are long propagated,
and others which as suddenly disappear. The beautiful and the deformed (I do
not say forms of countenances, but what is generally supposed to be beauty and
deformity) are not the most easily propagated; neither are the middling and
insignificant; but the great and the minute are easily inherited, and of long
duration.

Parents with small noses may have children with the largest and strongest
defined; but the father or mother seldom, on the contrary, have a very strong,
that is to say, large-boned nose, which is not communicated at least to one of
their children, and which does not remain in the family, especially when it is
in the female line. It may seem to have been lost for many years, but soon or
late will again make its appearance, and its resemblance to the original will
be particularly visible a day or two after death.

Where any extraordinary vivacity appears in the eyes of the mother, there is
almost a certainty that these eyes will become hereditary; for the imagination
of the mother is delighted with nothing so much as with the beauty of her own
eyes. Physiognomonical sensation has been hitherto more generally directed to
the eyes, than to the nose and form of the face; but if women should once be
induced to examine the nose, and form of the face, as assiduously as they have
done their eyes, it is to be expected that the former will be no less
strikingly hereditary than the latter.

Well-arched and short foreheads are easy of inheritance, but not of long
duration; and here the proverb is applicable, Quod cito fit, cito perit. (Soon
got, soon gone.)

It is equally certain and inexplicable, that some remarkable physiognomies, of
the most fruitful persons, have been wholly lost to their posterity; and it is
as certain and inexplicable, that others are never lost. Nor is it less
remarkable, that certain strong countenances, of the father or mother,
disappear in the children, and perfectly revive in the grandchildren.

As a proof of the powers of the imagination of the mother, we sometimes see,
that a woman shall have children by the second husband, which shall resemble
the first, at least in the general appearance. The Italians, however, are
manifestly too extravagant, when they suppose children, who strongly resemble
their father, are base bo^n. They say that the mother, during the commission of
a crime so shameful, wholly employs her imagination concerning the possibility
of surprise by, and the image of, her husband. But, were this fear so to act,
the form of the children must not only have the very image of the husband, but
also his appearance of rage and revenge, without which the adulterous wife
could not imagine the being surprised by, or image of, her husband. It is this
appearance, this rage, that she fears, and not the man.

Natural children generally resemble one of their parents more than the
legitimate.

The more there is of individual love, of pure, faithful, mild affection, the
more this love is reciprocal and unconstrained between the father and mother,
which reciprocal love and affection imply a certain degree of imagination, and
the capacity of receiving impressions, the more will the countenances of the
children appear to be composed of the features of the parents.

The sanguine of all the temperaments is the most easily inherited, and with it
volatility; and, being once introduced, much industry and suffering will be
necessary to extirminate this volatility.

The natural timidity of the mother may easily communicate the melancholy
temperament of the father. Be it understood that this is easy, if, in the
decisive moment, the mother be suddenly seized by some predominant fear; and
that it is less communicable when the fear is less hasty and more reflective.
Thus we find those mothers, who, during the whole time of their pregnancy, are
most in dread of producing monstrous or marked children, because they remember
to have seen objects that excited abhorrence, generally have the best formed,
and freest from marks; for the fear, though real, was the fear of reason, and
not the sudden effect of an object exciting abhorrence rising instantaneously
to ^ight.

When both parents have given a deep root to the choleric temperament in a
family, it may probably be some centuries before it be again moderated. Phlegm
is not so easily inherited, even though both father and mother should be
phlegmatic; for there are certain moments of life when the phlegmatic acts with
its whole power, though it acts thus but rarely, and these moments may and must
have their effects; but nothing appears more easy of inheritance than activity
and industry, when these have their origin in organization, and the necessity
of producing alteration. It will be long before an industrious couple, to whom
not only a livelihood, but business, is in itself necessary, shall not have a
single descendant with the like qualities, as such mothers are generally
prolific.

CHAPTER XXIV.
Remarks on the Opinions of Buffon, Haller, and Bonnet, concerning the
resemblance between Parents and Children.

THE theory or hypothesis of Buffon, concerning the cause of the human form, is
well known, which Haller has abridged and more clearly explained in the
following manner:

"Both sexes have their semen, in which are active particles of a certain form.
From the union of these the fruit of the womb arises. These particles contain
the resemblance of all the parts of the father or mother. They are, by nature,
separated from the rude and unformed particles of the human juices, and are
impressed with the form of all the parts of the body of the father or mother.
Hence arises the resemblance of children to their parents. This will account
for the mixture of the features of father and mother in the children -- for
spots in animals, when the male and female are of different colors -- for the
Mulatto produced by a Negro and a White -- and for many other phenomena
difficult to be resolved.

"It may be asked, how these particles can assume the internal structure of the
body of the father, since they can properly be only the images of the hollow
vessels? To which it is answered, that we know not all the powers of Nature,
and that she may have preserved to herself, though she has concealed it from
her scholar, Man, the art of making internally models and impressions, which
shall express the whole solidity of the model."

Haller, in his preface to Buffon's Natural History, has, in my opinion,
indisputably confuted this system. But he has not only forborne to elucidate
the resemblance between fathers and children, but while opposing Buffon, he has
spoken so much on the natural, physiological dissimilarity of the human body,
that he appears to have denied this resemblance. Buffon's hypothesis offended
all philosophy; and though we cannot entirely approve the theory of Bonnet, yet
he has very effectually opposed the incongruities of Buffon, to which Buffon
himself could scarcely give any serious faith. But he, as we shall soon see,
has either avoided the question of resemblance between parents and children,
or, in order to strengthen his own system, has rather sought to palliate than
to answer difficulties.

BONNET, concerning organized Bodies*
"Are the germs of one and the same species of organized bodies perfectly like
each other, or individually distinct? Are they only distinct in the organs
which characterize sex, or have they a resembling difference to each other,
such as we observe in individual substances of the same species of plants or
animals?

"Answer. -- If we consider the infinite variety to be observed in all the
products of nature, the latter will appear most probable. The differences which
are observed in the individuals of the same species, probably depend more on
the primitive form of the germs, than on the connection of the sexes."

On the Resemblance between Children and their Parents.
"I must own, that, by the foregoing hypothesis, I have not been successful in
explaining the resemblance of features found between parents and children. But
are not these features very ambiguous? Do we not suppose that to be the cause,
which probably is not so? The father is deformed, the son is deformed after the
same manner, and it is therefore concluded that deformity is inherited. This
may be true; but it may be false. The deformity of each may arise from very
different causes, and these causes may be infinitely varied.

"It is less difficult to explain hereditary diseases. We can easily conceive,
that defective juices may produce defective germs; and when the same parts of
the body are affected by disease in father or mother, and in child, this arises
from the similar conformation of the parts, by which they are subject to like
inconveniences. Besides, the misshapen body often originates in disease being
hereditary, which much diminishes the first difficulty. For, since the juices
conducted to those parts are of a bad quality, the parts must be more or less
ill formed, according as they are more or less capable of being affected by
these juices."

REFLECTION.
Bonnet cannot find the origin of family likeness in his system. But let us
take this his system in the part where he finds the origin of hereditary
disease. Shall the defective juices of father or mother very much alter the
germ, and produce, in the very parts where the father or mother is injured,
important changes of bad formation, more or less, according to the capability
of the germ, and its power of resistance? And shall the healthy juices of the
parent in no manner affect the germ? Why should not the healthy juices be (...)
active as the unhealthy? Why should they not introduce the same qualities in
miniature, which the father and mother have in the gross, since the father and
mother assimilate the nutriment they receive to their own nature, and since the
seminal juices are the spiritual extract of all their juices and powers, as we
have just reason to conclude from the most continued and accurate observations?
Why should they not as naturally, and as powerfully, act upon the germ, to
produce all possible resemblance? But which resemblance is infinitely varied,
by differently changeable and changed circumstances; so that the germ
continually preserves sufficient of its own original nature and properties, yet
is always very distinct from the parents, and sometimes even seems to have
derived very little from them, which may happen from a thousand accidental
causes or changes.

Hence family resemblance and dissimilarity being summarily considered, we
shall find that nature, wholly employed to propagate, appears to be entirely
directed to produce an equilibrium between the individual power of the germ, in
its first formation, and the resembling power of the parents; that the
originality of the first form of the germ may not wholly disappear before the
too great power of resemblance to the parents, but that they may mutually
concur, and both be subject to numberless circumstances, which may increase or
diminish their respective powers, in order that the riches of variety, and the
utility of the creature, and its dependence on the whole, and the general
Creator, may be the greater and more predominant.

From all observations on the resemblance between parents and children which I
have been enabled to make, it appears to me evident, that neither the theories
of Bonnet nor Buffon give any systematic explanation of phenomena, the
existence of which cannot be denied by the sophistry of hypothesis. Diminish
the difficulties as much as we will, facts will still stare us in the face. If
the germ exist preformed in the mother, can this germ, at that time, have
physiognomy? Can it, at that time, resemble the future, promiscuous, first, or
second father? Is it not perfectly indifferent to either? or, if the
physiognomonical germ exist in the father, how can it sometimes resemble the
mother, sometimes the father, often both, and often neither?

To me it appears, that something germ-like, or a whole capable of receiving
the human form, must previously exist in the mother; but which is nothing more
than the foundation of the future fatherly or motherly I know not what, and is
the efficient cause of the future living fruit. This germ-like something,
which, most especially constituted agreeable to the human form, is analagous to
the nature and temperature of the mother, receives a peculiar individual
personal physiognomy, according to the propensities of the father or mother,
the disposition of the moment of conception, and probably of many other future
decisive moments.

Still much remains to the freedom and predisposition of man. He may deprave or
improve the state of the juices, he may calm or agitate his mind, may awaken
every sensation of love, and by various modes increase or relax them. Yet I
think, that neither the nature of the bones, nor the muscles and nerves,
consequently the character, depends on the physiognomonical preformation
preceding generation; at least, they are far from depending on these along,
though I allow the organizable, the primitive form, always has a peculiar
individuality, which is only capable of receiving certain subtle influences,
and which must reject others.

CHAPTER XXV.
Observations on the Newborn, the Dying, and the Dead.

I HAVE remarked in some children, about an hour after a not difficult birth, a
striking, though infantine resemblance, in the profile, to the profile of the
father. In a few days, this resemblance had nearly disappeared. The impression
of the open air, nutriment, and perhaps of position, had so far altered the
outlines, that the child seemed entirely different.

Two of these children I saw dead, the one about six weeks, and the other about
four years old; and nearly twelve hours after death, I observed the same
profile which I had before remarked an hour after birth, with this difference,
that the profile of the dead child, as is natural, was something more tense and
fixed than the living. A part of this resemblance, however, on the third day,
was remarkably gone.

One man of fifty, and another of seventy years of age, who fell under my
observation while they were living, and after death, appeared, while living,
not to have the least resemblance to their sons, and whose countenances seemed
to be of a quite different class: yet, the second day after death, the profile
of one had a striking resemblance to that of his eldest, and, of the other, to
the profile of his third son; as much so as the profile of the dead children
before mentioned resembled the living profile an hour after birth, stronger
indeed, and, as a painter would say, harder. On the third day, here also a part
of the resemblance disappeared.

I have uniformly observed among the many dead persons I have seen, that
sixteen, eighteen, or twenty-four hours after death, according to the disease,
they have had a more beautiful form, better defined, more proportionate,
harmonized, homogeneous, more noble, more exalted, than they ever had during
life.

May there not be, thought I, in all men, an original physiognomy, subject to
be disturbed by the ebb and flow of accident and passion? and is not this
restored by the calm of death, like as troubled waters, being again left at
rest, become clear?

I have observed some among the dying, who had been the reverse of noble or
great during life, and who, some hours before their death, or perhaps some
moments (one was in a delirium), have had an inexpressible ennobling of the
countenance. Every body saw a new man; coloring, drawing, and grace, all was
new, all bright as the morning; beyond expression, noble and exalted; the most
inattentive must see, the most insensible feel, the image of God, I saw it
break forth and shine through the ruins of corruption, was obliged to turn
aside, and adore in silence. Yes, glorious God! still art thou there, in the
weakest, most fallible men!

CHAPTER XXVI.
Of the Influence of Countenance on Countenance.

AS the gestures of our friends and intimates become our own, so, in like
manner, does their appearance. Whatever we love, we would assimilate to
ourselves; and whatever, in the circle of affection, does not change us into
itself, that we change, as far as may be, into ourselves.

All things act upon us, and we act upon all things; but nothing has so much
influence as what we love; and among all objects of affection, nothing acts so
forcibly as the countenance of man. Its conformity to our countenance makes it
most worthy our affection. How might it act upon, how attract our attention,
had it not some marks, discoverable or indiscoverable, similar to, at least of
the same kind with, the form and features of our own countenance!

Without, however, wishing farther to penetrate into what is impenetrable, or
to define what is inscrutable, the fact is indubitable, that countenances
attract countenances, and also that countenances repel countenances; that
similarity of features between two sympathetic and affectionate men, increase
with the developement and mutual communication of their peculiar, individual
sensations. The reflection, if I may so say, of the person beloved, remains upon
the countenance of the affectionate.

The resemblance frequently exists only in a single point -- in the character
of mind and countenance. A resemblance in the system of the bones presupposes a
resemblance of the nerves and muscles.

Dissimilar education may affect the latter so much, that the point of
attraction may be invisible to unphysiognomonical eyes. Suffer the two
resembling forms to approach, and they will reciprocally attract and repel each
other; remove every intervening obstacle, and nature will soon prevail. They
will recongnize each other, and rejoice in the flesh of their flesh, and the
bone of their bone: with hasty steps will proceed to assimilate. Such
countenances also, which are very different from each other, may communicate,
attract, and acquire resemblance; nay, their likeness may become more striking
than that of the former, if they happen to be more flexible, more capable, and
to have greater sensibility.

This resemblance of features, in consequence of mutual affection, is ever the
result of internal nature and organization, and, therefore, of the character of
the persons. It ever has its foundation in a preceding, perhaps, imperceptible
resemblance, which might never have been animated, or suspected, had it not
been set in motion by the presence of the sympathetic being.

It would be of infinite importance to give the character of those countenances
which most easily receive and communicate resemblance. It cannot but be known,
that there are countenances that attract all, others that repel all, and a^
third kind which are indifferent. The all-repelling render the ignoble
countenances over which they have continued influence, more ignoble. The
indifferent allows no change. The all-attracting either receive, give, or
reciprocally give and receive. The first change a little, the second more, the
third most. "These are the souls (says Hemsterhuys the younger) which happily,
or unhappily, add the most exquisite discernment to that excessive internal
elasticity which occasions them to wish and feel immoderately; that is to say,
the souls, which are so modified, or situated, that their attractive force
meets the fewest obstacles in its progress."

To study the influence of countenance, this intercourse of mind would be of
the utmost importance. I have found the progress of resemblance most
remarkable, when two persons, the one richly communicative, the other apt to
receive, have lived a considerable time together, without foreign intervention;
when he who gave had given all, o^ he who received could receive no more,
physiognomonical resemblance had attained its punctum saturationis. It was
incapable of farther increase.

A word here to thee, youth, irritable, and easy to be won. Oh! pause,
consider; throw not thyself too hastily into the arms of an untried friend. A
gleam of sympathy and resemblance may easily deceive thee. If the man, who is
thy second self, have not yet appeared, be not rash, thou shall find him at the
appointed hour. Being found, he will attract thee to himself, will give and
receive whatever is communicable. The ardour of his eyes will nurture thine,
and the gentleness of his voice temper thy too-piercing tones. His love will
shine in thy countenance, and his image will appear in thee. Thou will become
what he is, and yet remain what thou art. Affection will make qualities in him
visible to thee, which never could be seen by an uninterested eye. This
capability of remarking, of feeling what there is of divine in him, is a power
which will make thy countenance assume his resemblance.

CHAPTER XXVII.
On the Influence of the Imagination on the Countenance.

A Word only on a subject concerning which volumes might be written; for it is
a subject I must not leave wholly in silence. The little, the nothing I have to
say upon it, can only act as an inducement to deeper meditations on a theme so
profound.

Imagination acts upon our own countenance, rendering it in some measure
resembling the beloved or hated image which is living, present, and fleeting
before us, and is within the circle of our immediate activity. If a man deeply
in love, and supposing himself alone, were ruminating on his beloved mistress,
to whom his imagination might lend charms, which, if present, he would be
unable to discover: were such a person observed by a man of penetration, it is
probable that traits of the mistress might be seen in the countenance of this
meditating lover. So might, in the cruel features of revenge, the features of
the enemy be read, whom imagination represents as present. And thus is the
countenance a picture of the characteristic features of all persons exceedingly
loved or hated.

It is possible, that an eye less penetrating than that of an angel, may read
the image of the Creator in the countenance of a truly pious person. He who
languishes after Christ, the more lively, the more distinctly, the more
sublimely, he represents to himself the very presence and image of Christ, the
greater resemblance will his own countenance take of this image. The image of
imagination often acts more effectually than the real presence; and whoever has
seen him of whom we speak, the great HIM, though it were but an instantaneous
glimpse, oh! how incessantly will the imagination reproduce his image in the
countenance!

Our imagination also acts upon other countenances. The imagination of the
mother acts upon the child; and hence men long have attempted to influence the
imagination for the production of beautiful children. In my opinion, however,
it is not so much the beauty of surrounding forms, as the interest taken
concerning forms in certain moments: and here again, it is not so much the
imagination that acts, as the spirit; that being only the organ of the spirit.
Thus it is true, that it is the spirit that quickens the flesh, and the image
of the flesh (merely considered as such) profits nothing.

A look of love, from the sanctuary of the soul, has certainly greater forming
power than hours of deliberate contemplation of the most beautiful images. This
forming look, if so I may call it, can as little be premeditatedly given, as
any other naturally beautiful form can be imparted by a studious contemplation
in the looking glass. All that creates, and is profoundly active, in the inner
man, must be internal, and be communicated from above; as I believe it suffers
itself not to be occasioned, at least not by forethought, circumspection, or
wisdom in the agent, to produce such effects. Beautiful forms, or abortions,
are neither of them the work of art or study, but of intervening causes, of the
quick-guiding Providence, the predetermining God.

Endeavor to act upon affection, instead of the senses. If thou can but
incite love, it will of itself seek and find the powers of creation; but this
very love must itself be innate before it can be awakened. Perhaps, however,
the moment of this awakening is not in our power; and therefore, to those who
would, by plan and method, effect that which is in itself so extraordinary, and
imagine they have had I know not what wise and physiological circumspection
when they first awaken love, I might exclaim, in the words of the enraptured
songster: I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem! by the roes and the hinds
of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake my love till he please. Here behold
the forming genius: -- Behold he comes, leaping upon the mountains, skipping
upon the hills, like a young heart!

Unforeseen moments, rapid as the lightning, in my opinion, form and deform.
Creation of every kind is momentaneous; the developement, nutriment, change,
improving, injuring, is the work of time, art, industry, and education.
Creative power suffers itself not to be studied; creation cannot be
premeditated. Marks may be molded; but living essence, within and without
resembling itself, the image of God, must be created, born, not of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Effects of the Imagination on the Human Form.

IT is equally true and incomprehensible, that, by the strength of imagination,
there are marks communicated by mothers to children during pregnancy; that
there are images, animals, fruit, or other substances, on the body of the
child; marks of the hand on the very parts where the pregnant person has been
suddenly touched; aversion to things which have occasioned disgust in the
mother; and a continued scurvy communicated to the child, by the unexpected
sight of a putrid animal. So many marks on the bodies of children, arising not
from imaginary but real accidents, must oblige us to own, that there is truth
in that which is inconceivable: therefore the imagination of the mother acts
upon the child.

Of the innumerable examples that might be produced, I shall cite the two
following:

A woman during the time of her pregnancy, was engaged in a card party, and
only wanted the ace of spades to win all that was staked; and as it happened,
in the change of cards, the so much wished-for ace was given her. Her joy at
this success had such an effect upon her imagination, that the child of which
she was pregnant, when born, had the ace of spades depicted in the apple of the
eye, and without injury to the organ of sight.

The following anecdote is certainly true, and still more astonishing:

A lady of Rheinthal had, during her pregnancy, a desire to see the execution
of a man, who was sentenced to have his right hand cut off before he was
beheaded. She saw the hand severed from the body, and instantly turned away and
went home, without waiting to see the death that was to follow. This lady bore
a daughter who was living at the time this fragment was written, and who had
only one hand. The right hand came away with the afterbirth.

Moral marks, as well as physical, are perhaps possible. I have heard of a
physician, who never failed to steal something from all the chambers through
which he passed, which he would afterward forget; and, in the evening, his
wife, who searched his pockets, would find keys, snuff-boxes, etuis-cases,
scissars, thimbles, spectacles, buckles, spoons and other trinkets, which she
restored to the owners. I have been likewise told of a child, who, at two years
of age, was adopted when begging at the door of a noble family, received an
excellent education, and became a most worthy man, except that he could not
forbear to steal. The mothers of these two extraordinary thieves must, during
pregnancy, have had an extraordinary desire to pilfer. It will be self-evident,
that however insufferable such men are in a state of society, they are rather
unfortunate than wicked. Their actions may be as involuntary as mechanical,
and, in the sight of God, probably as innocent as the customary motions of our
fingers when we tear bits of paper, or do any other indifferent, thoughtless
action.

The moral worth of an action must be estimated by its intention, as the
political worth must by its consequences. As little injury as the ace of
spades, if the story be true, did to the countenance of the child, as little
probably did this thievish propensity to the heart. Such a person certainly had
no roguish look, no avaricious, downcast, sly, pilfering aspect, like one who
is both soul and body a thief. I have not yet seen any man of such an
extraordinary character, and therefore cannot judge of his physiognomy by
experience; yet we have reason previously to conclude, that men so uncommon
must bear some marks of such deviation of character in their countenance.

Those extraordinary large or small persons, by us called giants and dwarfs,
should perhaps be classed among these active and passive effects of the
imagination. Though giants and dwarfs are not properly born such, yet it is
possible, however incomprehensible, that Nature may first, at a certain age,
suddenly enlarge or contract herself.

We have a variety of examples, that the imagination appears not only to act
upon the present, but on absence, distance, and futurity, Perhaps apparitions
of the dying and the dead may be attributed to this kind of effect. Be it
granted that these facts, which are so numerous, are true, and including not
only the apparitions of the dead, but of the living, who have appeared to
distant friends, after collecting such anecdotes, and adding others on the
subject of presage and prediction, many philosophical conjectures will thence
arise, which may probably confirm my following proposition.

The imagination, incited by the desire and languishing of love, or inflamed by
passion, may act in distant places and times. The sick or dying person, for
example, sighs after an absent friend, who knows not of his sickness, nor
thinks of him at the time. The pining of the imagination penetrates, as I may
say, walls, and appears in the form of the dying person, or gives signs of his
presence, similar to those which his actual presence gives. Is there any real
corporeal appearance? No. The sick or dying person is languishing in his bed,
and has never been a moment absent; therefore, there is no actual appearance of
him whose form has appeared. What then has produced this appearance? What is it
that has acted thus at a distance on another's senses or imagination? --
Imagination; but the imagination through the focus of passion. -- How? -- It is
inexplicable. But who can doubt such facts, who does not mean to laugh at all
historical facts?

May there not be similar moments of mind, when the imagination shall act alike
inexplicably on the unborn child? That the inexplicable disgusts, I will grant;
I feel it perfectly. But is it not the same in the foregoing examples, and in
every example of the kind? Like as cripples first become so many years after
birth, which daily experience proves; may not, after the same inconceivable
manner, the seeds of what is gigantic or dwarfish be the effects of the
imagination on the fruit, which does not make its appearance till years after
the child is born?

Could a woman keep an accurate register of what happened in all the powerful
moments of imagination, during her state of pregnancy, she then might probably
be able to foretell the chief incidents, philosophical, moral, intellectual,
and physiognomonical, which should happen to her child. Imagination actuated by
desire, love, or hatred, may, with more than lightning swiftness, kill or
enliven, enlarge, diminish, or impregnate, the organized (...) with the germ of
enlarging or diminishing wisdom or folly, death or life, which shall first be
unfolded at a certain time, and under certain circumstances. This hitherto
unexplored, but sometimes decisive and revealed creative and changing power of
the soul, may be, in its essence, identically the same with what is called
faith working miracles, which latter may be developed and increased by external
causes, wherever it exists, but cannot be communicated where it is not. A
closer examination of the foregoing conjectures, which I wish not to be held
for any thing more than conjectures, may perhaps lead to the profoundest
secrets of physiognomy.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Essay, by a late learned man of Oldenburg, (M. Sturtz), on Physiognomy,
interspersed with short Remarks, by the Author.

"I AM as clearly convinced of the truth of physiognomy as Lavater, and of the
all-significance of each limb and feature. True it is that the mind may be read
in the lineaments of the body, and its motions in the features, and their
shades.

"Connection and harmony, cause and effect, exist through all nature; therefore
between the external and internal of man. Our form is influenced by our
parents, by the earth on which we walk, the sun that warms us with its rays,
the food that assimilates itself with our substance, the incidents that
determine the fortunes of our lives. These all modify, repair, and chissel
forth the body, and the marks of the tool are apparent both in body and in
mind. Each arching, each sinuosity of the external, adapts itself to the
individuality of the internal. It is adherent and pliable, like wet drapery.
Were the nose but a little altered, Caesar would not be the Caesar with whom we
are acquainted.

"When the soul is in motion, it shines through the body, as the moon through
the ghosts of Ossian, each passion throughout the human race has ever the same
language."

From east Those passages, which are not marked with inverted ^^^mas, are the
observations of M. Lavater, on the different parts of (...) Essay.
to west, envy no where looks with the satisfied air of magnanimity, nor will
discontent appear like patience. Wherever patience is, there is it expressed by
the same signs; as likewise are anger, envy, and every other passion.

"Philoctetes certainly expresses not the sensation of pain like a scourged
slave. The angels of Raphael must smile more nobly than the angels of
Rembrandt; but joy and pain still have each their peculiar expression. They act
according to peculiar laws upon peculiar muscles and nerves, however various
may be the shades of their expression; and the oftener the passion is repeated,
or set in motion, the more it becomes a propensity, a favorite habit, the
deeper will be the furrows it ploughs.

"But inclination, capacity, modes and gradations of capacity, talents, and an
ability for business, lie much more concealed. A good observer will discover
the wrathful, the voluptuous, the proud, the discontented, the malignant, the
benevolent, and the compassionate, with little difficulty. But the philosopher,
the poet, the artist, and their various partitions of genius, he will be unable
to determine with equal accuracy. And it will be still more difficult to assign
the feature or trait in which the token of each quality is seaten, whether
understanding be in the eyebone, wit in the chin, and poetical genius in the
mouth."

Yet I hope, I believe, nay, I know, that the present century shall render this
possible. The penetrating author of this essay would not only have found it
possible, but would have performed it himself, had he only set apart a single
day to compare and examine a well-arranged collection of characters, either in
nature, or well-painted portraits.

"Our attention is always excited whenever we meet with a remarkable man, and
we all are more or less empirical physiognomists. We perceive in the aspect,
the mien, the smile, mechanism of the forehead, sometimes malice, sometimes
wit, at others penetration. We expect and presage, from the impulse of latent
sensation, very determined qualities, from the form of each new acquaintance;
and, when this faculty of judging is improved by an intercourse with the world,
we often succeed to admiration in our judgment on strangers.

"Can we call this feeling, internal unacquired sensation, which is
inexplicable, or is it comparison, indication, conclusion from a character we
have examined to another which we have not, and occasioned by some external
resemblance? Feeling is the aegis of enthusiasts and fools, and, though it may
often be conformable to truth, is still neither demonstration nor confirmation
of truth; but induction is judgment founded on experience, and this way only
will I study physiognomy.

"I meet many strangers, with an air of friendship, I recede from others with
cool politeness, though there is no expression of passion to attract, or to
disgust. On farther examination, I always found, that I have seen in them some
trait either of a worthy or worthless person, with whom I was before acquainted.

"A child, in my opinion acts from like motives, when he evades, or is pleased
with, the caresses of strangers, except that he is actuated by more trifling
signs, perhaps by the color of the clothes, the tone of the voice, or often by
some motion, which he has observed in the parent, the nurse, or the
acquaintance."

This cannot be denied to be often the case, and indeed much more often than is
commonly supposed; yet I make no doubt of being able to prove, that there are,
in nature and art, a multitude of traits, especially of the extremes of
passionate as well as dispassionate faculties, which, of themselves, and
without comparison with former experiments, are, with certainty, intelligible
to the most unpractised observer. I believe it to be incorporated in the nature
of man, in the organization of our eyes and ears, that he should be attracted
or repulsed by certain countenances, as well as by certain tones. Let a child,
who has seen but a few men, view but the open jaws of a lion, or a tiger, and
the smile of a benevolent person, and his nature will infallibly shrink from
the one, and meet the smile of benevolence with a smile; not from reason and
comparison, but from the original feelings of nature. For the same reason, we
listen with pleasure to a delightful melody, and shudder at discordant shrieks.
As little as there is of comparison or consideration on such an occasion, so is
there equally little on the first sight of an extremely pleasing, or an
extremely disgusting countenance.

"It is not therefore mere sensation, since I have good reason, when I meet a
person who resembles Turenne, to expect sagacity, cool resolution, and ardent
enterprise. If, in three men, I find one possessed of the eyes of Turenne, and
the same marks of prudence* another with his nose, and high courage; the third
with his mouth and activity; I then have ascertained the ^^at where each
quality expresses itself, and am justified in expecting similar qualities
wherever I meet similar features.

"Had we, for centuries past, examined the human form, arranged characteristic
features, compared traits, and exemplified inflexions, lines, and proportions,
and had we added explanations to each, then would our Chinese alphabet of the
race of man be complete, and we need but open it to find the interpretation of
any countenance. Whenever I indulge the supposition, that such an elementary
work is not absolutely impossible, I expect more from it than even Lavater. I
imagine we may obtain a language so rich, and so determinate, that it shall be
possible, from description only, to restore the living figure; and that an
accurate description of the mind shall give the outline of the body, so that
the physiognomist, studying some future Plutarch, shall regenerate great men,
and the ideal form shall, with facility, take birth from the given definition."

This is excellent; and, be the author in jest or earnest; this is what I
entirely, without dreaming, and most absolutely, expect from the following
century, for which purpose, with God's pleasure, I will hereafter hazard some
essays.

"With these ideal forms shall the chambers of future princes be hung, and he
who comes to solicit employment, shall retire without murmuring, when it is
proved to him that he is excluded by his nose."

Laugh or laugh not, friends or enemies of truth, this will, this must happen.

"By degrees, I imagine to myself a new, and another world, whence error and
deceit shall be banished."

Banished they would be were physiognomy the universal religion, were all men
accurate observers, and were not dissimulation obliged to recur to new arts, by
which physiognomy, at least for a time, may be rendered erroneous.

"We have to inquire, whether we should therefore be happier?"

Happier we should certainly be, although the present contest between virtue
and vice, sincerity and dissimulation, which so contributes to the developement
of the grand faculties of man, renders, as I may say, human virtue divine,
exalting it to heaven.

"Truth is ever found in the medium: we will not hope too little from
physiognomy, nor will we expect too much. Here torrents of objections break in
upon me, some of which I am unable to answer. Do so many men in reality
resemble each other? Is not the resemblance general; and when particularly
examined, does it not vanish, especially if the resembling persons be compared
feature by feature? Does it not happen, that one feature is in direct
contradiction to another; that a fearful nose is placed between eyes which
betoken courage?"

In the firm parts, or those capable of sharp outlines, accidents excepted, I
have never (...) found contradictory features, but often have between the firm
and the flexible, or the ground-form of the flexible and their apparent
situation. By ground-form I mean to say that which is preserved after death,
unless distorted by violent disease.

"It is far from being proved, that resemblance of form universally denotes
resemblance of mind. In families where there is most resemblance, there are
often the greatest varieties of mind. I have known twins, not to be
distinguished from each other, between whose minds there was not the least
similarity."

If this be literally true, I will renounce physiognomy, and to whoever shall
convince me of it, I will give him my copy of these fragments, and an hundred
physiognomonical drawings. Nor will I be my own judge, I leave it to the worthy
author of this remark to choose three arbitrators. Let them examine the fact
accurately, and, if they confirm it, I will own my error. Shades, however, of
these twin brothers will first be necessary. In all the experiments I have
made, I declare upon my honor, I have never made any such remark.

"And how shall we be able to explain the innumerable exceptions which almost
overwhelm rule? I will only produce some from my own observation. Dr. Johnson
had the appearance of a porter; not the glance of the eye, not any trait of the
mouth, speak the man of penetration or of science."

When a person of our author's penetration and judgment thus affirms, I must
hesitate and say, he has observed this, I have not. But how does it happen,
that, in more than ten years observation, I have never met any such example? I
have seen many men, especially in the beginning of my physiognomonical studies,
whom I supposed to be men of sense, and who were not so; but never, to the best
of my knowledge, did I meet a wise man whom I supposed a fool. In the
frontispiece is an engraving of Johnson. Can a countenance more tranquilly fine
be imagined, one that more possesses the sensibility of understanding,
planning, scrutinizing? In the eyebrows only, and their horizontal position,
how great is the expression of profound, exquisite, penetrating understanding!

"The countenance of Hume, was that of a common man."

So says common report. I have no answer but that I suspect the aspect, or
flexible features, on which most observers found their physiognomonical
judgment, have, as I may say, effaced the physiognomy of the bones; as, for
example, the outline and arching of the forehead, to which scarcely one in a
hundred direct their attention.

"Churchill had the look of a drover; Goldsmith of a simpleton; and the cold
eyes of Strange do not betray the artist."

The greatest artists have often the coldest eyes. The man of genius and the
artist are two persons. Phlegm is the inheritance of the mere artist.

"Who would say, that the apparent ardour of Will speaks the man who passed
his life in drawing parallel lines?"

Ardour and phlegm are not incompatible; the most ardent men are the coolest.
Scarcely any observation has been so much verified as this: it appears
contradictory, but it is not. Ardent, quickly determining, resolute, laborious,
and boldly enterprizing men, the moments of ardour excepted, have the coolest
of minds. The style and countenance of Will, if the profile portrait of him in
my possession be a likeness, have this character in perfection.

"It appears to me, that Boucher the painter of the graces, has the aspect of
an executioner."

Truly so. Such was the portrait I received. But then, my good M. Sturtz, let
us understand what is meant by these painters of the graces. I find as little
in his works, as in his countenance. None of the paintings of Boucher were at
all to my taste. I could not contemplate one of them with pleasure, and his
countenance had the same effect. I can now comprehend, said I, on the first
sight of his portrait, why I have never been pleased with the works of Boucher.

"I once happened to see a criminal condemned to the wheel, who, with satanic
wickedness, had murdered his benefactor, and who yet had the benevolent and
open countenance of an angel of Guido. It is not impossible to discover the
head of a Regulus among guilty criminals, or of a vestal in the house of
correction."

I can confirm this from experience. Far be contradiction from me on this
subject. But such vicious persons, however hateful with respect to the
appearance and effect of their actions, or even to their internal motives, were
not originally wicked. Where is the pure, the noble, finely formed, easily
irritated man, with angelic sensibility, who has not his devilish moments, in
which, were not opportunity happily wanting, he might, in one hour, be guilty
of some two or three vices, which would exhibit him, apparently at least, as
the most detestable of men; yet may he be a thousand times better and nobler
than numerous men of subaltern minds, held to be good, who never were capable
of committing acts so wicked, for the commission of which they so loudly
condemn him, and, for the good of society, are in duty bound to condemn?

"Lavater will answer, show me these men, and I will comment upon them, as I
have done upon Socrates. Some small, often unremarked trait, will probably
explain what appears to you so enigmatical. But will not something creep into
the commentary, which never was in the text?"

Though this may be, yet it ought not to be the case. I will also grant, that a
man with a good countenance may act like a rogue; but, in the first place, at
such a moment, his countenance will not appear good; and, in the next, he will
infinitely oftener act like a man of worth.

"Have we any right, from a known character, to draw conclusions concerning one
unknown? or, is it easy to discover what that being is, who wanders in
darkness, and dwells in the house of contradiction; who is one creature today,
and tomorrow the very reverse?"

How true, how important is this! How necessary a beacon to warn and terrify
the physiognomist!

"What judgment could we form of Augustus, if we were only acquainted with his
conduct to Cinna? or of Cicero, if we knew him only from his consulate? How
gigantic rises Elizabeth among queens, yet how little, how mean, was the
superannuated coquette! James II, a bold general, and a cowardly king! Monk,
the revenger of monarchs, the slave of his wife: Algernon Sydney and Russel,
patriots worthy of Rome, sold to France! Bacon, the father of wisdom, a bribed
judge! Such discoveries make us shudder at the aspect of man, and shake off
friends and intimates like coals of fire from the hand. When such cameleon
minds can be at one moment great, at another contemptible, and alter their
form, what can that form say?"

Their form shows what they may, what they ought to be, and their aspect, in
the moment of action, what they are. Their countenance shows their power, and
their aspect the application of their power. The expression of their littleness
may probably be like the spots of the sun, invisible to the naked eye.

"Does not (...) medium, through which we are accustomed to look, tinge our
judgment? Smellfungus views all objects through a blackened glass; another
through a prism Many contemplate virtue through a diminishing, and vice through
a magnifying medium."

How excellently expressed!

"A book written by (...) on physiognomy, would certainly have been very
different from that of Lavater. National physiognomy is still a large
uncultivated field. The families of the four classes of the race of Adam, from
the Esquimaux to the Greeks, in Europe, and in Germany alone, what varieties
are there which can escape no observer! Heads bearing the stamp of the form of
government, which ever will influence education; republican haughtiness, proud
of its laws; the pride of the slave, who feels pride because he has the power
of inflicting the scourges he has received; Greeks under Pericles, and under
Hassan Pacha; Romans, in a state of freedom, governed by emperors, and governed
by popes; Englishmen under Henry the Eighth, and Cromwell. How have I been
struck by the portraits of Hampden, Pym, and Vane! All produced varieties of
beauty, according to the different nations."

I cannot express how much I am indebted to the author of this spirited and
energetic essay. How worthy an act was it in him, whom I had unintentionally
offended, concerning whom I had published a judgment far from sufficiently
noble, to send me this essay, with liberty to make what use of it I pleased! in
such a manner, in such a spirit, may informations, corrections, or doubts be
ever conveyed to me! Shall I need to apologize for having inserted it? or
rather, will not most of my readers say, give us more such?

CHAPTER XXX.
Quotations from Huart, with Remarks.

1. SOME are wise and appear not to be so; others appear wise and are not so;
some again are not, and appear not to be wise; and others are wise, and also
appear to be wise.

A touchstone for many countenances.

2. "The son is often brought in debtor to the great understanding of the
father.

3. "Wisdom in infancy denotes folly in manhood.

"4. No aid can make those bring forth who are not pregnant."

We must not expect fruit where seed has not been sown. How advantageous, how
important, would physiognomy become, were it, by being acquainted with every
sign of intellectual and moral pregnancy enabled to render aid to all the
pregnant and to the pregnant only!

5. The external form of the head is what it ought to be, when it resembles a
hollow globe slightly compressed at the sides with a small protuberance at the
forehead and back of the head. A very flat forehead, or a sudden descent at the
back of the head, are no good tokens of understanding.

The profile of such a head, notwithstanding the compressure, would be more
circular than oval. The profile of a good head ought to form a circle combined
only when with the nose; therefore, without the nose it approaches much more to
the oval than the circular. "A very flat forehead, (says our author) is no sign
of good understanding." True, if the flatness resemble that of the ox; but I
have seen perfectly flat foreheads, let me be rightly understood. I mean flat
only between and above the eyebrows, in men of great wisdom. Much indeed,
depends upon the position and curve of the outlines of the forehead.

6. Man has more brain than any animal. Were the quantity of the brain in two
of the largest oxen compared to the quantity found in the smallest man, it
would prove to be less."

7. "Large oranges have thick skins and little juice. Heads of much bone and
flesh have little brain. Large bones, with abundance of flesh and fat, are
impediments to the mind."

8. "The heads of wise persons are very weak, and susceptible of the most
minute impressions."

Often, not always. And how wise? Wise to plan, but not to execute. Active
wisdom must have harder bones. One of the greatest of this earth's wonders is a
man in whom the two qualities are united, who has sensibility even to painful
excess, and colossal courage to resist the impetuous torrent, the whirlpool, by
which he shall be assailed. Such characters possess sensibility from the
tenderness of bodily feeling; and strength, not so much in the bones as in the
nerves.

9. "A thick belly, says Galen, a thick understanding."

With equal truth or falsehood, I may add, a thin belly, a thin understanding.
Remarks so general, which would prove so many able and wise men to be fools, I
value but little. A thick belly certainly is no positive token of
understanding, it is rather positive for sensuality, which is detrimental to
the understanding; but abstractedly, and unconnected with other indubitable
marks, I cannot receive this as a general proposition.

10. "Aristotle holds the smallest heads to be the wisest."

But this, with all reverence for so great a man, I think was spoken without
reflection. Let a small head be imagined on a great body, or a great head on a
small body, each of which may be found in consequence of accidents that excite
or retard growth; and it will be perceived that, without some more definite
distinction, neither the large nor the small head is, in itself, wise or
foolish. It is true, that large heads with short triangular foreheads, are
foolish; as are those large heads which are fat, and incumbered with flesh; but
small, particularly round heads, with the like encumbrance, are intolerably
foolish, and generally possess that, which renders their intolerable folly more
intolerable, a pretension to wisdom.

11. "It is a good sign, when a small person has a head somewhat large, and a
large person has the head somewhat small."

Provided this extends no farther than somewhat, it may be suffered; but it is
certainly best, when the head is in such proportion to the body, that it is not
remarkable either for its largeness or smallness.

12. "Memory and imagination resemble the understanding as a monkey does a man."

13. "It is if no consequence to the genius, whether the flesh be hard or
tender, if the brain do not partake of the same quality; for experience tells
us, that the latter is very often of a different temperament to the other parts
of the body. But when both the brain and the flesh are tender, they betoken ill
to the understanding, and equally ill to the imagination."

14. "The fluids which render the flesh tender, are phlegm and blood; and these
being moist, according to Galen, render men simple and stupid. The fluids, on
the contrary, which harden the flesh, are choler and melancholy, (or bile) and
these generate wisdom and understanding. It is therefore a much worse sign to
have tender flesh than rough; and tender signifies a bad memory, with weakness
of understanding and imagination."

If I may so say, there is an intelligent tenderness of flesh, which announces
much more understanding than do the opposite qualities of rough and hard. I can
no more class coriaceous flesh as the characteristic of understanding, than I
can tenderness of flesh, without being more accurately defined, as the
characteristic of folly. It will be proper to distinguish between tender and
porous, or spongy, and between rough and firm without hardness.

15. "To discover whether the quality of the brain corresponds with the flesh,
we must examine the hair. If the hair be black, strong, rough, and thick, it
betokens strength of imagination and understanding."

I am of a different opinion. Let not this be expressed in such general terms.
At this moment, I recollect a very weak man, by nature weak, with exactly such
hair. This roughness (sprodigk^it) is a fatal word, which, taken in what sense
it will, never signifies any thing good.

"But if the hair be ^ender and weak* it denotes nothing more than goodness of
memory."

Once more too little: it denotes a finer organization, which receives the
impression of images at least as strongly as the signs of images.

16. "When the hair is of the first quality, and we would farther distinguish,
whether it betokens goodness of understanding or imagination, we must pay
attention to the laugh. Laughter betrays the quality of the imagination."

And I add, of the understanding, of the heart, of power, love, hatred, pride,
humility, truth, and falsehood. Would I had artists, who would watch for and
design the outlines of laughter! The physiognomy of laughter would be the best
of elementary books for the knowledge of man. If the laugh be good, so is the
person. It is said of Christ, that he never laughed. I believe it; but, had he
never smiled, he would not have been human. The smile of Christ must have
contained the precise outline of brotherly love.

17. "Heraclitus says, a dry eye, a wise mind."

18. "We shall discover few men of great understanding who write a fine hand."

It might have been said with more accuracy, a schoolmaster's hand.

CHAPTER XXXI.
Remarks on an Essay on Physiognomy, by Professor Litchtenberg.

THIS essay is written with much intelligence, much ornament, and a mild
diffusive eloquence. It is the work of a very learned, penetrating, and, in
many respects, highly meritorious person, who appears to possess much knowledge
of men, and a large portion of the prompt spirit of observation. This essay
merits the utmost attention and investigation. It is so interesting, so
comprehensive, affords so much opportunity of remark for the physiognomist, and
of remarks which I have yet to make, that I cannot avoid citing the most
important passages, and submitting them to an unprejudiced and accurate
examination.

It is far from my intention or wish to compare myself with the excellent
author, to make any pretension to his fanciful and brilliant wit, and still
less to his learning and penetration. Though I could wish, I dare not hope, to
meet and answer him with the same elegance as his polished mind and fine taste
seem to demand. I am sensible of those wants which are peculiar to myself, and
which must remain mine, even when I have truth on my side. Yet, worthy Sir, be
assured that I shall never be unjust, and that, even where I cannot assent to
your observations, I shall never forget the esteem I owe your talents,
learning, and merits.

Let us in supposition, sit down in friendship with your essay before us, and,
with that benevolence which is most becoming men, philosophers in particular,
explain our mutual sentiments concerning nature and truth.

ON PHYSIOGNOMY.
"Certainly (says our author) the freedom of thought, and the very recesses of
the heart, were never more severely scrutinized than in the present age."

It appears to me that, at the very beginning, an improper point of view is
taken, which may probably lead the author and reader astray through the whole
essay. For my own part, at least, I know of no attacks on the freedom of
thought, or the secret recesses of the heart. It is universally known, that my
labors have been less directed to this than to the knowledge of predominant
character, capacities, talents, powers, inclinations, activity, genius,
religion, sensibility, irritability, and elasticity, of men in general, and not
to the discovery of actual and present thought. As far as I am concerned, the
soul may, and can, in our witty author's own words, "brood as secretly over its
treasures as it might have done centuries ago; may as tranquilly smile at the
progress of all Babylonian works, at all proud assailants of heaven, convinced
that, long before the completion of their work, there shall be a confusion of
tongues, and the master and the laborers shall be scattered."

Nobody would laugh more than I at the arrogance of that physiognomist, who
should pretend to read in the countenance the most secret thoughts and motions
of the soul, at any given moment, although there are moments, in which they are
legible to the most unpractised physiognomist.

I am of opinion, likewise, the secrets of the heart belong to pathognomy, to
which I direct my attention much less than to physiognomy; on which the author
says, more wittily than truly, "It is as unnecessary to write on as the art of
love.

The author is very right in reminding us, "that we ought to seek
physiognomonical instruction from known characters with great caution, and even
diffidence."

Our author then says, "Whether physiognomy, in its utmost perfection would
promote philanthropy, is at least questionable."

I confidently answer unquestionable, and I hope immediately to induce the
reasonable and philanthropic author to say the same. Physiognomy, in its utmost
perfection, must mean the knowledge of man in its utmost perfection. And shall
not this promote the love of man? or, in other words, shall it not discover
innumerable perfections, which the half physiognomist, or the unphysiognomist,
are unable to discover? Noble and penetrating friend of man, while writing
this, you had forgotten what you had so truly, so beautifully said, "that the
most hateful deformity might, by the aid of virtue, acquire irresistible
charms." And to whom more irresistible, more legible, than to the perfect
physiognomist? irresistible charms certainly promote not hatred, but love. From
my own experience, I can sincerely declare, that the improvement of my
physiognomonical knowledge has extended and increased the power of love in my
heart.

Though this knowledge may sometimes occasion affliction, still it is ever
true, that the affliction occasioned by certain countenances, endears,
sanctifies, and renders enchanting whatever is noble and lovely, which often
glows in the human countenance, like embers among ashes. My attention to the
discovery of this secret goodness is increased, and the object of my labors is
its increase and improvement; and how do esteem and love extend themselves,
wherever I perceive a preponderance of goodness! On a more accurate
observation, the very countenances that afflict me, and which, for some
moments, incense me against humanity, do but increase a tolerant and benevolent
spirit; for I then discern the load, and the nature of that sensuality, against
which they have to combat.

All truth, all knowledge of what is, of what acts upon us, and on which we
act, promotes general and individual happiness. Whoever denies this is
incapable of investigation. The more perfect this knowledge is, the greater are
its advantages. Whatever profits, whatever promotes happiness, promotes
philanthropy. Where are happy men to be found without philanthropy? Are such
beings possible? Were happiness and philanthropy to be destroyed or lessened,
by any perfect science, truth would war with truth, and eternal wisdom with
itself.

The man who can seriously maintain, "that a perfect science may be detrimental
to human society, or may not promote philanthropy, (without which happiness
among men cannot be supposed) is certainly not a man, in whose company our
author would wish to philosophize, as certainly will he, with me assume it as
an axiom, that "the nearer truth, the nearer happiness." The more our knowledge
and judgment resemble the knowledge and judgment of the Deity, the more will
our philanthropy resemble the philanthropy of the Deity. He who knows how man
is formed, who remembers that he is but dust, is the most tolerant friend of
man.

Angels I believe to be better physiognomists, and more philanthropic, than
men, although they may perceive in us a thousand failings and imperfections,
which may escape the most penetrating eye of man. God, having the most
knowledge of spirit, is the most tolerant of spirits. And who was more
tolerant, more affectionate, more lenient, more merciful than thou, who need
not that any should testify of man, for thou knew what was in man?

"It is certain, that the industrious, the insinuating, and active blockheads
in physiognomy may do much injury to society."

And as certainly worthy Sir, it is my earnest desire, my known endeavor, to
deter such blockheads from studying physiognomy. This evil can be prevented
only by accurate observation. True it is, that every science may become
dangerous, when studied by the superficial and the foolish, and the very
reverse, when studied by the accurate and the wise. According to your own
principles, therefore, we must agree in this, that none but the superficial,
the blockhead, the fanatical enemy of knowledge and learning in general, can
wish to prevent "all investigation of physiognomonical principles;" none but
such a person "can oppose physiognomonical labors; none but a blockhead will
suppose it unworthy and impracticable, in these (...) days, to awaken
sensibility, and the spirit (...) observation, or to improve the arts, and the
knowledge of men." To grant all this, as you, Sir, do, and yet to speak with
bitterness against physiognomy and physiognomists, I call sowing tares among
the (...) seed.

Our author next proceeds to distinguish between physiognomy and pathognomy.
"Physiognomy (he defines to be) a capability of discovering the qualities of
the mind and heart from the form and qualities of the external parts of the
body, especially the countenance, exclusive of all transitory signs of the
motions of the mind; and pathognomy, the whole semeiotica of the passions, or
the knowledge of the natural signs of the motions of the mind, according to all
their gradations and combinations."

I entirely agree with this distinction, and likewise subscribe to these given
difinitions.

It is next asked, is there physiognomy? Is there pathognomy? To the latter the
author justly replies, "This no man ever yet denied, for what would all
theatrical representations be without it? The languages of all ages and nations
abounds with pathognomonical remarks, and with which they are inseparable
interwoven."

However, after reading the work several times, I cannot discover whether the
author does or does not grant the reality of physiognomy. In one passage, the
author very excellently says, "No one will deny, that in a world where all
things are cause and effect, and where miracles are not to be found, each part
is a mirror of the whole. We are often able to conclude, from what is near to
what is distant, from what is visible to what is invisible, from the present to
the past and the future. Thus the history of the earth is written, in nature's
characters, in the form of each tract of country, of its sands, hills, and
rocks. Thus each shell on the seashore proclaims the once included mind,
connected, like the mind of man, with this shell. Thus also might the internal
of man be expressed, by the external, on the countenance, concerning which we
particularly mean to speak. Signs and traces of thought, inclination, and
capacity must be perceptible. How visible are the tokens impressed upon the
body by trade and climate! Yet what are trade and climate compared to the ever
active soul, created in every fiber, of whose absolute legibility from all and
to all no one doubts?"

From all mankind, rather than from the writer of this very excellent passage,
should I have expected the following: "What! the physiognomist will exclaim,
can the soul of a Newton reside in the head of a Negro, or an angelic mind in a
fiend-like form?"

As little could I have expected this passage: -- "Talents and the endowments
of the mind, in general, are not expressed by any signs in the firm parts of
the head."

I have never in my life met with any thing more contradictory to nature, and
to each other, than the foregoing and the following paragraphs:

"If a pea were thrown into the Mediterranean, an eye more piercing than ours,
though infinitely less penetrating than the eye of him who sees all things,
might perceive the effects produced on the coast of China." These are our
author's very words.

And shall the whole living powers of the soul, "creative in every fiber," have
no determinate influence on the firm parts, those boundaries of its activity,
which first were yielding, and acted upon, impressed, by every muscle; which
resemble each other in no human body, which are as various as characters and
talents, and are as certainly different as the most flexible parts of man?
Shall the whole powers of the soul, I say, have no determinate influence on
these, or not by these be defined?

In order to avoid the future imputation of indulging the shallow stream of
youthful declamation, instead of producing facts, and principles deduced from
experience, let us oppose experience to declamation, and facts to subtleties.
But first a word, that we may perfectly remove a degree of ambiguity, which I
should not have expected from the accuracy of a mathematician.

"Why not, (asks our author) why not the soul of Newton in the head of a Negro?
Why not an angel mind in a fiend-like form? Who, reptile! empowered thee to
judge of the works of God?"

Let us be rightly understood. We do not speak here of what God can do, but of
what is to be expected from the knowledge we have of his works. We ask what the
Author of order actually does, and not whether the soul of Newton can exist in
the body of a Negro, or an angelic soul in a fiend-like form. The
physiognomonical question is, can an angle's soul act the same in a fiend-like
body as in an angelic body? or, in other words, could the mind of Newton have
invented the theory of light, residing in the head of a Negro, thus and thus
defined? Such is the question.

Will you, Sir, who are the friend of truth, will you answer, it might? You,
who have previously said of the world, "all things in it are cause and effect,
and miracles are not to be found."

I should indeed be a reptile, judging the works of God, did I maintain its
possibility by miracle; but the question, at present, is not concerning
miracles; it is concerning natural cause and effect.

Having thus clearly stated the argument, permit me, Sir, to decide it, by
quoting your own words: "Judas scarely could be that dirty, deformed mendicant
painted by Holbein. No hypocrite, who associates with the good, betrays with a
kiss, and afterward hangs himself, has the look of Holbein's Judas. My
experience leads me to suppose Judas must have been distinguished by an
insinuating countenance, and an ever-ready smile."

How true! how excellent! yet what if I were to exclaim, "Who empowered thee,
reptile! to judge of the work of God?" What if I were to retort the following
just remark, "Tell me first, why a virtuous mind is so often doomed to exist in
an infirm body? Might not also, were it God's good pleasure, a virtuous man
have a countenance like the beggarly Jew of Holbein, or any other that can be
imagined?"

Can this, however, be called wise or manly reasoning? How wide is the
difference between suffering and disgusting virtue? or, is it logical to deduce
that, because virtue may suffer, virtue may be disgustful? Is not suffering
essential to virtue? To ask why virtue must suffer, is equivalent to asking why
God has decreed that virtue should exist. Is it alike incongruous to admit that
virtue suffers, and that virtue looks like vice? Virtue void of conflict, of
suffering, or of self-denial, is not virtue accurately considered; therefore it
is folly to ask, why must the virtuous suffer? It is in the nature of things;
but it is not in the nature of things, not in the relation of cause and effect,
that virtues should look like vice, or wisdom like foolishness. How, good Sir,
could you forget what you have so expressively said, "There is no durable
beauty without virtue, and the most hateful deformity may, by the aid of
virtue, acquire the most irresistible charms? The author is acquainted with
several women, whose example might inspire the most ugly with hope."

What may be the infirmities of the virtuous we do not inquire, nor whether a
man of genius may not become a fool; we ask, whether virtue, while existing,
can look like present vice, or actual folly, like actual wisdom? You Sir, who
are so profound an inquirer into the nature of man, will certainly never grant,
(who, indeed, will?) that the soul of the beloved disciple of Christ, could,
without a miracle, reside in the dirty, deformed mendicant, the beggarly Jew of
Holbein, and act as freely in that as in any other body. Will you, Sir,
continue to rank yourself, in your philosophical researches, with those, who
having maintained such senseless propositions, rid themselves of all
difficulties by asking, "Who empowered thee, reptile! to judge of the works of
God?"

Let us proceed to examine a few more passages.

"Our senses acquaint us only with the superficies, from which all deductions
are made. This is not very favorable to physiognomy, for which something more
definite is requisite, since this reading of the superficies is the source of
all our errors, and frequently of our ignorance."

So it is with us in nature; we absolutely can read nothing more than the
superficies. In a world devoid of miracles, the external ever must have a
relation to the internal; and, could we prove all reading of the superficies to
be false, what should we effect but the destruction of all human knowledge. All
our inquiries produce only new superficies. All our truth must be the truth of
the superficies. It is not the reading of the superficies that is the source of
all our error; for, if so, we should have not truth; but the not reading, or
which is the same in effect, the not rightly reading.

If "a pea thrown into the Mediterranean sea would effect a change in the
superficies, which should extend to the coast of China," any error that we
might commit, in our conclusions concerning the action of this pea, would not
be because we read only the superficies, but because we cannot read the
superficies.

"That we can only read the superficies is not very favorable to physiognomy,
for which something more definite is requisite." Something more definite we
have continually endeavored to give, and wish to hear the objections of acute
inquirers. But let facts be opposed to facts. Does not our author, by the
expression, "since the internal is impressed upon the external," seem to grant
the possibility of this impression? And if so, does not the superficies become
the index of the internal? Does he not thereby grant the physiognomy of the
firm parts?

He proceeds to ask, "If the internal be impressed upon the external, is the
impression to be discovered by the eyes of men?" Dare I trust my eyes, that I
have read such a passage in the writings of a philosopher!

We certainly see what we see. Be the object there, or be it not, the question
ever must be, do we or do we not see? That we do see, and that the author,
whenever he pleases, sees also, his essay is a proof, as are his other works.
Be this as it may, I know not what would become of all our philosophers and
philosophy, were we, at every new discovery of things, or the relation of
things, to ask, was this thing placed there to be discovered? With what degree
of ridicule would our witty author treat the man who should endeavor to render
astronomy contemptible by asking, "Though the wisdom of God is manifest in the
stars, were the stars placed there to be discovered?" "Must not signs and
effects, which we do not seek, conceal and render those erroneous of which we
are in search?"

The signs we seek are manifest, and may be known: they are the terminations of
causes, therefore effects, therefore physiognomonical expressions. The
philosopher is an observer, an observer of that which is sought, or not sought.
He sees, and must see, that which presents itself to his eyes; and that which
presents itself is the symbol of something that does not present itself. What
he sees can only mislead him when he does not see rightly. If the conclusion be
true, "that signs and effects which we do not seek must conceal, and render
erroneous those of which we are in search," then ought we to seek no signs and
effects, and thus all sciences vanish.

I have reason to hope, that a person of so much learning as is our author,
would not sacrifice all human sciences for the sole purpose of heaping
physiognomy on the pile. I grant the possibility and facility of error is
there; and this should teach us circumspection, should teach us to see the
thing that is, without the addition of any thing that is not. But to wish, by
any pretense, to divert us from seeing and observing, and to render inquiry
contemptible, whether with rude or refined wit, would be the most ridiculous of
all fanaticism. Such ridicule, in the mouth of a professed enemy of false
philosophers, would be as vapid as false. I am indeed persuaded that my
antagonist is only in jest.

"Were the growth of the body (says the author) in the most pure of
atmospheres, and modified only by the emotions of the mind, undisturbed by any
external power, the ruling passion, and the prevailing talent, I allow, might
produce, according to their different gradations, different forms of
countenance, like as different salts crystalize in different forms, when
obstructed by no impediment. But is the body influenced by the mind alone, or
is it not rather exposed to all the impulses of various contradictory powers,
the laws of which it is obliged to obey? Thus each mineral, in its purest
state, has its peculiar form; but the anomalies which its combination with
others occasions, and the accidents to which it is subjected, often cause the
most experienced to err, when they would distinguish it by its form."

What a simile! Salts and minerals compared to an organized body, internally
animate! A grain of salt, which the least particle of water will
instantaneously melt, to the human scull, which has defied misfortunes, and
millions of external impressions for centuries? Do not thou blush,
Philosophy? Not to confine ourselves to the organization of the sculls of men
and other animals, do we find that even plants, which have not the internal
resistance, the elasticity of men, and which are exposed to millions of
counteracting impressions from light, air, and other bodies, ever change their
form, in in consequence of such causes? Which of them is ever mistaken for
another by the botanist. The most violent accidents scarcely could effect such
a change, so long as they should preserve their organization.

"Thus is the body mutually acted upon by the mind and external causes, and
manifests not only our inclinations and capacities, but also the effects of
misfortune, climate, diseases, food, and thousands of inconveniences to which
we are subjected, not always in consequence of our vice, but often by
accidents, and sometimes by our virtues."

Who would, who can, deny this? But is the foregoing question hereby answered?
We are to attend to that. Does not our essayest himself say, "the body is acted
upon by the mind and external causes?" Therefore not by external causes alone.
May it not equally be affected by the internal energy, or inactivity of the
mind? What are we contending for? Has it not (if indeed the author be in
earnest) the appearance of sophistry (...) oppose external to internal effects,
and yet own the body is acted upon by both? And will you, Sir, acute and wise
as you are, maintain that ^^^fortune can change a wise, a round, and an (...),
into a cylindrical forehead; one that is lengthened into one that is square; or
the projecting into (...) retreating chin? Who can seriously believe and
affirm, that Charles XIV. Henry IV. and Charles V. men who were undoubtedly
subject to misfortunes, if ever men were, thereby acquired another form of
countenance, (we speak of the firm parts, not of scars) and which forms denoted
a different character to what each possessed previous to such misfortunes? Who
will maintain, that the noses of Charles XII. or Henry IV. denoting power of
mind, previous to their reverse of fortune, the one at Pultawa, the other by
the hand of Ravaillac, suffered any change, and were debased to the
insignificant pointed nose of a girl? Nature acts from within upon the bones;
accident and suffering act on the nerves, muscles, and skin. If any accident
attack the bones; who is so blind as not to remark such physical violence? The
signs of misfortune are either strong or feeble: when they are feeble, they are
effaced by the superior strength and power of nature; when strong, they are too
visible to deceive, and by their strength and visibility warn the physiognomist
not to suppose them the features of nature. By the physiognomist I mean the
unprejudiced observer, who alone is the real physiognomist, and has a right to
decide; not the man of subtlety, who is wilfully blind to experience.

"Are the defects, which I remark in an image of wax, always the defects of the
artist, or are they not the consequences of unskilful handling, the sun's heat
or the warmth of the room."

Nothing, dear friend of truth, is more easy to remark, in an image of wax,
than the original hand of the master, although it should, by improper handling,
accidental pressure, or melting, be injured. This example, Sir, militates
against yourself. If the hand of the master be visible in an image of wax,
where it is so easily defaced, how much more perceptible must accident be in an
organized body, so individually permanent? Instead of an image of wax, the
simile, in my opinion, would be improved were we to substitute a statue; and in
this every connoisseur can distinguish what has been broken, chopped, or filed
off, as well as what has been added by a later hand. And why should not this be
known in man? Why should not the original form of man be more distinguishable,
in despite of accident, than the beauty and workmanship of an excellent statue
which has been defaced?

"Does the mind, like an elastic fluid, always assume the form of the body? And
if a flat nose were the sign of envy, must a man, whose nose by accident should
be flattened, consequently become envious?"

The inquirer will gain but little, be this question answered in the negative
or affirmative. What is gained were we to answer, "Yes; the soul is an elastic
fluid, which always takes the form of the body?" Would it thence follow that
the flattened nose has lost so much of its elasticity, as would be necessary to
propel the nose? or where would be the advantage should we reply, "No; all such
comparisons are insignificant, except to elucidate certain cases: we must
appeal only to facts."

But what would be answered to a less subtle and more simple question? Is there
no example of the mind being injured by the maiming of the body? Has not a
fractured scull, by compressing the brain, injured the understanding? Does not
castration render the male half female? -- But to answer wit with reason, says
a witty writer, is like endeavoring to hold an eel by the tail.

We wholly subscribe to the affirmation, that "it is absurd to (...) the most
beautiful mind is to be found in the most beautiful body, and the most deformed
mind in the most deformed body."

We have already explained ourselves so amply on this subject, that being
supposed to hold a contrary opinion appears incomprehensible. We only say,
there is a proportion and beauty of body, which is more capable of superior
virtue, sensibility, and action, than the disproportionate. We say with the
author, "Virtue beautifies, vice deforms." We most cordially grant, that
honesty may be found in the most ugly, and vice in men of the most beautiful
forms.

We however, differ from him, concerning the following assertion: "Our
languages are exceedingly barren of physiognomonical terms. Were it a true
science, the language of the vulgar would have been proverbially rich in its
terms. The nose occurs in a hundred proverbs and phrases, but always
pathognomonically, denoting past action, but never physiognomonically,
betokening character or disposition."

Instead of a hundred, I am acquainted with only one such phrase, nasen rumfe,
to turn up the nose. Homo obesae, obtusae naris, said the ancients; and had
they not said it, what could thence have been adduced, since we can prove a
posteriori, that the nose is a physiognomonical sign of character?

I have neither the learning nor the inclination to cite sufficient proofs of
the contrary from Home^, Suetonius, Marshal, and an hundred others. That which
is, is, whether perceived by the ancients or not. Such dust might blind a
schoolboy, but not the eyes of a sage, who sees for himself, and who knows
that each age has its measure of discovery, and that there are those who fail
not to exclaim against all discoveries which were not made by the ancients.

"I should be glad to know (says our author) not what man may become, but what
he is?"

I must confess that I wish to know both. Many vicious men resemble valuable
paintings, which have been destroyed by varnish. Would you pay no attention to
such a painting! Is it wholly unworthy of you, though a connoisseur should
assure you, the picture is damaged; but there is a possibility of clearing away
the varnish, as this master's colors are so strongly laid on, and so
essentially good, that no varnish can penetrate deep enough, if we are but
careful in bringing it away not to injure the picture? Is this of no
importance? You observe the smallest change of position in the polar star. Days
are dedicated to examine how many ages shall elapse before it will arrive at
the nearest point of approach. I do not despise your labors. But is it of no
importance to you, to fathers, mothers, guardians, teachers, friends, and
statesmen, to inquire what a man may become, or what must be expected from this
or that youth, thus and thus formed and educated? Many foolish people are like
excellent watches, which would go well, were the regulator but rectified.

Is the goodness of the mechanism of no consequence to you, although a skilful
watchmaker should tell you, this was, and is, an excellent piece of
workmanship, infinitely better than that which you see set with brilliants,
which, I grant, will go well for a quarter of a year, but will then stop! Clean
this, repair it, and straighten the teeth of this small wheel. Is this advice
of no importance? Will you not be informed what it might have been, what it may
yet probably be? Will you not hear of a treasure that lies buried, and, while
buried, I own useless; but will you content yourself with the trifling interest
arising from this, or that small sum?

Do you pay attention only to the fruit of the present year, and which is
perhaps forced? And do you neglect the goodness of a tree, which, with
attention may bring forth a thousand fold, though, under certain circumstances,
it may yet have brought forth none! Have the hot blasts of the south parched up
its black leaves, or has the storm blown down its half-ripened fruit, and will
you therefore not inquire whether the root does not still remain undestroyed?

I feel I grow weary, and perhaps weary others, especially as I am more and
more convinced, that our pleasant author, at least hitherto, meant only to
amuse himself. I shall therefore only produce two more contradictions, which
ought not to have escaped the author, and scarcely can escape any thinking
reader.

In one place, he very excellently says, "Pathognomonical signs, often
repeated, are not always entirely effaced, but leave physiognomonical
impressions. Hence originate the lines of folly, ever gaping, ever admiring,
nothing understanding; hence the traits of hypocrisy; hence the hollowed cheek,
the wrinkles of obstinacy, and heaven knows how many other wrinkles.
Pathognomonical distortion, which accompanies the practice of vice, will
likewise, in consequence of the disease it produces, become more distorted and
hateful. Thus may the pathognomonical expression of friendship, compassion,
sincerity, piety, and other moral beauties, become bodily beauty to such as can
perceive and admire these qualities. On this is founded the physiognomy of
Gellert, which is the only true part of physiognomy. This is of infinite
advantage to virtue, and is comprehended in a few words, "virtue beautifies,
vice deform^"

The branch therefore has effect, the root none: the fruit has physiognomy,
the tree none; the laugh of self-sufficient vanity may, therefore, arise from
the most humble of hearts, and the appearance of folly from the perfection of
wisdom. The wrinkles of hypocrisy, therefore, are not the result of any
internal power or weakness. The author will always fix our attention on the
dial-plate, and will never speak of the power of the watch itself. But take
away the dial-plate, and still the hand will go. Take away those
pathognomonical traits, which dissimulation sometimes can effect, and the
internal power of impulse will remain. How contradictory therefore is it to
say, the traits of folly are there, but not the character of folly, the drop of
water is visible, but the fountain, the ocean, is not!

Again. It is certainly incongruous to say, "There is pathognomy, but this is
as unnecessary (to be written) as an act of love. It chiefly consists in the
motion of the muscles of the countenance and the eyes, and is learned by all
men. To teach this would be like an attempt to number the sands of the sea!"

Yet the author, in the very next page, with great acuteness, begins to teach
pathognomy, by explaining twelve of the countenances of Chodowiecki, in which
how much is there included of the science of physiognomy!

Permit me now, my worthy antagonist, yet no longer antagonist, but friend,
convinced by truth and the love of truth, I say, permit me to transcribe, in
one continued quotation, some of your excellent thoughts and remarks from your
essay, and elucidations on the countenances of Chodowiecki, part of which have
been already cited in this fragment, and part not. I am convinced they will be
agreeable to my readers.

"Our judgment concerning countenances frequently acquires certainty, not from
physiognomonical nor pathognomonical signs, but from the traces of recent
actions, which men cannot shake off. Debauchery, avarice, beggary, have each
their livery, by which they are as well known as the soldier by his uniform, or
the chimney-sweeper by his sooty jacket. The addition of a trifling expletive
in discourse will betray the badness of education; and the manner of putting on
the hat what is the company we keep, and what the degree of our folly."

Suffer me here to add, shall not then the whole form of man discover any thing
of his talents and disposition! Can the most milky candor here forget the
straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel!

"Maniacs will often not be known to be disordered in their senses, if not in
action. More will often be discovered, concerning what a man really is, by his
dress, behavior, and mode of paying his compliments at his first visit and
introduction, in a single quarter of an hour, than in all the time he shall
remain. -- (By unphysiognomonical eyes, permit me to add.) Cleanliness and
simplicity of manner will often conceal passions.

"Nothing, often, is to be surmised from the countenances of the most dangerous
men. Their thoughts are all concealed under an appearance of melancholy.
Whoever has not remarked this, is unacquainted with mankind. The heart of the
vicious man is always less easy to be read, the better his education has been,
the more ambition he has, and the better the company he has been accustomed to
keep.

"Cowardice and vanity, governed by an inclination to pleasure and indolence,
are not -- (sometimes) marked with strength equivalent to the mischief they
occasion; while, on the contrary, fortitude in defense of justice, against all
opponents whatever, be their rank and influence what it may, and the conscious
feelings of real self-worth often, look very dangerous, especially when
unaccompanied by a smiling mouth.

"Specious as the objections brought by the sophistry of the sensual may be, it
is notwithstanding certain that there is no possible durable beauty without
virtue, and the most hateful deformity may, by the aid of virtue, acquire
irresistible charms. Examples of such perfections, among persons of both sexes,
I own are uncommon, but not more so than heavenly sincerity, modest compliance,
without self-degradation, universal philanthropy, without busy intrusion, a
love of order without being minute, or neatness without foppery, which are the
virtues that produce such irresistible charms.

"Vice, in like manner, in persons yielding to its influence, may highly
deform; especially when, in consequence of bad education, and want of knowledge
of the traits of moral beauty, or of will to assume them, the vicious may find
no day, no hour, in which to repair the ravages of vice.

"Who will not listen to the mouth, in which no trait, no shade of falsehood is
discoverable? Let it preach the experience of what wisdom, what science it may,
comfort will ever be the harbinger of such a physician, and confidence hasten
to welcome his approach.

"One of the most hateful objects in the creation, says a certain writer, is a
vicious and deformed old woman. We may also say, that the virtuous matron, in
whose countenance goodness and the ardour of benevolence are conspicuous, is an
object most worthy our reverence. Age never deforms the countenance, when the
mind dares appear unmasked: it only ^^ars off the fresh varnish, under which
coquetry, vanity, and vice were concealed. Wherever age is excedingly deformed,
the same deformity would have been visible in youth, to the attentive observer.

"This is not difficult, and were men to act from conviction, instead of
flattering themselves with the hope of fortunate accidents, happy marriages
would be more frequent; and as Shakespeare says, the bonds which should unite
hearts would not so often strangle temporal happiness."

This is speaking to the heart. Oh! that I could have written my fragments in
company with such an observer! Who could have rendered greater services to
physiognomy than the man who, with the genius of a mathematician, possesses so
accurate a spirit of observation?

CHAPTER XXXII.
Description of Plate V.

Number 1.
WILLIAM HONDIUS, a Dutch engraver, after Vandyck. We here see mild, languid,
slow industry, with enterprizing, daring, conscious heroism. This forehead is
rounded, not indeed common nor ignoble. The eyebrows are curved, the eyes
languid and sinking, and the whole countenance oval, ductile, and maidenly.

Number 2.
This head, if not stupid, is at least common; if not rude, clumsy. I grant it
is a caricature, yet, however, there is something sharp and fine in the eye and
mouth, which a connoisseur will discover.

Number 3.
This is manifestly a Turk, by the arching and position of the forehead, the
hind part of the head, the eyebrows, and particularly the nose. The aspect is
that of observation, with a degree of curiosity. The open mouth denotes
remarking, with some reflection.

Number 4.
It must be a depraved taste which can call this graceful, and therefore it
must be far from majestic. I should neither wish a wife, mother, sister,
friend, relation, or goddess, to possess a countenance so cold, insipid,
affected, stony, unimpassioned, or so perfectly a statue.

Number 5.
The strong grimace of an impotent madman, No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
who distorts himself without meaning. In the eye is neither attention, fury,
littleness, nor greatness.

Number 6.
The eyes in this head are benevolently stupid. Wheresoever so much white is
seen as in the left eye, if in company with such a mouth, there is seldom much
wisdom.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
General Remarks on Women.

I Must premise, that I am but little acquainted with the female part of the
human race. Any man of the world must know more of them than I can pretend to
know. My opportunities of seeing them at the theater, at balls, or at the
card-table, where they best may be studied, have been exceedingly few. In my
youth, I almost avoided women, and was never in love.

Perhaps I ought, for this very reason, to have left this very important part
of physiognomy to one much better informed, having myself so little knowledge
of the fair sex. Yet might not such neglect have been dangerous? Might another
have treated the subject in the manner which I could wish? or, would he have
said the little I have to say, and which, though little, I esteem to be
necessary and important?

I frequently shudder while I think how excessively, how contrary to my
intention, the study of physiognomy may be abused, when applied to women.
Physiognomy will perhaps fare no better than philosophy, poetry, physic, or
whatever may be termed art or science. A little philosophy leads to atheism,
and much to Christianity. Thus must it be with physiognomy. But I will not be
discouraged; the half precedes the whole. We learn to walk by falling, and
shall we forbear to walk lest we should fall?

I can with certainty say, that true pure physiognomonical sensation, in
respect to the female sex, best can season and improve life, and is the most
effectual preservative against the degradation of ourselves or others.

Best can season and improve human life. -- What better can temper manly
rudeness, or strengthen and support the weakness of man, what so soon can
assuage the rapid blaze of wrath, what more charm masculine power, what so
quickly dissipate peevishness and ill temper, what so well can wile away the
insipid tedious hours of life, as the near and affectionate look of a noble,
beautiful woman? What is so strong as her soft delicate hand? What so
persuasive as her tears restrained? Who but beholding her must cease to sin?
How can the spirit of God act more omnipotently upon the heart, than by the
extending and increasing physiognomonical sensation for such an eloquent
countenance? What so well can season daily insipididity? I scarcely can
conceive a gift of more paternal and divine benevolence!

This has sweetened every bitter of my life, this alone has supported me under
the most corroding cares, when the sorrows of a bursting heart wanted vent. My
eyes swam in tears, and my spirit groaned with anguish. Then when men have
daily asked, "where is now thy God?" when they rejected the sympathy, the
affection of my soul, with rude contemptuous scorn; when acts of honest
simplicity were (...), and the sacred impulse of conscious truth was ridiculed,
hissed at, and despised; in those burning moments, when the world afforded no
comfort, even then did the Almighty open mine eyes, even then did he give me an
unfailing source of joy, contained in a gentle, tender, but internally firm,
female mind; an aspect like that of unpractised, cloistered virginity, which
felt, and was able to efface each motion, each passion, in the most concealed
feature of her husband's countenance, and who, by those means, without any
thing of what the world calls beauty, shone forth beauteous as an angel. Can
there be a more noble or important practice than that of a physiognomonical
sensation for beauties so captivating, so excellent as these.

This physiognomonical sensation is the most effectual preservative against the
degradation of ourselves and others. What can more readily discover the
boundary between appetite and affection, or cunning under the mask of
sensibility? What sooner can distinguish desire from love, or love from
friendship? What can more reverently, internally, and profoundly feel the
sanctity of innocence, the divinity of maiden purity, or sooner detect coquetry
unblessed, with wiles affecting every look of modesty? How often will such a
physiognomist turn contemptuous from the beauties most adored, from the
wretched pride of their silence, their measured affectation of speech, the
insipidity of their eyes, arrogantly overlooking misery and poverty, their
authoritative nose, their languid, unmeaning lips, relaxed by contempt, blue
with envy, and half bitten through by artifice and malice! The obviousness of
these and many others will preserve him, who can see from the dangerous charms
of their shameless bosom! How fully convinced is the man of pure
physiognomonical sensation, that he cannot be more degraded than by suffering
himself to be ensnared by such a countenance! Be this one proof among a
thousand.

But if a noble, spotless maiden but appear; all innocence and all soul; all
love, and of love all worthy, which must as suddenly be felt as she manifestly
feels; if in her large arched forehead all the capacity of immeasurable
intelligence which wisdom can communicate be visible; if her compressed but not
frowning eyebrows speak an unexplored mine of understanding, or her gentle
outlined or sharpened nose, refined taste, with sympathetic goodness of heart,
which flows through the clear teeth, over her pure and efficient lips; if she
breathe humility and complacency; if condescension and mildness be in each
motion of her mouth, dignified wisdom in each tone of her voice; if her eyes,
neither too open nor too close, but looking straight forward, or gently turned,
speak the soul that seeks a sisterly embrace; if she be superior to all the
powers of description; if all the glories of her angelic form be imbibed like
the mild and golden rays of an autumnal evening sun; may not then these so
highly prized physiognomonical sensations be a destructive snare or sin, or
both?

"If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light, as when the
bright shining of a candle does give thee light." And what is physiognomonical
sensations but this singleness of eye? The soul is not to be seen without the
body, but in the body; and the more it is thus seen, the more sacred to thee
will the body be. What! man having this sensation, which God has bestowed,
would thou violate the sanctuary of God? Would thou degrade, defame,
debilitate and deprive it of sensibility? Shall he whom a good or great
countenance does not inspire with reverence and love, incapable of offense,
speak of physiognomonical sensation; of that which is the revelation of the
spirit? Nothing maintains chastity so entire, nothing so truly preserves the
thoughts from brutal passion, nothing so reciprocally exalts souls, when they
are mutually held in sacred purity. The contemplation of power awakens
reverence, and the picture of love inspires love; not selfish gratification,
but that pure passion with which spirits of heaven embrace.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
General Remarks on Male and Female. -- A Word on the Physiognomonical Relation
of the Sexes.

GENERALLY speaking, how much more pure, tender, delicate, irritable,
affectionate, flexible, and patient, is woman than man! The primary matter of
which they are constituted appears to be more flexible, irritable, and elastic,
than that of man. They are formed to maternal mildness and affection. All their
organs are tender, yielding, easily wounded, sensible, and receptible.

Among a thousand females there is scarcely one without the generic feminine
signs, the flexible, the circular, and the irritable. They are the counterpart
of man, taken out of man, to be subject to man; to comfort him like angels, and
to lighten his cares. "She shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in
faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety." (1 Timothy ii. 15.)

This tenderness and sensibility, this light texture of their fibers and
organs, this volatility of feeling render them so easy to conduct and to tempt;
so ready of submission to the enterprise and power of the man; but more
powerful through the aid of their charms than man, with all his strength. The
man was not first tempted, but the woman, afterward the man by the woman. And
not only easily to be tempted, she is capable of being formed to the purest,
noblest, most seraphic virtue; to every thing which deserve praise or affection.

Highly sensible of purity, beauty and symmetry, she does not always take time
to reflect on internal life, internal death, internal corruption. "The woman
saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes and a
tree to be desired to make one wise, and she took of the fruit thereof."

The female thinks not profoundly; profound thought is the power of the man.
Women feel more: sensibility is the power of the woman. They often rule more
effectually, more sovereignly than man. They rule with tender looks, tears, and
sighs, but not with passion and threats; for, if they so rule, they are no
longer women, but abortions.

They are capable of the sweetest sensibility, the most profound emotion, the
utmost humility, and the excess of enthusiasm. In their countenance are the
signs of sanctity and inviolability, which every feeling man honors, and the
effects of which are often miraculous. Therefore, by the irritability of their
nerves, their incapacity for deep inquiry and firm decision, they may easily,
from their extreme sensibility, become the most irreclaimable, the most
rapturous enthusiasts.

The love of woman, strong and rooted as it is, is very changeable; their
hatred almost incurable, and only to be effaced by continued and artful
flattery. Men are most profound, women are more sublime. Men most embrace the
whole; women remark individually, and take more delight in selecting the
minutiae which form the whole. Man hears the bursting thunders, views the
destructive bolt with serene aspect, and stands erect amidst the fearful
majesty of the streaming clouds. Woman trembles at the lightning and the voice
of distant thunder, and shrinks into herself, or sinks into the arms of man.

A ray of light is singly received by man, woman delights to view it through a
prism, in all its dazzling colors. She contemplates the rainbow as the promise
of peace; ^e extends his inquiring eye over the whole horizon.

Woman laughs, man smiles; woman weeps, man remains silent. Woman is in anguish
when man weeps, and in despair when man is in anguish; yet has she often more
faith than man. Without religion, man is a diseased creature, who would
persuade himself he is well, and needs not a physician: but woman, without
religion, is raging and monstrous. A woman with a beard is not so disgusting as
a woman who acts the free-thinker; her sex is formed to piety and religion. To
them Christ first appeared; but he was obliged to prevent them from too
ardently and too hastily embracing him. -- Touch me not. They are prompt to
receive and seize novelty, and become its enthusiasts.

In the presence and proximity of him they love, the whole world is forgotten.
They sink into the most incurable melancholy, as they rise to the most
enraptured heights.

There is more imagination in male sensation, in the female more heart. When
communicative, they are more communicative than man; when secret, more secret.
In general they are more patient, long-suffering, credulous, benevolent, and
modest.

Woman is not a foundation on which to build. She is the gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, ^ay, stubble; (1 Cor. iii. 12.) the materials for building on the
male foundation. She is the leaven, or, more expressively the oil to the
vinegar of man; the second part to the book of man. Man singly, is but half a
man, at least but half human; a king without a kingdom. Woman, who feels
properly what she is, whether still or in motion, rests upon the man; nor is
man what he may and ought to be but in conjunction with woman. Therefore "it is
not good that man should be alone, but that he should leave father and mother
and cleave to his wife, and that they two shall be one flesh."

A Word on the physiognomonical Relation of the Sexes.
Man is the most firm, woman the most flexible. Man is the straightest, woman
the most bending. Man stands steadfast, woman gently retreats. Man surveys and
observes, woman glances and feels. Man is serious, woman is gay. Man is the
tallest and broadest, woman the smallest and weakest. Man is rough and hard,
woman is smooth and soft. Man is brown, woman is fair. Man is wrinkly, woman is
not. The hair of man is strong and short, of woman more long and pliant. The
eyebrows of man are compressed, of woman less frowning. Man has most unequal
lines, woman most concave. Man has most straight lines, woman most curved. The
countenance of man, taken in profile, is not so often perpendicular as that of
the woman. Man is most angular, woman most round.
CHAPTER XXXV.
On the Physiognomy of Youth. Extracts from Zimmermann's Life of Haller.

"THE first years of the youth include the history of the man. They develope
the qualities of the soul, the materials of future conduct, and the true
features of temperament. In riper years dissimulation prevails, or, at least,
that modification of our thoughts, which is the consequence of experience and
knowledge.

"The characteristics of the passions, which are undeniably discovered to us by
the peculiar art denominated physiognomy, are effaced in the countenance by
age; while, on the contary, their true signs are visible in youth. The original
materials of man are unchangeable; he is drawn in colors that have no deceit.
The boy is the work of nature, the man of art."

How much of the true, how much of the false, worthy Zimmermann, at least of
the indefinite, is there in this passage! According to my conception, I see the
clay, the mass, in the youthful countenance; but not the form of the future
man. There are passions and powers of youth, and passions and powers of age.
These often are contradictory in the same man, yet are they contained one
within the other. Time produces the expression of latent traits. A man is but a
boy seen through a magnifying glass, I always, therefore, perceive more in the
countenance of a man than of a boy. Dissimulation may indeed conceal the moral
materials, but not alter their form. The growth, of powers and passions,
imparts to the first undefined sketch of what is called a boy's countenance,
the firm traits, shading, and coloring, of manhood.

These are youthful countenances, which declare whether they ever shall, or
shall not, ripen into man. This they declare, but they only declare it to the
great physiognomist. I will acknowledge, when, which seldom happens, the form
of the head is beautiful, conspicuous, proportionate, greatly featured, well
defined, and not too feebly colored, it will be difficult that the result
should be common or vulgar. I likewise know, that where the form is distorted,
especially when it is transverse, extended, undefined, or too harshly defined,
much can rarely be expected. But how much do the forms of youthful countenances
change, even in the system of the bones?

Much has been said of the openness, undegeneracy, simplicity, and
ingenuousness of a childish and youthful countenance. It may be so, but for my
own part, I must own, I am not so fortunate as to be able to read a youthful
countenance with the same degree of quickness and precision, however small that
degree, as one that is manly. The more I converse with and consider children,
the more difficult do I find it to pronounce, with certainty, concerning their
character. Not that I do not meet countenances, among children and boys, most
strikingly and positively significant; yet seldom is the great outline of the
youth so definite as for us to be able to read in it the man. The most
remarkably advantageous young countenances may easily, through accident,
terror, hurt, or severity in parents or tutors, be internally injured, without
any apparent injury to the whole. The beautiful, the eloquent form, the firm
forehead, the deep, sharp eye, the cheerful, open, free, quick-moving mouth
remain; there will only be a drop of troubled water in what else appears so
clear; only an uncommon, scarcely remarkable, perhaps convulsive motion of the
mouth. Thus is hope overthrown, and beauty rendered indistinct.

As simplicity is the soil for variety, so is innocence for the products of
vice. Simplicity, not of a youth, but of a child, in thee the Omniscient only
views the progress of sleeping passion; the gentle wrinkles of youth, the deep
of manhood, and the manifold and relaxed of age. Oh! how different was my
infantine countenance to the present, in form and speech! But as transgression
follows innocence, so does virtue transgression.

Does the vessel say to the potter, "wherefore have thou made me thus? -- I am
little, but I am I." He who created me, did not create me to be a child but a
man. Wherefore should I ruminate on the pleasures of childhood, unburthened
with cares? I am what I am. I will forget the past, nor weep that I am no
longer a child, when I contemplate children in all their loveliness. To join
the powers of man with the simplicity of the child is the height of all my
hopes. God grant they may be accomplished!

CHAPTER XXXVI.
Physiognomical Extracts from an Essay inserted in the Deutschen Museum, a
German Journal or Review.

FROM this essay I shall extract only select thoughts, and chiefly none but
those which I suppose to be importantly true, importantly false, or ill defined.

1. "Men with arched and pointed noses are said to be witty, and that the blunt
nosed are not so."

A more accurate definition is necessary, which, without drawing, is almost
impossible. Is it meant by arched noses, arched in length or in breadth? How
arched? This is almost as indeterminate as when we speak of arched foreheads.
All foreheads are arched. Innumerable noses are arched, the most witty and the
most stupid. Where is the highest point of arching? Where does it begin? What
is its extent? What is its strength?

It is true, that people with tender, thin, sharply defined, angular noses,
pointed below, and something inclined toward the lip, are witty, when no other
features contradict these tokens; but that people with blunt noses are not so,
is not entirely true. It can only be said of certain blunt noses, for there are
others of this kind extremely witty, though their wit is certainly of a
different kind to that of the pointed nose.

2. "It is asked, (supposing for a moment, that the arched and the blunt nose
denote the presence or absence of wit) is the arched nose the mere sign that a
man is witty, which supposes his wit to originate in some occult cause, or is
the nose itself the cause of wit?"

I answer, sign, cause, and effect, combined. Sign; for it betokens the wit,
and is an involuntary expression of wit. Cause; at least cause that the wit is
not greater, less, or of a different quality, boundary cause. Effect; produced
by the quantity, measure, or activity of the mind, which suffers not the nose
to alter its form to be greater or less. We are not only to consider the form
as form, but the matter of which it is molded, the conformability of which is
determined by the nature and ingredients of this matter, which is probably the
origin of the form.

True indeed it is, that there are blunt noses, which are incapable of
receiving a certain quantity of wit; therefore it may be said with more
subtlety than philosophy, they form an insuperable barrier.

3. "The correspondence of external figures with internal qualities is not the
consequence of external circumstances, but rather of physical combination. They
are related like cause and effect, or, in other words, physiognomy is not the
mere image of internal man, but the efficient cause." -- (I should rather say
the limiting cause) -- The form and arrangement of the muscles determine the
mode of thought, and sensibility of the man."

I add, these are also determined by the mind of man.

4. "A broad conspicuous forehead is said to denote penetration. This is
natural. The muscle of the forehead is necessary to deep thought. If it be
narrow and contracted, it cannot render the same service as if spread out like
a sail."

Without contradicting the general proposition of the author, I shall here more
definitely add, it is, if you please generally true, that the more brain, the
more mind and capacity. The most stupid animals are those with least brain, and
those with most the wisest. Man, generally wiser, has more brain than other
animals; and it appears just, to conclude from analogy, that wise men have more
brain than the foolish. But accurate observation teaches, that this
proposition, to be true, requires much definition and limitation.

Where the matter and form of the brain are similar, there the greater space
for the residence of the brain is, certainly the sign, cause and effect of more
and deeper comprehension; therefore, caeteris pa^ibus, a larger quantity of
brain, and consequently a spacious forehead, is more intelligent than the
reverse. But as we frequently live more conveniently in a small well-contrived
chamber than in more magnificent apartments, so do we find, that in many small,
short foreheads, with less, or apparently less brain than others, the wise mind
resides at its ease.

I have known many short, oblique, straight-lined (when compared with others
apparently arched, or really well-arched) foreheads, which were much wiser,
more intelligent, and penetrating, than the most broad and conspicuous; many of
which latter I have seen in extremely weak men. It seems to me, indeed, a much
more general proposition, that short compressed foreheads are wise and
understanding; though this, likewise, without being more accurately defined, is
far from being generally true.

But is it true, that large spacious foreheads which, if I do not mistake,
Galen, and after him Huart, have supposed the most propitious to deep thinking,
which form a half sphere, are usually the most stupid. The more any forehead (I
do not speak of the whole scull) approaches a semispherical form, the more is
it weak, effeminate, and incapable of reflection, and this I speak from repeated
experience.

The more straight lines a forehead has, the less capacious it must be; for the
more it is arched, the more must it be roomy, and the more straight lines it
has, the more must it be contracted. This greater quantity of straight lines,
when the forehead is not flat like a board, for such flatness takes away all
understanding, denotes an increase of judgment, but a diminution of
sensibility. There undoubtedly are, however, broad, capacious foreheads,
without straight lines, particularly adapted to profound thinking; but these
are conspicuous by their oblique outlines.

5. What the author has said concerning enthusiasts, requires much greater
precision, before it ought to be received as true.

"Enthusiasts are said commonly to have flat, perpendicular foreheads."

Oval, cylindrical, or pointed at top, should have been said, of those
enthusiasts who are calm, cold-blooded, and always continue the same. Other
enthusiasts, that is to say, such as are subject to a variety of sensation,
illusion, and sensual experience, seldom have cylindrical or sugar loaf heads.
The latter, when enthusiasts, heat their imagination concerning words and
types, the signification of which they do not understand, and are
philosophical, unpoetical enthusiasts. Enthusiasts of imagination, or of
sensibility, seldom have flat forms of the countenance.

6. "Obstinate, like enthusiastic persons, have perpendicular foreheads."

The perpendicular always denotes coldness, inactivity, narrowness; hence
firmness, fortitude, pertinacity, obstinacy, and enthusiasm, may be there.
Absolute perpendicularity, and absolute folly, are the same.

7. "Each disposition of mind is accompanied by a certain appearance, or motion
of the muscles (...) consequently the appearance of man, which is natural to,
and ever present with him, will be accompanied by, and denote, his natural
disposition of mind. Countenances are so formed originally, that to one this,
and to another that appearance is the easiest. It is absolutely impossible for
folly to assume the appearance of wisdom, otherwise it would no longer be
folly. The worthy man cannot assume the appearance of dishonesty, or he would
be dishonest."

This is all excellent, the last excepted. No man is so good as not, under
certain circumstances, to be liable to become dishonest. He is so organized,
that he may be overtaken by the pleasure of stealing, when accompanied by the
temptation. The possibility of the appearance must be there as well as the
possibility of the act. He must also be able to assume the appearance of
dishonesty, when he observes it in a thief, without necessarily becoming a
thief. The possibility of assuming the appearance of goodness is, in my
opinion, very different. The appearance of vice is always more easily assumed
by the virtuous, than the appearance of virtue by the vicious; as it is
evidently much easier to become bad when we are good, than good when we are
bad. Understanding, sensibility, talents, genius, virtue, or religion, may with
much greater facility be lost than acquired. The best may descend as low as
they please, but the worst cannot ascend to the height they might wish. The
wise man may physically, without a miracle, become a fool, and the most
virtuous vicious; but the idiot-born cannot, without a miracle, become a
philosopher, nor the distorted villain noble and pure of heart. The most
beautiful complexion may become jaundiced, may be lo^t; but the negro cannot be
washed white. I shall not become a negro because, to imitate him I blacken my
face, nor a thief, because I assume the appearance of a thief.

8. "The physiognomist ought to inquire, what is the appearance the countenance
can most easily assume, and he will thence learn what is the disposition of
mind. Not that physiognomy is therefore an easy science. On the contrary, this
rather shows how much ability, imagination, and genius, are necessary to the
physiognomist. Attention must not only be paid to what is visible, but what
would be visible under various other circumstances."

Excellent; and I add, that as a physician can presage what alteration of
color, appearance, or form shall be the consequence of a known disease, of the
existence of which he is certain, so can the accurate physiognomist what
appearances or expressions are easy or difficult to each kind of muscle, and
form of forehead, what action is or is not permitted, and what wrinkles may or
may not take place, under any given circumstances.

9. "When a learner draws a countenance, we shall commonly find it is foolish,
and never malicious, satirical, and the like. May not the essence of a foolish
countenance hence be abstracted? Certainly; or what is the cause of this
appearance? The learner is incapable of preserving proportion, and the strokes
are unconnected. What is the stupid countenance? It is one, the parts of which
are defectively connected, and the muscles improperly formed and arranged.
Thought and sensation, therefore, of which these are the inseparable
instruments, must be alike feeble and dormant.

10. "Exclusive of the muscles; there is another substance in the body, that is
to say, the scull, or bones in general, to which the physiognomist attends. The
position of the muscles depends on these. How might the muscle of the forehead
have the position proper for thought, if the forehead bones, over which it is
extended, had not the necessary arches and superficies? The figure of the
scull, therefore, defines the figure and position of the muscles, which define
thought and sensation.

11. "The same may be observed of the hair, from the parts and position of
which conclusions may be drawn. Why has the Negro woolly hair? The thickness of
the skin prevents the escape of certain of the particles of perspiration, and
these render the skin opaque and black. Hence the hair shoots with difficulty,
and scarcely has it penetrated before it curls, and its growth ceases. The hair
spreads according to the form of the scull, and the position of the muscles,
and gives occasion to the physiognomist to draw conclusions from the hair to
the position of the muscles, and to deduce other consequences."

In my opinion our author is certainly in the right road. He is the first who,
to my knowledge, has perceived and felt the totality, the combination, the
uniformity of the various parts of the human body. What he has affirmed,
especially concerning the hair, that we may from that make deductions
concerning the nature of the body, and still farther of the minds, the least
accurate observer may convince himself is truth, by daily experience. White,
tender, clear, weak hair, always denotes weak, delicate, irritable, or rather a
timid and easily oppressed organization. The black and curly will never be
found on the delicate, tender, medullary head.

As is the hair, so the muscles; as the muscles, so the nerves; as the nerves,
so the bones; their powers are mutual, and the powers of the mind to act,
suffer, receive, and give, proportionate. Least irritability always accompanies
short, hard, curly, black hair, and the most (...) flaxen and the tender; that
is to say, irritability without elasticity. The one is oppressive without
elasticity, and the other oppressed without resistance.

"Much hair, much fat, therefore no part of the human body is more
conspicuously covered with hair than the head and armpits. From the elasticity
of the hair, deductions may with certainty be made to the elasticity of the
character. The hair naturally betokens moisture, and may properly determine the
quantity of moisture. The inhabitants of cold countries have hair more white,
and, on the contrary, those of hot countries, black. Lional Wafer observes,
that the inhabitants of the isthmus of Darien have milk-white hair. Few, if
any, have green hair, except those who work in copper mines. We seldom find
white hair betokening dishonesty, but often dark brown or black, with
light-coloured eyebrows. Women have longer hair than men. Men with long hair
are always rather effeminate than manly. Dark hair is harsher than light, as is
the hair of a man than that of a boy.

12. "As all depends on the quality of the muscles, it is evident, that in
these muscles, which are employed for certain modes of thought and sensation,
ought to be sought the expression of similar thoughts and sensations."

Let not the search be neglected, though probably it will be difficult to find
them; and they certainly will there be defined with greater difficulty than in
the forehead.

13. "The muscle of the forehead, is the most important instrument to the
abstract thinker, for which reason we always seek for abstract thought in the
forehead."

Rather near and between the eyebrows. It is of consequence to remark the
particular moment when the thinker is listening, or when he is preparing some
acute answer. Seize the moment, and another of the important tokens of
physiognomy is obtained.

14. "Among people who do not abstract, and whose powers of mind are all in
action, men of wit, exquisite taste, and genius, all the muscles must be
advantageously formed and arranged. Expression, therefore, in such, must be
sought in the whole countenance."

Yet may it be found in the forehead alone, which is less sharp,
straight-lined, perpendicular, and forked. The skin is less rigid, more easily
moved, more flexible.

15. "How great has been the trouble to convince people, that physiognomy is
only generally useful!"

It is at this very moment disputed by men of the stongest minds. How long
shall it continue so to be? Yet I should suppose, that he who curses the sun,
while exposed to its scorching rays, would, when in the shade, acknowledge its
universal utility.

"How afflicting is it to hear, from persons of the greatest learning, and who
might be expected to enlarge the boundaries of human understanding, the most
superficial judgments? How much is that great era to be wished, when the
knowledge of man shall become a part of natural history; when psychology,
physiology, and physiognomy, shall go hand in hand, and lead us toward the
confines of more general, more sublime illumination?"

CHAPTER XXXVII.
Extracts from Maximus Tyrius.

SINCE the soul of man is the nearest approach to the Deity, it was not proper
that God should clothe that which most resembled himself in dishonorable
garments; but with a body befitting an immortal mind, and endowed with a proper
capability of motion. This is the only body on earth that stands erect. It is
magnificent, superb, and formed according to the best proportion of its most
delicate parts. Its stature is not terrific, nor is its strength formidable.
The coldness of its juices occasions it not to creep, nor their heat to fly.
Man eats not raw flesh, from the savageness of his nature, nor does he graze
like the ox; but he is framed and adapted for the executions of his functions.
To the wicked he is formidable; mild and friendly to the good. By nature he
walks the earth, swims by art, and flies by imagination. He tills the earth,
and enjoys its fruits. His complexion is beautiful, his limbs firm, his
countenance is comely, and beard ornamental. By imitating his body, the Greeks
have thought proper to honor their deities.

Oh! that I could speak with sufficient force! Oh! that I could find faith
enough with my readers, to convince them how frequently my soul seems exalted
above itself, while I contemplate the unspeakably miraculous nature of the
human body! Oh! that all the languages of the earth would lend me words, that I
might turn the thoughts of men, not only to the contemplation of others, but,
by the aid of these, to the contemplation of themselves! No anti-physiognomist
can more despise my work than I myself shall, if I am unable to accomplish this
purpose. How might I conscientiously write such a work were not such my views?
If this be not impulse, no writer has impulse. I cannot behold the smallest
trait, nor the inflexion of any outline, without reading wisdom and
benevolence, or without waking, as if from a sweet dream into rapturous, and
actual existence, and congratulating myself that I also am a man.

In each the smallest outline of the human body, and how much more in all
together, in each member separately, and how much more in the whole body,
however old and runinous the building may appear, or be, how much is there
contained of the study of God, the genius of God, the poetry of God! My
trembling and agitated breast frequently pants after leisure to look into the
revelations of God.

2. "Imagine to thyself the most translucent water flowing over a surface, on
which grow beauteous flowers, whose bloom, though beneath, is seen through the
pellucid waves; even so it is with the fair flower of the soul, planted in a
beauteous body, through which its beauteous bloom is seen. The good formation
of a youthful body is no other than the bloom of ripening virtue, and as I may
say, the presage of far higher perfection; for, as before the rising of the
sun, the mountain tops are gilded by his rays, enlivening the pleasing
prospects, and promising the full approach of day, so also the future maturity
of an illustrious soul shines through the body, and is to the philosopher the
pleasing sign of approaching happiness."

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Extracts from a Manuscript by Th --.

"THE relation between the male and female countenance is similar to that
between youth and manhood. Our experience, that the deep, or scarcely visible
outline is in proportion to the depth or shallowness of thought, is one of the
many proofs that nature has impressed such forms upon her creatures as shall
testify their qualities. That these forms or signs are legible to the highly
perceptive soul is visible in children, who cannot endure the deceitful, the
tell-tale, or the revengeful; but run with open arms to the benevolent stranger.

"We may properly divide our remarks on this subject into complexion, lines,
and pantomime. That white, generally speaking, is cheerful, and black, gloomy
and terrific, is the consequence of our love of light, which act so
degenerately, as it were, upon some animals, that they will throw themselves
into the fire; and of our abhorrence of darkness. The reason of this our love
of light, is, that it makes us acquainted with things, provides for the soul
hungry after knowledge, and enables us to find what is necessary, and avoid
what is dangerous. I only mention this to intimate, that in this our love of
light originates our inclination for every thing that is perspicuous. Certain
colors are, to certain animals, particularly agreeable or disagreeable."

What is the reason of this? Because they are the expression of something which
has a relation to their character, that harmonizes with it, or is discordant.
Colors are the effect of certain qualities of object and subject; they are
therefore characteristic in each, and become more so by the manner in which
they are mutually received and repelled. This would be another immense field of
inquiry, another ray of the sun of truth. All is physiognomy!

"Our dislike is no less for every thing which is clothed in dark colors; and
nature has warned animals, not only against feeding on earth, but also on
dark-green plants; for the one is as detrimental as the other. Thus the man of
dark complexion terrifies an infant that is incapable of judging of his
character.

"So strikingly significant are the members of the body, that the aspect of the
whole attacks our feelings, and induces judgments as sudden as they are just.
Thus, to mention two extremes, all will acknowledge, at the first aspect, the
elephant to be the wisest, and the fish the most stupid of creatures.

"The upper part of the countenance, to the root of the nose, is the fea^ of
internal labor, thought, and resolution; the under, of these in action.
Animals, with very retreating foreheads, have little brain, and the reverse.

"Projecting nose and mouth (the latter certainly not always) betoken
persuasion, self-confidence, rashness, shamelessness, want of thought,
dishonesty, and all such feelings as are assembled in hasty expression."

This is a decision after the manner of the old physiognomists condemning, and
indefinite.

"The nose is the seat of derision, its wrinkles contemn. The upper lip, when
projecting, speaks arrogance, threats, and want of shame; the parting
under-lip, ostentation and folly. These signs are confirmed by the manner and
attitude of the head, when drawn back, tossed or turned round. The (...)
expresses contempt, during which the nose is active; the latter is a proof of
extreme arrogance, during which the projection of the under-lip is the
strongest.

"The in drawn lower part of the countenance, on the contrary, denotes
discretion, modesty, seriousness, diffidence, and its ^ailings are those of
malice and obstinacy."

Not so positive. The projecting chin is much oftener the sign of craft than
the retreating. The latter is seldom scheming and enterprising.

"The straight formation of the nose betokens gravity; inbent and crooked,
noble thoughts. The flat, pouting upper lip (when it does not close well with
the under,) signifies timidity; the lips resembling each other, circumspection
of speech.

"We may divide the face into two principal kinds. The first is that in which
the cheeks present a flat surface, the nose projecting like a hill, and the
mouth has the appearance of a sabre-wound, prolonged on an even surface, while
the line of the jaw bone has but little inflection. Such a form makes the
countenance more broad than long, and exceedingly rude, inexpressive, stupid,
and in every sense confined. The principal characteristics are obstinacy and
inflexibility.

"The second kind is, when the nose has a sharp ridge, and the parts on both
fides make acute angles with each other. The cheek bones are not seen,
consequently the muscular parts between them and the nose are full and
prominent. The lips retreat on each side of the mouth, assume or open into an
oval, and the jaw-bones come to a point at the chin."

This face denotes a mind more subtle, active, and intelligent.

"The better to explain myself, I must here employ the simile of two ships. The
first a merchant vessel, built for deep loading, has a broad bottom, and her
ribs long and flat. This resembles the broad, flat countenance. The frigate,
built for swift sailing, has a sharp keel or bottom, her ribs forming acute
angles. Such is the second countenance. Of these two extremes, the first
presents to ^e the image of the meanest, most contracted self-love; the second
of the most zealous, the noblest philanthropy.

"I am sensible, that nature does not delight in extremes. Still the
understanding must take its departure from these as from a light-house,
especially when sailing in unknown seas. The defects and excesses which are in
all works of nature will then be discovered, and one or both the boundaries
ascertained.

"On farther examination and application of the above hypothesis, it will I
believe extend through all nature. A broad countenance is accompanied by a
short neck, broad shoulders and back, and their known character is selfishness
and obtuse sensation. The long, small countenance, has a long neck, small, or
low shoulders and small back. From such I should expect more justice,
disinterestedness, and a general superiority of social feelings.

"The features and character of men are essentially altered by education,
situation, intercourse, and incidents; therefore we are justified in
maintaining, that physiognomy cannot look back to the origin of the features,
nor presage the changes of futurity; but from the countenance only, abstracted
from all external accidents by which it may be affected, it may read what any
given man may be, with the following addition at most: such shall be the empire
of reason, or such the power of sensuality. This man is too stubborn to be
instructed; that so flexible he may be led to good or ill.

"From this formation we may in part explain why so many men appear to be born
for certain situations, although they may have rather been placed in them by
accident than by choice. Why the prince, the nobleman, the overseer of the
poor, have a lordly, a stern, or a pedantic manner; why the subject, the
servant, the slave, are pusillanimous and spiritless; or the courtezan
affected, constrained, or insipid. The constant influence of circumstances on
the mind, far exceeds the influence of nature." Far the contrary.

"Although it is certain, that innate servility is* very distinct from the
servility of o^^ whom misfortune has rendered a servant; like as he whom chance
has made a ruler over his brother, is very different from one who is by nature
superior to vulgar souls."

There is no such thing as innate servility. It is true that, under certain
circumstances, some are much more disposed than others to become servile.

"The unfeeling mind of the slave has vacuity more complete, or, if a master,
more self-complacency and arrogance, in the open mouth, the projecting lip, and
the turned-up nose. The noble mind rules by the comprehensive respect, while,
in the closed lips, moderation is expressed. He will serve with sullenness,
with downcast eye, and his shut mouth will disdain to complain.

"As the foregoing causes will make durable impressions, so will the
adventitious occasion transitory ones, while their power remains. The latter
are more apparent than the signs of the countenance at rest, but may be well
defined by the principal characteristics of the agitated features; and, by
comparison with countenances subject to similar agitations, the nature of the
mind may be fully displayed. Anger in the unreasonable ridiculously struggles;
in the self-conceited it is fearful rage; in the noble minded, it yields and
brings opponents to shame; in the benevolent, it has a mixture of compassion
for the offender, moving him to repentance.

"The affliction of the ignorant is outrageous, and of the vain ridiculous; of
the compassionate, abundant in tears and communicative; of the resolute,
serious, internal, the muscles of the cheeks scarcely drawn upwards, the
forehead little wrinkled.

"The love of the ignorant is violent and eager; of the vain, disgusting, which
is seen in the sparkling eyes, and the forced smile of the forked cheeks, and
the indrawn mouth* of the tender, languishing, with the mouth contracted to
intr^^^t; of the man of sense, serious, steadfastly surveying the object, the
forehead open, and the mouth prepared to plead.

"On the whole, the sensations of a man of fortitude are restrained, while
those of the ignorant degenerate into grimace. The latter, therefore, are not
the proper study of the artist, though they are of the physiognomist, and the
moral teacher, that youth may be warned against too strong an expression of the
emotions of the mind, and of their ridiculous effects.

"Thus do the communicative and moving sensations of the benevolent inspire
reverence; but those of the vicious, fear, hatred, or contempt.

"The repetition of passions engrave their signs so deeply, that they resemble
the original stamp of nature. Hence certainly may be deduced, that the mind is
addicted to such passions. Thus are poetry and the dramatic art highly
beneficial, and thus may be seen the advantage of conducting youth to scenes of
misery and of death.

"Frequent intercourse forms such a similarity between men, that they not only
assume a mental likeness, but frequently contract some resemblance of voice and
features. Of this I know several examples.

"Each man has his favorite gesture, which might decypher his whole character,
might he be observed with sufficient accuracy to be drawn in that precise
posture. The collection of such portraits would be excellent for the first
studies of the physiognomist, and would increase the utility of the fragments
of Lavater tenfold.

"Of equal utility would be a series of drawings of the motions peculiar to
individuals. The number of these in lively men is great, and they are
transitory. In the more sedate they are less numerous and more grave.

"As a collection of idealized individuals would promote an extensive knowledge
of various kinds of men, so would a collection of the motions of a single
countenance promote a history of the human heart, and demonstrate what an
arrogant, yet pusillanimous thing the unformed heart is, and the perfection it
is capable of, from the efforts of reason and experience.

"It would be an excellent school for youth to see Christ teaching in the
Temple; asking, Whom seek you? agonizing in the Garden; expiring on the Cross.
Eve^ the same Godman! Ever displaying, in these various situations, the same
miraculous mind, the same steadfast reason, the same gentle benevolence. Caesar
jesting with the pirates when their prisoner, weeping over the head of Pompey,
sinking beneath his assassins, and casting an expiring look of affliction and
reproach, while he exclaims, Et tu Brute? Belshazar feasting with his nobles,
turning pale at the handwriting on the wall. The tyrant enraged, butchering
his slaves; and surrounded by condemned wretches entreating mercy from the
uplifted sword, pronouncing a general pardon ideal.

"Since sensation has a relative influence on the voice, must not th^^^ be one
principal tone or key, by which all the o^^ers are governed, and will not this
be the key, in which he speaks when unimpassioned, like as the countenance at
rest contains the propensities to all such traits as it is capable of
receiving? These keys of voice, a good musician, with a fine ear, should
collect, class, and learn to define, so that he might place the key of the
voice beside any given countenance, making proper allowances for changes,
occasioned by the form of the lungs, exclusive of disease. Tall people, with a
flatness of breast, have weak voices.

"This idea, which is more difficult to execute than conceive, was inspired by
the various tones in which I have heard yes and no pronounced. The various
emotions under which these words are uttered, whether of assurance, decision,
joy, grief, ridicule, or laughter, will give birth to tones as various. Yet
each man has his peculiar manner, respondent to his character, of saying yes,
no, or any other word. It will be open, hesitating, grave, trifling,
sympathizing* cold, peevish, mild, fearless, or timid. What a guide for the man
of the world, and how do such tones display or betray the mind!

"Since we are taught by experience, that at certain times, the man of
understanding appears foolish, the courageous cowardly, the benevolent
perverse, and the cheerful discontented, we might, by the assistance of these
accidental traits, draw an ideal of each emotion; and this would be a most
valuable addition, and an important step in the progress of physiognomy."

CHAPTER XXXIX.
Extracts from NICOLAI and WINKELMANN.

Extracts from Nicolai.
1. "THE distorted or disfigured form may originate as well from external as
from internal causes; but the consistency of the whole is the consequence of
conformity between internal and external causes; for which reason moral
goodness is much more visible in the countenace than moral evil."

This is true, those moments excepted when moral evil is in act.

2. "The end of physiognomy ought to be, not conjectures on individual, but the
discovery of general character."

That is to say, the discovery of general signs of powers and sensations, which
certainly are useless, unless they can be individually applied, since our
intercourse is with individuals.

3. "Were numerous portraits of the same man annually drawn, and the original,
by that means, well known, it would be of great utility to physiognomy.

It is possible, and perhaps only possible, to procure accurate shades, or
plaster casts. Minute changes are seldom accurately enough attended to by the
painter, for the purpose of physiognomy.

4. "The grand question of the physiognomist in his researches will ever be, in
what manner is a man considered capable of the impressions of sense? Through
what kind of perspective does he view the world? What can he give? What receive?

5. "That very vivacity of imagination, that quickness of conception, without
which no man can be a physiognomist, is probably almost inseparable from other
qualities which render the highest caution necessary, if the result of his
observations is to be applied to living persons."

This I readily grant; but the danger will be much less if he endeavors to
employ his quick sensations in determinate signs; if he be able to pourtray the
general token of certain powers, sensations, and passions; and if his rapid
imagination be only busied to discover and draw resemblances.

Extracts from Winklemann.
1. "Internal sensation is the characteristic of (...) the designer, who would
present such natural sensation to his academy, would not obtain a shade of the
true, without a particular addition of something, which an ordinary and
unimpassioned mind cannot read in any model, being ignorant of the action
peculiar to each sensation and passion."

The physiognomist is formed by internal sensation, which if the designer be
not, he will give but the shadow, and only an indefinite and confused shadow,
of the true character of nature.

2. "The forehead and nose of the Greek god and goddess form almost a strait
line. The heads of famous women, on Greek coins, have similar profiles, where
the fancy might not be indulged in ideal beauties. Hence we may conjecture,
that this form was as common to the ancient Greeks as the flat nose to the
Calmuc, or the small eye to the Chinese. The large eyes of Grecian heads, in
gems and coins, support this conjecture."

This ought not to be absolutely general, and probably was not, since numerous
medals show the contrary, though in certain ages and countries such might have
been the most common form. Had only one such countenance, however, presented
itself to the genius of art, it would have been sufficient for its propagation
and continuance. This is less our concern than the signification of such a
form. The nearer the approach to the perpendicular, the less is there
characteristic of the wise and graceful; and the higher the character of worth
and greatness, the more obliquely the lines retreat. The more straight and
perpendicular the profile of the forehead and nose is, the more does the
profile of the upper part of the head approach a right angle, from which wisdom
and beauty will fly with equally rapid steps* In the usual copies of these
famous ancient lines of beauty, I generally find the expression of meanness,
and, if I dare so say, of vague insipidity. I repeat, in the copies; in the
Sophonisba of Angelica Kauffman, for instance, where probably the shading under
the hair has been neglected, and where the gentle arching of the lines,
apparently, was scarcely attainable.

3. "The line which separates the repletion from the excess of nature is very
small."

Not to be measured by industry or instrument, yet all powerful, as every thing
unattainable is.

4. "A mind as beautiful as was that of Raphael, in an equally beautiful body,
is necessary, first to feel, and afterward to display, in these modern times,
the true character of the ancients.

5. "Constraint is unnatural, and violence disorder."

Where constraint is remarked, there let secret, profound, slowly destructive
passion be feared; where violence, there open and quick destroying.

6. "Greatness will be expressed by the straight and replete, and tenderness by
the gently curving."

All greatness has something of straight and replete, but all the straight and
replete is not greatness. The straight and replete must be in a certain
position, and must have a determinate relation to the horizontal, on which the
observer stands to view it.

"It may be proved, that no principle of beauty exists in this profile; for the
stronger the arching of the nose is, the less does it contain of the beautiful;
and if any countenance seen in profile is bad, any search after beauty will
there be vain.

The noblest, purest, wisest, most spiritual and benevolent countenance, may be
beautiful to the physiognomist, who, in the extended sense of the word beauty,
understands all moral expressions of good as beautiful; yet the form may not,
therefore, accurately speaking, deserve the appellation of beautiful*

7. "Nothing is more difficult than to demonstrate a self-evident truth."

CHAPTER XL.
Extracts from Aristotle and other Authors on Beasts.

WHAT Aristotle has written on physiognomy appears to me very superficial,
useless, and often self-contradictory, especially his general reasoning. Still,
however, we sometimes meet an occasional thought which deserves to be selected.
The following are some of these:

"A monster has never been seen which had the form of another creature, and, at
the same time, totally different powers of thinking and acting* Thus for
example, the groom judges from the mer^ appearance of the horse; the huntsman,
from the appearance of the hound. We find no man entirely like a beast,
although there are some features in man which remind us of beasts.

"If any one would endeavor to discover the signs of bravery in man, he would
act wisely to collect all the signs of bravery in animated nature, by which
courageous animals are distinguished from others. The physiognomist should then
examine all such animated beings, which are the reverse of the former, with
respect to internal character, and, from the comparison of these opposites, the
expressions or signs of courage would be manifest.

"As weak hair betokens of fear, so does strong hair courage. This observation
is applicable not only to men but to beasts. The most fearful of beasts are the
deer, the hare, and the sheep, and the hair of these is weaker than that of
other beasts. The lion and wild boar, on the contrary, are the most courageous,
which property is conspicuous in their extremely strong hair. The same also may
be remarked of birds; for, in general, those among them which have coarse
feathers are courageous, and those that have soft and weak feathers are
fearful. This may easily be applied to men. The people of the north are
generally courageous, and have strong hair; while those of the west are more
fearful, and have more flexible hair.

"Such beasts as are remarkable for their courage, simply give their voices
vent, without any great constraint, while fearful beasts utter vehement sounds.
Compare the lion, ox, the barking-dog, and cock, which are courageous to the
deer and the hare. The lion appears to have a more masculine character, than
any other beast. He has a large mouth, a four-cornered not too bony visage. The
upper jaw does not project, but exactly fits the under; the nose is rather hard
than soft, the eyes are neither sunken nor prominent, the forehead is square,
and sometimes flattened in the middle.

"Those who have thick and firm lips, with the upper hung over the under, are
simple persons, according to the analogy of the ape and monkey."

This is most indeterminately spoken. He would have been much more accurate had
he said, those whose under lips are weak, extended, and projecting, beyond the
upper, are simple people.

"Those who have the tip of the nose hard and ^irm, love to employ themselves
on subjects that give them little trouble, similar to the cow and the ox."

Insupportable! The few men, who have the tip of the nose firm, are the most
wearied in their researches. I shall transcribe no farther. His
physiognomonical remarks, and his similarities to beasts, are generally
unfounded in experience.

Porta, next to Aristotle, has most observed the resemblance between the
countenances of men and beasts, and has extended this inquiry the farthest. He,
as far as I know, was the first to render this similarity apparent, by placing
the countenances of men and beasts beside each other. Nothing can be more true
than this fact; and, while we continue to follow nature, and do not endeavor
to make such similarities greater than they are, it is a subject that cannot be
too accurately examined. But, in this respect, the fanciful Porta appears to me
to have been often misled, and to have found resemblances which the eye of
truth never could discover. I could discover no resemblance between the hound
and Plato, at least from which cool reason could draw any conclusions. It is
singular enough, that he has also compared the heads of men and birds. He might
more effectually have examined the excessive dissimilarity, than the very small
and almost imperceptible resemblance which can exist. He speaks little
concerning the horse, elephant, and monkey* though it is certain that these
animals have most resemblance to man.

A generic difference between man and beast is particularly conspicuous in the
structure of the bones. The head of man is placed erect on the spinal bone. His
whole form is as the foundation pillar for that arch in which heaven should be
reflected, supporting that scull by which, like the firmament it is encircled.
This cavity for the brain constitutes the greater part of the head. All our
sensations, as I may say, ascend and descend above the jaw bone, and collect
themselves upon the lips. How do the eyes, that most eloquent of organs, stand
in need, if not of words, at least of the angry constraint of the cheeks, and
all the intervening shades, to express, or rather to stammer, the strong
internal sensations of man.

How directly the reverse of this is the formation of beasts! The head is only
attached to the spine. The brain, the extremity of the spinal marrow, has no
greater extent than is necessary for animal life, and the conducting of a
creature wholly sensual, and formed but for temporary existence. For although
we cannot deny, that beasts have the faculty of memory, and act from reflection,
yet the former, as I may say, is the effect of primary sensation, and the
latter originates in the constraint of the moment, and the preponderance of
this or that object.

In the difference of the scull which defines the character of animals, we may
perceive, in the most convincing manner, how the bones determine the form, and
denote the properties of the creature.

As the characters of animals are distinct, so are their forms, bones, and
outlines. From the smallest winged insect to the eagle that soars and gazes at
the sun; from the weakest worm, impotently crawling beneath our feet, to the
elephant, or the majestic lion, the gradations of physiognomonical expression
cannot be mistaken. It would be more than ridiculous to expect from the worm,
the butterfly, and the lamb, the power of the rattlesnake, the eagle, and the
lion. Were the lion and lamb, for the first time, placed before us, had we
never known such animals, never heard their names, still we could not resist
the impression of the courage and strength of the one, or of the weakness and
sufferance of the other.

Let me ask the question, which are, in general, the weakest animals, and the
most remote from humanity, the most incapable of human ideas and sensations?
Beyond all doubt, those which in their form least resemble man. To prove this,
let us, in imagination, consider the various degrees of animal life, from the
smallest animalcula to the ape, lion, and elephant; and the more to simplify,
and give facility to such comparison, let us only compare head to head; as for
example, the lobster to the elephant, the elephant to the man.

Permit me here just to observe, how worthy would such a work be of the united
abilities of a Buffon, a Camper, and a Euler, could they be found united, that
the forms of heads might be enumerated and described, philosophically and
mathematically; that it might be demonstrated, that universal brutality* in all
its various kinds, is circumscribed by a determinate line; and that, among the
innumerable lines of brutality, there is not one which is not internally and
essentially different from the line of humanity, which is peculiar and unique.

Thoughts of a Friend on brutal and human Physiognomy.
"Each brute animal has some principal quality by which it is distinguished
from all others. As the make of each is distinct from all others, so also is
the character. This principal character is denoted by a peculiar and visible
form. Each species of beast has certainly a peculiar character, as it has a
peculiar form. May we not hence, by analogy, infer, that predominant qualities
of the mind are as certainly expressed by predominant forms of the body* as
that the peculiar qualities of a species are expressed in the general form of
that species?

"The principal character of the species in animals remains such as it was
given by nature; it neither can be obscured by accessory qualities, nor
concealed by art. The essential of the character can as little be changed a^
the peculiarity of the form. May we not therefore, with the greatest degree of
certainty, affirm such a form is only expressive of such a character?

"Let us now inquire whether this be applicable to man, and whether the form,
which denotes individual character in a beast is significant of similar
character in man, granting that, in man, it may continually be more delicate,
hidden, and complicated. If, on examination, this question be definitely
answered in the affirmative, how much is thereby gained! But it is
conspicuously evident that, in man, the mind is not one character or quality,
but a world of qualities interwoven with and obscuring each other. If each
quality be expressed by its peculiar form, then must variety of qualities be
attended with variety of forms; and these forms, combining and harmonizing
together, must become more difficult to select and decypher.

"May not souls differ from each other merely according to their relative
connection with bodies? May not souls also have a determinate capacity,
proportionate to the form and organization of the body? Hence each object may
make a different impression on each individual; hence one may bear greater
burdens and more misfortunes than another. May not the body be considered as a
vessel with various compartments, cavities, pipes, into which the soul is
poured, and in consequence of which motion and sensation begin to act? And thus
may not the form of the body define the capacity of the mind?"

Thus far my unknown friend. -- Figurative language is dangerous when
discoursing on the soul; yet how can we discourse on it otherwise? I pronounce
no judgment, but rely on sensation and experience, not on words and metaphors.
What is, is, be your language what it will. Whether effects all act from the
external to the internal, or the reverse, I know not, cannot, need not know.
Experience convinces us that, both in man and beast, power and form are in an
unchangeable, harmonized proportion; but whether the form be determined by the
power, or the power by the form, is a question wholly insignificant to the
physiognomist.

Observations on some Animals, and particularly the Horse.
The dog has more forehead above the eyes than most oth^^ beas^^^ but as much
as he appears to gain in the forehead, he loses in the excess of brutal nose,
which has every token of acute scent. Man too, in the act of smelling, elevates
the nostrils. The dog is also defective in the distance of the mouth from the
nose, and in the meanness, or rather nullity of chin.

Whether the hanging ears of a dog are characteristic of slavish subjection as
Buffon has affirmed, who has written much more reasonably on brute than on
human physiognomy, I cannot determine.

The camel and the dromedary are a mixture of the horse, sheep, and ass,
without what is noble in the first. They also appear to have something of the
monkey, at least in the nose. Not made to suffer the bit in the mouth, the
power of (...) wanting. The determining marks concerning (...) bit are found
between the eyes and the nose. No traces of courage or daring are found in
these parts. The threatening snort of the ox and horse is not perceptible in
these ape-like nostrils; none of the powers of plunder and prey, in the feeble
upper and under jaw. Nothing but burden-bearing patience in the eyes.

Wild cruelty, the menacing power of rending, appear in the bear, abhorring man
the friend of ancient savage nature.

The unau ^i, or sloth, is the most indolent, helpless, wretched creature, and
of the most imperfect formation, how extraordinary is the feebleness of the
outline of the head, body, and feet! No sole of the feet, no toes small or
great, which move independently, having but two or three long, inbent ^laws,
which can only m^re together. Its sluggishness, stupidity, and self-neglect are
indescribable.

Who does not read ferocity in the wild boar; a want of all that is noble,
greediness, stupidity, blunt feeling, gross appetite; and in the badger,
ignoble, faithless, malignant, savage gluttony?

The profile of the lion is remarkable, especially the outline of the forehead
and nose. A man, whose profile of forehead and nose should resemble that of the
lion, would certainly be no common man, but such I have never seen. I own, the
nose of the lion is much less prominent than that of man, but much more than
that of any other quadruped. Royal, brutal strength, and arrogant usurpation
are evident, partly in the arching of the nose, partly in its breadth and
parallel lines, and especially in the almost right angle, which the outline of
the eyelid forms with the side of the nose.

In the eye and s^out of the tiger, what blood-thirsty cruelty, what insidious
craft! Can the laugh of Satan himself, at a fallen saint, be more fiendlike
than the head of the triumphant tiger? Cats are tigers in miniature, with the
advantage of domestic education. Little better in character, inferior in power.
Unmerciful to birds and mice as the tiger to the lamb. They delight in
prolonging torture before they devour, and in this they exceed the tiger.

The more violent qualities of the elephant are discoverable in the number and
size of his bones; his intelligence in the roundness of his form; and his
docility in the massiness of his muscles; his art and discretion in the
flexibility of his trunk; his retentive memory in the size and arching of his
forehead, which approaches nearer to the outline of the human forehead than
that of any other beast. Yet how essentially different is it from the human
forehead, in the position of the eye and mouth, since the latter generally
makes nearly a right angle with the axis of the eye and the middle line of the
mouth.

The crocodile proves how very physiognomonical teeth are. This, like other
creatures, but more visibly and infallibly than others, in all its parts,
outlines and points, has physiognomy that cannot be mistaken. Thus debased,
thus despicable, thus knotty, obstinate, and wicked, thus sunken below the
noble horse, terrific, and void of all love and affection, is this fiend
incarnate.

I am but little acquainted with horses, yet it seems to me indubitable, that
there is as great a difference in the physiognomy of horses as in that of men.
The horse deserves to be particularly considered by the physiognomist, because
it is one of those animals whose physiognomy, at least in profile, is so much
more prominent, sharp, and characteristic, than that o^ most other beasts.

"Of all animals the horse is that, which to largeness of size unites most
proportion and elegance in the parts of his body; for, comparing him to those
which are immediately above or below him, we shall perceive that the ass is ill
made, the head of the lion is too large, the legs of the ox too small, the
camel is deformed, and the rhinoceros and elephant too unwieldy. There is
scarcely any beast has so various, so generally marking, so speaking a
countenance, as a beautiful horse.

"In a well made horse, the upper part of the neck, from which the mane flows,
ought to rise at first in a right line; and, as it approaches the head, to form
a curve somewhat similar to the neck of the swan. The lower part of the neck
ought to be rectilinear, in its direction from the chest to the nether jaw, but
a little inclined forward; for, were it perpendicular, the shape of the neck
would be defective. The upper part of the neck should be thin and not fleshy;
nor the mane, which ought to be tolerably full, and the hair long and straight.
A fine neck ought to be long and elevated, yet proportionate to the size of the
horse. If too long and small, the horse would strike the rider with his head;
if too short and fleshy, he would bear heavy on the hand. The head is
advantageously placed when the forehead is perpendicular to the horizon. The
head ought to be bony and small, not too long; the ears near each other, small,
erect, firm, straight, free, and situated on the top of the head. The forehead
should be narrow and somewhat unequal, the hollows filled up; the eyelids thin;
the eyes clear, penetrating, full of ardour, tolerably large, as I may say, and
projecting from the head; the pupil large, the under jaw bony, and rather
thick; the nose somewhat arched, the nostrils open, and well slit, the
partition thin; the lips fine, the mouth tolerably large, the withers high and
sharp. I must beg pardon for this quotation from the Encyclopedic, and for
inserting thus much of the description of a beautiful horse, in a
physiognomonical essay intended to promote the knowledge and the love of man.

The more accurately we observe horses, the more shall we be convinced, that a
separate treatise of physiognomy might be written on them. I have somewhere
heard a general remark, that horses are divided into three classes, the
swan-necked, the stag-necked and the hog-necked. Each of these classes has its
peculiar countenance and character, and from the blending of which various
others originate.

The heads of swan-necked horses are commonly even, the forehead small, and
almost flat; the nose extends, arching from the eyes to the mouth; the nostrils
are wide and open; the mouth small; the ears little, pointed, and projecting;
the eyes large and round; the jaw below, small; above, something broader; the
whole body well proportioned, and the horse beautiful. This kind is cheerful,
tractable, and high spirited. They are very sensible of pain, which, when
dressing, they sometimes express by the voice. Flattery greatly excites their
joy, and they will express their pride of heart by parading and prancing. I
will venture to assert, that a man with a swan-neck, or what is much more
determinate, with a smooth, projecting profile, and flaxen hair, would have
similar sensibility and pride.

The stag-necked has something, in the make of his body, much resembling the
stag itself. The neck is small, large, and scarely bowed in the middle. He
carries his head high. I have seen none of these. They are racers and hunters,
being particularly adapted for swiftness by the make of the body.

The hog-necked. The neck above and below is alike broad; the head hanging
downwards; the middle of the nose is concave, in profile; the ears are long,
thick, and hanging; the eyes small and ugly; the nostrils small, the mouth
large, the whole body round, and the coat long and rough. These horses are
intractable, slow, and vicious; and will run the rider against a wall, stone,
or tree. When held in, they rear, and endeavor to throw the rider. Blows or
coaxing are frequently alike ineffectual, they continue obstinate and restif.

If we examine the different heads of horses, we shall find, that all cheerful,
high-spirited, capricious, courageous horses, have the nose-bone of the profile
unequal; and that most of the vicious, restif, and idle, have the same bone flat
or concave. In the eyes, mouth, and especially in the nostrils and jaw-bones,
are remarkable varieties, concerning which I shall say nothing. I shall here
add some remarks on the horse, communicated by a friend.

The gray is the tenderest of horses, and we may here add, that people with
light hair, if not effeminate, are yet, it is well known, of tender formation
and constitution. The chestnut and iron-grey, the black, and bay, are hardy; the
sorrel are the most hardy, and yet the most subject to disease. The sorrel,
whether well or ill-formed, is treacherous. All treacherous horses lay their
ears in the neck. They stare and stop, and lay down their ears alternately.

The following passage, on the same subject, is cited from another writer:
"When a horse has broad, long, widely separated, hanging ears, we are well
assured he is bad and sluggish. If he lays down his ears alternately, he is
fearful, and apt to start. Thin, pointed, and projecting ears, on the contrary,
denote a horse of good disposition."

We never find that the thick, hog-necked horse is sufficiently tractable for
the riding-house, or that he is of a strong nature when the tail shakes, like
the tail of a dog. We may be certain, that a horse with large cheerful eyes,
and a fine shining coat, if we have no other tokens, is of a good constitution
and understanding.

These remarks are equally applicable to oxen and sheep, and probably to all
other animals. The white ox is not so long serviceable, for draught or labor,
as the black or red: he is more weak or sickly than these. A sheep with short
legs, strong neck, broad back, and cheerful eyes, is a good breeder, and
remains peaceably with the flock. And I am of opinion, that if we may judge of
the internal by the external of beasts, men may be judged of in the same manner.

CHAPTER XLI.
Of Birds, Fishes, Serpents, and Insects.

Birds.
BIRDS, whether compared to each other, or to other creatures, have their
distinct characters. The structure of birds throughout, is lighter than that of
quadrupeds. Nature, ever steadfast to truth, thus manifests herself in the form
of birds. Their necks are more pliant, their heads smaller, their mouths more
pointed, and their garb more bright and shining than those of quadrupeds.

Their distinction of character, or gradation of passive and active power, is
expressed by the following physiognomonical varieties:

1. By the form of the scull. The more flat the scull, the more weak, flexible,
tender, and sensible is the character of the animal. This flatness contains
less, and resists less.

2. By the length, breadth, and arching, or obliquity of their beaks; and here
again we find, when there is arching, there is a greater extent of docility and
capacity.

3. By the eyes which appear to have an exact correspondence with the arching
of the beak.

4. Particularly by the middle line, I cannot say of the mouth, but what is
analagous to the mouth, the beak; the obliquity of which is ever in a
remarkable proportion with the outline of the profile of the head.

Who can behold the eagle hovering in the air, the powerful lord of so many
creatures, without perceiving the seal, the native star of royalty in his
piercing round eye, the form of his head, his strong wings, his talons of
brass, and, in his whole form, his victorious strength, his contemptuous
arrogance, his fearful cruelty, and his ravenous propensity?

Consider the eyes of all living creatures from the eagle to the mole; where
else can be found that lightning glance, which defies the rays of the sun?
Where that capacity for the reception of light? How truly, emphatically, to all
who will hear and understand, is the majesty of his kingly character visible,
not alone in his burning eye, but in the outline of what is analagous to the
eyebone, and in the skin of the head, where anger and courage are seated? But,
throughout his whole form, where are they not?

Compare the vulture with the eagle, and who does not observe, in his
lengthened neck and beak, and in his more extended form, less power and
nobility than in the eagle? In the head of the owl, the ignoble greedy prey; in
the dove, mild, humble timidity; and in the swan, more nobility than in the
goose, with less power than in the eagle, and tenderness than in the dove; more
pliability than in the ostrich; and, in the wild duck, a more savage animal
than in the swan, without the force of the eagle?

Fish.
How different is the profile of a fish from that of a man! How much the
reverse of human perpendicularity! How little is there of countenance when
compared to the lion! How visible is the want of mind, reflection, and cunning.
What little or no analogy to forehead! What an impossibility of covering, of
half, or entirely closing the eyes? The eye itself is merely circular and
prominent, has nothing of the lengthened form of the eye of the fox or elephant.

Serpents.
I will allow physiognomy, when applied to man to be a false science, if any
being throughout nature can be discovered void of physiognomy, or a countenance
which does not express its character. What has less, yet more physiognomy than
the serpent? May we not perceive in it decisive tokens of cunning and
treachery? Certainly not a trace of understanding or deliberate plan. No
memory, no comprehension, but the most unbounded craft and falsehood. How are
these reprobate qualities distinguished in their forms? The very play of their
colors, and wonderful meandering of their spots, appear to announce and to
warn us of their deceit.

All men possessed of real power are upright and honest; craft is but the
substitute of power. I do not here speak of the power contained in the folds of
the serpent; they all want the power to act immediately, without the aid of
cunning. They are formed to "bruise the heel, and to have the head bruised."
The judgment which God has pronounced against them is written on their flat,
impotent forehead, mouth, and eyes.

Insects.
How inexpressibly various are the characteristics impressed by the eternal
Creator on all living beings! How has he stamped on each its legible and
peculiar properties! How especially visible is this in the lowest classes of
animal life! The world of insects is a world of itself. The distance between
this and the world of men I own is great; yet were it sufficiently known, how
useful would it be to human physiognomy! What certain proofs of the physiognomy
of men must be obtained from insect physiognomy!

How visible are their powers of destruction, of suffering and resisting, of
sensibility and insensibility, through all their forms and gradations! Are not
all the compact, hard-winged insects physiognomonically and characteristically
more capable and retentive than various light and tender species of the
butterfly? Is not the softest flesh the weakest, the most suffering, the
easiest to destroy? Are not the insects of least brain the beings most removed
from man, who has the most brain? Is it not perceptible in each species whether
it be warlike, defensive, enduring, weak, enjoying, destructive, easy to be
crushed, or crushing? How distinct in the external character are their degrees
of strength, of defense, of stinging, or of appetite.

The great dragon fly shows its agility and swiftness in the structure of its
wings; perpetually on flight in search of small flies. How sluggish, on the
contrary, is the crawling caterpillar! How carefully does he set his feet as he
ascends a leaf! How yielding his substance, incapable of resistance! How
peaceable, harmless, and indolent is the moth! How full of motion, bravery, and
hardiness, is the industrious ant! How loath to remove, on the contrary, is the
harnessed lady-bird!

CHAPTER XLII.
On Shades.

THOUGH shades are the weakest and most vapid, yet they are at the same time,
when the light is at a proper distance, and falls properly on the countenance
to take the profile accurately, the truest representation that can be given of
man. The weakest, for it is not positive, it is only something negative, only
the boundary line of half the countenance. The truest, because it is the
immediate expression of nature, such as not the ablest painter is capable of
drawing by hand after nature. What can be less the image of a living man than a
shade? Yet how full of speech! Little gold, but the purest.

The shade contains but one line; no motion, light, color, height, or depth;
no eye, ear, nostril, or cheek; but a very small part of the lip; yet how
decisively it is significant! Drawing and painting, it is probable, originated
in shades. They express, as I have said, but little, but the little they do
express is exact. No art can attain to the truth of the shade taken with
precision. Let a shade be taken after nature with the greatest accuracy, and
with equal accuracy be afterward reduced upon fine transparent oil paper. Let
a profile, of the same size, be taken, by the greatest master, in his happiest
moment; then let the two be laid upon each other, and the difference will be
immediately evident.

I never found, after repeated experiments, that the best efforts of art could
equal nature, either in freedom or in precision, but that there was always
something more or less than nature. Nature is sharp and free: whoever studies
sharpness more than freedom will be hard, and whosoever studies freedom more
than sharpness will become diffuse and indeterminate. I can admire him only,
who, equally studious of her sharpness and freedom, acquires equal certainty
and impartiality.

To attain this, artist, imitator of humanity! first exercise yourself in
drawing shades; afterward copy them by hand, and next compare and correct.
Without this you will with difficulty discover the grand secret of uniting
precision and freedom.

I have collected more physiognomonical knowledge from shades alone than from
every other kind of portrait; have improved physiognomonical sensation more by
the sight of them than by the contemplation of ever mutable nature. Shades
collect the distracted attention, confine it to an outline, and thus render the
observation more simple, easy, and precise. Physiognomy has no greater, more
incontrovertable certainty of the truth of its object than that imparted by
shade. If the shade, according to the general sense and decision of all men,
can decide so much concerning character, how much more must the living body,
the whole appearance, and action of the man! If the shade be oracular, the
voice of truth, the word of God, what must the living original be illuminated
by the spirit of God!

Hundreds have asked, and hundreds will continue to ask, "What can be expected
from mere shades?" Yet no shade can be viewed by any one of these hundred, who
will not form some judgment on it, often accurately, more accurately than I
could have judged.

In order to make the astonishing significance of shades conspicuous, we ought
either to compare opposite characters of men taken in shade, or, which may be
more convincing, to cut out of black paper, or draw, imaginary countenances
widely dissimilar. Or, again, when we have acquired some proficiency in
observation* to double black paper, and cut two countenances; and, afterward,
by cutting with the scissars, to make slight alterations, appealing to our eye,
or physiognomonical feeling, at each alteration; or, lastly, only to take
various shades of the same countenance, and compare them together. Such
experiments would astonish us, to perceive what great effects are produced by
slight alteraons.

The common method of taking shades is accompanied with many inconveniences. It
is hardly possible the person drawn should sit sufficiently still; the designer
is obliged to change his place, he must approach so near to the person that
motion is almost inevitable, and the designer is in the most inconvenient
position; neither are the preparatory steps every where possible, nor simple
enough. A seat purposely contrived would be more convenient. The shade should
be taken on post paper, or rather on thin oiled paper, well dried. Let the head
and back be supported by a chair and the shade fall on the oil-paper behind a
clear flat polished glass. Let the drawer sit behind the glass, holding the
frame with his left hand, and, having a sharp black lead pencil, draw with the
right. The glass, in a detached Mendel^ohn
Spalding
Roghow
(...)
Lavater.
sliding-frame, may be raised or lowered, according to the height of the
person. The bottom of the glass frame, being thin, will be best of iron, and
should be raised so as to rest steadily upon the shoulder. In the center, upon
the glass, should be a small piece of wood or iron, to which fasten a small
round cushion, supported by a short pin, scarcely half an inch long, which also
may be raised or lowered, and against which the person drawn may lean.

CHAPTER XLIII.
Description of Plate VI.

Number I. MENDELSOHN.
IN the forehead and nose, penetration and sound understanding are evident. The
mouth is much more delicate than the mouth of 2.

Number II. SPALDING.
Clear ideas, love of elegance, puri^y, accuracy of thought and action; does
not easily admit the unnatural. -- The forehead not sufficiently
characteristic, but fine taste in the nose.

Number III. ROGHOW.
Has more good sense; prompt, accurate perception of truth, and delica^y,than
4: but I suspect less acuteness.

Number IV. MENDELSOHN.
Whoever hesitates concerning the character of this head, never can have
observed the forehead. -- This arch, abstractedly considered, especially in the
upper part, has more capacity than Nos. 2 and 3. In the upper outline, also, of
the under part, understanding and exquisite penetration cannot be overlooked.

Number V.
One of those masculine profiles which generally please. Conceal the under
chin, and an approach to greatness is perceptible; except that greater
variation in the outline is wanting, especially in the nose and forehead. The
choleric phlegmatic man is visible in the whole; especially in the eyebrows,
nose, and bottom part of the chin; as likewise are integrity, fidelity,
goodness, and complaisance.

Number VI. LAVATER.
This shade, though imperfect may easily be known. It must pass without
comment, or rather the commentary is before the world, is in this book. Let
that speak; I am silent.

CHAPTER XLIV.
A Word to Travelers.

THERE appear to me to be the three things indispensable to travelers, health,
money, and physiognomy. Therefore, a physiognomonical word to travelers. I
could wish, indeed, that, instead of a word, a traveller's physiognomonical
companion were written; but this must be done by an experienced traveller. In
the mean time I shall bid him farewell, with the following short advice:

What do you seek, travelers? What is your wish? What would you see more
remarkable, more singular, more rare, more worthy to be examined, than the
varieties of humanity? This indeed is fashionable. You inquire after men; you
seek the wisest, best, and greatest men, especially the most famous. Why is
your curiosity limited to seeing only? Would it not be better you should
illuminate your own minds by the light of others, and animate yourselves by
their ardour?

His curiosity is childish, which is merely confined to seeing, whose ambition
desires only to say, I have beheld that man. He who would disregard views so
confined, must study such men physiognomonically; if he would learn wisdom, he
must be able to compare and judge of the relation between their works, their
fame and their form. By this only may much be learned. By this may the stream
be compared to the fountain, the quality of the waters examined, their course,
their gentle murmurs, or more boisterous war. The inquirer may ask, what is the
degree of originality of those men, what is borrowed, what is internal, what
external? This forehead, and these eyebrows, will thus versify, thus translate,
thus criticize; therefore, on this eye depends the fate of the writer, the
blockhead, or the man of genius. This nose thus estimates the mortal and the
immortal, in human performances. As are the features, so will be the mind.

Yes, scholars of nature, you have much to learn from the countenances of
famous men. In them you will read, that the wasp will dare to alight on the
nose of the hero. To (...) it will be pleasure when you have acquired this
physiognomonical sensation; for, without this, you will but travel in the dark;
you will but be led through a picture-gallery blindfold, only that you might
say, I too have been in that gallery.

Could I travel unknown, I would also visit artists, men of learning, and
philosophers, men famous in their respective countries; ^ut it should either be
my adieu, as the thing least important, or as a recreation on my arrival.
Pardon me, men of renown, I have been credulous in your favor, but I daily
become more circumspect. Far be it from me to depreciate your worth. I know
many, whose presence does not diminish but increase fame; yet will I be
careful, that remorse shall neither dazzle nor cloud my reason.

I would rather mix unknown with the multitude, visit churches, public walks,
hospitals, orphan-houses, and assemblies of ecclesiastics and men of the law. I
would first consider the general form of the inhabitants, their height,
proportion, strength, weakness, motion, complexion, attitude, gesture, and
gait. I would observe them individually, see, compare, close my eyes, trace in
imagination all I had seen, open them again, correct my memory, and close and
open them alternately. I would study for words, write, and draw with a few
determinate traits, the general form, so easy to be discovered. I would compare
my drawings with the known general form of the people. How easily might a
summary, an index of the people be obtained.

Having made these familiar to me, I would descend to the particular, would
search for the general form of the head, would ask, Is it most confined to the
cylindrical, the spherical, the square, the unequal, or the concave? Is the
countenance open, is it writhed, is it free, or forked? I would next examine
the forehead, then the eyebrows, the outline and color of the eyes, the nose,
and especially the mouth when it is open; and the teeth, with their
appearances, to discover the national characteristic.

Could I but define the line of the opening of the lips, in seven promiscuous
countenances, I imagine I should have found the general physiognomonical
character of the nation or place. I almost dare to establish it as an axiom,
that what is common to six or seven persons of any place, taken promiscuously,
is more or less common to the whole. Exceptions there may be, but they will be
rare.

I next would plant myself in a public walk, or at the crossing of streets.
There I would wait patiently for the unknown noble countenance, uncorrupted by
fame and adulation, which certainly, most certainly, I should find: for in all
countries on earth, wherever a hundred common men are assembled, one not common
may be found; and out of a thousand, ten; and I must have, indeed, little eye,
little sensibility for noble humanity, little faith in Providence, which seeks
its adorers, if I did not find this one in a hundred, or at least in the ten
among the thousand. He that seeks shall find. I waited not in vain. He came,
I found him, he passed by me. And what (...) the tokens by which I discovered
him, in every town, every nation, under every cope of heaven, and among all
people, kindred, and tongues? -- By the general combination of the countenance,
by the upper outline of the forehead, the eyebrows, the basis of the nose, and
the mouth, so conformable to each other, so parallel and horizontal, at the
first glance. By the wrinkless, compressed, yet open forehead, the powerful
eyebrows; the easily discerned, easily delineated space between the eyebrows,
which extends itself to the back of the nose, like the great street from the
marketplace to the chief gate of a city. By the shut but freely breathing
mouth; the chin, neither haggard nor fleshy; the deep and shining attraction of
the eye; which all, uncautiously and unintentionally betrayed themselves to my
research: or, I discovered him even in his foreign and distorted form, from
which the arrogant, self-supposed handsome, would turn with contempt. I see
through his disguise, as I should the hand of a great master through the smear
of varnish.

I approach the favorite of heaven. I question him concerning what I do, and
what I do not wish to know, that I may hear the voice of the soul proceeding
from the mouth; and, viewing him nearer, I see all the obliquities of
distortion vanish. I ask him concerning his occupation, his family, his place
of residence. I inquire the road thither. I come unexpectedly upon him into his
house, into his workshop; he rises, I oblige him to be seated, to continue his
labor. I see his children, his wife, and am delighted. He knows not what I
want, nor do I know myself, yet I am pleased with him, and he with me. I
purchase something or nothing, as it happens. I inquire particularly after his
friends. "You have but few, but those few are faithful." He stands astonished,
smiles or weeps, in the innocence and goodness of his heart, which he wishes to
conceal, but which is open as day. He gains my affection; our emotions are
reciprocally expanded and strengthened; we separate reluctantly, and I know I
have entered a house which is entered by the angels of God.

Oh! how gratefully, how highly is he rewarded for his labors who travels,
interested in behalf of humanity, and with the eyes of a man, to collect, in
the spirit, the children of God, who are scattered over the world! This appears
to me to be the supreme bliss of man, as it must be of angels.

If I meet him not, I have no resource but in society. Here I ^ear him most who
speaks least, mildest, and most unaffectedly. Wherever I meet the smile of
self-sufficiency, or the oblique look of envy, I turn away, and seek him who
remains oppressed by the loud voice of confidence. I set myself rather beside
the answerer than the man of clamorous loquacity; and still rather beside the
humble inquirer than the voluble solver of all difficulties.

He who hastens too fast, or lags behind, is no companion of mine. I rather
seek him who walks with a free, firm, and even step; who looks but little about
him; who neither carries his head aloft, nor contemplates his legs and feet. If
the hand of affliction be heavy on him, I set myself by his side, take his
hand, and, with a glance, infuse conviction to his soul, that God is love.

I fix in my memory the simple outlines of the loud and the violent, the
laugher and the smiler, of him who gives the key, and him who takes. I then
commit them to paper; my collection increases. I compare, arrange, judge, and
am astonished. I every where find similarity of traits, similarity of
character; the same humanity every where, and every where the same tokens.

CHAPTER XLV.
A Word to Princes and Judges.

FOR your use, most important of men, how willingly would I write a treatise.
Who so much as you need a perfect knowledge of man, free from cabal, or the
intervention of self-interest! Suffer me to approach your throne, and present
my petition.

In your most secret common place-book keep an index to each class of character
among men, taken from at least ten of the most accurate proofs; not at a
distance, not among foreigners, but seek at home for the wisest and best of
your own subjects. Wherever a wise and good prince governs, there are excellent
subjects. Such a prince believes that he has such subjects, although at the
moment he should be unacquainted with them; or at least, that he has subjects
capable of wisdom and goodness. Wherever one good person is, there certainly
are two, as certainly as where the female is, there will the male be.

Suffer me, princes, consecrated as you are among men, to entreat you, for the
honor of humanity, principally to study, to seek for, and to seize on
excellence. Judge not too suddenly, nor by mere appearances. That which a
prince once approves, it may afterward be difficult or dangerous to reject.
Depend not on the testimony of others, which, to princes especially, is ever
exaggerated either in praise or blame; but examine the countenance, which,
though it may dissemble to a prince, or rather to the dignity of a prince,
cannot deceive him as a man. Having once discovered wisdom and goodness in a
subject, honor such a subject as the best blessing which heaven can, in this
world, bestow upon its favorites. Seek features that are strong, but not
forbidding; gentle, yet not effeminate; positive, without turbulence; natural,
not arrogant; with open eyes, clear aspects, strong noses near the forehead,
and with such let your thrones be surrounded.

Entrust your secrets to proportionate and parallel drawn countenances: to
horizontal, firm, compressed eyebrows; channelled, not too rigorously closed,
red, active, but not relaxed or withered lips. Yet I will forbear to delineate,
and again only entreat, that the countenance may be sacred to you for the sake
of goodness and wisdom.

And you, judges, judge not indeed by appearanances, but examine according to
appearances, Justice blindfold without physiognomy is as unnatural as blindfold
love. There are countenances which cannot have committed a multitude of vices.
Study the traits of each vice, and the forms in which vice naturally or
unwillingly resides. There are capabilities and incapabilities in the
countenance, things which it can will, others which it cannot. Each passion,
open or concealed, has its peculiar language. The appearance of innocence is as
determinate to the experienced eye as the appearance of health.

Bring guilt and innocence face to face, and examine them; in your presence,
and when they suppose you do not observe them; in the presence and in the
absence of witnesses; with justice see, with justice hear and obey, the
determined voice of unprejudiced conviction. Remark their walk when they enter,
and when they leave the judgment-hall. Let the light fall upon their
countenances, be yourself in the shade. Physiognomy will render the torture A
few years since one philosopher wrote to another, the torture will soon be
abolished in Austria. It was asked, What shall be its subst^^ute? The
penetrating look of the judge, replied Sonnensels. Physiognomy will, in
twenty-^^ve years, become a part of jurisprudence, instead of the torture, and
lectures will be read in the universities on the Physiognom^c^ ^orence, instead
of the Medicina ^orensis.
unnecessary, will deliver innocence, will make the most obdurate vice turn
pale, will teach us how we may act upon the most hardened. Every thing human
must be imperfect, yet will it be evident that the torture, more disgraceful to
man than the halter, the axe, and the wheel, is infinitely more uncertain and
dangerous than physiognomy. The pain of torture is more horrible even than the
succeeding death, yet it is only to prove, to discover truth. Physiognomy shall
not execute, and yet it shall prove; and by its proof, vice alone, and not
innocence, shall suffer. O ye judges of men, be men, and humanity shall teach
you, with more open eyes, to see and abhor all that is human!

CHAPTER XLVI.
A Word to the Clergy.

YOU also my brethren, need a certain degree of physiognomy, and perhaps,
princes excepted, no men more. You ought to know whom you have before you, that
you may discern spirits, and portion out the word of truth to each, according
to his need and capacity. To whom can a knowledge of the degree of actual and
possible virtue, in all who appear before you, be more advantageous than to you?

To me physiognomy is more indispensable than the liturgy. It is to me alike
profitable for doctrine, exhortation, comfort, correction, examination; with
the healthy, with the sick, the dying, the malefactor; in judicial
examinations, and the education of youth. Without it, I should be as the blind
leading the blind.

A single countenance might rob me of ardour or inspire me with enthusiasm.
Whenever I preach, I generally seek the most noble countenance, on which I
endeavor to act, and the weakest when teaching children. It is generally our
own fault if our hearers are inattentive; if they do not themselves give the
key, in which it is necessary they should be addressed.

Every teacher possessed of physiognomonical sensation, will easily discern and
arrange the principal classes among his hearers, and what each class can and
cannot receive. Let six or seven classes, of various capacities, be selected;
let a chief, representative, a characteristic countenance, of each class be
chosen: let these countenances be fixed in the memory, and let the preacher
accommodate himself to each; speaking thus to one, and thus to another, and in
such a manner to a third.

There cannot be a more natural, effective, or definite incitement to
eloquence, than supposing some characteristic countenance present of the
capacity of which almost mathematical certainty may be obtained. Having six or
seven, I have nearly my whole audience before me. I do not then speak to the
winds. God teaches us by physiognomy to act upon the best of men according to
the best of means.

CHAPTER XLVII.
Physiognomonical Elucidations of Countenances.

A REGULAR well formed countenance, is where all the parts are remarkable for
their symmetry. The principal features, as the eyes, nose, and mouth, neither
small nor bloated; yet distinct and well-defined. In which the position of the
parts, taken together, and viewed at a distance, appears nearly horizontal and
parallel.

A beautiful countenance is that in which, besides the proportion and position
of the parts, harmony, uniformity, and mind, are visible; in which nothing is
superfluous, nothing deficient, nothing disproportionate, nothing superadded,
but all is conformity and concord.

A pleasant countenance does not necessarily require perfect symmetry and
harmony, yet nothing must be wanting, nothing burdensome. Its pleasantry will
principally exist in the eye and lips, which must have nothing commanding,
arrogant, contemptuous, but must generally speak complacency, affability and
benevolence.

A gracious countenance arises out of the pleasant, when, far from any thing
assuming, to the mildest benevolence are added affability and purity.

A charming countenance must not simply consist either of the beautiful, the
pleasant, or the gracious; but when to these is added a rapid propriety of
motion, which renders it charming.

An insinuating countenance leaves no power to active or passive suspicion. It
has something more than the pleasant, by infusing that into the heart, which
the pleasant only manifests.

Other species of these delightful countenances are, the attracting, the
winning, the irrsistible.

Very distinct from all these are the amusing, the divertingly loquacious, the
merely mild, and also the tender and delicate.

Superior, and more lovely still, is the purely innocent, where no distorted,
oblique muscle, whether in motion, or at rest, is ever seen.

This is still more exalted, when it is full of soul, of natural sympathy and
power to excite sympathy.

When in a pure countenance good power is accompanied by a spirit of order, I
may call it an attic countenance.

Spiritually beautiful may be said of a countenance where nothing thoughtless,
inconsiderate, rude, or severe, is to be expected; and the aspect of which
immediately and mildly incites emotion in the principal powers of the mind.

Noble is when we have not the least indiscretion to fear, and when the
countenance is exalted above us, without a possibility of envy, while it is
less sensible of its own superiority than of the pleasure we receive in its
presence.

A great countenance will have few small secondary traits; will be in grand
divisions, without wrinkles; must exalt, must affect us, in sleep, in plaster
of Paris, in every kind of caricature; as, for example, that of Philip de
Comines.

A sublime countenance can neither be painted nor described; that by which it
is distinguished from all others can only be felt. It must not only move, it
must exalt the spectator. We must at once feel ourselves greater and less in
its presence than in the presence of all others. Whoever is conscious of its
excellence, and can despise or offend it, may, as has been before said,
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost.

CHAPTER XLVIII.
Physiognomonical Anecdotes.

1. I REQUIRE nothing of thee, said a father to his innocent son, when bidding
him farewell, but that you will bring me back your present countenance.

2. A noble, amiable, and innocent young lady, who had been educated
principally in the country, saw her face in the glass as she passed it with a
candle in her hand, retiring from evening prayers, and having just laid down
her Bible. Her eyes were cast to the ground, with inexpressible modesty, at the
sight of her own image. She passed the winter in town, surrounded by adorers,
hurried away by dissipation, and plunged in trifling amusements. She forgot her
Bible and her devotion. In the beginning of spring she returned to her country
seat, her chamber, and the table on which the Bible lay. Again she had the
candle in her hand, and again saw herself in the glass. She turned pale, put
down the candle, retreated to a sofa, and fell on he^ knees: "O God! I no
longer know my own face. How am I degraded! My follies and vanities are all
written in my countenance. Wherefore have they been neglected, illegible, to
this instant? O come and expel, come and utterly efface them, mild
tranquillity, sweet devotion, and ye gentle cares of benevolent love!"

3. "I will forfeit my life, (said Titus of the priest Tacitus) if this man be
not an arch knave. I have three times observed him sigh and weep without cause;
and (...) times turn aside to conceal a laugh he could not restrain, when vice
or misfortune were mentioned."

4. A stranger said to a physiognomist, "How many dollars is my face worth?" --
"It is hard to determine," replied the latter. "It is worth fifteen hundred,
(continued the questioner) for so many has a person lent me upon it, to whom I
was a total stranger."

5. A poor man asked alms. "How much do you want?" said the person of whom he
asked, astonished at the peculiar honesty of his countenance. "How shall I dare
to fix a sum?" answered the needy person. "Give me what you please, Sir, I
shall be contented and thankful." -- "Not so," replied the physiognomist, "as
God lives I will give you what you want, be it little or much." -- "Then, Sir,
be pleased to give me eight shillings." -- "Here they are; had you asked a
hundred guineas you should have had them."

CHAPTER XLIX.
Miscellaneous Extracts from K^mpf's Essay on the Temperaments, with Remarks.

1. WILL not physiognomy be to man what the looking-glass is to an ugly woman?

Let me also add to the handsome woman. The wise looks in the glass, and washes
away spots; the fool looks, turns back, and remains as he was.

2. "Each temperament, each character, has its good and bad. The one has
inclinations of which the other is incapable. The one has more than the other.
The ingot is of more worth than the guineas individually, into which it is
coined; yet the latter are most useful. The tulip delights by its beauty, the
carnation by its smell. The unseemly wormwood displeases both taste and smell,
yet, in medical virtue, is superior to both. There it is that each contributes
to the perfection of the whole."

The carnation should not wish to be a tulip, the finger an eye, nor the weak
desire to act within the circle of the strong. Each has its peculiar circle, as
it has its peculiar form. To wish to depart from this circle, is like wishing
to be transported into another body.

3. "Within the course of a year, we are assured, that the activity of nature
changes the body, yet we are sensible of no change of mind, although our body
has been subjected to the greatest changes, in consequence of meat, drink, air,
and other accidents; the difference of air and manner of life does not change
the temperament."

The foundation of character lies deeper, and is, in a certain degree,
independent of all accidents. It is probably the spiritual and immortal
texture, into which all that is visible, corruptible and transitory, is
interwoven.

4. "A block of wood may be carved by the statuary into what form he shall
please; he may make it an AEsop or an Antinous, but he will never change the
inherent nature of the wood."

To know and distinguish the materials and form of men, so far as knowledge
contributes to their proper application, is the highest and most effectual
wisdom of which human nature is capable.

5. "In the eyes of certain persons there is something sublime, which beams and
exacts reverence. This sublimity is the concealed power of raising themselves
above others, which is not the wretched effect of constraint, but primitive
essence. Each finds himself obliged to submit to this secret power, without
knowing why, as soon as he perceives that look, implanted by nature to inspire
reverence, shining in the eyes. Those who possess this natural, sovereign
essence, rule as lords, or lions, among men by native privilege, with heart and
tongue conquering all.

6. "There are only four principal aspects, all different from each other, the
ardent, the dull, the fixed, and the fluctuating."

The proof of all general propositions is their application. Let
physiognomonical axioms be applied to known individuals, friends or enemies,
and their truth or falsehood, precision or inaccuracy, will easily be
determined. Let us make the experiment with the above, and we shall certainly
find there are numerous aspects which are not included within these four: such
as the luminous aspect, very different from the ardent, and neither fixed like
the melancholic, nor fluctuating like the sanguine.

There is the look or aspect, which is at once rapid and fixed, and, as I may
say, penetrates and attaches at the same moment. There is the tranquilly active
look, neither choloric nor phlegmatic. I think it would be better to arrange
them into the giving, the receiving, and the giving and receiving combined; or
into intentive and extensive; or into the attracting, repelling, and
unparticipating; into the contracted, the relaxed, the strained, the attaining,
the unattaining, the tranquil, the steady, the flow, the open, the close, the
cold, the amorous, the complying, the firm, the courageous, the faithful, etc.

CHAPTER L.
Upon Portrait Painting.

PORTRAIT painting, is the most natural, manly, useful, noble, and, however
apparently easy, the most difficult of arts. Love first discovered this
heavenly art. Without love what could it perform?

Since a great part of this present work, and the science on which it treats,
depend on this art, it is proper that something should be said on the subject.
Something; for how new, how important, and great a work might be written on
this art! For the honor of man, and of the art, I hope such a work will be
written. I do not think it ought to be the work of a painter, however great in
his profession, but of the understanding friend of physiognomy, the man of
taste, the daily confidential observer of the great Portrait painter.

Sultzer, that philosopher of taste and discernment, has an excellent article,
in his dictionary, on this subject, under the word Portrait. But what can be
said in a work so confined, on a subject so extensive? Again, whoever will
employ his thoughts on this art, will find that it is sufficient to exercise
all the searching, all the active powers of man; that it never can be entirely
learned, nor ever can arrive at ideal perfection.

I shall now attempt to recapitulate some of the avoidable and unavoidable
difficulties attendant on this art; the knowledge of which, in my opinion, is
as necessary to the painter as to the physiognomist.

Let us first inquire, What is portrait painting? It is the communication, the
preservation of the image of some individual; the art of suddenly depicting all
that can be depicted of that half of man, which is rendered apparent, and which
never can be conveyed in words. If what Gothe has somewhere said, be true, and
in my opinion nothing can be more true, that the best text for a commentary on
man, is his presence, his countenance, his form. How important then is the art
of portrait painting*

To this observation of Gothe's, I will add a passage on the subject from
Sultzer's excellent dictionary: "Since no object of knowledge whatever can be
more important to us than a thinking and seeling soul, it cannot be denied but
that man, considered according to his form, even though we should neglect what
is wonderful in him, is the most important of visible objects"

The portrait painter should know, feel, and be penetrated with this;
penetrated with reverence for the greatest work of the greatest master. Were
such the subject of his meditation, not from constraint, but native sensation;
were it as natural to him as the love of life, how important, how sacred to him
would his art become! Sacred to him should be the living countenance as the
text of holy scripture to the translator. As careful should the one be not to
falsify the work, as should be the other not to falsify the word of God.

How great is the contempt which an excellent translator of an excellent work
deserves, whose mind is wholly inferior to the mind of his original. And is it
not the same with the portrait painter? The countenance is the theater on which
the soul exhibits itself: here must its emanations be studied and caught.
Whoever cannot seize these emanations, cannot paint; and whoever cannot seize
these emanations, cannot paint; and whoever cannot paint these, is no portrait
painter.

Each perfect portrait is an important painting, since it displays the human
mind with the peculiarities of personal character. In such we contemplate a
being where understanding, inclinations, sensations, passions, good and bad
qualities of mind and heart are mingled in a manner peculiar to itself. We here
frequently see them better than in nature herself, since in nature nothing is
fixed, all is swift, all is transient. In nature also we seldom behold the
features under that propitious aspect in which they will be transmitted by the
able painter.

Could we indeed seize the sleeting transitions of nature, or had ^he her
moments of stability, it would then be much more advantageous to contemplate
nature than her likeness; but this being impossible, and since likewise few
people will suffer themselves to be observed, sufficiently to deserve the name
of observation, it is to me indisputable, that a better knowledge of man may be
obtained from portraits than from nature, she being thus uncertain, thus
fugitive.

Hence the rank of the portrait painter may easily ^e determined; he stands
next to the historical painter. Nay history painting itself derives a part of
its value from its portraits; for expression, one of the important requisites
in historical painting, will be the more estimable, natural, and strong, the
more of actual physiognomy is expressed in the countenances, and copied after
nature. A collection of excellent portraits is highly advantageous to the
historical painter for the study of expression.

Where shall we find the historical painter, who can represent real beings with
all the decorations of fiction? Do we not see them all copying copies? True it
is, they frequently copy from imagination; but this imagination is only stored
with the fashionable figures of their own or former times.

This premised, let us now enumerate some of the surmountable difficulties of
portrait painting. I am conscious the freedom with which I shall speak my
thoughts will offend, yet to give offense is (...) from my intention. I wish to
aid, to teach that art, which is the imitation of the works of God: I wish
improvement. And how is improvement possible without a frank and undisguised
discovery of defects?

In all the works of portrait painters which I have seen, I have remarked the
want of a more philosophical, that is to say, a more just, intelligible, and
universal knowledge of men. The insect painter, who has no accurate knowledge
of insects, the form, the general, the particular, which is appropriated to
each insect, however good a copyist he may be, will certainly be a bad painter
of insects. The portrait painter, however excellent a copyist, (a thing much
less general than is imagined by connoisseurs) will paint portraits ill, if he
have not the most accurate knowledge of the form, proportion, connection, and
dependence of the great and minute parts of the human body, as far as they have
a remarkable influence on the superficies; if he has not most accurately
investigated each individual member and feature. For my own part, be my
knowledge what it may, it is far from accurate in what relates to the minute
specific traits of each sensation, each member, each feature; yet I daily
remark that this acute, this indispensable knowledge, is at present every where
uncultivated, unknown, and difficult to convey to the most intelligent painters.

Whoever will be at the trouble of considering a number of men promiscuously
taken, feature by feature, will find that each ear, each mouth, not
withstanding their infinite diversity, have yet their small curves, corners,
characters, which are common to all, and which are found stronger or weaker,
more or less marking, in all men who are not monsters born, at least in these
parts.

Of what advantage is all our knowledge of the great proportions of the body
and countenance? (Yet even that part of knowledge is, by far, not sufficiently
(...), not sufficiently accurate. Some future physiognomonical painter will
justify this assertion, till when be it considered as nothing more than cavil.)
Of what advantage, I say, is all our knowledge of the great proportions, when
the knowledge of the finer traits, which are equally true, general,
determinate, and no less significant, is wanting? And this want is so great,
that I appeal to those who are best informed, whether many of the ablest
painters, who have painted numerous portraits, have any tolerably accurate or
general theory of the mouth only. I do not mean the anatomical mouth, but the
mouth of the painter, which he ought to see and may see, without any anatomical
knowledge.

I have examined volume after volume of engravings of portraits, after the
greatest masters, and am therefore entitled to speak. But let us confine
observations to the mouth. Having previously studied infants, boys, youth,
manhood, old age, maidens, wives, matrons, with respect to the general
properties of the mouth; and having discovered these, let us compare, and we
shall find that almost all painters have failed in the general theory of the
mouth; that it seldom happens, and seems only to happen by accident, that any
master has understood these general properties. Yet how indescribably much
depends on them! What is the particular, what the characteristic, but shades of
the general! As it is with the mouth, so it is with the eyes, eyebrows, nose,
and each part of the countenance.

The same proportion exists between the great features of the face; and as
there is this general proportion in all countenances, however various, so is
there a similar proportion between the small traits of these parts. Infinitely
varied are the great features, in their general combination and proportion. As
infinitely varied are the shades of the small traits, in these features,
however great their general resemblance (...) Without an accurate knowledge of
the proportion of the principal features, as for example, of the eyes and
mouth, to each other, it must ever be mere accident, and accident that indeed
rarely happens, when such proportion exists in the works of the painter.
Without an accurate knowledge of the particular constituent parts, and traits
of each principal feature, I once again repeat, it must be accident, miraculous
accident, should any one of them be justly delineated.

This remark may induce the reflecting artist to study nature intimately by
principle, and to show him, if he be in search of permanent fame, that, though
he ought to behold and study the works of the greatest masters with esteem and
reverence, he yet ought to examine and judge for himself. Let him not make the
virtue modesty his plea, for under this does omnipresent mediocrity shelter
itself. Modesty, indeed, is not so properly virtue as the garb and ornament of
virtue, and of existing positive power. Let him, I say, examine for himself,
and study nature in whole and in part, as if no man ever had observed, or ever
should observe, but himself. Deprived of this, young artist, thy glory, will
but resemble a meteor's blaze; it will only be founded on the ignorance of thy
cotemporaries.

By far the greatest part of the best portrait painters, when most successful,
like the majority of physiognomists, content themselves with expressing the
character of the passions in the moveable, the muscular features of the face.
They do not understand, they laugh at, rules which prescribe the grand outline
of the countenance as indispensable to portrait painting, independent of the
effects produced by the action of the muscles.

Till institutions shall be formed for the improvement of portrait painting,
perhaps till a physiognomonical society or academy shall produce
physiognomonical portrait painters, we shall at best but creep in the regions
of physiognomy, where we might otherwise soar. One of the greatest obstacles to
physiognomy is the actual, incredible imperfection of this art. There is
generally a defect of eye, or hand of the painter, or the object is defective
which is to be delineated, or, perhaps, all three. The artist cannot discover
what (...), or cannot draw it when he discovers it. The object continually
alters its position, which ought to be so exact, so continually the same; or
should it not, and should the painter be endowed with an all-observing eye, an
all-imitative hand, still there is the last insuperable difficulty, that of the
position of the body, which can but be momentary, which is constrained, false,
and unnatural, when more than momentary.

What I have said is trifling, indeed, to what might be said. According to the
knowledge I have of it, this is yet uncultivated ground. How little has Sultzer
himself said on the subject! But what could he say in a dictionary? A work
wholly dedicated to this is necessary to examine and decide on the works of the
best portrait painters, and to insert all the cautions and rules necessary for
the young artist, in consequence of the infinite variety, yet incredible
uniformity, of the human countenance.

The artist who wishes to paint portraits perfectly, must so paint, that each
spectator may, with truth exclaim, "This is indeed to paint! this is true,
living likeness; perfect nature; it is not painting! Outline, form, proportion,
position, attitude, complexion, light and shade, freedom, ^ase, nature! Nature
in every characteristic disposition! Nature in the complexion, in each trait,
in her most beauteous, happiest moments, her most select, most propitious state
of mind; near at a distance, on every side Truth and Nature! Evident to all
men, all ages, the ignorant and the connoisseur; most conspicuous to him who
has most knowledge; no suspicion of art; a countenance in a mirror, to which we
would speak, that speaks to us; that contemplates more than it is contemplated;
we rush to it, we embrace it, we are enchanted!"

Emulate such excellence, young artists, and the least of your seize in
this age will be riches and honor, and fame in futurity. With tears you will
receive the thanks of father, friend, and husband, and your work will honor
that Being, whose creations it is the noblest gift of man to imitate, only in
their superficies, and during a single instant of their existence.

CHAPTER LI.
Description of Plate VII.

Number 1. The late KING of PRUSSIA.
HOW much yet how little is there of the royal countenance in this copy! The
covered forehead, may be suspected from this nose, this sovereign feature. The
forked descending wrinkles of the nose are expressive of killing contempt. The
great eyes, with a nose so bony, denotes a firmness and fire not easily to be
withstood. Wit and satirical fancy are apparent in the mouth though defectively
drawn. There is something minute seen in the chin which cannot well be in
nature.

Number 2. The EMPRESS of RUSSIA.
Except the smallness of the nostril, and the distance of the eyebrow from the
outline of the forehead, no one can mistake the princely, the superior, Late K
of Prussia.
(...) of Russia.
Voltaire.
Malherbe.
Voisin.
Lavater.
the masculine firmness of this, nevertheless seminine, but fortunate and kind
countenance.

Number 3. VOLTAIRE.
Precision is wanting to the outline of the eye, power to the eyebrows, the
sting, the scourge of satire to the forehead. The under part of the profile, on
the contrary, speaks a flow of wit, acute, exuberant, exalted, ironical, never
deficient in reply.

Number 4. MALHERBE.
Here is a high, comprehensive, powerful, firm, retentive, French forehead,
that appears to want the open, free, noble essence of the former; has something
rude and productive; is more choleric; and its firmness appears to border on
harshness.

Number 5. VOISIN.
The delicate construction of the forehead, the aspect of the man of the world,
the beauty of the nose, in particular, the somewhat rash, satirical mouth, the
pleasure loving chin, all show the Frenchman of a superior class. -- The
excellent companion, the fanciful wit, the supple courtier, are every where
apparent.

Number 6. LAVATER.
A bad likeness of the author of these fragments, yet not to be absolutely
mistaken. The whole aspect, especially the mouth, speaks inoffensive
tranquillity, and benevolence bordering on weakness; -- More understanding and
less sensibility in the nose than the author supposes himself to possess --
Some talent for observation in the eye and eyebrows.

CHAPTER LII.
Miscellaneous Quotations.

1. "CAMPANELLA has not only made very accurate observations on human faces,
but was very expert in mimicking such as were any way remarkable. Whenever he
thought proper to penetrate into the inclinations of those he had to deal with,
he composed his face, his gestures, and his whole body, as nearly as he could
into the exact similitude of the person he intended to examine, and then
carefully observed what turn of mind he seemed to acquire by his change. So
that, says my author, he was able to enter into the disposition and thoughts of
people, as effectually as if he had been changed into the very man. I have
often observed that, on mimicking the gestures and looks of angry, or placid,
or frightened, or daring men, I have involuntarily found my mind turned into
that passion, whose appearance I endeavored to imitate. Nay, I am convinced,
it is hard to avoid it, though one strove to separate the passion from its
correspondent gestures. Our minds and bodies are so closely and intimately
connected, that one is incapable of pain or pleasure without the other.
Campanella, of whom we have been speaking, could so abstract his attention from
any sufferings of his body, that he was able to endure the rack itself without
much pain; and, in lesser pains, every body must have observed, that, when we
can employ our attention on any thing else, the pain has been for a time
suspended. On the other hand, if by any means the body is indisposed to perform
such gestures, or to be stimulated into such emotions as any passion usually
produces in it, that passion itself never can arise, though it should be merely
mental, and immediately affecting none of the senses. As an opiate or spiritous
liquor shall suspend the operation of grief, fear, or anger, in spite of all
our efforts to the contrary; and this by inducing in the body a disposition
contrary to that which it receives from these passions." This passage is
extracted from Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful.

2. "Who can explain wherein consists the difference of organization between an
idiot and another man?"

The naturalist, whether Buffon or any other, who is become famous, and who can
ask this question, will never be satisfied with any given answer, even though
it were the most formal demonstration.

3. "Diet and exercise would be in vain recommended to the dying."

There are countenances which no human wisdom or power can rectify; but that
which is impossible to man, is not so to God.

4. "The appearance without must be deformity and shame, when the worm gnaws
within."

Let the hypocrite, devoured by conscience, assume whatever artful appearance
he will, of severity, tranquillity, or vague solemnity, his distortion will
ever be apparent to the physiognomist.

5. "Take a tree from its native soil, its free air, and mountainous situation,
and plant it in the confined circulation of a hot-house: there it may vegetate,
but in a weak and sickly condition. Feed the foreign animal in a den; you will
find it in vain. It starves in the midst of plenty, or grows fat and feeble."

This, alas! is the mournful history of many a man.

6. "A portrait is the ideal of an individual, not of men in general."

A perfect portrait is neither more nor less than the circular form of a man
reduced to a flat surface, and which shall have the exact appearance of the
person for whom it was painted, seen in a camera obscura.

7. I once asked a friend, "How does it happen, that artful and subtle people
always have one or both eyes rather closed?" -- "Because they are feeble,
(answered he.) Who ever saw strength and subtlety united? The mistrust of
others is meanness toward ourselves."

8. This same friend, who to me is a man of ten thousand for whatever relates
to mind, wrote two valuable letters on physiognomy to me, from which I am
allowed to make the following extracts:

"It appears to me to be an eternal (...), that the first is the only true
impression. Of this I offer no proof, except by asserting such is my belief,
and by appealing to the sensations of others. The stranger affects me by his
appearance, and is, to my sensitive being, what ^^e sun would be to a man born
blind restored to sight.

"Rousseau was right when he said of D. that man ^oes not please me though he
has never done me any injury; but I must break with him before it comes to that.

"Physiognomy is as necessary to man as language." I may add, as natural.

CHAPTER LIII.
Miscellaneous Thoughts.

1. ALL is good. All good may, and must be misused. Physiognomonical sensation
is in itself as truly good as godlike, as expressive of the exalted worth of
human nature as moral sensation, perhaps they are both the same. The
suppressing, the destroying a sensation so deserving of honor, where it begins
to act, is sinning against ourselves, and in reality equal to resisting the
good spirit. Indeed, good impulses and actions must have their limits, in order
that they may not impede other good impulses and actions.

2. Each man is a man of genius in his large or small sphere. He has a certain
circle in which he can act with inconceivable force. The less his kingdom, the
more concentrated is his power, consequently the more irresistible is his form
of government. Thus the be is the greatest of mathematicians, as far as its
wants extend. Having discovered the genius of a man, how inconsiderable soever
the circle of his activity may be, having caught him in the moment when his
genius is in its highest exertions, the characteristic token of that genius
will also be easily discovered.

3. The approach of the Godhead cannot be nearer, in the visible world, and in
what we denominate nature, than in the countenance of a great and noble man.
Christ could not but truly say, "He who sees me sees Him that sent me." God
cannot, without a miracle, be seen any where so fully as in the countenance of
a good man. Thus the essence of any man is more present, more certain to me, by
having obtained his shade.

4. Great countenances awaken and stimulate each other, excite all that can be
excited. Any nation, having once produced a Spencer, a Shakespeare, and a
Milton, may be certain that a Steel, a Pope, and an Addison will follow. A
great countenance has the credentials of its high original in itself. With calm
reverence and simplicity nourish the mind with the presence of a great
countenance; its emanations shall attract and exalt thee. A great countenance,
in a state of rest, acts more powerfully than a common countenance impassioned;
its effects, though unresembling, are general. The fortunate disciples, though
they knew Him not, yet did their hearts burn within them, while he talked with
them by the way, and opened to them the scriptures. The buyers and sellers whom
he drove out of the Temple, durst not oppose him.

It may from hence be conceived how certain persons, by their mere presence,
have brought a seditious multitude back to their duty, although the latter had
acquired the full power. That natural, unborrowed, indwelling power, which is
consequently superior to any which can be assumed, is as evident to all eyes as
the thunder of heaven is to all ears.

5. Great physiognomonical wisdom not only consists in discovering the general
character of, and being highly affected by the present countenance, or this or
that particular propensity, but in discriminating the individual character of
each kind of mind, and its capacity, and being able to define the circle beyond
which it cannot pass; to say what sensation, actions, and judgments, are, or
are not, to be expected from the man under consideration, that we may not idly
waste power, but dispense just sufficient to actuate, and put him in motion.

No man is more liable to the error of thoughtless haste than I was. Four or
five years of physiognomonical observation were requisite to cure me of this
too hasty waste of power. It is a part of benevolence to give, entrust, and
participate; but physiognomy teaches when, how, and to whom to give. It
therefore teaches true benevolence to assist where assistance is wanted, and
will be accepted. Oh! that I could call at the proper moment, and with proper
effect, to the feeling and benevolent heart. Waste not, cast not thy seed upon
the waters, or upon a rock. Speak only to the hearer; unbosom thyself but to
those who can understand thee; philosophize with none but philosophers;
spiritualize only with the spiritual. It requires greater power to bridle
strength than to give it the rein. To withhold is often better than to give.
What is not enjoyed will be cast back with acrimony, or trodden to waste, and
thus will become useless to all.

6. To the good be good; resist not the irresistible countenance. Give the eye
that asks, that comes recommended to thee by Providence, or by God himself, and
which to reject is to reject God, who cannot ask thee more powerfully than when
entreating in a cheerful, open, innocent countenance. Thou can not more
immediately glorify God than by wishing and acting well to a countenance
replete with the spirit of God; no^ more certainly, and abhorrently, offend and
wound the majesty of God, than by despising, ridiculing, and turning from such
a countenance. God cannot more effectually move man than by man. Whoever
rejects the man of God, rejects God. To discover the radiance of the Creator in
the visage of man is the pre-eminent quality of man; it is the summit of wisdom
and benevolence to feel how much of this radiance is there, to discern this ray
of Divinity through the clouds of the most debased countenances, and dig out
this small gem of heaven from amid the ruins and rubbish by which it is
encumbered.

7. Should thou, friend of man, esteem physiognomy as highly as I do, to
whom it daily becomes of greater worth, the more I discover its truth; if thou
have an eye to select the few noble, or that which is noble in the ignoble,
that which is divine in all men, the immortal in what is mortal, then speak
little, but observe much; dispute not, but exercise thy sensation; for thou will convince no one to whom this sensation is wanting.

When noble poverty presents to you a face, in which humility, patience, faith,
and love, shine conspicuously, how superior will thy joy be in his words who
has told thee, "inasmuch as thou have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, thou have done it unto me!"

With a sigh of hope you will exclaim, when youth and dissipation present
themselves, this forehead was delineated by God for the search and the
discovery of truth. In this eye rests wisdom yet unripened.

CHAPTER LIVE.
Of the Union between the Knowledge of the Heart and Philanthropy. --
Miscellaneous physiognomical Thoughts from Holy Writ.

MAY the union between the knowledge of the heart and philanthropy be obtained
by the same means? Does not a knowledge of the heart destroy or weaken
philanthropy? Does not our good opinion of any man diminish when he is
perfectly known? And if so, how may philanthropy be increased by this knowledge?

What is here alleged is truth; but it is partial truth. And how fruitful a
source of error is partial truth! It is a certain truth, that the majority of
men are losers, by being accurately known. But it is no less true, that the
majority of men gain as much on one side, as they lose on the other by being
thus accurately known. Who is so wise as never to act foolishly? Where is the
virtue wholly unpolluted by vice; with thoughts, at all moments, simple,
direct, and pure? I dare undertake to maintain, that all men, with some very
rare exceptions, lose by being known. But it may also be proved, by the most
irrefragable arguments, that all men gain by being known; consequently a
knowledge of the heart is not detrimental to the love of mankind, but promotes
it.

Physiognomy discovers actual and possible perfections, which, without its aid,
must ever have remained hidden. The more man is studied, the more power and
positive goodness he will be discovered to possess. As the experienced eye of
the painter, perceives a thousand small shades and colors, which are
unremarked by common spectators, so the physiognomist views a multitude of
actual or possible perfections, which escape the general eye of the despiser,
the slanderer, or even the more benevolent judge of mankind.

I speak from experience the good which I, as a physiognomist, have observed in
people round me, has more than compensated that mass of evil, which, though I
appeared blind, I could not avoid seeing.

The more I have studied man, the more have I been convinced of the general
influence of his faculties; the more have I remarked, that the origin of all
evil is good, that those very powers which made him evil, those abilities,
forces, irritability, elasticity, were all in themselves actual, positive good.
The absence of these, indeed, would have occasioned the absence of an infinity
of evil, but so would they likewise of an infinity of good. The essence of good
has given birth to much evil; but it contains in itself the possibility of a
still infinite increase of good.

The least failing of an individual incites a general outcry, and his character
is at once darkened, trampled on, and destroyed. The physiognomist views and
praises the man whom the whole world condemns. What, does he praise vice? -- No
-- Does he excuse the vicious? -- No: he whispers, or loudly affirms, "Treat
this man after such a manner, and you will be astonished at what he is able,
what he may be made willing to perform. He is not so wicked as he appears; his
countenance is better than his actions. His actions, it is true, are legible in
his countenance; but not more legible than his great powers, his sensibility,
the pliability of that heart which has had an improper bent. Give but these
powers, which have rendered him vicious, another direction, and other objects,
and he will perform miracles of virtue."

Yes, the physiognomist will pardon where the most benevolent philanthropist
must condemn. For myself, since I have become a physiognomist, I have gained
knowledge, so much more accurate, of so many excellent men, and have had such
frequent occasions to rejoice my heart in the discoveries I made concerning
such men, that this, as I may say, has reconciled me to the whole human race.
What I here mention as having happened to myself, each physiognomist being
himself, a man, must have undoubtedly felt.

Miscellaneous Physiognomonical Thoughts from Holy Writ.
"Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of our
countenance." Psalm xc. 8. -- No man believes in the omniscience, or has so
strong a conviction of the presence of God and his angels, or reads the hand of
heaven so visible in the human countenance, as the physiognomist.

"Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? -- And why
take ye thought for raiment? -- Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." Matt. vi. 27, 28,
33. -- No man, therefore, can alter his form. The improvement of the internal
will also be the improvement of the external. Let men take care of the
internal, and a sufficient care of the external will be the result.

"When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they
dis^igure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head and
wash thy face, that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which
is in secret, and thy Father, which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly."
Matt. vi. 16, 17, 18 -- Virtue, like vice, may be concealed from men, but not
from the Father in secret, nor from him in whom his spirit is, who fathoms not
only the depths of humanity but of divinity. He is rewarded, who means that the
good he has should be seen in his countenance.

"Some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up;
some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth, and forthwith they
sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth; and when the sun was up they
were scorched, and because they had not earth they withered away; and some fell
among thorns, and the thorns sprung up and choked them; but others fell into
good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty fold,
some thirty fold." Matt. xiii. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. -- There are many men, many
countenances, in whom nothing can be planted, each fowl devours the seed; or
they are hard like stone, with little earth, (or flesh) have habits which
stifle all that is good. There are others that have good bones, good (...),
with a happy proportion of each, and no (...).

"For whosoever has to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance;
but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he has." Matt.
xiii. 12. -- True again of the good and bad countenance. He who is faithful to
the propensities of nature, he has, he enjoys, he will manifestly be ennobled.
The bad will lose even the good traits he has received.

"Take heed that you despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
that in heaven their angles do always behold the face of my father which is in
heaven." Matt. xviii. 10. -- Probably the angels see the countenance of the
father in the countenance of the children.

"If any man have ears to hear let him hear. Do you not perceive, that whatever
thing from without enters into the man it cannot defile him, because it
enters not into his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the
draught, purging all meats? And he said, that which comes out of the man, that
de^ileth the man." Mark vii. 16, 18, 19, 20. -- This is physiognomonically
true. Not external accidents, nor spots which may be washed away, not wounds
which may be healed, nor even scars which remain, will defile the countenance
in the eye of the physiognomist, neither can paint beautify it to him.

"A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump." Galat. v. o. -- A little vice
often deforms the whole countenance. One single false trait makes the whole a
caricature.

"Ye are our epistle, written in our hearts, known and read of all men.
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered
by us, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God." 2 Cor.
iii. 2, 3. -- What need have the good of letters of recommendation to the good?
The open countenance recommends itself to the open countenance. No letters of
recommendation can recommend the perfidious countenance, nor can any slanderer
deprive the countenance, beaming with the divine spirit, of its letters of
recommendation. A good countenance is the best letter of recommendation.

I shall conclude with the important passage from the epistle to the Romans:

"God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.
Oh! the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has
known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his counselor? or who has first
given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things. To whom be glory for ever. Amen."

CHAPTER LV.
Of the apparently false decisions of Physiognomy -- Of the general Objections
made to Physiognomy -- Particular objections answered.

ONE of the strongest objections to the certainty of physiognomy is, that the
best physiognomists often judge very erroneously.

It may be proper to make some remarks on this objection.

Be it granted the physiognomist often errs; that is to say, his discernment
errs, not the countenance -- But to conclude there is no such science as
physiognomy, because physiognomists err, is the same thing as to conclude there
is no reason, because there is much false reasoning.

To suppose that, because the physiognomist has made some false decisions, he
has no physiognomonical discernment, is equal to supposing that a man, who had
committed some mistakes of memory, has no memory; or, at best, that his memory
is very weak. -- We must be less hasty. We must first inquire in what
proportion his memory is faithful, how often it has failed, how often been
accurate. The miser may perform ten acts of charity; must we therefore affirm
he is charitable? Should we not rather inquire how much he might have given,
and how often it has been his duty to give? -- The virtuous man may have ten
times been guilty, but before he is condemned, it ought to be asked, in how
many hundred instances he has acted uprightly? He who games must oftener lose
than he who refrains from gaming. He who slides or skaits upon the ice is in
danger of many a fall, and of being laughed at by the less adventurous
spectator. Whoever frequently gives alms, is liable, occasionally, to
distribute his bounties to the unworthy. He, indeed, who never gives cannot
commit the same mistake, and may truly vaunt of his prudence, since he never
furnishes opportunities for deceit. In like manner, he who never judges never
can judge falsely. The physiognomist judges oftener than the man who ridicules
physiognomy, consequently must oftener err than he who never risks a
physiognomonical decision.

Which of the favorable judgments of the benevolent physiognomist may not be
decried as false? Is he not himself a mere man, however circumspect, upright,
honorable and exalted he may be; a man who has in himself the root of all
evil, the germe of every vice; or, in other words, a man whose most worthy
propensities, qualities, and inclinations, may occasionally be overstrained,
wrested, and warped?

You behold a meek man, who, after repeated and continued provocations to
wrath, persists in silence; who, probably, never is overtaken by anger, when he
himself alone is injured. The physiognomist can read his heart, fortified to
bear and forbear, and immediately exclaims, behold the most amiable, the most
unconquerable, gentleness. -- You are silent -- You laugh -- You leave the
place, and say, "^ye on such a physiognomist! How full of wrath have I seen
this man!" -- When was it that you saw him in wrath? -- Was it not when some
one had mistreated his friend? -- "Yes, and he behaved like a frantic man in
defense of this friend, which is proof sufficient that the science of
physiognomy is a dream, and the physiognomist a dreamer." -- But who is in an
error, the physiognomist or his censurer? -- The wisest man may sometimes utter
folly -- This the physiognomist knows, but, regarding it not, reveres and
pronounces him a wise man. -- You ridicule the decision, for you have heard
this wise man say a foolish thing. -- Once, more, who is in an error? -- The
physiognomist does not judge from a single incident, and often not from several
combining incidents. -- Nor does he, as a physiognomist, judge only by actions.
He observes the propensities, the character, the essential qualities and
powers, which often, are apparently contradicted by individual actions.

Again -- He who seems stupid or vicious may yet probably possess indications
of a good understanding, and propensities to every virtue. Should the
beneficent eye of the physiognomist, who is in search of good, (...), these
qualities, and announce them; should he not pronounce a decided judgment
against the man, he immediately becomes a subject of laughter. Yet how often
may dispositions to the most heroic virtue be there buried! How often may the
fire of genius lay deeply smothered beneath the embers! -- Wherefore do you so
anxiously, so attentively, rake among these ashes? -- Because here is warmth --
Notwithstanding that at the first, second, third, fourth raking, dust only will
fly in the eyes of the physiognomist and spectator. The latter retires
laughing, relates the attempt, and makes other laugh also. The former may
perhaps patiently wait and warm himself by the flame he has excited.
Innumerable are the instances where the most excellent qualities are over grown
and stif^ed by the weeds of error. Futurity shall discover why, and the
discovery shall not be in vain. The common unpractised eye beholds only a
desolate wilderness. Education, circumstances, necessities, stifle every effort
toward perfection. The physiognomist inspects, becomes attentive, and waits. He
sees and observes a thousand contending contradictory qualities; he hears a
multitude of voices exclaiming, What a man! But he hears too the voice of the
Deity exclaim What a man! He prays, while those revile who cannot comprehend,
or, if they can, will not, that in the countenance, under the form they view,
lie concealed beauty, power, wisdom, and a divine nature.

Still further, the physiognomist, or observer of man, who is a man, a
Christian, that is to say a wise and good man, will a thousand times act
contrary to his own physiognomonical sensations, I do not express myself
accurately -- He appears to act contrary to his internal judgment of the man.
He speaks not all he thinks -- This is an additional reason why the
physiognomist so often appears to err; and why the true observer, observation
and truth are in him, is so often mistaken, and ridiculed. He reads the villain
in the countenance of the beggar at his door, yet does not turn away, but
speaks friendly to him, searches his heart, and discovers; -- Oh God, what does
he discover! -- An immeasurable abyss, a chaos of vice! -- But does he discover
nothing more, nothing good? -- Be it granted he finds nothing good, yet he
there contemplates clay which must not say to the potter, why have thou made me
thus? He sees, prays, turns away his face, and hides a tear which speaks, with
eloquence inexpressible, not to man, but to God alone. He stretches out his
friendly hand, not only in pity to a hapless wife, whom he has rendered
unfortunate, not only for the sake of his helpless innocent children, but in
compassion to himself, for the sake of God, who has made all things, even the
wicked themselves, for his own glory. He gives, perhaps, to kindle a spark
which he yet perceives, and this is what is called (in scripture) giving his
heart. -- Whether the unworthy man misuses the gift, or misuses it not, the
judgment of the donor will alike be arraigned. Whoever hears of the gift will
say, How has this good man again suffered himself to be deceived!

Man is not to be the judge of man, and who feels this truth more coercively
than the physiognomist? The mightiest of men, the Ruler of man, came not to
judge the world, but to save. Not that he did not see the vices of the vicious,
nor that he concealed them from himself or others, when philanthropy required
they should be remarked and detected. Yet he judged not, punished not. -- He
for gave -- "Go thy way sin no more." Judas he received as one of his
disciples, protected him, embraced him -- Him in whom he beheld his future
betrayer.

Good men are most apt to discover good -- Thine eye cannot be christian if
thou give me not thy heart. Wisdom without goodness is folly, I will judge
justly and act benevolently.

Once more -- A profligate man, an abandoned woman, who have ten times been to
blame when they affirmed they were not, on the eleventh are condemned when they
are not to blame. They apply to the physiognomist. He inquires, and finds that,
this time they are innocent. Discretion loudly tells him he will be censured
should he suffer it to be known that he believes them innocent; but his heart
more loudly commands him to speak, to bear witness for the present innocence of
such rejected persons. A word escapes him and a multitude of reviling voices
are at once heard -- "Such a judgment ought not to have been made by a
physiognomist!" -- Yet who has decided erroneously?

The above are a few hints and reasons to the discerning, to induce them to
judge as cautiously concerning the physiognomist, as they would wish him to
judge concerning themselves, or others.

Of the general Objections made to Physiognomy.
Innumerable are the objections which may be raised against the certainty of
judgments drawn from the lines and features of the human countenance. Many of
these appear to me to be easy, many difficult, and some impossible to be
answered.

Before I select any of them, I will first state some general remarks, the
accurate consideration, and proof of which will remove many difficulties.

It appears to me that, in all researches, we ought first to inquire what can
be said in defense of any proposition. One irrefragable proof of the actual
existence and certainty of a thing will overbalance ten thousand objections.
One positive witness, who has all possible certainty that knowledge and reason
can give, will preponderate against innumerable others who who are only
negative. All objections against a certain truth are in reality only negative
evidence. "We never observed this: we never experienced that." -- Though ten
thousand should make this assertion, what would it prove against one man of
understanding, and sound reason, who should answer, "But I have observed, and
you, also, may observe, if you please." No well founded objection can be made
against the existence of a thing visible to sense. Argument cannot disprove
fact. No two opposing positive facts can be adduced; all objections, to a fact,
therefore, must be negative.

Let this be applied to physiognomy. Positive proofs of the true and
acknowleged signification of the face and its features, against the clearness
and certainty of which nothing can be alleged, render innumerable objections,
although they cannot probably be answered, perfectly insignificant. Let us
therefore endeavor to inform ourselves of those positive arguments which
physiognomy affords. Let us first make ourselves steadfast in what is certainly
true, and we shall soon be enabled to answer many objections, or to reject them
as unworthy any answer.

It appears to me that in the same proportion as a man remarks and adheres to
the positive, will be the strength and perseverance of his mind. He whose
talents do not surpass mediocrity is accustomed to overlook the positive, and
to maintain the negative with invincible obstinacy.

Thou should first consider what thou art, what is thy knowledge, and what
are thy qualities and powers, before thou inquirest what thou art not, know
not, and what the qualities and powers are that thou have not? This is a rule
which every man who wishes to be wise, virtuous and happy ought, not only to
prescribe to himself, but, if I may use so bold a figure, to incorporate with,
and make a part of, his very soul. The truly wise always first directs his
inquiries con^^rning what is; the man of weak intellect, the pedant, first
searches for that which is wanting. The true philosopher looks first for the
positive proofs of the proposition. I say first -- I am very desirous that my
meaning should not be misunderstood, and, therefore, repeat, first. The
superficial mind first examines the negative objections -- This has been the
method pursued by infidels, the opponents of Christianity. Were it granted that
Christianity were false, still this method would neither be logical, true, nor
conclusive. Therefore such modes of reasoning must be set aside, as neither
logical nor conclusive, before we can proceed to answer objections.

To return once more to physiognomy, the question will be reduced to this --
"Whether there are any proofs sufficiently positive and decisive, in favor of
physiognomy, to induce us to disregard the most plausible objections?" -- Of
this I am as much convinced as I am of my own existence; and every unprejudiced
reader will be the same, who shall read this work through, if he only possess
so much discernment and knowledge as not to deny that eyes are given us to see!
although there are innumerable eyes in the world that look and do not see.

It may happen that learned men, of a certain description, will endeavor to
perplex me by argument. They, for example, may cite the female buterfly of
Reaumur, and the large winged ant, in order to prove how much we may be
mistaken, with respect to final causes, in the products of nature -- They may
assert, wings, undoubtedly appear to be given for the purpose of flight, yet
these infects never fly; therefore wings are not given for that purpose. -- And
by a parity of reasoning, since there are wise men, who, probably do not see,
eyes are not given for the purpose of sight. -- To such objections I shall make
no reply, for never, in my whole life, have I been able to answer a sophism. I
appeal only to common sense. I view a certain number of men, who all have the
gift of fight, when they open their eyes, and there is light, and who do not
see when their eyes are shut. As this certain number are not select, but taken
promiscuously, among millions of existing men, it is the highest possible
degree of probability that all men, whose formation is similar, that have
lived, do live, or shall live, being alike provided with those organs we call
eyes, must see. This at least, has been the mode of arguing and concluding
among all nations, and in all ages. In the same degree as this mode of
reasoning is convincing, when applied to other subjects, so it is when applied
to physiognomy, and is equally applicable; and, if untrue in physiognomy, it is
equally untrue in every other instance.

I am therefore of opinion, that the defender of physiognomy may rest the truth
of the science on this proposition, That it is universally confessed that,
among ten, twenty, or thirty men, indiscriminately selected, there as certainly
exists a physiognomonical expression, or demonstrable correspondence of
internal power and sensation, with external form and figure, as that, among the
like number of men, in the like manner selected, they have eyes and can see.
Having proved this, he has as sufficiently proved the universality and truth of
physiognomy as the universality of sight by the aid of eyes, having shown that
ten, twenty, or thirty men, by the aid of eyes, are all capable of seeing. From
a part I draw a conclusion to the whole; whether those I have seen or those I
have not.

But it will be answered, though this may be proved of certain features, does
it therefore, follow that it may be proved of all? -- I am persuaded it may: if
I am wrong show me my error.

Having remarked that men who have eyes and ears see and hear, and being
convinced that eyes were given him for the purpose of sight, and ears for that
of hearing; being unable longer to doubt that eyes and ears have their destined
office, I think I draw no improper conclusion, when I suppose that every other
sense, and member, of this same human body, which so wonderfully form a whole,
has each a particular purpose; although it should happen that I am unable to
discover what the particular purposes of so many senses, members, and
integuments may be. Thus do I reason also, concerning the signification of the
countenance of man, the formation of his body, and the disposition of his
members.

If it can be proved that any two or three features have a certain determinate
signification, as determinate as that the eye is the expression of the
countenance, is it not accurate to conclude, according to the mode of reasoning
above cited, universally acknowledged to be just, that those features are also
significant, with the signification of which I am unacquainted -- I think
myself able to prove, to every person of the commonest understanding, that all
men without exception, at least under certain circumstances, and in some
particular feature, may, indeed, have more than one feature, of a certain
determinate signification; as surely as I can render it comprehensible, to the
simplest person, that certain determinate members of the human body are to
answer certain determinate purposes.

Twenty or thirty men, taken promiscuously, when they laugh, or weep, will, in
the expression of their joy or grief, possess something in common with, or
similar to, each other. Certain features will bear a greater resemblance to
each other among them than they otherwise do, when not in the like sympathetic
state of mind.

To me it appears evident that, since excessive joy and grief are universally
acknowledged to have their peculiar expressions, and that the expression of
each is as different as the different passions of joy and grief, it must,
therefore, be allowed that the state of rest, the medium between joy and grief,
shall likewise have its peculiar expression; or, in other words, that the
muscles which surround the eyes and lips, will indubitably be found to be in a
different state.

If this be granted concerning the state of the mind in joy, grief, or
tranquillity; why should not the same be true concerning pride, humility,
patience, magnanimity, and other affections?

According to certain laws the stone ^lies upward, when thrown with sufficient
force; by other laws, equally certain, it afterward falls to the earth; and
will it not remain unmoved according to laws equally fixed if suffered to be at
rest? Joy according to certain laws expressed in one manner, grief in another,
and tranquillity in a third. Wherefore then shall not anger, gentleness, pride,
humility, and other passions, be subject to certain laws; that is, to certain
fixed laws?

All things in nature are or are not subjected to certain laws. There is a
cause for all things or there is not. All things are cause and effect, or are
not. Ought we not hence to derive one of the first axioms of philosophy? And,
if this be granted, how immediately is physiognomy relieved from all
objections, even from those which we know not how to answer; that is, as soon
as it shall be granted there are certain characteristic features, in all men,
as characteristic as the eyes are to the countenance!

But, it will be said, how different are the expressions of joy and grief, of
the thoughtful and the thoughtless! And how may these expressions be reduced to
rule?

How different from each other are the eyes of men, and of all creatures; the
eye of an eagle from the eye of a mole, an elephant, and a fly! and yet we
believe of all who have no evident signs of infirmity, or death, that they may
see.

The feet and ears are as various as are the eyes; yet we universally conclude
of them all, they were given us for the purposes of hearing and walking.

These varieties by no means prevent our believing that the eyes, ears, and
feet, are the expressions, the organs of seeing, hearing, and walking; and why
should we not draw the same conclusions concerning all features and lineaments
of the human body? The expressions of similar dispositions of mind cannot have
greater variety than have the eyes, ears and feet, of all beings that see,
hear, and walk; yet may we as easily observe and determine what they have in
common, as we can observe and determine what the eyes, ears, and feet, which
are so various, among all beings that see, hear, and walk, have also in common.
This well considered, how many objections will be answered or, become
insignificant!

Various Objections to Physiognomy Answered.
Objection 1. "It is said, we find persons who, from youth to old age, without
sickness, without debauchery, have continually a pale, death-like aspect; who,
nevertheless, enjoy an uninterrupted and confirmed state of health."

Answer. These are uncommon cases. A thousand men will show their state of
health by the complexion and roundness of the countenance, to one in whom these
appearances will differ from the truth. -- I suspect that these uncommon cases
are the effects of impressions, made on the mother, during her state of
pregnancy. -- Such cases may be considered as exceptions, the accidental causes
of which may, perhaps, not be difficult to discover.

To me it seems we have as little just cause hence to draw conclusions against
the science of physiognomy, as we have against the proportion of the human
body, because there are dwar^s, giants, and monstrous births.

Objection 2. A friend writes me word, "He is acquainted with a man of
prodigious strength, who, the hands excepted, has every appearance of weakness,
and would be supposed weak by all to whom he should be unknown."

Answer. I could wish to see this man. I much doubt whether his strength be
only expressed in his hands, or, if it were, still it is expressed, in the
hands; and, were no exterior signs of strength to be found, still he must be
considered as an exception, an example unexampled. But, as I have said, I much
doubt the fact. I have never yet seen a strong man whose strength was not
discoverable in various parts.

Objection 3. "We perceive the signs of bravery and heroism in the countenances
of men who are, notwithstanding, the first to run away."

Answer. The less the man is the greater he wishes to appear.

But what were these signs of heroism? Did they resemble those found in the
Farnesian Hercules? -- Of this I doubt: let them be drawn, let them be
produced; the physiognomist will probably say, at the second, if not at the
first, glance, quanta species* Sickness, accident, melancholy, likewise,
deprive the bravest men of courage. This contradiction, however ought to be
apparent, to the physiognomist.

Objection 4. "We find persons whose exterior appearance denotes extreme pride,
and who, in their actions, never betray the least symptom of pride."

Answer. A man may be proud, and affect humility.

Education and habit may give an appearance of pride, although the heart be
humble; but this humility of heart will shine through an appearance of pride,
as sunbeams through transparent clouds. It is true that this apparently proud
man would have more humility had he less of the appearance of pride.

Objection 5. "We see mechanics who, with incredible ingenuity, produce the
most curious works of art, and bring them to the greatest perfection; yet who,
in their hands and bodies, resemble the rudest peasants and wood-cutters; while
the hands of fine ladies are totally incapable of such minute and curious
performances."

Answer. I should desire these rude and delicate frames to be brought together
and compared. -- Most naturalists describe the elephant as gross and stupid in
appearance; and, according to this apparent stupidity, or rather according to
that stupidity which they ascribe to him, wonder at his address. Let the
elephant and the tender lamb be placed side by side, and the superiority of
address will be visible from the formation and flexibility of the body without
farther trial.

Ingenuity and address do not so much depend upon the mass as upon the nature,
mobility, internal sensation, nerves, construction, and suppleness of the body
and its parts.

Delicacy is not power, power is not minuteness. Apelles would have drawn
better with charcoal than many miniature painters with the finest pencil. The
tools of a mechanic may be rude, and his mind the very reverse. Genius will
work better with a clumsy hand, than stupidity with a hand the most pliable. --
I will indeed allow your objection to be well founded, if nothing of the
character of an artist is discoverable in his countenance; but, before you come
to a decision, it is necessary you should be acquainted with the various marks
that denote mechanical genius, in the face. Have you considered the luster, the
acuteness, the penetration, of his eyes; his rapid, his decisive, his firm
aspect; the projecting bones of his brow, his arched forehead, the suppleness,
the delicacy, or the massiness of his limbs? Have you well considered these
particulars? "I could not see it in him," is easily said. More consideration is
requisite to discover the character of the man.

Objection 6. "There are persons of peculiar penetration who have very
unmeaning countenances."

Answer. The assertion requires proof.

For my own part, after many hundred mistakes, I have continually found the
fault was in my want of proper observation. -- At first, for example, I looked
for the tokens of any particular quality, too much in one place; I sought and
found it not, although I knew the person possessed extraordinary powers. I have
been long before I could discover the seat of character. I was deceived,
sometimes by seeking too partially, at others, too generally. To this I was
particularly liable in examining those who had only distinguished themselves in
some particular pursuit; and, in other respects, appeared to be persons of very
common abilities, men whose powers were all concentrated to a point, to the
examination of one subject; or men whose powers were very indeterminate: I
express myself improperly, powers which had never been excited, brought into
action. Many years ago, I was acquainted with a great mathematician, the
astonishment of Europe; who, at the first sight, and even long after, appeared
to have a very common countenance. I drew a good likeness of him, which obliged
me to pay a more minute attention, and found a particular trait which was very
marking and decisive. A similar trait to this, I many years afterward,
discovered in another person, who, though widely different, was also a man of
great talents; and who, this trait excepted, had an unmeaning countenance,
which seemed to prove the science of physiognomy all erroneous. Never since
this time have I discovered that particular trait in any man who did not posses
some peculiar merit, however simple his appearance might be.

This proves how true and false, at once, the objection may be which states,
"Such a person appears to be a weak man, yet has great powers of mind."

I have been written to concerning D'Alembert, whose countenance, contrary to
all physiognomonical science, was one of the most common. To this I can make no
answer, unless I had seen D'Alembert. This much is certain, that his profile,
by Cochin, which yet must be very inferior to the original, not to mention
other less obvious traits, has a forehead, and in part a nose, which were never
seen in the countenance of any person of moderate, not to say mean, abilities.

Objection 7. "We find very silly people with very expressive countenances."

Who does not daily make this remark? My only answer, which I have repeatedly
given, and which I think perfectly satisfactory, is, that the endowments of
nature may be excellent; and yet by want of use, or abuse, may be destroyed.
Power is there, but it is power misapplied: the fire wasted in the pursuit of
pleasure can no longer be applied to the discovery and display of truth. -- It
is fire without light, fire that ineffectually burns.

I have the happiness to be acquainted with some of the greatest men in Germany
and Switzerland; and I can, upon my honor, assert that, of all the then of
genius with whom I am acquainted, there (...) not one who does not express the
degree of invention and powers of mind he possesses in the features of his
countenance, and particularly in the form of his head.

I shall only select the following names, from an innumerable multitude.
Charles XII. Louis XIV. Turenne, Sully, Polignac, Montesquieu, Voltaire,
Diderot. -- Newton, Clarke, Maupertuis, Pope, Lock, Swift, Lessing, Bodmer,
Sultzer, Haller. I believe the character of greatness in these heads is visible
in every well drawn outline. I could produce numerous specimens, among which an
experienced eye would scarcely ever be mistaken.

FINIS.

