Mr. OSGOOD's THANKSGIVING SERMON, NOVEMBER 20, 1794.

The Wonderful Works of GOD are to be remembered.

A SERMON, DELIVERED ON THE DAY OF ANNUAL THANKSGIVING, NOVEMBER 20, 1794.

BY DAVID OSGOOD, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN MEDFORD.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON, MDCCXCIV.

PSALM CXI. 4. HE HAS MADE HIS WONDERFUL WORKS TO BE REMEMBERED --.
THE works of God are usually distinguished into those of creation, and those
of providence. By the former, we understand the stretching forth and garnishing
of the heavens, the forming and replenishing of the earth, and the originating
of the present order and course of nature. By the latter, are meant the
continued preservation, the upholding and governing of all these things; and
the superintending of all events, both in the natural and moral world. All
these are great and wonderful works, worthy to be had in constant remembrance
by every rational spectator. They make God to be remembered; nay, they are so
many memorials of him, witnessing his eternal power and Godhead, his
overflowing benignity, and his care of, and kindness toward, his creatures.

They who have any taste for intellectual and moral pleasures, who are capable
of relishing what is grand and sublime, will delight in prying into, and
contemplating these great and wonderful works of creation and providence. To
this purpose it is observed in the context, that the works of the Lord being
great, honorable and glorious, they will be sought out or investigated by all
them who have pleasure therein. By these works the Psalmist has special
reference to the more signal dispensations of Providence in his dealings with
his covenant people, the descendants of Abraham his friend. In these
dispensations he set before them the most striking illustrations of his
character and glorious perfections. They often saw him, on one occasion and
another, triumphing over the false gods of the heathen around them, executing
judgment upon their vain idols, and confounding their stupid worshippers. They
saw his infinite power displayed in an almost continued series of miraculous
operations; his justice in the exemplary punishment of cruel oppressors; his
mercy in numberless affecting instances toward themselves; and his truth and
faithfulness in the exact fulfillment of his promises and predictions. These
things were intended to make lasting impressions on their minds -- such as
might not be easily or speedily effaced. The wonderful works of Providence are
wrought for this very purpose, that, by beholding them, men may be so affected,
as to have God continually in their thoughts, and thereby be led to fear and
serve him.

The text may teach us, that the more signal mercies of Heaven toward us, and
those more remarkable deliverances which, at any time, have been wrought in our
favor, ought to be gratefully remembered, and thankfully acknowledged by us.
These things are some of the chief beauties and most brilliant pages in that
book of Providence, which it highly concerns us daily to read and study. This
book indeed contains the whole history of God's dealings with mankind, from age
to age; in which he displays his moral perfections to the view of his rational
offspring. The clear light of eternity will show every part of this volume to
be full of meaning; and such an explanation will then be given to those
passages, which are now esteemed dark and mysterious, as will induce enraptured
saints, with astonishment, to exclaim, O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! But while we dwell in this land of shadows and obscurity, we see only a
small proportion of what God does; and having such limited views of his
dispensations, it is no wonder if we be unable to comprehend the meaning of
particular events.

There are many, however, which contain such striking illustrations of the
divine attributes, especially of the divine mercy and goodness, that we can be
at no loss about them. Not a few of these have fallen within our own
observation; and many others our ears have heard, and our fathers have told us.
God expects and requires, that we gather them up as a treasure, and carefully
preserve them in our memories. They are in themselves memorable; and he has
done them, that they might be remembered by us. Of course, he is highly
offended when men forget his works and the wonders which he has showed them.
Such behavior reflects upon the Divine Majesty, as though his method of
governing the world, and his dealings with his creatures, were not worthy of
our attention. The misery and destruction of men are, in some instances,
attributed to their not regarding the work of the Lord, nor considering the
operation of his hands. And it is certain, that the frequent review of the more
striking dispensations of Providence is of excellent use to confirm us in the
belief, and to excite us to the practice, of true religion. Through the
weakness and darkness of their minds, and the strength of their corruptions,
mankind are prone to unbelief. Some, under every advantage for light and
conviction, do, notwithstanding, indulge to skeptical opinions: And they would
generally, perhaps, be in danger of such opinions, and of calling in question
the first principles and fundamental articles even of natural religion, the
being, perfections, and moral government of the Deity; were it not for those
less common appearances of his Providence, by which they are awakened to
consider the manifold proofs of a Supreme Almighty Ruler working in the midst
of them, and sitting as Governor and Judge among the nations.

At certain periods of time, through the several ages and among the different
nations of the world, God breaks forth in signal and remarkable dispensations
for the relief of the righteous, or for the punishment of the wicked. His
providence is seen justifying its own procedure in vindicating and delivering
oppressed innocence, or in precipitating prosperous guilt from its lofty seat.
On these occasions, God is known by the glory that surrounds him. Beholding
these extraordinary proofs of his presence and power, men are constrained to
say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that
judges in the earth.

And when we are once established in the belief of such a great and glorious
Being, this faith will naturally prompt us to fear and serve him. Convinced of
his power and justice by the awful manifestations of them in his works, we
shall be led to stand in awe of him, and heedfully to shun whatever we
apprehend to be offensive in his sight. Struck with the more signal displays of
his mercy and goodness, and excited by them to the more fixed contemplation of
his unbounded beneficence; we shall be satisfied, that our happiness must
consist in the enjoyment of his favor. This persuasion will render us anxious
to know what the Lord our God requires of us; and solicitous to approve
ourselves to him, by a patient continuance in well-doing.

Our present trust in the divine mercy is also encouraged by the remembrance of
former favors and deliverances. For this purpose, among others, the Israelites
were enjoined to teach "their children the praises of the Lord, his strength,
and his wonderful works -- that the generation to come might know them -- even
the children which should be born: who should arise and declare them to their
children; that they might set their HOPE in God."

The honor of God, the interests of religion, and the comfort and consolation
of good men, being all promoted by the memory of the divine dispensations; it
is highly agreeable to reason, and consonant to scripture, that public days
should be set apart, on which a whole people may unite in celebrating the
goodness of God; recollecting the instances of his providential care of, and
kindness toward, them; and talking of his wonderful works in their favor.
Such institutions serve as pillars of remembrance, to revive and perpetuate a
sense of our obligations to Heaven. The thoughts of the great body of the
people are so taken up about their own private affairs, that they are prone to
pay but little attention to the concerns of the public. After the first
impression is worn off, they soon forget, at least practically, national
mercies and deliverances, as well as national judgments. They need to have
their minds stirr^d up by way of remembrance. And when God, by a long and
continued series of remarkable interpositions, has multiplied, blessed, and
prospered any people -- has, on one occasion and another, repeatedly rescued
them from great and threatening dangers -- put them in full possession of their
rights and liberties, laws and religion; and from year to year continues them
in the quiet enjoyment of these privileges, together with the usual bounties of
his munificent providence; they cannot too frequently recollect, nor too
fervently and gratefully acknowledge, these signal instances of the divine
benignity. It surely becomes christian magistrates, and is a duty they owe to
God, to call upon their subjects to unite in commemorating these wonderful
works of Heaven in their favor.

Our forefathers, from the first settlement of the country, esteemed certain
seasons of the year as highly proper for special acts of devotion. At the
opening of the spring, they judged it fit and suitable, to set apart a day for
humiliation and prayer; that they might implore the divine blessing on the
affairs of the ensuing season -- that it might be rendered fruitful, healthy
and prosperous. And after the reception of these mercies, at the close of the
season, another day was set apart for public thanksgiving. To this custom of
our pious and renowned ancestors the proclamation for the observance of this
day expressly refers. To the friends of religion among us it must be highly
agreeable, to join in making this day a grateful memorial of God's providential
kindness toward us; and especially, in recording the more signal mercies of
the last revolving season

He has, says the proclamation, been pleased to favor us with a good measure
of health, while others, whom we ought to pity and pray for, have been visited
with contagious and mortal sickness. In the West India Islands, in some of the
southern states, and even in the neighboring state of Connecticut, we have
heard of an unusual mortality. But among ourselves, the instances of it have,
as yet, fallen considerably short of the average number for the last twenty
years. It is rare, indeed, that a year passes over us in which health is more
generally enjoyed. Life is the basis of all our enjoyments in this world; and
health is the balm of life. It sweetens and enhances all the comforts of life.
It enables us to bear our part in the affairs of the world, and to partake of
that rich profusion of good which a bountiful Providence sets before us. (...)
we see, or hear of, others from whom this blessing is withdrawn, it ought to
excite our gratitude afresh, that to us it is still continued. On this day it
becomes us, with increased love and thankfulness, to pay our vows to that Being
who is the health of our countenance and the God of our lives; whose kind
visitations uphold us in the land of the living, while many others, cut off by
pining sickness, are continually sinking into the grave.

Next to the blessing of health, the proclamation mentions those of harvest: He
has smiled on our agricultural labors, and caused the earth to yield her
increase. For the space of some weeks, at the opening of the spring, our
prospect was melancholy. An early drought and a late frost, unusually severe,
alarmed our apprehensions. But, from that period, we have rarely known, in this
vicinity, a more fruitful season. Refreshing showers succeeding each other at
short intervals, preceded and followed with a warm sun, have furnished a
continued supply of grass for the cattle, and rendered the latter harvest, and
the various productions of autumn, plentiful and abundant. In this respect also
we record the rich bounty of Providence, and are constrained gratefully to
acknowledge, that still "he leaves not himself without witness, in that he
continues to do us good, to give us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons,
^illing our hearts with food and gladness."

With the blessings already recounted the proclamation goes on to inform us,
that He has prospered our fishery, and in a great measure our merchandise,
notwithstanding the depredations of unreasonable despoilers. The attack of
these despoilers upon our commerce has undoubtedly been infamous, and such as
ought to be execrated by all civilized nations. And were we to judge of the
extent of the mischief which they have done us, from the representations in
some of the public papers, and in the resolves of certain self-created
societies, we might be led to conclude, that the trade of the country was
annihilated, and all its merchants bankrupts. It is therefore, after such
continued alarms through the season, some consolation to hear, from so high an
authority, that, notwithstanding all our losses, disappointments and vexations,
a great measure of commercial prosperity has been enjoyed. Of this, indeed, we
have yet further evidence, even ocular demonstration, in the splendid and
princely appearance of many of our mercantile citizens, and in the high price
of our country produce, enhanced to a degree, which (though oppressive and
ruinous to a few individuals whose sole dependence is upon a fixed stipend) is
yet exceedingly gainful to the great body of the community. Such prodigious
exportations would not, and could not, be continued, did not the merchant,
notwithstanding every risk, find his account in them.

What a claim upon our gratitude then is this, that, through the mercy of
Heaven, we are allowed to increase in wealth, in numbers and strength, at a
time, when the nations of Europe are madly wasting, impoverishing and
destroying each other. There the awakened jealousy of tyrants, tenacious of
their usurped powers, and the ferocious zeal, the desperate fury of a mighty,
though long oppressed nation, have set the world in a flame. These lusts
consume the abundance of the seas and the treasures of the dry land, the
productions both of nature and art: They lay waste the works and improvements
of ages, and, so far as their power extends, render all the elements
subservient to misery and ruin. What a blast do the follies and vices of men
bring upon the rich blessings of Heaven? For our continued exemption from these
scenes of devastation and ruin, how fervent should be our gratitude to the
supreme Disposer! In times past we have experienced them; and may Heaven grant,
that we may know them no more! As yet we hail each of the contending nations as
our friends: and while they are mutually suffering such complicated evils from
one another, these states present a common asylum for the distressed of all
parties, who are almost daily arriving on our peaceful shores.

The enumeration of blessings in the proclamation concludes with adding, He
has continued to us the inestimable blessing of the Gospel, and our religious,
as well as civil rights and liberties. For the former of these -- the rich
blessings of the Gospel and our religious privileges -- as they are primarily a
supernatural grant from Heaven, and comprise all our hopes and prospects for
eternity; so no period, short of that endless duration, will be sufficient for
adequate returns of adoration and praise. -- For the latter, our civil rights
and liberties, we are, under Providence, and as the mean by which Heaven has
granted and continues them to us, indebted to a cause or source which, I am
sorty to observe, is not mentioned, nor even referred to, in the proclamation
-- I mean the general or federal government. This omission is strange and
singular, beyond any thing of the kind that I recollect to have seen since the
first union of the states in the memorable year 1775. It has, to say the least,
a strong appearance of disconnection with the general government, and an air of
separate sovereignty and independence, as though we enjoyed not our civil
rights in union with the other states under one common Head.

Here then, I think it my duty, to remind you, that of all our political
blessings for which we ought, on this day, to make our grateful acknowledgments
to the Divine Goodness, our federal government is the greatest, the chief, and,
in fact, the basis of the whole. Its form and constitution are by wise men
universally admired. The wisdom, integrity, ability and success of its
administration have commanded the respect and applause of the world. Its happy
effects and consequences to ourselves, which we have known and experienced,
have been great and estimable, beyond any other political good which we have
ever enjoyed. By guarantying to each of the states a republican form of
government, and the enjoyment of every right consistent with the rights of the
whole, it becomes to them all their greatest security against the attempts both
of internal faction and external invasion. In this view, it is their main
pillar of support and bulwark of defense.

Previous to the adoption of this most excellent form of government -- under
the old confederation, these states presented to the world a many-headed
monster, frightful and alarming to all the lovers of peace and good order. Each
state claimed a negative on the resolves of the whole in Congress assembled;
and the regulations of the several states respectively were continually
interfering and clashing with each other. From this foundation for discord,
parties and divisions were inevitable. In almost every state, many were
disaffected toward their own immediate government. In some of the states, open
rebellions existed. Things went on from bad to worse, till the administration
of justice was suspended, the laws silenced -- all public and private faith
left without a support, and the obligation of promises and contracts set aside.
Men could neither confide in the public, nor in one another. Industry wanted
encouragement -- trade languished -- a general uneasiness prevailed; and we
tottered on the brink of the most dreadful convulsions.

The federal government was no sooner organized, than it speedily rescued us
from this eminently hazardous situation. It gave fresh vigor to each of the
state governments; awed into submission the factious through all the states;
restored the course of justice, and thereby established peace and good order
among the citizens at large. It recovered the sinking credit of the nation,
together with that of the respective states; and gave such a spring to
commerce, agriculture, manufactures, and all those useful arts which supply the
necessaries and conveniences of life, that they have flourished to a degree
incomparably beyond what had ever been known in this country before. In
promoting these important ends of every good government, it exceeded the most
sanguine expectations of its friends and patrons. So striking and manifest were
its beneficial effects, that even its restless enemies were compelled to
silence. This tide of public prosperity continued rising even after the
commencement of the present troubles in Europe: The current of our trade flowed
for a while with but little interruption, and with accumulated profit to our
merchants and farmers.

In this prosperous situation of our affairs, a foreign incendiary appeared
among us; the object of whose mission was, at all events, to draw us in for a
share in the war of Europe. By fair negotiation with the existing government,
he had no hope of success. It was therefore necessary, that the government
should be overthrown; or, at least, that the wise and good men entrusted with
its administration, should be driven from the helm. Materials for either or
both of these purposes were ready to his hand.

In every country there are some who envy the abilities of their superiors,
and covet their stations; some constitutionally turbulent and uneasy, who can
have pleasure in nothing but scenes of tumult and confusion; some who can make
themselves conspicuous on no other occasions* and some in desperate
circumstances, whose only hope of bettering them is in revolutions of
government. Besides a proportion of all these, there has been in this country a
large party, from the beginning, ill affected toward the federal government,
and with these may be reckoned numbers of ignorant, though honest, people, who
think the period arrived when the debt of gratitude ought to be paid to our
allies. The passions, prejudices and opinions of these several classes of
people prepared their minds to receive the impressions of an insidious minister.

He immediately put in practice the arts which had proved so dreadfully
efficacious in his own country. His intrigues were suddenly and surprisingly
extended. His very breath seemed to kindle the smothered (...) of sedition
(...) Georgia to Newhampshire. Presses through the fiates were engaged to
forward his designs, by conveying torrents of slander and abuse against the
great officers of government. Popular societies, unknown to the laws, were
recommended and actually formed under the influence of demagogues well skilled
in the business of faction. The British councils, as though in league to aid
the attempts of GENET, perfidiously seized upon our trade, and thereby
furnished (what as yet had been wanting) a plausible occasion for clamor to
those who were seeking it, and a just ground of resentment and indignation to
the most peaceable and well disposed. The passions of men were worked up to a
degree of fury. Rash and violent measures were proposed and strenuously urged.
Favored by these circumstances of embarrassment to the government, the western
counties in Pennsylvania embraced the opportunity to rise in rebellion.

Such, my hearers, have been the trials and dangers to which our peace,
liberty, and all our political happiness, have been exposed. That the
consequences have not, as yet, been more pernicious, we have abundant reason,
this day, to thank and praise the Supreme Disposer. Our general government,
with all our rights and privileges embarked, has been steering between Scylla
and Charybdis: That we have not been dashed upon either, is owing to the good
hand of God, influencing and directing the pilots.

The prospect is now more favorable. Through the wise and good conduct of the
President, his ministers, and the men of sober judgment in Congress, we seem to
have escaped many rocks and quicksands. With dignity and firmness they resisted
the intrigues and machinations of an unworthy ambassador, till, at length, they
obtained his removal. With respect to the nation from whom we have received
unprovoked injuries, while they have been preparing for the dernier resort, by
putting the country into a state of defense; they have sent forward to them the
remonstrance of reason, truth and justice, that (if possible) they might
prevent the dreadful calamity of war. A degree of success has already attended
the negotiation. The offending power now appears half ashamed of the wrongs
which it has committed against us; and is constrained to promise restitution.
They have also, the present year, been successful against the hostile tribes of
savages: And to suppress rebellion, have sent forth an army so numerous and
powerful as affords the hopeful prospect of effecting the purpose without the
effusion of blood. To the several democratic societies through the states, who
have incessantly censured, misrepresented and calumniated all these measures of
our federal rulers, they have opposed a dignified patience and moderation,
worthy of their high stations and great abilities.

But as those societies, and the spirit of faction which they engender, nourish
and spread among the people, are, in my view, the greatest danger which, at
present, threatens the peace and liberties of our country, I shall close this
discourse with a few strictures upon them.

In every country the men of ambition, who covet the chief seats in government,
exert all their abilities to ingratiate themselves with the source of power.
Under a monarchy they are the most servile courtiers at the levee of the
prince. In a republic, the same men appear in the character of flaming
patriots, profess the warmest zeal for liberty, and call themselves the friends
of the people. In monarchies, their intrigues and factions are endless. But as
the monarch himself is the main object of all their attempts, over whom they
endeavor to extend their influence; their factions are usually limited to the
precincts of the court, and rarely occasion any general convulsion in the
empire. In a republic, the case is widely different: thousands and millions are
the object whom they would influence. Of course, the more popular any
government is, the more liable it is to be agitated and rent by parties and
factions. Our's is not the first republic which the world has seen. Some
centuries before the christian era, the states of ancient Greece and Rome were
so many republics. But through the intrigues of ambitious and designing men,
influencing each one his party, they became so many hot beds of faction and
dissension. Their worthiest and best characters, when such chanced to hold the
reins of government, were soon hunted down; and the vilest of men took their
places, and this in continual rotation. Civil wars frequently occurred; and as
either party prevailed, proscriptions, banishments and massacres ensued.
Precisely the same scenes are now exhibited in France. We all rejoiced at the
downfall of despotism in that country: We considered it as the dawn of liberty
to the world. But how soon was the fair morning overcast? They had no sooner
adopted a popular government, than all the violence of faction broke out. A
constitution, which the collected wisdom of the nation had been two years in
framing, was, in a day or an hour, overset and demolished. From that time to
this, their civil government has been nothing but a contest of parties, carried
on with all the ferocity of barbarians. Previous to the revolution, it was said
of the French, that so refined was their sensibility, so abhorrent of every
appearance of cruelty, that they would not suffer tragedy to be acted at their
theaters. Is it not astonishing, how so great a change in the morals and
manners of a nation could be so suddenly effected? Faction alone accounts for
it. Had the representatives of the nation been left to act their own judgment,
uncontrouled by the leaders of faction, they would never have been guilty of
those excesses and cruelties which chill all humane minds with horror. But how
came those factious leaders by such a controuling power over the convention?
Solely by means of those popular societies in which they presided, or over
which they first gained an influence. These gave to faction its whole force.

On the same principles with those in France are founded the democratic
societies in this country; and should they become numerous here, as they are
there, they will infallibly have a similar effect. Their pretense is, to watch
government -- they mean the federal government. But this, like each of the
state governments, is chosen by the nation at large; and, of course, every man
in his individual capacity has an equal right and an equal interest in watching
its measures. What presumption then is it, and what an usurpation of the rights
of their brethren, for private associations, unauthorized by the laws, to
arrogate this charge to themselves? Admitting the propriety of setting a watch
upon Congress and the President; are not the state legislatures fully competent
to the business? Is not their interest at stake, and their jealousy always
awake, ready to notice any fault or error in the general government? What then
is there for these private associations to do? Good they cannot do; and if they
do any thing, it must be evil. And that they have done evil already, and are,
in fact, the support of a pernicious and inveterate faction against the general
government, among many other unquestionable proofs, the omission of our chief
magistrate, just mentioned, is, to my mind, not an improbable one. For unless
we suppose him to have fallen under the baneful influence of those societies,
we know not how to account for his having hazarded a proclamation in which we
are directed, neither to give thanks for any advantages enjoyed by means of
that government, ^or even to ask the blessing of Heaven upon it. This must
appear the more extraordinary when we reflect, that at the time of issuing the
proclamation, war with the savages raged on our frontiers, rebellion in the
bosom of the country, and our situation, with respect to the powers of Europe,
had become so critical, that we were actually fortifying and forming a numerous
army.
As though its destruction were already decreed, it is treated as no longer the
subject of prayer.

Should so melancholy an event as its overthrow ultimately take place, no cause
at present appears so probable, as those ill-judged associations. To pull down
and destroy good governments as well as bad, is their only tendency. In the
nature of things they can have no other effect. In such a country as this,
therefore, where, through the distinguishing mercy of Heaven, we have obtained
a government so admirably adapted to promote the general happiness, these
irregular and unwarrantable associations ought to be guarded against and
suppressed with a vigilance like that with which we extinguish a fire when it
is kindling in a great city. Their meetings are so many collections of
combustibles; and should they be generally extended, the whole country will be
in a flame. The members of those societies, by virtue of this relation,
necessarily become the mere tools and dupes of their artful leaders, who have
their own ends to serve by all their professions of patriotism. "The moment a
man is attached to a club, his mind is not free: He receives a bias from the
opinions of the party: A question indifferent to him, is no longer indifferent,
when it materially affects a brother of the society. He is not left to act for
himself; he is bound in honor to take part with the society -- his pride and
his prejudices, if at war with his opinion, will commonly obtain the victory;
and rather than incur the ridicule or censure of his associates, he will
countenance their measures, at all hazards; and thus an independent freeman is
converted into a mere walking machine, a convenient engine of party leaders."
In this way a few ambitious individuals are enabled to extend their influence;
and as they rise in power and consequence, to infringe upon the liberty of the
public.

"Each individual member of the state should have an equal voice in elections;
but the individuals of a club have more than an equal voice, because they have
the benefit of another influence; that of extensive private attachments, which
come in aid of each man's political opinion. And just in proportion as the
members of a club have an undue share of influence, in that proportion they
abridge the rights of their fellow citizens. Every club therefore, formed for
political purposes, is an aristocracy established over their brethren. It has
all the properties of an aristocracy, and all the effects of tyranny. It is a
literal truth, that the democratic clubs in the United States, while running
mad with the abhorrence of aristocratic influence, are attempting to establish
precisely the same influence under a different name. And if any thing will
rescue this country from the jaws of faction, it must be either the good sense
of a great majority of Americans, which will discourage private political
associations, and render them contemptible; or the controling power of the laws
of the country, which, in an early stage, shall demolish all such institutions,
and secure to each individual, in the great political family, equal rights and
an equal share of influence in his individual capacity.

But let us admit that no fatal consequences to government, and equal rights,
will ensue from these institutions, still their effects on social harmony are
very pernicious, and already begin to appear. A party spirit is hostile to all
friendly intercourse; it inflames the passions; it sours the mind; it destroys
good neighborhood: it warps the judgment in judicial determinations: it
banishes candor and substitutes prejudice; it restrains the exercise of
benevolent affections; and in proportion as it chills the warm affections of
the soul, it undermines the whole system of moral virtue. Were the councils of
hell united to invent expedients for depriving men of the little portion of
good they are destined to enjoy on this earth, the only measure they need adopt
for this purpose, would be, to introduce factions into the bosom of the
country. -- Faction begets disorder, force, rancorous passions, anarchy,
tyranny, blood and slaughter." The Revolution in France, by an American: a
judicious and instructive pamphlet.
May the God of order and peace preserve us from such dreadful calamities! and
to Him shall be the glory forever.

AMEN.

