A CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS BELONGING TO THE MEDICAL LIBRARY IN The Pennsylvania
Hospital; TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, THE RULES To be observed in the use of them.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, ON THE WEST SIDE OF
FOURTH-STREET, BETWEEN MARKET-STREET AND ARCH-STREET. MDCCXC.

RULES TO BE OBSERVED IN THE USE OF THE BOOKS, BELONGING TO The Pennsylvania
Hospital.
I. THE Librarian shall attend on every Fourth and Seventh-day morning, from
nine till eleven o'clock, to receive and lend out books.

II. Books shall be lent to no person, but the Managers and Physicians of the
Hospital, the Pupils of those Physicians, and such Students of medicine who pay
for the privilege, and have a certificate from the sitting Managers with their
permission to attend.

III. The Librarian shall keep a catalogue, in the library, of all books which
now belong to the same, or may be added hereafter; he shall also label and
number them, and replace them on the shelves as they are brought in, first
examining if they are free from damage.

IV. If damaged the borrower shall have them immediately replaced, or pay for
the injury done, which if he neglects to do he shall have no more use of the
books.

V. A Folio may be lent out for four weeks, a Quarto for three weeks, Octavos
and Duodecimos for two weeks and no longer, unless the note is renewed.

VI. A deposit shall be left for every book lent, of at least one-third more
than the value, which the Librarian is to estimate, and the borrower shall give
a promissory note, in which he shall specify the deposit, and engage to return
the book, undefaced, within a limited time; at the expiration of which he may
renew his note, and take it again if no other person applies for the book; but
if another person should apply for the same book, the new applicant shall have
the preference.

VII. When a deposit is returned, a receipt shall be given for it on the back
of the note.

VIII. No person shall have more than two books out at one time.

IX. Any person taking a book from the library, without giving a note, shall
return it, and not be allowed to take any more.

X. One shilling per week shall be paid as a fine on every book which is kept
beyond the time specified in the note, and if the borrower does not return it
in three months from the date of his note, it shall be deemed to be lost, in
which case the deposit shall be forfeited; moreover the value of the book shall
be paid without delay, or another shall be replaced in its room to the
satisfaction of the sitting Managers and Physicians, in default of which the
borrower shall forever forfeit his right in the use of the books.

XI. If the borrower of a single book not belonging to a set, should lose it,
he shall forfeit his deposit; and if the borrower of one or more books
belonging to a set or sets, should lose either of them, he shall take all the
remaining volumes of the set so broken and pay the full value thereof, besides
forfeiting his deposit for the use of the library.

XII. Notes given are not to be returned, but cancelled by cutting off the
signers' names.

XIII. All fines are to be appropriated to the use of the library.

XIV. The Librarian shall keep an account of the fines and forfeitures he
receives, and pay the same to the order of the sitting Managers.

XV. In all cases where doubts arise respecting a violation of the foregoing
rules, the case shall be submitted to the sitting Managers and Physicians,
whose determination shall be conclusive; but no such Manager or Physician shall
be allowed to judge in his own case.

XVI. The following books are not to be lent out of the house, but any person
having a right to the use of the library, may have access to them, under the
Librarian's inspection, at the hours appointed for him to attend: Albinus's
tables; Smellie's plates; Hunter's gravid uterus; Monro's nervous system; Monro
on fishes; Motherby's medical dictionary.


A CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS BELONGING TO THE MEDICAL LIBRARY IN The PENNSYLVANIA
HOSPITAL.
FOLIO.
1 TABLES of the skeleton and muscles of the human body. By Bernard Siegfried
Albinus. Translated from the Latin. London, 1749.

2 Monro on the structure and functions of the nervous system; illustrated with
tables. Edinburgh, 1783.

3 Monro on the structure and physiology of fishes, explained and compared with
those of man and other animals; illustrated with figures. Edinburgh, 1785.

4 Bernardi Siegfried Albini explicatio tabularum anatomicarum Bartholomaei
Eustachii. Leidae Batavorum, 1744. The gift of Doctor John Redman.

5 Aretaei Cappadocis de Causis et Signis Acutorum et Diuturnorum Morborum
Libri Quatuor. Lugduni Batavorum, 1735 The gift of Deborah Morris.

6 Frederici Hoffmanni opera omnia, in sex tomos distributa. Gene^ae, 1748. The
gift of Deborah Morris. Cum supplemento in duas parts distributo. 1749.

7 Historia plantarum. Auctore Johanne Raio. 2 vols. Londini, 1686.

8 Observationum medicarum, rararum, novarum, admirabilium and monstrosarum
Volumen, Tomis Septem de toto Homine institutum. Francofurti, 1609. The gift of
Deborah Morris.

9 Petri Foresti opera omnia. Francofurti, 1634. The gift of Deborah Morris.

10 A new medical dictionary; or general repository of physic. By G. Motherby,
M. D. Second edition. London, 1785.

11 The anatomy of the human gravid uterus; exhibited in figures. By William
Hunter. Birmingham, 1774.

12 A set of anatomical tables; with explanations, and an abridgment of the
practice of midwifery. By William Smellie, M. D. Second edition. London, 1761.

13 A description of all the bursae mucosae of the human body; with tables. By
Alexander Monro, M. D. Edinburgh, 1788.

QUARTO.
1 THE seats and causes of diseases investigated by anatomy. Translated from
the Latin of John Baptist Morgagni, by Benjamin Alexander, M. D. 3 vols.
London, 1769.

2 and 3 A methodical synopsis of mineral waters. By John Rutty, M. D. London,
1757.

4 A new and general system of physic, in theory and practice. By William
Smith, M. D. London, 1749.

5 An experimental history of the materia medica, or of the natural and
artificial substances made use of in medicine. By William Lewis, M. B. F. R. S.
London, 1761.

6 A dictionary of chemistry. Translated from the French; with plates, notes
and additions by the translator. 2 vols. London, 1771.

7 Philosophical commerce of arts. By W. Lewis, M. B. and F. R. S. London, 1765.

8 The medical works of Richard Mead, M. D. London, 1762.

9 Elements of chemistry; being the annual lectures of Herman Boerhaave, M. D.
Translated by Timothy Dallowe, M. D. 2 vols. in one. London, 1735.

10 The chemical works of Caspar Neuman, M. D. with large additions by William
Lewis, M. B. London, 1759.

11 B. S. Albini Academicarum Annotationum libri septem. 2 vols. Leidae. Apud
J. and H. Verbeek. Bibliopolas, 1654.

12 The works of Robert Whytt, M. D. Published by his son. Edinburgh, 1768.

13 Alberti v Haller opera minora emendata, aucta, et renovata. 3 vols.
Lausannae, 1763.

14 Elementa physiologiae corporis humani. Auctore Alberto v Haller. 8 vols.
Lausannae, 1757.

15 Jo. Baptistae Morgagni P. P. P. P. de sedibus, et causis morborum per
anatomen indagatis, libri quinque. 4 vols. Neapoli, 1762.

16 Gerardi van Swieten, M. D. commentaria in Hermanni Boerhaavii aphorismos de
cognoscendis et curandis morbis. 5 vols. Lugduni Batavorum, 1742.

17 The works of Alexander Monro, M. D. Published by his son, with the life of
the author. Edinburgh, 1781.

18 A methodical introduction to the theory and practice of physic. By David
Macbride, M. D. London, 177^.

19 The history and present state of electricity; with original experiments. By
Joseph Priestley, L. L. D. F. R. S. Fourth edition. London, 1775.

20 Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Edinburgh, 1788

21 Observations on the diseases of the army. By John Pringle. Fifth edition,
corrected. London, 1765.

22 Lectures on the materia medica, as delivered by William Cullen, M. D.
America, 1775.

23 A treatise of the materia medica. By William Cullen, M. D. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1789.

24 The anatomy of the absorbing vessels of the human body. By William
Cruikshank. London, 1786.

25 Medical commentaries. By William Hunter, M. D. Part first. Second edition.
London, 1777.

26 Two introductory lectures, delivered by William Hunter; to which are added,
some papers relating to Doctor Hunter's intended plan for establishing a museum
in London, for the improvement of anatomy, surgery and physic. London, 1784.

27 A treatise on the venereal disease. By John Hunter. London, 1786.

28 The natural history of the human teeth; explaining their structure, use,
formation, growth, and diseases; with copper plates. By John Hunter, F. R. S.
London, 1771.

29 History of the origin of medicine; an oration delivered at the anniversary
meeting of the Medical Society of London, January 19, 1778; to which are since
added, various historical illustrations. By John Coakley Lettsom, M. D. London,
1778.

30 The history and present state of discoveries relating to vision, light and
colors By Joseph Priestley, L. L. D. F. R. S. London, 1772.

31 A general system of surgery. Translated from the Latin of Dr. Laurence
Heister. London, 1743.

32 Gerardi B Van Swieten commentaria in Hermanni Boerhaavii aphorismos. Vols.
1 and 3. Lugduni Batavorum, 1753. The gift of Deborah Morris.

33 Laurentii Bellini Florentini in Academia Pisana anatomes professoris
celeberrimi opera (...) Venetiis, 1732. The gift of Deborah Morris.

34 Praxeos medicae tomi tres, novis observationibus a Felice Platero, M. D.
Editio quarta. Basiliae, 1736. The gift of Deborah Morris.

35 Opera omnia Georgii Baglivi. Lugduni, 1745. The gift of Deborah Morris.

36 The complete herbal; or the botanical institutions of M. Tournesort. 2
vols. London, 1719 and 1730. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

37 Gregorii Horstii senioris opera medica. Goudae, 1661.

38 Archibaldi Pitcarnii Scoti opuscula medica. Roterodami, 1714. The gift of
Deborah Morris.

39 D. Hieronymi Fabricii ab Aquapendente, medicina practica. Parisiis, 1634.
The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

40 The lord Bacon's relation of the sweating sickness examined; in a reply to
George Thompson. By Henry Stubbe. London, 1671. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

41 Caelius Aurelianus de morbis acutis et chronicis. Amstelodami, 1722. The
gift of Deborah Morris.

42 Nicolai Pisonis medici Lotharingi de cognoscendis et curandis praecipue
internis humani corporis morbis. Libri tres. 2 vols. Lugduni Batavorum, 1736.
The gift of Deborah Morris.

43 Practicae medicinae liber quartus. Auctore Daniele Sennerto, M. D. Anno
1632. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

44 A complete discourse of wounds. By John Brown. London, 1678.

45 Prosper Alpinus de praesagienda vita et morte AEgrotantium. Lugduni
Batovorum, 1733. The gift of Deborah Morris.

46 Thesaurus medicinae practicae, studio and opera Thomae Burnet. London,
1673. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

47 Johannes De Gorter de perspiratione insensibili. Lugduni Batavorum, 1736.

48 A new system of midwifery, in four parts* with copperplates. By Robert
Johnson, M. D. London, 1769.

49 An account and method of cure of the Bronchocele or Derby-Rock. By Thomas
Prosser. Third edition. London, 1782.

50 Observations on certain parts of the animal economy. By John Hunter.
London, 1786.

51 A sermon, preached at Christ church, Middlesex, for the benefit of the
Humane Society. By the Reverend Robert Pool Finch, D. D. With a prefatory
address, and an appendix, containing some select accounts of recovery in
various cases of suspended animation. London, 1788.

52 53 54 and 55 Some account of the Pennsylvania Hospital, from its rise to
the fifth day of May, 1761; with an alphabetical list of the contributors, and
of legacies which have been bequeathed for the promotion and support thereof,
from its first rise to that time. Philadelphia, 1761.

OCTAVO.
1 MEDICAL and philosophical commentaries. By a society of physicians in
Edinburgh. 10 vols. London, 1774.

1 Medical and philosophical commentaries. 2 vols. London, 1788.

2 Medical communications. London, 1784.

3 Medical observations and inquiries. By a society of physicians in London. 6
vols. London, 1771.

4 Medical transactions. Published by the college of physicians in London. 3
vols viz. 1, 2, 3. London.

5 Medical Register for the year 1783. London.

6 Medical Museum, or select cases, experiments, enquiries and discoveries in
medicine, pharmacy, anatomy, botany, chemistry, surgery, physiology, etc. 3
vols. Second edition. London, 1781.

7 Essays and observations, physical and literary, read before the
philosophical society in Edinburgh, and published by them. 3 vols. Second
edition. Edinburgh, 1771.

8 Thesaurus medicus five disputationum in academia Edinensi ad rem medicam
pertinentium a collegio institute ad hoe usque tempus, delectus. A Gulielmo
Smellio, S. P. E. S. habitus. 4 vols. Edinburgi, 1778.

9 Synopsis nosologiae methodicae, exibens clariss. Virorum Sauvagesii,
Linnaei, Vogelii, Sagari et Macbridii, systemata nosologica; edidit suumque
proprium systema nosologicum adjecit Gulielmus Cullen. Editio quarta. 2 vols.
in one. Edinburgi, 1785.

10 Institutions of medicine. Part first, physiology. By William Cullen, M. D.
Third edition. Edinburgh, 1785.

11 First lines of the practice of physic. By William Cullen, M. D. A new
edition. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1786.

12 Clinical experiments, histories and dissections. By Francis Home, M. D.
Third edition. London, 1783.

13 A system of surgery. By Benjamin Bell. 6 vols. Edinburgh.

14 A system of surgery. By Benjamin Bell. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1786.

15 The anatomy of the human body. By Samuel Foart Simmons, M. D. F. R. S. vol.
1. London, 1780.

16 The chirurgical works of Percival Pott, F. R. S. A new edition. 3 vols.
London, 1783.

17 An enquiry into the present state of medical surgery, including the analogy
betwixt external and internal disorders; and the inseparability of these
branches of the same profession. By Thomas Kirkland, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1786.

18 Elements of the theory and practice of physic and surgery. By John Aitken,
M. D. 2 vols. London, 1783.

19 and 20 Consultations on most of the disorders that require the assistance
of surgery. By Henry Francis Le Dran, director of the royal academy of surgery
at Paris. Translated by Alexander Reid. London, 1766.

21 Cases and remarks in surgery; to which is subjoined an appendix, containing
the method of curing the bronchocele in Coventry. By B. Wilmer, surgeon.
London, 1779.

22 A treatise on the operations of surgery; with a description and
representation of the instruments used in performing them. To which is
prefixed, an introduction on the treatment of wounds, abscesses, and ulcers. By
Samuel Sharp. Tenth edition. London, 1782.

23 A treatise on the theory and management of ulcers; with a dissertation on
white swellings of the joints. To which is prefixed, an essay on the
chirurgical treatment of inflammation and its consequences. By Benjamin Bell.
Third edition. Edinburgh, 1784.

24 An introduction to the theory and practice of surgery. By William Dease.
vol. 1. London, 1780.

25 An historical sketch of medicine and surgery from their origin to the
present time. By W. Black, M. D. London, 1782.

26 Practical observations on amputation, and the after-treatment; to which is
added, an account of the amputation above the ancle, with a flap. The whole
illustrated by cases. By Edward Alanson. Second edition. 1782.

27 Experimental inquiries. Part the first, containing an enquiry into the
properties of the blood, with remarks on some of its morbid appearances; and an
appendix relating to the discovery of the lymphatic system in birds, fish, and
the animals called amphibious. By William Hewson, F. R. S. Third edition.
London, 1780.

28 Medical and chirurgical observations, as an appendix to a former
publication. By Benjamin Gooch, surgeon. London.

29 Medical instructions toward the prevention and cure of chronic diseases
peculiar to women. To which are added, prescriptions, or efficacious forms of
medicine, in English, adapted to each disease. By John Leake, M. D. Sixth
edition. 2 vols. London, 1787.

30 Elements of natural history and chemistry, being the second edition of the
elementary lectures on those sciences. By the author M. De Fourcroy. Translated
into English. 4 vols. London 1788.

31 A treatise on medical and pharmaceutical chemistry, and the materia medica.
To which is added, an English translation of the pharmacopoeia of the royal
college of physicians of London. By Donald Monro, M. D. 3 vols. London, 1788.

32 Physical and chemical essays; translated from the original Latin of Sir
Torbern Bergman, by Edmund Cullen, M. D. To which are added, notes and
illustrations, by the translator. 2 vols. London, 1784.

33 Elements of the branches of natural philosophy, connected with medicine. By
J. Elliot, M. D. London, 1786.

34 The chemical essays of Charles William Scheele. Translated from the
transactions of the academy of sciences at Stockholm. London, 1786.

35 Elements of mineralogy by Richard Kirwan, Esquire, F. R. S. London, 1784.

36 Treatise of the venom of the viper, and other poisons; to which are
annexed, observations on the primitive structure of the animal body, different
experiments on the reproduction of the nerves, and a description of a new canal
of the eye. With descriptive plates. Translated from the French of Felix
Fontana. By Joseph Skinner. 2 vols. London, 1787.

37 First lines of physiology. By Baron Albertus Haller, M. D. Translated from
the Latin, and printed under the inspection of William Cullen, M. D. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1786.

38 A treatise, with a collection of cases and observations, in midwifery. By
William Smellie, M. D. Fourth edition. 3 vols. London, 1768.

39 An essay on fevers; to which is added a dissertation on the malignant,
ulcerous sore throat. By John Huxham, M. D. Third edition, London, 1757.

40 Practical essays upon fevers, dropsies, the epilepsy, colic, dysenteric
fluxes; and the operation of Calomel. By Daniel Lysons, M. D. Second edition.
Bath, 1783.

41 An essay on disorders of people of fashion. By Mr. Tissot, D. M. Translated
from the French, by Francis Bacon Lee. London.

42 Advice to the people in general, with regard to their health. Translated
from the French edition of Dr. Tissot, by J. Kirkpatrick, M. D. London, 1765.

43 A treatise on the scurvy. By James Lind, M. D. Third edition. London, 1772.

44 Observations on the diseases incident to seamen. By Gilbert Blane, M. D. F.
R. S. London, 1785.

45 A System of the practice of medicine from the Latin, of Dr. Hoffman, by the
late William Lewis, M. B. F. R. S. Revised and completed by Andrew Duncan, M.
D. 2 vols. London, 1783.

46 Observations on hepatic diseases, incidental to Europeans in the East
Indies. By Stephen Mathews. London, 1783.

47 The works of John Fothergill, M. D. By John Coakley Lettsom. 3 vols.
London, 1783.

48 Memoirs of the literary and philosophical society of Manchester. 2 vols.
Warrington, 1785.

49 The London practice of physic, for young practitioners. Fourth edition.
London, 1785.

50 Pharmacopoeia medico-chymica five thesaurus pharmacologicus. Editio ultima.
Authore Johanne Schrodero, M. D. Lugduni Batavorum, 1672.

51 Thomae Bartholini Casp. Fill. anatomia ex Caspari Bartholini parentis
institutionibus, omniumque recentiorum and propriis observationibus tertium ad
sanguinis circulationem reformata, cum iconibus novis accuratissimis. Additur
and huic postremae editioni Thomae Bartholini appendix de Lacteis Thoracicis
and Vasis Lymphaticis. Hagae-Comitis, 1666.

52 Emmenologia; in qua fluxus muliebris menstrui, phenomenon periodi, vitia,
cum medendi methodo, ad rations mechanicas exiguntur. Anthore Joh. Friend, M.
D. Editio tertia. Londini, 1720. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

53 Pyrotechnical discourses. London, 1705.

54. De Morbis acutis infantum, cui access^^^liber observationes de morbis
aliquot gravioribus medicas complectens. Editio tertia. Autore Gualtero Harris,
M. D. Londini, 1720.

55 Materia medica; or a description of simple medicines generally used in
physic; written by monsieur Tournefort, and translated into English. Second
edition. London, 1716.

56 Pharmacopaeia Bateana; or Bate's dispensatory. By William Salmon, M. D.
Third edition. London, 1706. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

57. A new practice of physic. By Peter Shaw, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1726. The
gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

58. A treatise of the venereal disease, originally in Latin, by John Astrue;
translated into English by William Barrowby, M. B. 2 vols. London, 1737.

59 A new English dispensatory, in four parts. By James Alleyne, M. D. London,
1733. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

60 Institutions in physic; collected from the writings of the most eminent
physicians. By J. Brown, M. D. London, 1714. The gift of Deborah Morris.

61 The aphorisms of Hippocrates, and the sentences of Celsus; with aphorisms
upon the small pox, measles, and other distempers, not so well known to former
ages. By C. J. Sprengell, M. D. London, 1708.

62 Eight chirurgical treatises. By Richard Wiseman. Fifth edition. 2 vols.
London, 1719.

63 The philosophical and mathematical elements of physic. By Archibald
Pitcairn, M. D. London, 1718. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

64 Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Surgery at Paris. Translated from the
French. 2 vols. London, 1750.

65 A treatise on the small pox. By Theophilus Lobb, M. D. Second edition.
London, 1757.

66 The art of surgery. By Daniel Turner, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1725. The gift
of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

67 Phthisiologia seu exercitationes de phthisi tribus libris comprehense.
Authore Richardo Morton, M. D. Londini, 1689. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

68 Emmenologia; in qua fluxus muliebris menstrui, phenomenon periodi, vitia,
cum medendi methodo, ad rations mechanicas exiguntur. Authore Joh. Friend, M.
D. Editio secunda. Londini, 1717. The gift of Deborah Morris.

69 Etmullerus abridged; or a complete system of the theory and practice of
physic. Translated into English. London, 1712.

70 Euodia; or a discourse on causes and cures. By Edward Strother, M. D.
London, 1718.

71 A physical essay on the senses. Translated from the French of M. Le Ca^.
London, 1750.

72 A treatise of the diseases of the bones; with observations on the venereal
and other distempers; and figures representing the dressings, machines and
instruments. London, 1726.

73 Hippocrates upon air, water and situation; upon epidemical diseases; and
upon prognostics, in acute cases especially; also, Thucydides's account of the
plague of Athens. Second edition. London, 1752.

74 Pharmacopaeia officinalis et extemporanea; or a complete English
dispensatory; in two parts, theoretic and practical. By John Quincy, M. D.
Fourteenth edition. London, 1769.

75 A dissertation on the use of seawater in the diseases of the glands;
particularly the scurvy, jaundice, king's evil, leprosy, and the glandular
consumption. Translated from the Latin of Richard Russel, M. D. with a
translation of (...) Speed's commentary on seawater; also an account of the
nature, properties, and uses of all the remarkable mineral waters in Great
Britain; and of the foreign mineral waters of Pyrmont, Spa, and Seltzer. Fifth
edition. London, 1769.

76 Lexicon physico-medicum; or a new medicinal dictionary. By John Quincy, M.
D. Eighth edition. London, 1767.

77 Observations on the air and epidemic diseases, from the year 1728 to 1737
inclusive; with a short dissertation on the Devonshire cholic. Translated from
the Latin of Doctor Huxham. 2 vols. London, 1759.

78 Cases in surgery; with introductions, operations, and remarks; to which is
added, an account of the preparation and effects of the agaric of the oak in
stopping of bleedings, after some of the most capital operations. By Joseph
Warner, F. R. S. Third edition. London, 1760.

79 Chirurgical observations and cases; with plates. By William Bromfeild. 2
vols. London, 1773.

80 Experimental essays on medical and philosophical subjects; with plates. By
David Macbride, M. D. Second edition. London, 1767.

81 Elements of the theory and practice of chemistry. Translated from the
French of M. Macquer. Second edition. 2 vols. London, 1764.

82 Experiments upon the human bile; and reflections on the biliary secretion.
By James Maclurg, M. D. London, 1772.

83 Emmenologia. Written in Latin, by Dr. John Friend; translated into English,
by Thomas Dale, M. D. Second edition. London, 1752.

84 General medical principles and cautions. By Theophilus Lobb, M. D. London,
1753.

85 The operations in surgery of Monsieur Le Dran. Translated by Mr. Gataker,
surgeon; with remarks, plates of the operations, and a set of instruments, by
Mr. Cheselden. Fourth edition. London, 1768.

86 The practice of physic, reduced to the ancient way of observations.
Translated from the Latin of Geo. Baglivi, M. D. London, 1704.

87 Observations on the diseases of the army. By Sir John Pringle, baronet.
Sixth edition. London, 1768.

88 Alberti v Haller, primae lineae physiologiae. Edinburgi, 1767.

89 Observations on the nature, causes, and cure of those disorders which have
been commonly called nervous, hypocondriac, or hysteric. By Robert White, M. D.
F. R. S. Second edition. Edinburgh, 1765.

90 Synopsis medicinae; or, a summary view of the whole practice of physic.
With a treatise on all sorts of poisons. Fourth edition. 2 vols. London, 1761.

91 The chirurgical works of Percivall Pott, F. R. S. 4 vols. London, 1771.
(Third vol. missing.)

92 Institutes of experimental chemistry: being an essay toward reducing that
branch of natural philosophy, to a regular system. 2 vols. London, 1759.

93 The general practice of physic, extracted chiefly from the writings of the
most celebrated physicians. By R. Brooks, M. D. Sixth edition. 2 vols. London,
1771.

94 Synopsis Nosologiae Methodi^ae in usum Studiosorum. A Gulielmo Cullen, M.
D. Editio altera. Edinburgi, 1772.

95 First lines of the practice of physic, for the use of students, in the
university of Edinburgh. By William Cullen, M. D. and P. Second edition. 2
vols. Philadelphia, 1781.

96 Medical transactions, published by the college of physicians in London.
London, 1772.

97 The commentaries upon the aphorisms of Dr. Herman Boerhaave. By Gerard Van
Swieten, M. D. Translated into English. Second edition. 18 vols. London, 1765,
to 1773.

98 An essay on the vital and other involuntary motions of animals. By Robert
Whytt, M. D. Edinburgh, 1751.

99 Caroli Linnaei species plantarum. 2 vols. Holmiae 1753. The gift of Deborah
Morris.

100 Essays and observations, physical and literary. Read before a society in
Edinburgh. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1754.

101 A treatise on the eye, the manner and phenomenon of vision. By William
Porterfield, M. D. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1759.

102 Boerhaave's medical correspondence, containing the various symptoms of
chronical distempers; with his practice in the hospital at Leyden. London, 1745.

103 A method of studying physic. By Herman Boerhaave. Translated into English.
By Mr. Samber. London, 1719.

104 A critical enquiry into the present state of surgery. By Samuel Sharp, F.
R. S. Fourth edition. London, 1761.

105 A new treatise of the diseases of the eyes. By M. De St. Yves. Translated
from the French by J. Stockton, M. D. Second edition. London, 1744.

106 The elaboratory laid open; or, the secrets of modern chemistry and
pharmacy revealed. London, 1758.

107 Observations on the epidemical diseases in Minorca. From the year 1744 to
1749. By George Cleghorn. Third edition. London, 1768.

108 A course of anatomico-physiological lectures on the human structure, and
animal economy. By Charles Nicholas Jenty, M. D 3 vols. London, 1762.

109 A treatise on mineral waters. By Donald Monro, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1770.

110 Dr. Boerhaave's academical lectures on the theory of physic. Third
edition. 5 vols. London 1766.

111 A mechanical account of Fevers. By Laurentius Bellini, M. D. Translated
into English. London, 1720.

112 An essay concerning the nature of aliments, and the choice of them. By
John Arbuthnot, M. D. London, 1756.

113 An essay on the uterine Haemorrhage, which precedes the delivery of the
full grown foetus; illustrated with cases. By Edward Rigby. Third edition.
London, 1784.

114 The principles and practice of midwifery. By Edward Foster, M. D.
Completed and corrected, by James Sims, M. D. London, 1781.

115 Six discourses delivered by Sir John Pringle, Bart. on occasion of six
annual assignments of Sir Godfrey Copley's medal; with the author's life. By
Andrew Kippis, D. D. F. R. S. and S. A. London, 1783.

116 An essay on the nature and cure of the phthisis pulmonalis. With an
appendix on the use and effects of frequent vomits. By Thomas Reid, M. D. F. R.
S. Second edition. London, 1785.

117 A treatise on the struma or scrosula, commonly called the king's evil. By
Thomas White. Second edition. London, 1787.

118 Experimental inquiries; part the third, containing a description of the
red particles of the blood in the human subject, and in other animals. With an
account of the structure and offices of the lymphatic glands, of the thymus
gland, and of the spleen; being the remaining part of the observations and
experiments of the late Mr. William Hewson, F. R. S. By Magnus Falconar,
surgeon. London, 1777.

119 Some observations relative to the influence of climate on vegetable and
animal bodies. By Alexander Wilson, M. D. London, 1780.

120 The present state of midwifery in Paris; with a theory of the cause and
mechanism of labor. By A. Folver, manmidwife. London, 1770.

121 Elements of the practice of physic. By George Fordyce, M. D. F. R. S.
Fifth edition. London, 1784.

122 Observations on the changes of air, and the concomitant epidemical
diseases, in the Island of Barbados; with a treatise on the putrid bilious
fever, commonly called the yellow fever. By William Hilary, M. D. Second
edition. London, 1766.

123 Observations medical and political, on the small pox, and the advantages
and disadvantages of general inoculation, especially in cities; and on the
mortality of mankind at every age, in city and country. By W. Black, M. D.
Second edition. London, 1781.

124 An essay on the medical constitution of Great Britain. By Charles Bisset.
London, 1762.

125 Modern improvements in the practice of physic. By Henry Manning, M. D.
London, 1780.

126 A medical commentary on fixed air. By Matthew Dobson, M. D. F. R. S. Third
edition, with an appendix on the efficacy of the solution of fixed alkaline
salts, saturated with fixable air, in the stone and gravel. By William
Falconer, M. D. F. R. S. London, 1787.

127 A new enquiry into the causes, symptoms and cure of putrid and
inflammatory fevers; with an appendix on the hectic fever, and on the ulcerated
and malignant sore throat. By William Fordyce, M. D. Fourth edition. London,
1777.

128 Elements of therapeutics. By Andrew Duncan, M. D. Edinburgh, 1770.

129 Georgical essays. By A. Hunter, M. D. F. R. S. York, 1777.

130 A system of anatomy from Monro, Winslow, Innes, and the latest authors.
Illustrated with copper plates. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1784.

131 An account of the diseases which were most frequent in the British
military hospitals in Germany, from January, 1761, to the return of the troops
in March, 1763. With an essay on the means of preserving the health of
soldiers, and conducting military hospitals. By Donald Monro, M. D. London,
1764.

132 The works of the late Joseph Else, F. R. S. Containing a treatise on the
hydrocele, and other subjects in surgery. By George Vaux, surgeon. London, 1782.

133 A treatise on childbed fevers, with two dissertations, one on the brain
and nerves, the other on different kinds of irritability. By Thomas Kirkland,
M. D. London, 1774.

134 Medical reports of the effects of tobacco, principally with regard to its
diuretic quality, in the cure of dropsies, and dysuries. By Thomas Fowler, M.
D. London, 1785.

135 An essay upon nursing and the management of children, from their birth to
three years of age. By W. Cadogan. Tenth edition. London, 1772.

136 A dissertation on the gout, and all chronic diseases, by William Cadogan.
Eleventh edition. London, 1772.

137 A philosophical inquiry into the causes of animal heat; with incidental
observations on several physiological and chemical questions, connected with
the subject. By P. Dugud Leslie, M. D. London, 1778.

138 A treatise on the diseases of the eye, and their remedies; with the
anatomy of the eye; the theory of vision, and the several species of imperfect
sight. With plates. By George Chandler, surgeon. London, 1780.

139 Nosocomii Civici Pazmanniani annus medicus tertius, five observationum
circa morbos acutos et chronicos ab Henrico Josepho Collin, pars prima. Lugduni
Batavorum, 1764.

140 A treatise on the Hydrocele. By John Douglass, surgeon. London, 1755.

141 A full and plain account of the gout. By Ferdo. Warner, L. L. D. London,
1772.

142 Outlines of the theory and practice of midwifery. By Alexander Hamilton. A
new edition. Edinburgh, 1787.

143 Observations on the animal economy, and on the causes and cure of
diseases. By John Gardener, M. D. Edinburgh, 1784.

144 The new pharmacopocia of the royal college of physicians of London.
Translated into English by Thomas Healde, M. D. F. R. S. Third edition. London,
1788.

145 The works of Thomas Sydenham, M. D. on acute and chronic diseases; wherein
their histories and modes of cure as recited by him, are delivered with
accuracy and perspicuity. By George Wallis, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1788.

146 An account of the methods pursued in the treatment of cancerous and
schirrhous disorders, and other indurations. By J. O. Justamond, F. R. S.
London, 1780.

147 The present method of inoculating for the smallpox. By Thomas Dimsdale,
M. D. Seventh edition. London, 1779.

148 Remarks on the opthalmy, psorophthalmy and purulent eye, with the case of
a gutta serena cured by electricity. By James Ware, surgeon. Second edition.
London, 1787.

148 An account of the weather and diseases of South Carolina. By Lionel
Chalmers, M. D. 2 vols. London, 1776.

150 Experiments and observations on different kinds of air, and other branches
of natural philosophy. By Joseph Priestley, L. L. D. F. R. S. Third edition. 6
vols. London, 1781.

151 Observations on diseases incidental to seamen. By Lewis Rouppe, M. D.
Translated from the Latin edition printed at Leyden. London, 1772.

152 and 153 Dissertations relative to the natural history of animials and
vegetables. Translated from the Italian of the Abbe Spallanzani. A new edition.
2 sets. 2 vols. each. London, 1789.

154 Experiments and observations on magnesia, quick lime, various absorbents,
the comparative antiseptic powers of vegetable infusions prepared with lime,
etc. and the sweetening properties of fixed air. By Thomas Henry, apothecary.
London, 1773.

155 Observations on epidemical disorders; with remarks on nervous and
malignant fevers. By James Sims, M. D. Second edition. London, 1776.

156 The works of John Huxham, M. D. F. R. S. Translated from the Latin
original. 2 vols. London, 1788.

157 Observations on the nature, kinds, causes, and prevention of insanity,
lunacy, or madness. By Thomas Arnold, M. D. 2 vols. Leicester, 1782.

158 Medicinae praxeos systema, ex academiae Edinburgenae disputationibus
inauguralibus praecipue depromptum et secundum naturae ordinem digestum.
Curante Carolo Webster, M. D. 3 vols. Edinburgi, 1781.

159 The use of sea voyages in medicine, and particularly in a consumption;
with observations on that disease. By Ebenezer Gilchrist, M. D. A new edition.
London 1771.

160 Modern improvements in the practice of surgery. By Henry Manning, M. D.
London, 1780.

161 A treatise on experience in physic. From the German of Doctor Zimmermann.
2 vols. London, 1782.

162 Observations on the internal use of the solanum or nightshade. By Thomas
Gataker, surgeon. London, 1757.

163 A treatise on medical sympathy, and on the balance and connection of the
extreme vessels of the human body. By Seguin Henry Jackson, M. D. Second
edition. London, 1787.

164 An account of the taenia, and the method of treating it. By Samuel Foart
Simmons. Second edition. London, 1778.

165 An enquiry into the nature and cause of that swelling in one or both of
the lower extremities which sometimes happens to lying-in women. Together with
an examination into the propriety of drawing the breasts of those who do, and
also of those who do not give suck. By Charles White, Esquire, F. R. S.
Warrington, 1784.

166 An essay on the theory and practice of medical electricity. By Tiberius
Cavallo, F. R. S. Second edition. London, 1781.

167 De Arthritide primogenia regulari dissertatio. Auctore Gulielmo Musgrave.
Oxon, 1726

168 169 and 170 Myographiae comparatae specimen; or a comparative description
of all the muscles in a man and in a quadruped. By James Douglass, M. D. With
an account of the blood vessels and nerves. A new edition. Edinburgh, 1775.

171 A compendium of anatomy. Translated from the last edition of Dr.
Laurentius Heister. With plates. London, 1721.

172 Pharmacopocia collegii regii medicorum Edinburgensis. Edinburgi et
Londini, 1783.

173 Cases in surgery, particularly of cancers, and disorders of the head from
external violence. To which is added, an account of the sibbens. By James Hill.
Edinburgh, 1772.

174 A treatise on opium, founded upon practical observations. By George Young,
M. D. London, 1753.

175 A botanical dictionary, or elements of systematic and philosophical
botany. By Collin Milne, L. L. D. Second edition. With plates. London, 1778.

176 Hippocratis opera omnia. Graece et Latin. 2 vols. Lugduni Batavorum,
1665. The gift of Deborah Morris.

177 Observations on the jail, hospital, or ship fever. By Robert Robertson, M.
D. London, 1783.

178 Experiments and observations on animal heat and the inflammation of
combustible bodies: being an attempt to resolve these phenomena into a general
law of nature. By A. Crawford, M. D. F. R. S. Second edition. London, 1788.

179 A treatise on female, nervous, hysterical, hypochondriacal, bilious,
convulsive diseases, apoplexy and palsy; with thoughts on madness, suicide,
etc. By William Rowley, M. D. London, 1788.

180 Experiments on the red and quill Peruvian bark; with observations on its
history, mode of operation and uses, and on some other subjects connected with
the phenomenon and doctrines of vegetable astringents. By Ralph Irving.
Edinburgh, 1785.

181 An essay on laborious parturition; in which the division of the symphysis
pubis is particularly considered. By William Osborn, M. D. London, 1783.

182 An essay on the recovery of the apparently dead. By Charles Kite; to which
is prefixed, Dr. Lettsom's address on the delivery of the medal. London, 1788.

183 Observations on the duties and offices of a physician, and on the method
of prosecuting enquiries in philosophy. London, 1770.

184 A treatise of the materia medica. By William Cullen, M. D. 2 vols.
Philadelphia, 1789.

185 Dr. Radcliffe's practical dispensatory. By Edward Strother, M. D. Fourth
edition. London, 1721.

186 The history of physic, from the time of Galen to the beginning of the
sixteenth century. By J. Friend, M. D. Third edition. London, 1726. The gift of
Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

187 Criticon Febrium; or a critical essay on fevers. By Edward Strother, M. D.
London, 1716. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

188 An essay of health and long life. By George Cheyne, M. D. F. R. S. Second
edition. London, 1725. The gift of Samuel Coats.

189 A mechanical account of the non-naturals; being a brief explication of the
changes made in human bodies by air, diet, etc. By Jer. Wainwright, M. D.
Second edition. London, 1708.

190 Gemmarum et lapidum historia. Autore Johanni Maire. Lugduni Batavorum,
1647. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

191 The works of Doctor Archibald Pitcairn; wherein are discovered the true
foundation and principles of the art of physic. Done from the Latin original;
with some account of the author's life. London, 1715.

192 A most excellent and learned work of chirurgerie. By Lanfranke of Mylayne.
London, 1565.

193 A complete English dispensatory; in four parts By John Quincy, M. D. Third
edition. London, 1720. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

194 A discourse concerning gleets. By Daniel Turner. London, 1729. The gift of
Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

195 A directory, physico-medical; composed for the use and benefit of all such
as design to study and practice the art of physic. By Peter Paxton, M. D.
London, 1707. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

196 An essay concerning the knowledge and cure of most diseases afflicting
human bodies. By P. Paxton, M. D. London, 1711.

197 A new theory of acute and slow continued fevers; with an essay concerning
the improvements of the theory of medicine. Third edition. London, 1722. The
gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

198 A compendious and new method of performing chirurgical operations fit for
young surgeons; with directions how to manage the venereal disease. By Edward
Dunn, surgeon. London, 1724.

199 A complete body of chirurgical operations; containing the whole practice
of surgery; with plates. By M. de la Vauguion, M. D. Second edition. Done into
English. London, 1707.

200 Dissertatio epistolaris ad spectatissimum doctissimumque Virum Gulielmum
Cole, M. D. de observationibus nuperis circa curationem variolarum confluentium
nec non de affectione hysterica, per Tho. Sydenham, M. D. Londini. The gift of
Deborah Morris.

201 A. Corn. Celsi de medicina libri octo. Lugduni Batavorum, 1746. The gift
of Deborah Morris.

202 Jo Hartm. Degneri historia medica de dysenteria biliosocontagiosa.
Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1738. The gift of Deborah Morris.

203 Pharmacopoeia Leidensis. Lugduni Batavorum, 1751. The gift of Deborah
Morris.

204 A treatise on the puerperal fever; wherein the nature and cause of that
disease, so fatal to lying-in women, are represented in a new point of view:
illustrated by dissections. By Nathaniel Hulme, M. D. London, 1772.

205 The institutions of medicinal pathology. By H. D. Ganbius. Translated from
the Latin, by Charles Erskine, surgeon. Edinburgh, 1778.

206 An enquiry into the human mind on the principles of common sense. By
Thomas Reid, D. D. Fourth edition. London, 1785.

207 Medical sketches, in two parts. By John Moore, M. D. London, 1786.

208 Medical cautions, chiefly for the consideration of invalids; with
appendixes. By James Makittrick Adair, M. D. Second edition. Bath, 1787.

209 The connection of life with respiration; or an experimental inquiry into
the effects of submersion, strangulation, and several kinds of noxious airs on
living animals; with an account of the nature of the disease they produce; its
distinction from death itself; and the most effectual means of cure. By Edmund
Goodwyn, M. D. London, 1788.

210 Memoirs of the medical society of London. Instituted in the year 1773. 2
vols. London, 1787 and 1789.

211 An essay on the management and nursing of children in the earlier periods
of infancy, and on the treatment and rule of conduct requisite for the mother
during pregnancy and in lying-in. By William Moss, surgeon. London, 1781.

212 A treatise on the management of pregnant and lying-in women. By Charles
White, F. R. S. London, 1773.

213 A treatise on the dysentery; with a description of the epidemic dysentery
that happened in Switzerland, in the year 1765. Translated from the German of
John George Zimmerman, M. D. by C. R. Hopson, M. D. London, 1771.

214 The entire works of Doctor Thomas Sydenham; newly made English from the
originals. By John Swan, M. D. Fourth edition. London, 1763.

215 Cases in surgery; with remarks. Part the first. By Charles White, F. R. S.
To which is added, an essay on the ligature of arteries. By J. Aikin, surgeon.
London, 1770.

216 -- 1 An essay on the malignant, ulcerated sore throat; containing
reflections on its causes and fatal effects in 1787. By William Rowley, M. D.
London, 1788.

-- 2 An account of the culture and use of the mangel wurtzel or root of
scarcity. Translated from the French of the Abbe de Commerell, by John Coakley
Lettsom. Fourth edition. London, 1788. The gift of Doctor Thomas Park.

-- 3 Flora Caroliniana secundum systema vegetabilium perillustris Linnaei
digesta. Auctore Thoma Walter, Agricola. Londini, 1788. The gift of Doctor
Thomas Park.

217 An essay on the puerperal fever. By Thomas Denman, M. D. Third edition.
London, 1785.

218 -- 1 Medical commentaries.

-- 2 Observations on the sulphur-water at Croft near Darlington. By Robert
Willan, M. D. London, 1782.

-- 3 A treatise on the venereal disease. By Mr. John Hunter of London.
Abridged by William Currie, F. C. P. P. Philadelphia, 1787.

-- 4 An essay on the evil consequences attending injudicious bleeding in
pregnancy; with an address in replication to the monthly reviewers. By George
Wallis, M. D. Second edition. London, 1781.

219 -- 1 A treatise on child bed fevers, and on the methods of preventing
them; with two dissertations, the one on the brain and nerves; the other on the
sympathy of the nerves, and on different kinds of irritability. By Thomas
Kirkland, M. D. London, 1774.

-- 2 Observations on the asthma, and on the hooping cough. By John Millar, M.
D. London, 1769.

220 -- 1 An account of the scarlet fever and sore throat, or scarlatina
angi^^^^^ particularly as it appeared at Birmingham in the year 1778. By
William Withering, M. D. London, 1779.

-- 2. Medical reports of the effects of arsenic in the cure of agues,
remitting fevers, and periodic head-achs. By Thomas Fowler, M. D. London, 1786.

-- 3 A treatise on the infantile remittent fever. By William Butter, M. D.
London, 1782.

221 -- 1 Reports of the Humane Society. Instituted in the year 1774, for the
recovery of persons apparently drowned. Second edition, for the years 1785 and
1786. London. The gift of Doctor Thomas Park.

-- 2 Statutes of the Medical Society of London. Instituted in the year 1773.
The gift of Doctor Thomas Park.

222 -- 1 Winslow's anatomy. (Title page lost.)

-- 2 The anatomy of the brain. To which is annexed, a particular account of
animal functions and muscular motion. By H. Ridley, M. D. London, 1695.

223 The elements of botany, being a translation of the philosophia botanica,
and other treatises of the celebrated Linnaeus; with an appendix. By Hugh Rose,
apothecary. London, 1775.

224 Principles of anatomy and physiology. By John Aitken, M. D. 3 vols.
London, 1786.

225 A dissertation on milk. By Samuel Ferris, M. D. London, 1785.

226 A treatise of midwifery. By Alexander Hamilton, M. D. Edinburgh, 1785.

227 Dissertatio medica inauguralis de animo demisso. Auctore Casparo Wistar,
M. B. Edinburgh, 1786. The gift of the author.

228 Thoughts on hospitals. By John Aikin, surgeon. With a letter to the
author, by Thomas Percival, M. D. F. R. S. London, 1771.

229 The elements of medicine; or a translation of the elementa medicinae
Brunonis. With large notes, illustrations and comments. By the author of the
original work. 2 vols. London, 1788.

DUODECIMO.
1 AN essay on comparative anatomy. Third edition. Also, the anatomy of the
human nerves, and a description of the human lacteal sac and duct. By Alexander
Monro, senior, M. D. and P. A. Tenth edition. Edinburgh, 1782.

2 A radical cure for a recent catarrhous cough; to which is added, a chapter
on the vis vitae, accompanied with some strictures on the treatment of compound
fractures. By John Mudge, F. R. S. Second edition. London, 1779.

3 Outlines of the theory and cure of fever. By John Aitken. Edinburgh, 1781.

4 Compendium anatomicum, totam rem anatomicam brevissime complectens. Auctore
B. D. Laurentino Heistero, M. D. Editio nova. Edinburgh, 1777.

5 A manual of chemistry; or a brief account of the operations of chemistry and
their products. Translated from the French of M. Beaume. Second edition, with
additions. Warrington, 1786.

6 7 and 8 A short description of the human muscles, chiefly as they appear on
dissection, together with their several uses, and the synonyma of the best
authors. By John Innes. A new edition, greatly improved, by Alexander Monro, M.
D. Edinburgh, 1784.

9 Chemical essays, by R. Watson, D. D. F. R. S. Fourth edition. 5 vols.
London, 1787.

10 Memoirs of Albert De Haller, M. D. By Thomas Henry. Warrington, 1783.

11 Medical essays and observations. Published by a society in Edinburgh. Fifth
edition. 6 vols. Edinburgh, 1771.

12 Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Surgery at Paris. Translated from the
original, by George Neale. 3 vols. London, 1759.

13 Hermanni Boerhaavii praelectiones academicae in propias institutiones rei
medicae edit Albertus Haller. Editio secunda. 4 vols. Gottingae, 1740. The gift
of Deborah Morris.

14 An essay on the virtues of lime water and soap in the cure of the stone. Ly
Robert Whytt, M. D. F. R. S. Third edition. Edinburgh, 1761.

15 Ophthalmiatria qua accurata and integra Oculorum male affectorum
instituitur medela. Autore Gul. Coward, M. D. London, 1706. The gift of Deborah
Morris.

16 Myographiae comparatae specimen; or a comparative description of all the
muscles in a man, and in a quadrupede; to which is added, an account of the
muscles peculiar to a woman. By James Douglass, M. D. Edinburgh, 1752.

17 A treatise on the effects and various preparations of lead; particularly of
the extract of Saturn for different chirurgical disorders Translated from the
French of Mr. Goulard, by G. Arnaud. A new edition. London, 1773.

18 Zacuti Lusitani, medici and philosophi praestantissimi tomi IX.
Amstelodami, 1642. The gift of Deborah Morris.

19 La physionomie human de Jean Baptiste Porta Neapolitan. A Rouen, 1655.

20 Hieronymi Davidis Gaubii de methodo concinnandi formulas medicamentorum
libellus. Editio quarta. Francofurti ad Maenum and Moguntiae, 1750. The gift of
Deborah Morris.

21 Joh. Jacobi Wepferi historia cicutae aquaticae. Lugduni Batavorum, 1733.
The gift of Deborah Morris.

22 Aphorismi de cognoscendis et curandis morbis in usum doctrinae domesticae
digesti ab Hermanno Boerhaave. Lugduni Batavorum, 1737. The gift of Deborah
Morris.

23 Phthisiologia; or a treatise of consumptions. By Richard Morton, M. D.
London, 1694.

24 Medela medicina; a plea for the free profession, and a renovation of the
art of physic. London, 1665. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

25 Nicolai Tulpii observationes medicae. Editio sexta. Lugduni Batavorum,
1739. The gift of Deborah Morris.

26 Novae hypotheseos ad explicanda febrium intermittentium symptomata et typos
excogitatae hypotyposis. Authore Gulielmo Cole, M. D. Londini, 1693. The gift
of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

27 A treatise of vapors, or hysteric fits. By John Purcell, M. D. London,
1702. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

28 Mellificium chirurgiae; or the marrow of surgery. By James Cook.
London, 1676. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

29 Observationes medicae circa morborum acutorum historiam et curationem.
Authore Thoma Sydenham, M. D. Londini, 1676. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

30 and 59 Diatribae duae medico-philosophicae quarum prior agit de
Fermentatione, sive de motu intestino particularum in quovis corpore altera de
Febribus, sive de motu earundem in sanguine animalium. His accessit dissertatio
epistolica de urinis. Studio Thomae Willis. Londini, 1659. The gift of Lloyd
Zachary's Legatees.

31 -- 1 Practical thoughts on amputations, etc. By R. Mynors, surgeon.
Birmingham, 1783.

-- 2 A dissertation on the autumnal remitting fever. By William Currie, F. C.
P. P. Philadelphia, 1789.

32 A short answer to a book entitled, "Tentamen medicinale." London, 1705.

33 An alphabetical table of herbs and plants; also what planet governs every
one of them. By Nicholas Culpepper. 1653. The gift of Samuel Coats.

34 Medica omnla (quae hactenus inveniri potuere,) ad chyli and sanguinis
circulationem eleganter concinnata. Autore D. Johanne Wallaeo, D. M. Londini,
1660. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

35 Pharmacopoeia Bateana in libros duos digesta. Cura et opera Thomae Fuller,
M. D. Londini, 1719. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

36 Johannis Jacobi Waldschmidt praxis medicinae rationalis succincta per casus
tradita. et in appendice monitis medicopracticis necessariis illustrata.
Parisiis, 1691. The gift of Deborah Morris.

37 A treatise on the gout, by Herman Busschoff, senior; also, a treatise
partly chirurgical, partly medical, containing some observations and practices
relating both to some extraordinary cases of women in travail, and to some
other uncommon cases of diseases in both sexes. By Henry Van Roonhuyse,
physician in ordinary at Amsterdam. London, 1676. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

38 Traite de la gangrene, par M. Quesnay, medecin consultant du roy. A Paris,
1749. The gift of Deborah Morris.

39 Traite de physique, par Jacque Rohault. Tom. premier. Quatrieme edition,
revelle et corrigee. A Lion, 1681.

40 Tyrocinium chymicum recognitum et auctum. Autore Joanne Begvino, Regis
Eleemosynario. Parisiis, 1612. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

41 Colloquia chyrurgica; or the whole art of surgery. Second edition. London,
1710.

42 Disquisitio anatomica de formato foetu. Authore Gualtero Needham, M. D.
London, 1667. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

43 Suite du nouveau course de chymie. The gift of Deborah Morris.

44 Pharmacopaeia Collegii regalis, medicorum Londinensis. Londini, 1747. The
gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

45 Pharmacopoeia domestica. By Thomas Fuller. M. D. Londini, 1723.

46 Tractatus de cord, item de motu and color sanguinis et chyli in eum
transitu cui accessit dissertatio de origin catarrhi. Autore Richardo Lower,
M. D. Editio tertia. Amstelodami, 1671. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

47 Idea universae medicinae practicae. Autore Joh. Jonstono, M. D.
Amstelodami, 1648. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

48 Traite de physique par Jacques Rohault. Troisieme edition. Tom. second. A
Paris, 1675.

49 Institutiones medicae, in usus annuae exercitationis domesticos digestae ab
Hermanno Boerhaave. Editio tertia. Lugduni, Batavorum, 1720. The gift of
Deborah Morris.

50 De morbo scorbutico. Authore Severino Eugaleno. Doccumans, 1658. The gift
of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

51 A treatise of chirurgical operations; to which is annexed, a general idea
of wounds. By Joseph de la Charrier, London, 1695.

52 Lithotomia vesicae; or an accurate description of the stone in the bladder.
By Gulielmus Fabritius Hildanus. London, 1640.

53 Pharmacopoeia collegii regalis medicorum Londinensis. Londini, 1747. The
gift of Deborah Morris.

54 Caspari Porta, medicina brevis. Lugduni Batavorum, 1688.

55 Chirurgus marinus; or the sea surgeon. By John Moyle, senior. London,
1693.

56 Morbus polyrhizos et polymorphaeus. A treatise of the scurvy. By Everard
Maynwaringe, M. D. Second edition. London, 1666. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

57 The treasury of drugs unlocked. By Jo. Jacob Berlu of London. Second
edition. London, 1724. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

58 and 63 Pathologiae cerebri et nervosi generis speeimen, in quo agitur de
morbis convulsivis, et de scorbuto. Studio Thomae Willis. Editio quarta.
Londini, 1678.

60 Pauli Offredi Medicinae Doctoris, in librum aphorismorum, Hippocratis
commentaria aphoristica, ad methodum analyticam reducta. 1606.

61 Queries relating to the practice of physic. By H. Chamberlen. London, 1694.

62 Praxis medica Boerhaaveana, being a complete body of prescriptions adapted
to each section of the practical aphorisms of Hermannus Boerhaave. To which is
annexed, methodus praescribendi formulas. Secundum Archibaldium Pitcarnium.
London, 1716. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

64 Aphorismi ex institutionibus medicis Sennerti, magna diligentia collecti,
opera Joannis Joachimi Becheri, Mathematici et Medicinae Doctoris. Francofurti,
1663. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

65 Praxis Barbettiana cum notis et observationibus, Frederici Deckers, M. D.
Amstelodami, 1678. The gift of Deborah Morris.

66 Joannis Pequeti Diepaei experimenta nova, anatomica, quibus incognitum
hactenus chyli receptaculum, et ad eo per thoracem in ramos usque subclavios
vasa lactea deteguntur. Ejusdem dissertatio anatomica, de circulatione
sanguinis et chyli motu. Amstelaedami, 1661. The gift of Lloyd Zachary's
Legatees.

67 Schola Salernitana, sive de conservanda valetudine praecepta metrica.
Autore Joanne de Medio Lano, hactenus ignoto. Roterodami, 1649. The gift of
Lloyd Zachary's Legatees.

68 Gulielmi Harvei, Doct. et Profess. Regii, exercitatio anatomica de motu
cordis et sanguinis, accessit dissertatio de cord Doct. Jacobi de Back.
Roterodami, 1648.

69 A treatise on the putrid and remitting marsh fever, which raged at Bengal
in the year 1762. Translated from the Latin of a dissertation on that subject.
By James Lind, M. D. Edinburgh, 1776.

CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS WHICH HAVE BEEN ADDED TO THE MEDICAL LIBRARY IN The
Pennsylvania Hospital, SINCE THE YEAR M DCC XC.
FOLIO.
14 MICHAELIS ETMULLERI, Phil. and M. D. Theoretico-practica; opera medica;
correctioraque cum indicibus locupletissimis studio et cura Johannis C.
Whestphali, M. D. etc. 3 vols. Francosurti, 1606.

15 Halleri Icones anatomicae quibus praecipuae parts corporis humani
continentur. Gottingae, 1743.

16 Lancisii primariam medicinae practicae cathedram moderantis opera varia in
unum congesta. 2 vols. in one. Venetiis, 1739.

17 A medicinal dictionary, with a history of drugs. With plates. By R. James,
M. D. 3 vols. London, 1743.

18 Muotomia reformata; or an anatomical treatise on the muscles of the human
body; with figures after the life. By William Cowper, Surgeon and F. R. S. To
which is prefixed, an introduction concerning muscular motion. London, 1724.

19 Valorum lymphaticorum corporis humani historia et ichnographia. Autore
Paulo Mascagni, in regio senarum lyceo publico, anatomes professore. Senis,
1787.

20 Faetus extra uterum historia, cum inductionibus quaestionibusque aliquot
subnexis, accedunt porro tabulae explanatrices, cum tabulis itidem linearibus
subsidiariae illustrationis (...) super-additis. Auctore Henrico Krohn. M. D.
London, 1791.

21 The anatomy of the human gravid uterus, exhibited in figures. By William
Hunter. In Latin and English. Birmingham. 1774.

QUARTO.
56 The philosophy of natural history. By William Smellie, member of the
antiquarian and royal societies of Edinburgh. Edinburgh, 1790.

57 A general system of chemistry, taken chiefly from the German of M. Wiegleb.
By C. R. Hopson, M. D. London, 1789.

58 Haileri studium medicum. tom. 2. Amstelodami, 1751.

59 -- 1 The works of the late William Stark, M. D. consisting of clinical and
anatomical observations; with experiments, dietetical and statical. Revised and
published from his original M. S. by James Carmichael Smith, M. D. F. R. S.
physician extraordinary to his majesty. London, 1787.

-- 2 surgical tracts. By the late J. O. Justamond; containing outlines of the
history of surgery; an essay on inflammation and abscess: a dissertation on the
effect of motion and rest; observations on counter strokes; the methods of
treating cancerous diseases. Collected and interspersed with notes, by William
Houlston. London, 1789.

60 The history of epidemics, by Hippocrates; in seven books. Translated into
English from the Greek, with notes and observations, and a preliminary
dissertation on the nature and cause of infection, by Samuel Far, M. D. F. R.
S. London, 1780.

61 Medical botany; containing systematic and general descriptions, with plates
of all the medicinal plants. By William Woodville, M. D. of the royal college
of Physicians. Vol. 1. London, 1790.

62 The works of John Fothergill, M. D. member of the royal college of
physicians, and fellow of the royal society of London; with some account of his
life, by J. C. Lettsom. London, 1784. The gift of Doctor Lettsom.

63 History of the origin of medicine: An oration, delivered at the anniversary
meeting of the medical society of London, January 19, 1778: to which are since
added, various historical illustrations. By J. C. Lettsom, M. D. London, 1778.
The gift of J. C. Lettsom.

64 A system of chemistry; comprehending the history, theory and practice of
the science, according to the latest discoveries and improvements. Extracted
from the American edition of the Encyclopaedia. Philadelphia, 1791.

65 Gulielmi Harveii opera omnia: a collegio medicorum Londinensi edita: 1766.

66 Bibliotheca chirurgica, qua scripta ad artem chirurgicam facientia a rerum
initiis recensentur. Auctore Alberto van Haller. Tom. 2. Bernae. 1774.

67 Surgical tracts By the late J. O. Justamond, F. R. S. Surgeon to the
Westminster hospital; with notes and observations, by William Houlston. London,
1789.

68 A treatise on the plague; with an appendix. By P. Russell, M. D. F. R. S.
formerly physician to the British factory, Aleppo. London, 1791.

69 A treatise on the nature and properties of air and other permanently
elastic fluids. By Tiberius Cavallo, F. R. S. and member of the royal academy
of Naples. London, 1781.

70 Lectures on the materia medica. Published from the manuscript of Dr.
Charles Alston. By John Hope, M. D. professor of medicine and botany in the
university of Edinburgh. 2 vols. London, 1770.

71 A complete treatise on the origin, theory and cure of the lues venerea and
obstructions in the urethra. By Jesse Foot London, 1792.

72 Medical botany; containing systematic and general descriptions, with
colored plates of all the medicinal plants. By William Woodville, M. D. of the
royal college of physicians, London. 2 vols. London, 1790.

73 Miscellaneous experiments and remarks on electricity, the air-pump, and
barometer. By A. Brook. Norwich, 1789.

74 Medical pamphlets -- Vol. I. -- 1 Dissertation on the properties of pus;
which gained the prize-medal, given by the Lyceum Medicum Londinense for the
year 1778. By Everard Home, F. R. S. and one of the presidents of the Lyceum
Med. London, 1788.

-- 2 An essay on the epidemic diseases of lying-in women. By John Clarke,
licentiate in midwifery, etc. London, 1788.

-- 3 A dissertation on the process of nature in the filling up of cavities,
healing of wounds, and restoring parts which have been destroyed in the human
body; which obtained the prize-medal, given by the Lyceum Medicum Londinense
for the year 1789. By James Moore, member of the surgeons' company of London.
London, 1789.

74 -- Vol. II. -- 1 A description of the different diseases of the human body;
to which is added, an arrangement of the medicines and preparations in the
London pharmacopoeia, according to their respective virtues: Being the 1st.
vol. of the Franklinian improvement of medicine, etc. By George Edwards, M. D.
author of "The aggrandisement of Great Britain, etc." London.

-- 2 A lecture on muscular motion, read at the royal society on the thirteenth
and twentieth of November, 1788. By Gilbert Blane, M. D. F. R. S. London.

74 -- Vol. III. -- 1 The descriptions and characters of the different diseases
of the human body; to which is added, an arrangement of the medicines in the
London pharmacopoeia, according to their respective virtues: Being the 1st.
vol. of the Franklinian improvement. By George Edwards, M. D. London.

-- 2 The anatomy of the absorbing vessels of the human body. Second edition
enlarged, by William Cruikshank. Lon. 1790.

74 -- Vol. IV. -- 1 Reflections on Dr. Smith's practice in diseases of
debility, showing the propriety of arranging them by their effects upon the
constitution, and therefore consistently with the method of cure. By a disciple
of nature. London, 1791.

-- 2 An essay on the retroversion of the uterus, with cases and observations.
By William Cockell, of Pontefract, M. D. London, 1785.

-- 3 Verses on the beneficial effects of inoculation; which obtained a prize
in the year 1772. By the rev W. Lipscomb, A. M. Published by Mr. J. Palmer.
London, 1793.

-- 4 A safe and easy remedy for the stone, gravel, scurvy, gout, etc. also for
worms in the human body; with cases. By Nathaniel Hulme, M. D. Second edition.
London, 1778.

-- 5 The case of a boy who had been mistaken for a girl, with three views of
the parts, before and after the operation and cure. By Thomas Brand, surgeon.
London, 1787.

-- 6 An essay toward a definition of animal vitality; read at the theater,
Guy's hospital, January 26th. 1793. By John Thelwall. London, 1793.

-- 7 Annual oration, delivered March 8th. 1790, before the medical society,
Bolt-court, Fleet Street, London. By George Wallis. London, 1790.

-- 8 The effects of motion and rest, and the several modes of application in
surgery, together with the various effects of counter strokes on the human
body, and the method of relieving them. By M. David, surgeon. Translated from
the French by J. O. Justamond, F. R. S. London, 1790.

75 Elementa chemiae, quae docuit in scholis Hermannus Boerhaave. Tomis 2.
Lugdun. 1732.

76 The natural, experimental, and medical history of the mineral waters of
Derbyshire, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, particularly those of Scarborough. By
Thomas Short, M. D. of Sheffield. London, 1734.

77 Memoirs sur les hopitaux de Paris, par M. Tenon, professeur royal, etc.
avec figures en taille-douce. A Paris, 1778.

78 Bibliotheca medicinae practicae, quae scripta medica a rerum initiis ad
annum 1775, recensentur. Auctore A. von Haller, domino, etc. praeside societat.
etc. 4 tomis. Basiliae, 1776.

79 and 80 Observations on the prevailing diseases in Great Britain, together
with a review of those of former periods, and in other parts. By John Millar,
D. M. London, 1770.

81 Conspectus chemiae theoretico-practicae in forma tabularum representatus in
quibus physica, praesertim subterranea and corporum naturalium principia, etc.
e dogmatibus Becheri and Stahlii potissimum explicantur, etc. Auctore Joanne
Junchero, profes. pub. ordin. 1730. 7 tomis.

82 Pauli Gottlieb Werlhofii cautiones medicae de limitandis laudibus et
vituperiis morborum and remediorum. Hannov. 1734.

83 Eight anatomical tables of the human body; containing the principal parts
of the skeletons and muscles represented in the large tables of Albinus, with
concise explanations, by John Innis. Edinburgh, 1776.

84 Observations sur la physique, sur l'histoire naturelle and sur les arts and
metiers avec des planches en taille douce dedie a Mgr. Le Compte D'Artos, par
M. l'Abbe Rozier, Chevalier de l'eglise de Lion, de l'acadamie, etc. 42 tom.
1773 jusqu'a 1792. A Paris.

85 -- 1 The history of the absorbent system, part the first; containing the
chylography or description of the human lacteal vessels, with the different
methods of discovering, injecting and preparing them, and the instruments; with
figures. By John Sheldon, surgeon, F. R. S. London, 1784.

-- 2 A collection of engravings tending to illustrate the generation and
parturition of animals and the human species. By Thomas Denman, M. D. London,
1787. Part first and second.

86 A compendious system of anatomy; extracted from the American edition of the
Encyclopoedia. Philadelphia, 1790.

87 A treatise on the science of muscular action. With plates. By John Pugh,
anatomist. London, 1794.

OCTAVO.
230 THE first principles of chemistry. By William Nicholson. London, 1790.

231 An essay on diseases incidental to Europeans in hot climates, with the
method of preventing their fatal consequences. By James Lind. To which is
added, an appendix concerning intermittent fevers. Second edition enlarged.
London, 1771.

232 The works, theological, medical, political and miscellaneous, of John
Jebb, M. D. F. R. S. With memoirs of the life of the author. By John Disney, D.
D. F. S. A. 3 vols. London, 1787.

233 Practical observations on venereal complaints. By F. Swediaur, M. D. Third
edition. To which are added, an account of a new venereal disease which has
lately appeared in Canada, and a pharmacopoeia Syphilitica. Edinburgh, 1788.

234 The diseases of children and their remedies. By Nicholas Rosen Van
Rosentein, first physician to his Swedish majesty, and knight of the polar
star. Translated into English, by Andrew Sparman, M. D. London, 1776.

235 Experiments and observations on quilled and red Peruvian bark, to which is
added, an appendix on the cinchona caribboea. By Thomas Skeete, M. D. London,
1786.

236 The new Edinburgh dispensatory, containing an addition of those formulae
from the best foreign pharmacopaeias, which are held in highest esteem in other
parts of Europe; being an improvement of the new dispensatory. By Dr. Lewis.
Second edition. With plates. Edinburgh, 1791.

237 The present practice of surgery. By Robert White, M. D. and practitioner
in surgery. Bury St. Edmunds.

238 An enquiry into the smallpox, medical and political. By Robert Walker, M.
D. Fellow of the royal college of surgeons, Edinburgh. London, 1790.

239 Hortus Kewensis, or a catalogue of the plants cultivated in the royal
botanic garden at Kew. By William Alton, gardener to his majesty. 3 vols.
London, 1790.

240 Historical and biographical sketches of the progress of botany in England,
from its origin to the introduction of the Linnaean system. By Richard
Pulteney, M. D. F. R. S. 2 vols. London, 1790.

241 The prognostics and prorrhetics of Hippocrates. By John Moffat, M. D.
translator of Aretaeus. London, 1788.

242 An enquiry into the state of medicine on the principles of inductive
philosophy; with an appendix containing practical cases and observations. By
Robert Jones, M. D. Edinburgh, 1781.

243 Cases of insanity, epilepsy, etc. By William Perfect, surgeon of West
Malling in Kent. Second edition. London.

244 Elements of therapeutics. By Andrew Duncan, M. D. of the royal college of
physicians at Edinburgh. Edinburgh, 1770.

245 Cases in midwifery. By William Perfect, surgeon of West Malling in Kent. 2
vols. Rochester.

246 Aretaeus; consisting of eight books on the causes, symptoms and cure of
acute and chronic diseases. Translated from the original Greek. By John Moffat,
M. D. London.

247 A treatise on one hundred and eighteen diseases of the eyes and eyelids.
By William Rowley, M. D. Member of the university of Oxford, etc. London, 1790.

248 Linnae amoenitates academicae seu dissertationes physicae, medicae
botanicae collectae and auctoe cum tabulis aeneis. Curante Schrebero. 10 vols.
Erlangae, 1787.

249 Elementa botanica, Not. Jos. de Necker, botan. Serenissimi electoris
Bavaro Palatini; historiograph, etc. 3 vols. Neowedae ad Rhenum, 1790.

250 Memoirs of the medical society of London, instituted in the year 1773. 3
vols.

251 Observations on the typhus fever. By D. Campbell, M. D. and clinical
observations on the use of opium in low fevers. By Martin Wall, M. D. Oxford,
1786.

252 The anatomical instructor. By Thomas Pole. Member of the corporation of
surgeons in London. London, 1790.

253 A treatise on tropical diseases, on military operations and on the climate
of the West Indies. By Benjamin Moseley, M. D. Second edition. London, 1789.

254 An account of the fox glove and its use. By William Withering, M. D. And
remarks on the hydrophobia. By R. Hamilton, M. D. London, 1785.

255 Memoirs of John Fothergill, M. D. etc. By John Coakley Lettsom, M. D.
Fourth edition. London, 1786. Presented by Dr. Lettsom.

256 The first principles of chemistry. By William Nicholson. London, 1790.

257 A system of surgery, extracted from the works of Benjamin Bell of
Edinburgh. By Nicholas B. Waters, M. D. With notes and copperplates.
Philadelphia, 1791.

258 The analytical review, or history of literature, domestic and foreign, on
an enlarged plan, from May, 1788, to April, 1793, inclusive. 15 vols. London.

259 A treatise on medical and pharmaceutical chemistry and the materia medica;
to which is added, an English translation of the London pharmacopoeia for 1788.
In 3 vols. By Donald Monro, M. D. London, 1788.

260 A short appendix to Dr. D. Monro's treatise on medical and pharmaceutical
chemistry, etc. London, 1789. Making a fourth volume to the other three above
mentioned.

261 Elements of chemistry. By M. I. A. Chaptal. Translated from the French. 3
vols. London, 1791.

262 The chirurgical works of Percivall Pott, F. R. S. A new edition, to which
is added, a short account of the author. By James Earl, Esquire. 3 vols.
London, 1790.

263 A system of midwifery. Translated from the French of Baudelocque. By John
Heath. 3 vols. London, 1790.

264 An essay toward a system of mineralogy. By Axel Frederick Cronstedt.
Translated from the original Swedish. By Gustav. Von Engestrom. Second edition
greatly enlarged and improved, by John Hyacinth de Magellan. 2 vols. London,
1788.

265 Essays, medical, philosophical and experimental. By Thomas Percivall, M.
D. F. R. S. etc. Fourth edition, revised and enlarged. 2 vols. Warrington, 1788.

266 Practical observations on the childbed fevers, also, on uterine
haemorrhages and convulsions. By John Leake, M. D. Member of the college of
physicians, London, etc. London, 1784.

267 Outlines of the theory and practice of midwifery. By Alexander Hamilton,
M. D. F. R. S. Edinburgh, Professor of midwifery in the university and fellow
of the royal college of physicians, Edinburgh. Third edition. London, 1791.

268 A comparative view of the mortality of the human species at all ages;
illustrated with charts and tables. By William Black, M. D. one of the royal
college of physicians in London, etc. London, 1788.

269 Speculations on the mode and appearances of impregnation in the human
female. By a physician. Edinburgh, 1789.

270 The pharmacopoeia of the royal college of physicians of London. Translated
into English by the late Thomas Healde. Fifth edition, revised and adapted to
the last improved edition of the college, by John Latham, M. D. fellow of the
royal college of physicians, etc. London, 1791.

271 Method of chemical nomenclature; proposed by Messrs. De Morveau,
Lavoisier, Bertholet and De Fourcroy. To which is added, a new system of
chemical characters adapted to the nomenclature, by Messrs. Hassenfratz and
Adet. Translated by James St. John, M. D. London, 1788.

272 A treatise on the cataract; with cases. By M. De Wenzel, junior, baron of
the holy Roman empire, etc. Translated from the French, with additional
remarks, by James Ware, surgeon. London, 1791.

273 An account of the nature and medicinal virtues of the principal mineral
waters of Great Britain and Ireland; with an appendix, containing a description
of Dr. Nooth's apparatus, etc. By John Elliot, M. D. London, 1781.

274 An account of the various systems of medicine, from Hippocrates to the
present time; particularly collected from the works of John Brown, M. D. etc.
By Francis Carter, M. D. 2 vols. in one. London, 1788.

275 Observations on the diseases of the army in Jamaica, and on the best means
of preserving the health of Europeans in that climate. By John Hunter, M. D. F.
R. S. etc. London, 1788.

276 An introduction to the practice of midwifery. By Thomas Denman, M. D. Vol.
1. London, 1788.

277 Surgical tracts; containing a treatise upon ulcers of the legs, etc.
Second edition. With observations on the disorders of the eye and on gangrene.
By Michael Underwood, M. D. London, 1788.

278 A comparative view of the phlogistic and antiphlogistic theories; with
inductions. To which is annexed, an analysis of the human calculus. By William
Higgins. Second edition. London, 1791.

279 Observations on severs, especially those of the (...) type; and on the
scarlet fever attended with ulcerated sore throat. By John Clarke, M. D. fellow
of the royal college of physicians, Edinburgh. London, 1792.

280 An essay on fevers, wherein their theoretic genera, species, and various
denominations are reduced under their characteristic genus. By Robert
Robertson, M. D. physician to the royal hospital, Greenwich. London, 1790.

281 The instruments of medicine; or the philosophical digest and practice of
physic. By George Hoggart Toulmin, M. D. London, 1789.

282 A dissertation on suspended respiration from drowning, hanging and
suffocation. By Edward Coleman, surgeon. London, 1791.

283 First lines of the theory and practice of philosophical chemistry. By John
Berkenhout, M. D. London, 1788.

284 An essay on the scurvy; with some observations on fevers, etc. By
Frederick Thomson, surgeon in the royal navy. London, 1790.

285 Essays on medical subjects; with an introduction relating to the use of
hemlock and corrosive sublimate, and the application of caustic medicines in
cancerous disorders. By Thomas Gataker, surgeon. London, 1764.

286 Principles of surgery for the use of chirurgical students. Part the first.
By John Pearson, surgeon to the Lock hospital and to the public dispensary.
London, 1788.

287 An essay on phlogiston and the constitution of acids. A new edition. By R.
Kirwan, Esquire. To which are added, notes and additional remarks, by the
author. London, 1789.

288 Medical advice to the inhabitants of warm climates. By Robert Thomas,
surgeon, late of the island of Nevis. London, 1790.

289 Human osteogeny explained in two lectures. By Robers Nesbitt, M. D. F. R.
S. London, 1736.

290 An essay on the Bath waters. By William Falconer of Bath, M. D. London,
1772.

291 A practical treatise upon dentition or the breading of teeth in children.
By Joseph Hurlock, surgeon. London, 1742.

292 The history of health and the art of preserving it. By James Mackenzie, M.
D. Third edition. To which is added, a short account of inoculation for the
smallpox. Edinburgh, 1760.

293 Solitude considered with respect to its influence upon the mind and the
heart. Written originally in German by M. Zimmermann, aulic counselor, etc.
Translated from the French of J. B. Mercier. London, 1791.

294 Vol I. -- 1 A treatise of diluents, and an enquiry into the diseases of
the fluids of the human body; with dilution practically applied to particular
diseases. By Thomas Jameson, surgeon. London, 1788.

-- 2 An essay on the rupture called hydrocele, explaining the anatomy of the
parts affected, with objections to the incision, seton, etc. By Benjamin
Humpage, surgeon, etc. London, 1788.

-- 3 Observations on animal life and apparent death from accidental suspension
of the function of the lungs, with remarks on the Brunonian system of medicine.
By John Franks. London, 1790.

-- 4 Cases of insanity, the epilepsy, hypochondriacal affection, hysteric
passion and nervous disorders. By William Perfect, surgeon. Second edition.
London.

294 Vol. II. -- 1 An essay on crookedness or distortions of the spine; showing
the insufficiency of the modes made use of for relief in these cases, with new
methods of cure, and some hints for the prevention of these affections, etc.
With plates. By Philip Jones. London, 1788.

-- 2 A vindication of the opinions and facts contained in a treatise on the
glandular disease of Barbados. By James Hendy. D. M. Member, etc. London, 1789.

-- 3 Essays on the hepatitis and spasmodic affections in India, founded on
observations, etc. By Thomas Gerdlestone. M. D. London, 1787.

-- 4 Chemical experiments and opinions, extracted from a work published in the
last century. Oxford, 1790.

294 Vol. III. -- 1 Medical reform. A plan for a medical court of judicature to
correct abuses of the profession, and a medical college to instruct youth for
the navy or army without national expense. In a letter to the right honorable
William Pit, chancellor, etc. London, 1788.

-- 2 Observations on an extraordinary case of ruptured uterus. By Andrew
Douglass, M. D. Member, etc. London, 1785.

-- 3 Chemical observations on sugar. By Edward Rigby. London, 1788.

-- 4 Advice to gouty persons. By Richard Kentish, M. D. of the royal college
of Physicians. London, etc. London, 1791.

-- 5 Experiments and observations on the crescent water at Harrowgate. By
Thomas Garnett. M. D. Leeds, 1791.

-- 6 Cautions concerning the poison of lead and of copper; with a method of
detecting these metals in wines, cider and various other aliments. By A.
Fothergill, M. D. F. R. S. Bath, 1790.

294 Vol. IV. -- 1 Essays on fashionable diseases; the dangerous effects of hot
and crowded rooms, the clothing of invalids, lady and gentlemen doctors, etc.
By James M. Adair, formerly M. D. To which is added, a dramatic dialogue, by
Benjamin Goosequill and Peter Paragraph. London.

-- 2 An essay on pulmonary consumptions, including several remarable instances
of recovery from the most alarming stages of the disorder, by an improved
method of treatment. By William May. M. D. Member of the royal college of
physicians, London, etc. Plymouth. Presented by Dr. Lettsom.

-- 3 An enquiry into the nature, causes and cure of the consumption of the
lungs; with observations on a late publication on the same subject. By Michael
Ryan, M. D. etc. Dublin, 1787.

294 Vol. V. -- 1 A short description of Pyrmont; with observations on the uses
of its waters. Abridged from the German description of Pyrmont of Dr. Marcard.
London, 1788.

-- 2 the generation of animal heat investigated; an attempt to point out the
elementary principles and fundamental laws of nature and apply them to explain
certain operations, etc. in chemistry. By E. Peart, M. D. Gainsborough, 1788.

-- 3 A letter to Sir John Sinclair, Bart-concerning the virtues of the
muriatic acid in the cure of putrid diseases. By Sir W. Fordyce, M. D. F. R. S.
London, 1790.

-- 4 Observations on gangrenes and mortifications, accompanied with or
occasioned by convulsive spasms. By Charles White, Esquire, F. R. S.
Warrington, 1790.

-- 5 Thoughts upon preserving the health of the poor; Addressed to the
inhabitants of the town of Manchester. By the Reverend Sir William Clerk,
Bart. rector of Bury, etc. London, 1790.

-- 6 Bath waters, a conjectural idea of their nature and qualities, in three
letters to --. To which is added, putridity and infection, imputed to fevers.
By A. W. M. D. Reg. Colleg. Med. Edin. Soc. Bath, 1788.

-- 7 Utility of electricity illustrated in a series of cases, tending to prove
the superiority of vibrations to every other mode of applying the electric
fluid. By Francis Lowndes, medical electrician, etc. London, 1791.

-- 8 An essay on the preservation of the health of persons employed in
agriculture. By William Falconer, M. D. etc. Bath, 1789.

294 Vol. VI. -- 1 An essay on the bite of a mad dog; with observations on John
Hunter's treatment of Master R -- also, two cases successfully treated. By
Jesse Foot, surgeon. London, 1788.

-- 2 A treatise on the disease commonly called angina pectoris. By William
Butter, M. D. London, 1791.

-- 3 Observations on the plague. By William Henderson, M. D. London, 1789.

-- 4 Essay on the fracture of the patella or knee-pan, containing a new and
efficacious method of treating that accident; with observations on the fracture
of the olecranon. By John Sheldon, F. R. S. London, 1789.

-- 5 Treatise on cancers. By Henry Fearon. London, 1785.

-- 6 Of the hydrocele. A case of Hernia vesic. urinar. etc. By T. Keate,
surgeon. London, 1788.

294 Vol. VII. -- 1 A treatise on diluents and the operation of fluids upon the
human body, wherein mineral and common waters are considered. By Thomas
Jameson, surgeon. London, 1788.

-- 2 Primary particles of bodies enquired into, and found to be earth, water,
air, fire and frost. By John Gibson, M. D. London, 1772.

-- 3 Observations upon the new opinions of John Hunter, in his late treatise
on the venereal disease, ending with the subject of gonorrhaea, etc. to be
continued. By Jesse Foot, surgeon. London, 1786.

-- 4 Essay on the vitality of the blood. By James Corrie, M. D. London, 1791.

-- 5 A treatise on the diagnosis and prognosis of diseases; part the first.
With an account of internal phlegmonous inflammation. By Philip Parry Price.
London, 1791.

294 Vol. VIII. -- 1 The causes of the great number of deaths among children
and adults, in putrid, scarlet fevers, etc. explained. By William Rowley, M. D.
London.

-- 2 A singular case of the re-production of the sphincter any and three other
cases annexed; with remedies, etc. By Richard Griffith. London, 1792.

-- 3 A method of constructing vapor-baths at a small expense; with a design of
a hot vapor-bath. By James Play-fair, architect. London, 1793.

-- 4 Practical dissertations on nervous complaints and other diseases, etc. By
Mr. Neale. London, 1788.

-- 5 Observations on the different methods of radically curing the hydrocele,
and of cutting for the stone. By William Dease, surgeon. Dublin, 1782.

294 Vol. IX. -- 1 On the properties of matter, the principles of chemistry,
and the nature and construction of aeriform fluids or gases. By E. Peart, M. D.
Gainsborough, 1792.

-- 2 Observations on animal life and apparent death, from suspension of the
function of the lungs; with remarks on the Brunonian system of medicine. By
John Franks. London, 1790.

-- 3 An appendix to a treatise on the hydrocele, containing additional proofs
of the efficacy of injection for the cure of that disease. By James Earl,
Esquire, and surgeon. London, 1793.

-- 4 Practical observations on the operation for the stone. By James Earl,
Esquire, and surgeon. London, 1793.

-- 5 Darwin's experiments, establishing a criterion between mucaginous and
purulent matter, and an account of the retrograde motions of the absorbent
vessels. Litchfield, 1780.

294 Vol. X. -- 1 Account of the gaol (...) as it appeared at Carlisle in 1781.
By John (...), M. D. London, 1783.

-- 2 A critical enquiry into the treatment of the diseases of the urethra;
with an improved method of cure. By Jesse Foot. London.

-- 3 Medical reports of the effects of tobacco, in the cure of dropsies and
dysuries. By Thomas Fowler, M. D. Second edition. London, 1788.

-- 4 Experimental inquiry into the properties of opium, and its effects on
living subjects, which gained the Harveian prize. By John Leigh, M. D.
Edinburgh, 1786.

-- 5 Chirurgical essays on the cure of ruptures, and the bad consequences of
referring patients to truss-makers. By T. Brand, surgeon. Second edition.
London, 1785.

294Vol. XI. -- 1 An essay on the evil consequences attending injudicious
bleeding in pregnancy, with a reply to the monthly reviewers. By George Wallis,
M. D. Second edition. London, 1781.

-- 2 A treatise on the regular, irregular, atonic and flying gout, with the
excellent effects of the muriatic acid in that disorder. By William Rowley, M.
D. London, 1792.

-- 3 An enquiry into the remote cause of urinary gravel. By Alexander Philip
Wilson, M. D. Edinburgh, 1792.

-- 4 Observations on the nature and method of cure of the phthisis pulmonalis,
from the materials of the late William White, M. D. F. A. S. Now published by
A. Hunter, M. D. York, 1792.

294 Vol. XII. -- 1 Practical observations on cancerous complaints on similar
diseases, and on certain operations in cancerous cases. By John Pearson.
London, 1793.

-- 2 Practical essays on the management of pregnancy and labor, and on the
diseases of lying-in women. By John Clarke. M. D. London, 1793.

294 Vol. XIII. -- 1 Treatise upon the herb tobacco, pointing out its
deleterious, pernicious quality. By a gentleman of the University of Cambridge.
London.

-- 2 A letter to Erasmus Darwin, M. D. on a new method of treating pulmonary
consumption, and some other diseases hitherto found incurable. By Thomas
Beddoes, M. D. Bristol.

-- 3 An essay for a nosological and comparative view of the cynanche maligna,
scarlatina anginosa. Second edition; with a supplement, containing an account
of the febris aphthosa. By William L. Perkins, M. D. London, 1790.

-- 4 Observations on cold bathing. By William Simpson. Leeds.

-- 5 A treatise on the real cause and cure of insanity, in which the nature
and distinctions of this disease are fully explained. By Andrew Harper. London,
1789.

294 Vol. XIV. -- 1 A plan for preventing the fatal effects from the bite of a
mad dog; with cases. By Jesse Foot, surgeon. London, 1793.

-- 2 A letter addressed to Dr. Priestley, Messrs. Cavendish, Kirwan,
Lavoisier, etc. endeavoring to prove, that their newly adopted opinions are
fallacious. By Robert Harrington, M. D. London, 1788.

-- 3 The economy of health, or a medical essay containing new and familiar
instructions for the attainment of health, happiness, and longevity. By Andrew
Harper, late Surgeon, etc.

-- 4 Practical observations on cancerous complaints, similar diseases and
operations in cancerous cases. By John Pearson, surgeon of the Lock hospital,
etc. London, 1793.

-- 5 An essay on the erysipelatous sore throat; to which is subjoined an
account of a case of hemiplegia. By Thomas Reeve, surgeon. Bury St. Edmunds,
1789.

294 Vol. XV. -- 1 An inaugural dissertation, containing an inquiry into the
existence of the living principle and causes of animal life. By Matthias E.
Sawyer. Philadelphia, 1793. Presented by the author.

-- 2 An essay on the true nature and due method of treating the gout. Written
for the use of Richard Tennison. By George Cheyne, M. D. London, 1753.

-- 3 Thoughts on the effects of the application and abstraction of stimuli on
the human body; with a view to explain the nature and cure of Typhus. By James
Wood, M. D. London, 1793.

-- 4 Surgical and physiological essays. By John Abernethey, professor of
anatomy, etc. London, 1793.

-- 5 Weldon's different modes of puncturing the bladder.

-- 6 An inquiry into the nature and causes of sickness in ships of war;
showing the error of its being chiefly ascribed to maratime diet, etc. With a
review of Sir John Pringle's discourse on preserving the health of mariners. By
William Renwick, surgeon. London, 1792.

294 Vol. XVI. -- 1 Observations concerning the history and cure of the plague.
By William Henderson, M. D. London, 1789.

-- 2 Considerations on bilious diseases and some particular affections of the
liver and gall bladder. Second edition. By John Andree, M. D. London, 1790.

-- 3 The economy of health, how to attain to long life, etc. By A. Harper,
late surgeon.

-- 4 An historical investigation into the first appearance of the venereal
disease in Europe, with remarks on its particular nature. By M. Sanchez, doctor
of the faculty of medicine of Paris. Translated from the French by Joseph
Skinner, surgeon. London, 1790.

-- 5 Observations on the different methods of treating the venereal disease.
By William Dease, surgeon, etc. Dublin, 1779.

-- 6 A commentary on the dysentery; translated from Dr. Akenside. By John
Ryan. M. D. London, 1767.

294 Vol. XVII. -- 1 An inaugural dissertation on the chemical properties of
atmospheric air. By William R. Cozens, of New Jersey. Philadelphia, 1791.
Presented by the author.

-- 2 Tentamen medicum inaugurale, quaedam de asphyxia ab aeris
dephlogisticati, privatione oriunda, tradens. Gulielmus Stokes, A. B.
Virginiensis. Philadelphiae, 1793. Presented by the author.

-- 3 An inaugural dissertation; being an attempt to disprove the doctrine of
the putrefaction of the blood of living animals. By Adam Seybert of
Philadelphia. Philadelphia, 1793. Presented by the author.

-- 4 An inaugural physiological dissertation on the catamenia; to which are
subjoined observations on amenorrhoea. By James Westwood Wallace of Virginia.
Philadelphia, 1793. Presented by the author.

-- 5 An inaugural dissertation on the scarlet fever attended with an ulcerated
sore throat. By Matthias Williamson of New Jersey. Philadelphia, 1793.
Presented by the author.

294 Vol. XVIII. -- 1 The importance and method of cultivating and curing
rhubarb in Britain for medical uses; with an appendix. By Sir William Fordyce,
M. D. F. R. S. London 1792.

-- 2 A treatise on the medical properties of mercury. By John Howard, surgeon.
London, 1782.

-- 3 The annual report of the royal humane society for the anniversary
festival, 1793. By W. Hawes, M. D. register.

-- 4 A dissertation on the properties and efficacy of the Lisbon diet drink in
the cure of the venereal disease, the scurvey, etc. By John Leake, M. D. The
fourth edition. London.

294 Vol. XIX. -- 1 Doctor Zimmermann's conversations with the late king of
Prussia, when he attended him in his last illness. Translated from the last
edition. London, 1791.

-- 2 Philosophical observations on the senses of vision and hearing and on
harmonic sounds; also, an essay on combustion and animal heat. By J. Elliot.
London, 1780.

-- 3 Experiments and observations on a new species of bark, showing its great
efficacy in very small doses, etc. By Richard Kentish, D. M. etc. London, 1784.

295 A treatise on the venereal disease. By John Hunter. Philadelphia, 1791.

296 A compendious system of anatomy, extracted from the American edition of
the Encyclopaedia. Philadelphia, 1792.

297 An historical account of the climates and diseases of the United States of
America, and of the remedies and methods of treatment, etc. By William Currie,
fellow of the college of physicians of Philadelphia. Philadelphia, 1792.

298 Ditto. The gift of the author.

299 Medical inquiries and observations. By Benjamin Rush, M. D. Professor of
chemistry in the university of Pennsylvania. 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1789 and
1793.

300 The art of preventing diseases and restoring health. By George Wallis, M.
D. etc. London, 1793.

301 Observations on the nature and cure of calculus, sea scurvy, consumption,
catarrh and fever. By Thomas Beddoes, M. D. London, 1793.

302 A view of the diseases of the army, in Great Britain, America and the West
Indies, from the beginning of the late war to the present time. By Thomas D.
Reide, surgeon to the first battalion of the first regiment of foot. London,
1793.

303 Observations on the diseases which prevail in long voyages to hot
countries, particularly to the Indies; and as they appear in Great Britain By
John Clark, M. D. etc. 2 vols. Second edition. London, 1792.

304 Transactions of a society for the improvement of medical and chirurgical
knowledge. With plates. London, 1793.

305 A treatise on gonorrhaea virulenta and lues venerea. By Benjamin Bell. 2
vols. Edinburgh, 1793.

306 A treatise on the fevers of Jamaica, with some observations on the
intermitting fever of America, and an appendix, containing some hints on the
means of preserving the health of soldiers in hot climates. By Robert Jackson,
M. D. London, 1791.

307 Institutiones physiologicae, A. D. Jo. Frid. Blumenbachio. Prof. med.
ordin. societ. etc. memb. Gottingae, 1786.

308 A treatise on the fevers of Jamaica, with some observations on the
intermitting fever of America, and an appendix, containing some hints on the
means of preserving the health of soldiers in hot climates. By Robert Jackson,
M. D. London, 1791.

309 Memoirs of the first forty-five years of James Lackington's life. Written
by himself. London, 1792.

310 Commentarii de rebus in scientia naturali et medicina gestis. Lipsiae,
1752. In 14 volumes.

311 A translation of Dr. Boerhaave's academical lectures on the theory of
physic; with explanatory comments, etc. 6 vols. Third edition, corrected.
London, 1766.

312 First lines of the practice of physic. By William Cullen, M. D. late
professor, etc. 4 vols. With notes. By John Rotheram. Edinburgh, 1791.

313 A system of anatomy and physiology, with the comparative anatomy of
animals, compiled from the latest and best authors. 3 vols. With copperplates,
etc. Edinburgh, 1791.

314 The chirurgical works of Benjamin Gooch, surgeon. 3 vols. London, 1792.

315 An exposition of the principles of anatomy and physiology, with the
praelectiones anatomicae of Ferdinand Leber. Translated by Walter Vaughan, M.
D. Physician, etc. 2 vols. London, 1791.

316 A treatise on gonorrhaea virulenta and lues venerea. By Benjamin Bell. 2
vols. Edinburgh, 1793.

317 Conspectus Medicinae theoreticae ad usum academicum autore Jacobo Gregory,
M. D. Prof. etc. 2 vols. A new edition. Edinburgh, 1790.

318 Duties of a regimental surgeon. By R. Hamilton, M. D. 2 vols. London.

319 Observations on jail, hospital, or ship fever, from the fourth of April,
1776, to the thirtieth of April, 1789, made in various parts of Europe and
America. By Robert Robertson, M. D. Physician, etc. London, 1789.

320 Elements of natural history and chemistry. By M. Fourcroy. Translated from
the last Paris edition. 3 vols, London, 1790.

321 Dissertationes inaugurales. 2 vols. Edinburgh.

322 Observations on the asthma and on the hooping cough. By John Millar, M. D.
London, 1769; also, cases in surgery, with remarks, by Charles White, F. R. S.
To which is added, an essay on the ligature of arteries, by J. Aikin. London,
1770.

323 The art of preventing diseases and restoring health. By George Wallis, M.
D. London, 1793.

324 An essay on diseases incidental to Europeans in hot climates. By James
Lind, M. D. F. R. S. etc. Fifth edition. London, 1792.

325 A treatise on female diseases. By Henry Manning, M. D. Second edition. To
which is added, a letter on the puerperal fever. London, 1775.

326 An introduction to physiology, being a course of lectures. By Malcolm
Flemyng, M. D. London, 1759.

327 Nature and effects of emetics, purgatives, mercurials and low diet in
disorders of Bengal and similar latitudes. By John Peter Wade, M. D. London,
1792.

328 A medical commentary on fixed air. By Matthew Dobson, M. D. F. R. S. Third
edition. With Dr. Falconer on fixed alkaline (...), etc. in cases of gravel.
London, 17^7.

329 Essays on the practice of midwifery in natural and difficult labors. By
William Osborn, M. D. London, 1792.

330 Formulae medicamentorum selectae. By Edward Fox. London, 1777.

331 A treatise on tropical diseases, military operations, and on the climate
of the West Indies. By Benjamin Moseley, M. D. physician to Chelsea hospital,
etc. Third Edition. London, 1792.

332 The London practice of physic. Fifth edition. London, 1792.

333 A view of the diseases of the army in Great Britain, America, the West
Indies and on board of king's ships and transports, from the beginning of the
late war to the present time. By Thomas Dickson Reide, surgeon, etc. London,
1793.

334 Transactions of a society for the improvement of medical and chirurgical
knowledge. With copper plates. London, 1793.

335 A commentary on apoplectic and paralitic affections and on diseases
connected with the subject. By Thomas Kirkland, M. D. London, 1792.

336 Essays on fractures and luxations. By John Aitkin, M. D. London, 1790.

337 The prognostics and prorrhetics of Hippocrates, with some account of his
life. By John Moffat, M. D. London, 1788.

338 An improved method of opening the temporal artery, also a new proposal for
extracting the cataract; with plates. By the author when a student at
Edinburgh. London, 1783.

339 Observations on the nature and cure of calculus, sea scurvy, consumption,
catarrh and fever; with conjectures on other subjects. By T. Beddoes, M. D.
London, 1793.

340 A treatise on the digestion of food. By G. Fordyce, M. D. F. R. S. Second
Edition. London, 1791.

341 An essay on the materia medica, in which the theories of the late doctor
Cullen and others are considered. By James Moore. London, 1792.

342 Experiments on animal electricity, with their application to physiology.
By Eusebius Valli, M. D. London, 1793.

343 Thoughts phisiological, pathological and practical, with some cases and
anatomico practical observations. By Allen Swainston. M. D. York, 1790.

344 Pharmacopoeia collegii regii medicorum Edinburgensis. Edinburgi, 1792.

345 Speculations on the mode and appearances of impregnation in the human
female, with an examination of the present theories of generation. By a
physician. Edinburgh, 1789.

346 The principles and practice of midwifery, under four heads, generation,
gestation, delivery and recovery. By Edward Foster, M. D. Completed and
corrected by James Sims, M. D. London, 1781.

347 Medical cases, selected from the records of the public dispensary at
Edinburgh, with remarks and observations. By Andrew Duncan, M. D. F. R. S. etc.
Edinburgh, 1790.

348 A treatise on putrid intestinal remitting fevers; in which the laws of the
febrile state and sol-lunar influence are investigated. By Francis Balfour, M.
D. Edinburgh, 1790.

349 Observations on diseases incidental to seamen. By Louis Rouppe, M. D.
London, 1772.

350 An essay on the cure of abscesses by caustic and on the treatment of
wounds and ulcers, and a new method of curing the lues venerea. By Peter Clare,
surgeon. London, 177^.

351 A treatise on the asthma; to which are added, cases and observations. By
Thomas Withers, M. D. London, 1786.

352 Remarks on the ophthalmy, psoropthalmy and purulent eye. By James Ware,
surgeon. Second edition. London, 1787.

353 Ioannis Brunonis, M. D. Elementa medicinae edet. plur. emendata.
Edinburgi, 1784.

354 Experiments and observations on quilled and red Peruvian bark, to which is
added, an appendix on the cinchona caribboea. By Thomas Skeete, M. D. London,
1786.

355 A compendious system of the theory and practice of modern surgery, in the
form of a dialogue. By Hugh Munro, surgeon. London, 1792.

356 Philosophical inquiry into the nature, origin and extent of animal motion.
By Samuel Far, M. D. London, 1771.

357 Biographical memoirs of medicine in Great Britain, from the revival of
literature to the time of Harvey. By John Aikin, surgeon. London, 1780.

358 An inquiry into the nature, cause and cure of the gout and of some of the
diseases with which it is connected. By John Gardener, M. D. Edinburgh, 1792.

359 Observations in midwifery and on the disorders of women and children. By
William Dease, surgeon, Dublin, 1783.

360 Medical histories and reflections. By John Ferriar, M. D. Warrington, 1792.

361 A treatise on the extraction of the cataract. By D. Augustus Gottlieb
Richter. Translated from the German. London, 1791.

362 An essay on the scurvy; showing effectual and practical means for its
prevention at sea, etc. With some observations on fevers. By Frederick Thomson,
surgeon. London, 1790.

363 Doctrines and practice of Hippocrates in surgery and physic; with
occasional remarks. By Francis Riollay, M. B. London, 1783.

364 The diseases of children and their remedies. By Nicholas Rosen Von
Rosentein. Translated into English, by Andrew Sparrman, M. D. London, 1776.

365 Outlines of the theory and practice of midwifery. By Alexander Hamilton,
M. D. Third edition. London, 1791.

366 Laurentii Heisteri compendium medicinae practicae cui medicinae mechanicae
praestantia dissertatio. Amstelaedami, 1743.

367 The use of sea voyages in medicine and particularly in a consumption, with
observations on that disease. By Ebenezer Gilchrist, M. D. London, 1771.

368 Praelectiones medicae duodecim a Thoma Lawrence, M. D. Londini, 1757.

369 A treatise on opium, founded upon practical observation. By George Young,
M. D. London, 1753.

370 A practical essay on diseases of the viscera, in which their nature and
cure are considered. By John Leake, M. D. London, 1792.

371 The new medical journal, for the year 1792. Vol. I. London, 1792.

372 Theses variae and medicae Philadelphienses; autorum donationes. 2 vols.
Latin and Anglice.

373 A treatise on female diseases. By Henry Manning, M. D. Second edition. To
which is added, a letter on the puerperal fever. London, 1775.

374 An inaugural dissertation on the apoplexy. By John Andrews of
Pennsylvania. Philadelphia, 1793. Presented by the author.

375 Observations on the disease of the hip joint; with remarks on white
swellings of the knee, the caries of the joint of the wrist and other similar
complaints. With plates. By Edward Ford, F. S. A. surgeon to the Westminster
dispensary. London, 1794.

376 An inaugural dissertation on insanity. By Edward Cutbush, M. D.
Philadelphia, 1794. Presented by the author.

377 An account of the bilious remitting yellow fever, as it appeared in the
city of Philadelphia in the year 1793. By Benjamin Rush, M. D. Philadelphia,
1794. Presented by Samuel Coats.

DUODECIMO.
70 Observations on the nature and treatment of the variolous abscess, with
remarks on the modern practice of inoculation and a new and easy method of
curing the lues venerea. By Peter Clare, surgeon. London, 1781.

71 The works of the late Dr. John Gregory, F. R. S. late professor in the
university of Edinburgh, etc. To which is prefixed, an account of the life of
the author. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1783.

72 -- 1 A dissertation on the influence of the passions upon disorders of the
body. By William Falconer, M. D. F. R. S. To which the Fothergillian medal was
adjudged. Second edition. London, 1791.

-- 2 A treatise on the putrid and remitting fever which raged at Bengal in
1762. By James Lind, M. D. Edinburgh.

73 Description of a portable chest of chemistry, or complete collection of
chemical tests. By I. F. A. Gottling, professor of chemistry at Jena in Saxony.
Translated from the original German. London, 1791.

74 Observations on scrophulous affections, on schirrus, cancer and rachitis;
with remarks, by Robert Hamilton, M. D. London, 1791.

75 A treatise on the diseases of children; with general directions for the
management of children from the birth. By Michael Underwood, M. D. 2 vols.
London, 1789.

76 Experiments and observations to investigate, by chemical analysis, the
medicinal properties of mineral waters of Spa and Aix la Chappelle in Germany,
etc. By John Ash, M. D. fellow of the royal college of physicians, etc. London,
1788.

77 An essay on the dropsy and its different species. By Donald Monro, M. D.
Second edition. London, 1756.

78 The poetical works of John Armstrong, M. D. containing the art of
preserving health, etc. Perth, 1792.

79 The medical pocketbook, containing a short but plain account of the
symptoms, causes and method of cure of the diseases incident to the human body,
etc. By John Elliot, M. D. Third edition. London, 1791.

80 An inaugural dissertation on the chemical and medical properties of the
persimmon tree and the analysis of astringent vegetables. By James Woodhouse,
A. M. Philadelphia, 179^. Presented by the author.

81 Vol. I. -- 1 General directions for the preservation of health, intended
for the benefit of the settlers at Sierra Leone. By John Bell, M. D. London,
1791.

-- 2 Short directions for the management of infants. By T. Mantell, surgeon.
London, 1787.

81 Vol. II. -- 1 Thoughts on the cancer of the breast. By. G. Bell, surgeon.
Birmingham, 1788.

-- 2 Elements of medical jurisprudence.

-- 3 Account of Drs. Parsons, Huck, Colignon and Sir Alexander Dick. From the
medical commentaries.

-- 4 Observations on herniae; with cases. By W. Wilmer, surgeon. London, 1788.

-- 5 An essay on generation. By I. F. Blumenbach, M. D. Aulic counselor.
Translated from the German. London.

82 Chemisches journal fuer die freunde der naturlehre, arzneygelahrtheit,
haushaltungskunst and manufacturen. En^worfen von D. Lorenz Crell. 2 bond.
Lemgo, 1778.

83 Observations on scrophulous affections; with remarks on schirrus, cancer
and rachitis. By R. Hamilton, M. D. London, 1791.

84 A disquisition of the stone and gravel; with strictures on the gout when
combined with those disorders. By S. Perry, surgeon. Seventh edition. London,
1785.

85 Discourses on a sober and temperate life. By Lewis Cornaro. London, 1779.

86 Observations sur la physique sur l'histoire naturelle and sur les arts;
avec des planches en taille douce. Par M. l'Abbe Rozier de l'academie royale
des sciences, etc. 6 vols. From 1771 to 1772. A Paris.

RULES AGREED TO BY THE MANAGERS AND PHYSICIANS OF The Pennsylvania Hospital,
For the Preservation of the valuable Paintings and Castings presented by the
late Doctor JOHN FOTHERGILL, of London; ALSO, For the anatomical Preparations
bought of the heir of the late Doctor ABRAHAM CHOVET; and for such others as
may hereafter be added to the present Collection, by Purchase, or the Gift of
Friends, to the said Hospital.
I. ALL the anatomical preparations which now are in the house, and those which
hereafter may be added, shall be annexed to the Medical Library; and the
expenses of increasing and preserving as well this collection as the Library,
shall be paid out of the Medical Fund.

II. The Medical Fund, to be applied to the above uses, shall consist of all
moneys received in discharge of the fines incurred by those who detain books
for a longer period than is allowed by the rules; -- for the privilege granted
to medical pupils of attending the practice of the house; -- for exhibiting the
anatomical preparations, and permission to attend the lectures given thereon,
-- and for certificates sold.

III. From and after the first day of the Eighth month, 1794, (until otherwise
directed) a ticket for a single season, or any part of a season, shall be three
pounds, and a ticket for a perpetual privilege, shall be six pounds; which
shall entitle the purchaser to the use of the books, subject to the rules of
the Library, to attend the practice of the Hospital, agreeably to its rules,
and all the lectures on the anatomical preparations, which are given for the
instruction of medical pupils, but no others, without an express invitation
from the Lecturing Physician; neither shall any medical pupil have access to
the anatomical rooms, unless a Manager, the Treasurer, or some one of the
Hospital Physicians, in company with the Resident Apothecary, is present with
him.

IV. The same privileges, under the limitations contained in the preceding
rule, shall be extended to the apprentices of the Hospital Physicians, for the
time being, but no longer, unless they purchase a ticket.

V. Every person, but those who are excepted in these rules, shall pay seven
shillings and sixpence for every time they view the anatomical museum, and
fifteen shillings for attending each lecture which may generously be given by
any one of the Hospital Physicians to enlarge the Medical Fund; but all the
anatomical pupils who do not attend the Hospital, shall be admitted for seven
shillings and sixpence, as often, during the course, as the Anatomical
Professors think necessary.

VI. No other persons but the Hospital Physicians, shall, at any time, lecture
therein, unless they make a special contract with the Attending Managers and
Physicians, in which case, the Managers and Treasurer, the Hospital Physicians
and their pupils, the Resident Apothecaries, and the pupils of the house, shall
be admitted to attend.

VII. To benefit the Hospital, and more fully to qualify the apprentices to
fulfill their duty therein, such of them as conduct themselves in a proper
manner, shall be allowed to attend, gratis, as well the lectures in the
Hospital, as every other medical lecture given by the Hospital Physicians to
their respective pupils, during the time of their apprenticeship to the
institution, but no longer.

VIII. A general demonstration of the anatomical museum, for the benefit and
instruction of the pupils who have the privilege of attending the Hospital,
shall be made, at least once in every winter, by the Anatomical Professors, or
some of the other Physicians of the Institution.

IX. The Managers, Treasurer, or any of the Physicians, may, at all times,
invite any of the following persons to view the anatomical rooms gratis, viz.

The Governor and Members of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania;

The Judges of the Supreme Court;

The State Attorney;

The Contributors to the Pennsylvania Hospital of ten pounds;

The regular physicians of this or any other country.

And any or either of the Hospital Physicians may, if they think proper, give a
gratuitous lecture, at any time, to any of the gentlemen mentioned in this
rule; and to such lecture the medical pupils are not to be admitted, unless
invited by the physicians, or some one of them.

X. No anatomical preparations shall ever be lent or taken out of the house,
unless it becomes necessary to preserve them from destruction by fire.

XI. All presents to the museum shall be reported to the Managers and recorded
in their minutes.

XII. A catalogue shall be presented to the College of Physicians, one to the
Library Company of Philadelphia, one to the Loganian Library, and the remainder
are to be sold to the Managers and Physicians, the medical pupils, and such
other persons as may apply for them, at twenty-five cents each.

XIII. It shall be the duty of the Attending Physicians, or some one of them,
to report to the Sitting Managers, on the Seventh day next preceding the last
Second day in every month, the condition in which they find the anatomical
museum.

Extracted from the minutes of the Board of Managers, the 27th. of the First
month, 1794. JOSIAH HEWES, President. SAMUEL COATS, Secretary.


DESCRIPTION OF THE ANATOMICAL MUSEUM IN The Pennsylvania Hospital.
Imitations of the internal Parts of the Human Body, in wax, by the late Dr.
Chovet.
No. I. Represents the figure of a man, completely dissected, placed in a
supine position, on a table, exhibiting all the blood vessels injected, and all
the viscera in the cavities of the thorax, and abdomen in their natural
situation, so contrived that each viscus may be separately examined. -- Copied
from a dead subject six feet in length.

No. II. Represents the body of a pregnant woman with the abdomen and uterus
opened, in order to show the true situation of the foetus in utero with the
membranes enclosing it, the placenta and the funis umbilicalis. -- Copied from
a subject that died before delivery, within a month of her full time.

No. III. Represents a child dissected, so as to exhibit the brain, with the
nerves throughout the body, with the arteries and veins.

No. IV. Represents the female organs of generation, in their adult state. --
Copied from nature.

No. V. An imitation of the bust of a man of full size, displaying the muscles
of the head and face, the parotid glands, salivary ducts and blood vessels. The
scull appears removed to show the brain invested with its meninges, and, also,
its intestinal convolutions when they are removed. The brain may be taken from
the scull to view its inferior surface or basis.

No. VI. A full grown foetus.

No VII. Represents a gravid uterus extracted from a subject, who died in labor
near her full time, laid open to show the foetus in the position for delivery.

No. VIII. Is the accurate imitation of a new born child that expired soon
after birth, with the placenta and umbilical chord injected; the abdomen laid
open to demonstrate the manner in which the foetus in utero is supported alive.

Preparations of different parts of the human subject, in spirit of wine, by
the late Dr. Chovet.
No. I and II. Diseased lungs.

No. III. Ditto, injected.

No. IV. Diseased liver.

No. V. Diseased lungs.

No. VI. Integuments of the cranium.

No. VII. Dura matter.

No. VIII. An injected ear with another uninjected, for comparison.

No. IX. A child's face.

No. X. Part of a child's face injected.

No. XI. A calf's nose opened to show the olfactory nerves.

No. XII. The tongue and lower jaw, etc. to exhibit the structures of the
fauces.

No. XIII. A tongue injected.

No. XIV. Part of the lower jaw, to demonstrate the second set of teeth.

No. XV. An uterus with a diseased ovarium.

No. XVI. A full grown foetus, injected by the umbilical vein.

No. XVII. and XVIII. Small foetus.

No. XIX. An injected kidney.

No. XX. An uncommon kidney.

No. XXI. A diseased kidney injected and macerated.

No. XXII. Kidneys, heart, etc.

No. XXIII. A heart opened to show the cavities.

No. XXIV. Part of a large vein, showing the valves.

No. XXV. Part of the artery of an ox dissected, so as to exhibit the different
coats.

No. XXVI. A portion of the cuticle.

No. XXVII. The cutis and cuticle.

No. XXVIII. Skin and cellular membrane separated.

No. XXIX. A portion of skin of full thickness.

No. XXX. Palm of a child's hand injected.

No. XXXI. A portion of the sole of the foot.

No. XXXII. A diseased prostate gland with the muscular coat of the bladder
much thickened.

No. XXXIII. A diseased bladder.

No. XXXIV. Lower part of the rectum.

No. XXXV. and XXXVI. Portions of the large intestines opened to show their
internal surface.

No. XXXVII. and XXXVIII. Parts of intestines injected.

No. XXXIX. Ditto exhibiting the valvulae conniventes.

No. XL. Part of an intestine injected.

No. XLI. Part of the mesentery.

No. XLII. Stomach of a child injected.

No. XLIII. Bones of the fore arm of a child to exhibit the periosteum.

No. XLIV. An arm partly dissected to show the muscles.

Dried preparations, by the late Dr. Chovet.
No. I. An adult subject with the arteries and veins injected, and muscles
preserved.

No. II. A young subject injected.

No. III. A child with the arteries injected and nerves dissected, for
demonstration.

No. IV. A preparation of a child exhibiting arteries injected and nerves, with
some of the viscera injected.

No. V. The skeleton of an adult.

No. VI. Ditto of a foetus.

No. VII. The bones of the lower extremity, with an exostosis of the os femoris.

No. VIII. An arm injected.

No. IX. The bones that compose the articulation of the humerus, with the
ligaments.

No. X. Scapula to show the periosteum.

No. XI. Spine of a child, with the nerves that proceed from it.

No. XII. Pelvis of foetus, with the arteries and veins injected.

No. XIII. Trachea of a child.

No. XIV. Female organs of generation in their natural situation in the pelvis.

No. XV. Organs of generation of a child.

No. XVI. Ditto girl.

No. XVII. Uterus injected.

No. XVIII. Organs of generation of a boy, with the kidneys and arteries
injected.

No. XIX. Penis and bladder of a man in their natural situation with respect to
the pelvis.

No. XX. A penis opened, laterally, to show the internal cavernous structure.

No. XXI. Ditto, with sections in different places.

No. XXII. A human bladder.

No. XXIII. Stomach and all the intestines of a child.

No. XXIV. Small intestines, with the mesentery injected.

No. XXV. and XXVI. Part of the small intestines of a child, with the merentery.

No. XXVII. Part of the caecum and colon, with a section to show the valve.

No. XXVIII. Part of the duodenum, with its duct.

No. XXIX. Portion of intestine exhibiting the valvulae conniventes.

No. XXX. Ditto of the small intestines.

No. XXXI. Stomach and colon injected.

No. XXXII. Stomach injected.

No. XXXIII. Diaphragm.

No. XXXIV. Diaphragm and liver.

No. XXXV. An injected Kidney.

No. XXXVI. A diseased spleen injected,

No. XXXVII An injected kidney.

No. XXXVIII. XXXIX. and XL. Diseased lungs injected.

No. XLI. Lungs with their blood vessels injected.

No. XLII. The heart and lungs of a foetus in their natural situation in the
thorax.

No. XLIII. Heart of a child injected.

No. XLIV. Incomplete preparation of the heart.

No. XLV. XLVI. and XLVII. Different preparations of the heart to show its
internal cavities.

No. XLVIII. Heart molded in wax to show the ventricles.

No. XLIX. A portion of injected artery, with accompanying vein.

No. L. An eye with all its muscles.

No. LI. An imitation of the eye.

No. LII. A preparation of the ear.

No. LIII. All the bones of the ear.

No. LIVE. Transverse section of the cranium, with the muscles, arteries and
nerves of the neck.

No. LV. and LVI. The scull divided by a longitudinal section to exhibit the
dura matter and its processes.

No. LVII. Part of a scull, with the basis of the brain in wax.

No. LVIII. Scull of a man.

No. LIX. Ditto of a boy.

No. LX. Ditto of an infant.

No. LXI. Several separate bones of the cranium.

No. LXII. Articulation of the hip.

No. LXIII. A portion of injected skin.

To which have been added the following, prepared and presented by different
persons: --
Part of a skeleton.

A young subject injected.

An injected heart.

Ditto, uncommonly large. Presented by Dr. Park.

Castings of Gypsum, presented by the late Dr. Fothergill, of London.
No I. Represents the abdomen of a pregnant woman about nine months advanced.

No. II. Represents the same subject with the abdomen opened, to exhibit the
situation of the gravid uterus, with some of the other viscera.

No. III. The same subject, with the anterior parts of the thorax, abdomen and
uterus removed, to show the situation of the foetus in utero, with the
umbilical chord and part of the investing membranes, and also the heart (the
perricardium being removed) and part of the lungs, liver, stomach, etc.

The paintings in crayons are eighteen in number; they represent the structure
of the human body internally and externally, and also the gravid uterus and
foetus in utero.

AN INDEX OF THE Names of Authors and Editors IN THE CATALOGUES OF BOOKS,
Printed in 1790 and 1794.
A
Abernethey 54. Adair 27, 49. Aikin 28, 30, 57, 59. Aitkin 14, 29, 31, 58.
Aiton. 43. Akenside 54. Alanson 14. Albinus 7, 9, 42. Alexander 9. Alleyne 17.
Alpinus 11. Alston 39. Andree 54. Andrews 60. Arbuthnot 20. Aretaeus 8, 44.
Armstrong 62. Arnaud 32. Arnold 24. Ash 62. Astruc 17. Aurelianus 11.
B
Bacon 11, 16. Back 14, 35. Baglivus 11, 19. Balfour 59. Barrowby 17.
Bartholinus 16. Bates 17. Baudelocque 45. Beaume 31. Becherus 35. Beddoes 53,
56, 58. Begvinus 33. Bell 13, 14, 45, 56, 57, 62. Bellini 20. Bergman 15.
Berkenhout 47, Berlu 34. Bertholet 46. Bisset 21. Black 14, 21, 46. Blane 16,
40. Blumenbach 56, 62. Boerhaave 9, 20, 31, 32, 34, 35, 41, 56. Brand 41, 52.
Bromfield 18. Brook 40. Brooks 19. Brown 11, 30, 46, 59. Brown 17. Burnet 11.
Buschoff 33. Butter 29, 50.
C
Cadogan 22. Campbell 44. Carter 46. Cat 18. Cavallo 24, 39. Celsus 17, 27.
Chalmers 23. Chamberlen 35. Chandler 23. Chaptall 45. Charrier 34. Cheselden
19. Cheyne 26, 53. Clare 59, 61. Clarke 40, 47, 52, 56. Cleghorn 20. Clerk 50.
Cockell 41. Cole 32. Coleman 47. Colignon 62. Collin 23. Commerell 28. Cook
32. Cornaro 62. Corrie 51. Coward 32. Cowper 38. Cozens 54. Crawford 25. Creli
62. Cronstedt 45. Cruikshank 10, 40. Cullen 10, 13, 15, 19, 26, 56, 58.
Culpepper 33. Currie 29, 33, 55. Cutbush 61.
D
Dale 19. Dallowe 9. Darwin 52. David 41. Dease 14, 51, 54, 60. Deckers 35.
Degnerus 27. Denman 28, 42, 46. Dick 62. Diepaeus 35. Dimsdale 23. Disney 43.
Dobson 22, 57. Douglass 23, 25, 32, 49. Dran 14, 19. Duncan 16, 22, 44, 59.
Dunn 27.
E
Earl 45, 51. Edwards 40. Elliott 15, 46, 55, 62. Else 22. Engestrom 45.
Erskine 27. Etmuller 18, 37. Eugalenus 34. Eustachius 7.
F
Fabricius 11. Falconar 21, 22, 48, 50, 57, 61. Far 39, 59. Fearon 50. Ferriar
60. Ferris 29. Finch 12. Florentinus 11. Flemyng 57. Folver 21. Fontana 15.
Foot 39, 50, 51, 52, 53. Ford 61. Fordyce 21, 22, 50, 55, 58. Forest 8. Foster
21, 59. Fothergill 16, 39, 45, 49. Fourcroy 15, 46, 57. Fowler 22, 29, 52. Fox
58. Franks 48, 51. Friend 16* 17, 19, 26. Fuller 33, 34.
G
Gardener 23, 59. Garnett 49. Gataker 19, 24, 47. Gaubuis 27, 32. Gerdlestone
48. Gilchrist 24, 60. Gibson 51. Gooch 15, 57. Goodwyn 28. Gorter 11. Gottling
61. Goulard 32. Gregory 57, 61. Griffith 51.
H
Haller 9, 15, 19, 31, 37, 38, 39, 41. Hamilton 23, 30, 45, 46, 57, 60, 61, 62.
Harper 53, 54. Harrington 53. Harris 17. Harvey 35, 39, 59. Hassenfratz 46.
Hawes 55. Healde 23, 46. Heath 45. Heister 10, 25, 31, 60. Henderson 50, 54.
Hendy 48. Henry 24, 31. Hewson 14, 21. Heysham 52. Higgins 47. Hilary 21.
Hildanus 34. Hill 25. Hippocrates 17, 18, 25, 39, 44. Hoffman 8, 16 Home 13,
40. Hope 39. Hopson 28, 38. Horstius 11. Houlston 38, 39. Howard 55. Huck 62.
Hulme 27, 41. Humpage 48. Hunter 8, 10, 11, 22, 29, 38, 46, 52, 55. Hurlock 48.
Hyacinth 45. Huxham 16, 18, 24.
I
Innis 22, 31, 42. Irving 25.
J
Jackson 24, 56. James 37. Jameson 48. 50. Jebb 43. Jenty 20. John 46. Johnson
11. Johnstone 34. Jones 44, 48. Juncherus 42. Justamond 23, 38, 39, 41.
K
Keate 50. Kentish 49, 55. Kippis 21. Kite 26. Kirkland 14, 22, 29, 58.
Kirkpatrick 16. Kirwan 15, 47. Krohn 38.
L
Lackington 56. Lancisuis 37. Lanfranke 26. Lanus 35. Latham 46. Lavoisier 46.
Lawrence 60. Leake 15, 45, 55, 60. Lee 16. Leigh 52. Leslie 22. Lettsom 10, 16,
26, 28, 39, 45. Lewis 9, 16, 43. Linnaeus 13, 20, 44. Lind 16, 35, 43, 57, 61.
Lipscomb 41. Lobb 17, 19. Lower 34. Lowndes 50. Lusitanus 32. Lysons 16.
M
Macbride 10, 13, 18. Mackenzie 48. Maclurg 19. Macquer 19. Maire 26. Manning
22, 24, 57, 60. Mantell 62. Marcard 49. Mascagni 38. Mathews 16. May 49.
Maynwaringe 34. Mead 9. Mercier 48. Millar 29, 41, 57. Milne 25. Moffat 44, 58.
Monro 7, 8, 10, 15, 20, 23, 31, 45, 62. Moore 27, 40, 58. Morgagni 9. Morton
17, 32. Morveau 46. Moseley 44, 58. Moss 28. Motherby 8. Moyle 34. Mudge 31.
Munro 59. Musgrave 25. Mynors 33.
N
Neale 31, 53. Necker 44. Needham 34. Nesbitt 48. Neuman 9. Nicholson 43, 45
Nooth 46.
O
Offredus 35. Osborn 25, 58.
P
Palmer 41. Parsons 62. Paxton 26, 27. Pazmannianus 23. Pearson 47, 52, 53.
Peart 49, 51. Percival 30, 45. Perfect 44, 48. Perkins 53. Perry 62. Piso 11.
Pitcarn 11, 17, 26, 35. Pit 49. Platerus 11. Playfair 51. Pole 44. Porta 32,
34. Porterfield 20. Pott 14, 19, 45. Priestley 10, 23. Price 51. Pringle 10,
19, 21. Prosser 11. Pugh 42. Pulteney 44. Purcell 32.
Q
Quincy 18, 26. Quesnay 33.
R
Radcliffe 26. Ray 8. Reeve 53. Reid 14, 21, 27. Reide 56, 58. Renwick 54.
Richter 60. Ridley 29. Rigby 21, 49. Riollay 60. Robertson 25, 47, 57. Rohault
33, 34. Roonhuyse 33. Rose 29. Rosentein 43, 60. Rotheram 56. Rouppe 23, 59.
Rowley 25, 28, 44, 51, 52. Rozier 42, 62. Rush 55, 61. Russel 18, 39. Rutty 9.
Ryan 49, 54.
S
Sagarus 13. Salmon 17. Samber 20. Sanchez 54. Sauvage 13. Sawyer 53. Scheele
15. Schreberus 44. Schroderus 16. Sennertus 11, 35. Seybert 54. Sharp 14, 20.
Shaw 17. Sheldon 42, 50. Short 41. Simmons 14, 24. Simpson 53. Sims 21, 24, 59.
Skeete 43, 59. Skinner 15, 54. Smellie 8, 13, 15, 38. Smith 9, 38, 40.
Spallanzani 24. Speed 18. Sparman 43, 60. Sprengell 17. Stark 38. Stockton 20.
Stokes 54. Strother 18, 26. Swainston 58. Swan 28. Swediaur 43. Swieten 9, 10,
20. Sydenham 23, 27, 28, 32.
T
Tenon 41. Thelwall 41. Thomas 47. Thomson 47, 60. Thucydides 18. Tissot 16.
Toulmin 47. Tournefort 11, 17. Tulpius 32. Turner 17, 26.
U
Underwood 47, 61.
V
Valli 58. Vaughan 57. Vanguion 27. Vaux 22. Vogel 13.
W
Wade 57. Wainwright 26. Waldschmidt 33. Walker 43. Wall 44. Wallaeus 33.
Wallace 54. Wallis 23, 29, 41, 52, 55, 57. Walter 28. Ware 23, 46, 59. Warner
18, 23. Waters 45. Watson 31. Webster 24. Weldon 54. Wenzel 46. Wepfer 32.
Werlhofius 42. Whestphalus 37. White 21, 24, 28, 43, 50, 52, 57. Whytt 9, 19,
20, 31. Wiegleb 38. Willan 28. Williamson 55. Willis 33, 34. Wilmer 14, 62.
Wilson 21, 52. Winslow 22, 29. Wiseman 17. Wistar 30. Withering 29, 45. Withers
59. Wood 53. Woodhouse 62. Woodvile 39, 40.
X
Y
Young 25, 60. Yves 20.
Z
Zimmerman 24, 28, 48, 55.
PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR.


