A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, PUBLISHED BY THE DIFFERENT MEMBERS OF THE PHILADELPHIA
COMPANY OF PRINTERS AND BOOKSELLERS, AND NOW FOR SALE, At WM. SPOTSWOOD'S
Book-store,

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY D. HUMPHREYS, No. 48, SPRUCE-STREET. M.DCC.XCIV.

CATALOGUE, etc.
Dols. cts. ACT, declaration, and testimony of the associate Presbytery Adams's
defense of the constitutions of the United States of America 1. Adminiculum
puerile 50 Algiers, an account of 25 Almanacks, house 6 -- pocket 12 -- sheet 6
Alphonso and Dalinda; or the magic of art and nature 67 Adventures of Alphonso
20 American jest book, and merry fellow's companion 62 American tutor's
assistant, or a compendious system of practical arithmetic. By sundry teachers
in Philadelphia 55 American grove 50 American harmony, by N. Shumway 2.
American letter writer, or the art of correspondence, containing letters on the
most important subjects, viz. business, friendship, courtship, love and
marriage, politeness, economy, affection, amusement, duty, advice, religion,
etc. composed by writers eminent for their perspicuity and elegance of
expression; to which are added, the complete gentleman; or principles of
politeness, Rochefoucault's moral reflections and maxims, economy of human life,
aphorisms on man, with forms of message cards, instructions how to address
persons of all ranks, a compendious English grammar, and a copious English
spelling dictionary, 12 mo. 1.10 American jester, in two parts 50 American
museum from January, 1787, to December, 1792, 12 vols. N. B. Any of the volumes
or numbers may be had separate. 19.20 America, the history of 75 Anatomy,
system of 2. Anderson's first discourse on psalmody 25 -- second discourse on
do. 31 -- mirror 31 -- on saving faith 37 Aphorisms on faith 10 Arabian nights
entertainment, a new edition, 4 vols. bound in two 1.60 Arabian nights
entertainment, abridged 20 Associate Presbytery's vindication 25 Bachmair's
German grammar 1. Barclay's catechism 34 Barclay's apology for the true
christian divinity, being an explanation and vindication of the principles and
doctrines of the people called Quakers 1.33 Beatties' evidences of christianity
40 Ditto ditto - fine 53 Beattie's poems 40 Beattie's elements of moral science
80 Beauties of Johnson, consisting of maxims and observations, moral, critical
and miscellaneous; to which is prefixed the life of Doctor Johnson, with some
papers written by him in behalf of a late unfortunate character 80 Beauties of
Blair 50 Beauties of Fielding 50 Beauties of Stern, including his pathetic
tales and most distinguished observations on life, selected for the heart of
sensibility, 18 mo. 67 Beauties of poetry, British and American 80 Beauties of
the creation, or a new moral system of natural history, displayed in the most
singular, curious and beautiful quadrupeds, birds, insects, trees and flowers
82 Bennett's letters and strictures on female education, bound in 1 vol. 87
Berridge's christian world unmasked 62 Bibles, 12 mo. from 67 cents to 1 dollar
Bibles, 18 mo. from 1 to 3 dollars Bible abridged, with cuts 18 Blair's
lectures on rhetoric and the belles lettres, 2 vol. 8vo. 3.30 Blair's sermons,
2 vols. 2. Bligh's narrative of the mutiny on board of his Britannic majesty's
ship Bounty 25 Blind child, or, anecdotes of the Wyndham family 33 Booth's
apology for the Baptists 20 Ditto, ditto -- bound 25 Book of knowledge 20
Bradford's enquiry on punishments 37 1/^ Brigg's new art of cookery according
to the present practice, being a complete guide to all house keepers 1.27
Brown's elements of medicine 1.67 Buchan's domestic medicine 2. Buchannan's
syntax 40 Burke's reflections on the revolution in France, and on the
proceedings in certain societies in London relative to that event: in a letter
intended to be sent to a gentleman in Paris, boards 1. Campbell's translation
of the gospels, with dissertations and notes Campbell's dissertations on
miracles 80 Carey's account of the yellow fever, blue paper 50 Carver's travels
67 Catechism of man, pointing out from sound principles and acknowledged facts,
the rights and duties of every rational being 18 Catechism, shorter 3 Larger 8
Church 3 Child's 6 Muckarsie's 6 Catholics true principles, to which is added an
exposition of the ten commandments 3 Chalkley's works and journal 1.33
Chapone's letters 40 Charlotte, a novel, by Mrs. Rowson 62 Charmer, a
collection of songs, embellished with a handsomely engraved frontispiece of
Anna's urn, being a select collection of English, Scotch and American songs,
including the modern, with a collection of favorite toasts and sentiments, 12
mo. 50 Charms of melody 25 Chambaud's fables 50 Child's instructor 25
Children's miscellany; in which is included the history of Little Jack, by
Thomas Day, Esquire. author of Sandford and Merton, with a number of cuts 1.
Chemical and economical essays, by John Pennington 1.10 Chesterfield's advice
to his son 50 Choice elements 25 Christians' vade mecum, or a summary of select
and necessary devotion 25 Christian economy, translated from a Greek manuscript
found in the island of Patmos, where St. John wrote the apocalypse 25 Christian
Parent, or, short and plain discourses concerning God, and the works of God, in
creation, redemption, and sanctification. Intended originally for young persons
in a family 44 Church in the house, a sermon by Matthew Henry 6 Cicero de
officiis 62 Clark's Esop's fables, Latin and English 33 Clarke's treatise on
the prevention of diseases incident to horses, 12 mo. 87 Condorcet's life of
Voltaire, to which is added memoirs of Voltaire, written by himself, 12 mo. 1.
Consecration of the Right Rev. John Carrol, D. D. Bishop of Baltimore 6
Constitutions of the several United States, according to the latest amendments,
with the declaration of independence, the federal constitution and the
amendments made thereto 62 Cornaro on health and long life 37 Crawford's
remarks on the French revolution 25 Crawford's experiments on animal heat 50
Cullen's materia medica 3.33 Cullen's practice of physic, 2 vols. 4. Davidies
Death of Abel Death of Cain, in five books, after the manner of Gesner, by a
lady 25 Devil upon two sticks 75 Dickinson's familiar letters to a Gentleman,
upon a variety of seasonable and important subjects in religion 88
Dictionaries. Sheridan's complete dictionary, both with regard to sound and
meaning; one main object of which is to establish a plain and permanent
standard of pronunciation. To which is prefixed a rhetorical grammar. The 5th
edition carefully revised and corrected by John Andrews, D. D. rector of St.
James's, Bristol, and professor of rhetoric and belles letters in the
university of Pennsylvania 2.50 Ditto small for the pocket 1.33 English
spelling dictionary 1.10 Digest of the law of actions of nisi prius, by Isaac
Espinasse, 2 vols. 2.25 Dilworth's schoolmasters assistant 50 Dilworth's
book-keeping 82 Doddridge's sermons on the religious education of children 44
Doddridge's sermons to young persons on several subjects. The sixth edition 62
Doddridge's rise and progress of religion in the soul, etc. 62 Doddridge's
sermons on regeneration and free salvation through faith 82 Dodsley's Esop's
fables 50 Ditto, with cuts 67 Doway translation of the vulgate bible, in one
quarto volume* containing nearly one thousand pages 6. Duncan's elements of
logic 75 Duty of Woman 13 Economy of human life 20 Edinburgh new dispensatory
2. Edinburgh medical commentaries, 9 vols. per vol. 2.50 Ela, or the delusions
of the heart, a tale, founded on facts; to which is added Henry and Emma, a
poem by Mr. Prior, and the deserted village by doctor Goldsmith 80 Emmon's
discourses concerning the process of the general judgment; in which the modern
notions of universal salvation are particularly considered 38 Encyclopoedia, or
dictionary of arts and sciences, 18 volumes, per vol. 5. Enfield's family
prayers, suitable for all denominations of Christians, 12 mo. 55 Enquiry into
the tendency of certain public measures 37 Epicteti Enchiridion 31 Erasmus 47
Erskine's select sermons 1. Evelina, 2 volumes 1.50 Examination of the
observations of lord Sheffield, on the commerce of the United States 62 Fables
for the ladies, in verse, by dr. Cozens 33 Fables with cuts 20 Fair solitary,
or female hermit 25 Fairy tales 20 Farrier, the pocket 25 Fisher's young man's
companion 67 Fordyce's sermons to young women 80 Fothergill's sermons 33 Fry's
poems 33 Garden of the soul 50 Gardiner's enquiry into the nature, cause and
cure of the gout, and of some diseases, with which it is connected, 12 mo. 87
Gentleman's pocket library, containing Chesterfield's principles of politeness,
economy of human life, Rochesoucault's moral reflections, Lavater's aphorisms on
man, polite philosopher, Lord Burghley's ten precepts, the way to wealth,
select sentences, old Italian, Spanish and English proverbs, and a tablet of
memory to the present time, 12 mo. 1. Geography, elements of 50 Geography
epitomized 25 Gib's contemplations 1.50 Gibraltar, history of the siege of,
with a description and account of that garrison, by a captain in the late 72d
regiment or royal Manchester volunteers, 12 mo. 1. Gibson's surveying 2. Gil
Blas, adventures of 33 Gilbert's law evidence 1.50 Golden cabinet, being a
laboratory, or handmaid to the arts, containing such branches of useful
knowledge, as nearly concern all kinds of people from the 'squire to the
peasant, 12 mo. 62 Goldsmith's deserted village 12 Gospel sonnets 50 Governess,
or female academy 37 Gough's treatise of arithmetic in theory and practice;
containing every thing important in the study of abstract and applicate
numbers, adapted to the commerce of Great Britain and Ireland; to which are
added many valuable additions and amendments, more particularly fitting the
work, for the improvement of the American youth. By Benjamin Workman, A. M. 80
Grammars. Ash's English grammar 25 Philadelphia Latin grammar 40 Bachmair's
German grammar 1. Comprehensive English grammar 25 Grandison, Charles, the
history of, abridged 16 Grave, a poem, by Dr. Blair. 12 Gregory's legacy 20
Guthrie's Geography, 4to. with nearly 50 maps, including those of all the
United States, bound in 2 volumes 18. Hale's epistles to his children, 18 mo.
25 Hammond and Collins's poems 50 Hamilton's outlines of midwifery 80
Hamilton's outlines of midwifery, with plates 2. Henry and Emma, a poem 6
Horne's commentary on the book of psalms. In which their literal or historical
sense, as they relate to king David and the people of Israel, is illustrated;
and their application to the Messiah, to the church, and to individuals, as
members thereof, is pointed out; with a view to render the use of the psalter
pleasing and profitable to all orders and degrees of christians, 2 vols. 8vo.
2.50 History of Robin Hood, 20 Hopkinson's works, 3 volumes 5. Humming bird,
one of the most pleasing and delightful collection of songs now extant, etc.
including also, the most admired musical productions of America, Ireland and
Scotland; catches and glees, together with a curious selection of toasts,
sentiments, and hobnobs 31 Humphreys's poems 37 Hutcheson's moral philosophy 80
Jenyn's evidence of the christian religion 20 Jenyn's disquisitions 25 Indian
cottage, translated from the French of M. de St. Pierre, author of Paul and
Mary, etc. 12mo. 50 Information to Europeans disposed to migrate to America 12
Joseph, life of 50 Ditto ditto - fine 75 Knox's moral and literary essays, 2
volumes, 12 mo. 1.75 Ladies library, containing miss Moore's essays, Gregory's
legacy, lady Pennington's advice, marchioness of Lambert's advice, Swift's
letters to a married lady, miss Chapone on the command of temper, More's fables
for the ladies, with Langhorne's fables of Flora 50 Ladies friend, being a
treatise on the virtues and qualifications, which are the brightest ornament of
the fair sex, and render them most agreeable to the sensible part of mankind 37
Lavater's essays on physiognomy, for the promotion of the knowledge and love of
mankind, embellished with a number of elegant engravings, 12 mo. 1.33 Lavater's
aphorisms, 18 mo. 25 Letter writer 20 Letters to a young lady on useful and
interesting subjects; to which is added, strictures on female education, chiefly
as it relates to the culture of the heart, 12 mo. 87 Letters from an American
farmer, describing certain provincial situations, manners and customs, and
conveying some idea of the people of North America 80 Letters, fifteen, to
married women, on nursing and the management of children, by Doctor Smith 67
Lucian's select dialogues (by Murphy) with a new literal translation in Latin:
and English notes 1. Lyttleton on the conversion of St. Paul 20 L^mpriere's
tour in Morocco 75 Man of feeling 75 Man of true courage 12 Mason on self
knowledge 75 Maria Cecilia; or the life and adventures of the daughter of
Achmet III. emperor of the Turks, who reformed from mahometanism and embraced
the christian religion, 12 mo. 87 McFing^l, an epic poem, by John Trumbull 37
McIntosh's defense of the French revolution and its English admirers, against
the accusations of the right honorable Edmund Burke, including some strictures
on the late productions of M. de Calonne, boards 75 Medical transactions of the
Philadelphia college of physicians, in boards 1. Methodist pocket hymn book
Milton's paradise lost, and other poems, 2 volumes, in one 1. Milton's paradise
regained 25 Misses' Magazine 1.33 Mirror, a periodical paper, published in
Edinburgh in the years 1779 and 1780, by the editors of the Lounger, 2 vols. 12
mo. 1.57 Miscellanies in prose and verse 37 Mocking bird, or a collection of
songs 20 Modern chivalry, vol. 1, 2, and 3, each 50 Moore's fables for the
ladies, with Langhorn's fables of Flora 50 Moore's sacred dramas 62 1/^ Ditto
ditto -- fine 68 Moore's journal in France, 2 vols. 1.75 Newton's, Olney,
hymns, or select texts of scripture, on occasional subjects, and on the
progress and changes of the spiritual life 67 Newton's six discourses or
sermons, as intended for the pulpit. Also, twenty sermons preached in the
parish church of Olney 80 Newton's letters, originally published under the
signatures of Omicron and Virgil; to which is prefixed, an authentic narrative
of some remarkable and interesting particulars in the life of Mr. Newton 80
Newton's review of ecclesiastical history 80 Newton's letters and sermons, with
a review of ecclesiastical history and hymns, 6 vols. 4.50 Newton's
cardiphonia, or, the utterance of the heart; in the course of real
correspondence. The fifth edition, 2 vols. 1.60 Nicholson's natural philosophy
3. Nightcap, or miscellaneous essays, by Mr. Mercier, 2 vols. 12 mo. 1.50
Opinions of the federal judges on the suability of a state 50 Original poems on
various subjects, by a lady. Revised by William Cooper 44 Ovidii Nasonis
metamorphoseon, libri X; or ten select books of Ovid's metamorphosis, with an
English translation, and notes compiled from Davidson and Clark, 8 vo. 1.50
Owen's nature, power, deceit and prevalency of indwelling sin in believers;
together with the ways of its working, and means of prevention, opened, evinced
and applied. With a resolution of cases of conscience thereunto appertaining. A
new edition 80 Paine's Thomas a Kempis 55 Paine's rights of man, part 1st and
2d 75 Paine's address to the addressers 25 Paley's moral philosophy 2. Park on
insurance 2. Paul and Mary, an Indian story: to which is added, the Indian
cottage, from the French of M. de St. Pierre, 12 mo. 87 Penn's no cross, no
crown 1. Penn's maxims and reflections: to which is added, his advice to his
children 62 Percival's moral tales 50 Ditto, ditto - fine 67 Pilgrim's
progress, second American edition, with cuts 60 Pindar's, Peter, poetical works
complete, in 2 volumes, 12 mo. 2.25 Philadelphia directory and register,
containing the names, occupations and places of abode of the citizens, arranged
in alphabetical order; with a register of the executive, legislative and
judicial magistrates of the United States, and the state of Pennsylvania, with
their salaries; the governors of the different states, and the magistrates of
the city; to which is added, the duties on goods, wares and merchandise, and
many other particulars interesting both to citizens and strangers. By J.
Hardy, A. M. 62 Pelew Islands, an account of 67 Peyton's grammar for Frenchmen
50 Pierce's new American spelling book 25 Polite Philosopher 20 Pope's essay on
man 12 1/^ Ditto, ditto -- fine 18 Power of religion on the mind 20 Present for
an apprentice, 18 mo. 20 Price's sermons, 12 mo. 67 Prophetic conjectures
relative to the French revolution 25 Psalms of David 37 Psalter or psalms of
David 17 Psalter, German 33 Punctuation, an essay on 34 Ready reckoner, or
traders' sure guide 50 Reid on consumptions 50 Resignation, a poem 20
Richardson, John, the life of 60 Richardson's essays on Shakespeare's dramatic
characters; to which is added, an essay on the faults of Shakespeare, 12 mo. 80
Rigley on uterine hemorrhage 40 Robespiere's reports upon the principles of
political morality 12 Rowe's devout exercises of the heart 37 Ditto, ditto --
fine 50 Rudiments of taste, in a series of letters from a mother to her
daughter; to which are added, maxims addressed to young ladies, by the countess
Dowager of Carlisle, 18 mo. 33 Rush on spirituous liquors 6 Rush's medical
observations and enquiries, 2 vols. 3. Rush on the yellow fever 1.50 Reason and
faith 62 Rasselas, prince of Abyssinia 37 Ditto, with the continuation 67
School of virtue, or the history of Henry Howard, and the honorable miss
Henrietta Colville, 12 mo. 87 Scripture truth demonstrated in thirty-two
sermons. By Stephen Crisp 1. Selectae e veteri testamento et e profanis
scriptoribus historiae: quibus sunt adjuncta Catonis moralia desticha et C.
Lilli^ Paedagogi, monita. Ad usum scholarum hujus continentis. Ut et a J.
Davidson, A. M. in academia Philadelphiensi lit. human. professore studiose
revisa 54 Selectae e Corderio, Erasmo et Phoedri fabulis. accurante Jacobo
Davidson, A. M. in academia Philadelphiensi lit. human. proffessore 67 Stanton,
Daniel, the life of 50 Select poems, chiefly American 16 Selectae e profanis 80
Shipwreck, a poem, by Falconer, sewed 17 Sherlock's trial of the witnesses of
the resurrection 20 Smith's wealth of nations, 3 vols. 3. Smith's elegiac
sonnets 12 Smith's history of New York 1.25 Steuben's, Baron, military exercise
67 System of mineralogy and metalurgy Scott's force of truth; an authentic
narrative. The third edition 44 Sanford and Merton, 3 volumes in one: a work
intended for the use of children. The sixth edition 88 Sentimental journey
through France and Italy, 2 vols. in one 60 Sterne's Beauties, including all
his pathetic tales and most distinguished observations on life, selected for
the heart of sensibility: to which is added, the life of mr. Stern 68 Scot's
Lessons, with plates 80 Swedenborg's true christian religion 4.50 -- Doctrine
of life 37 Sullivan's observations upon the government of the United States of
America 25 Taplin's Earriery 2.25 Tables of logarithms, sines, tangents, etc.
Tas^, a poem, by Cooper 80 Telemaque, in French 1. Testaments, new 80 Think
well on it, or reflections for every day in the month; by R Chaloner 25 Thoughts
on the manners of the great 20 Trenck, Baron, life of 1. Travels of the marquis
de Chatteleux in N. America, critically examined by Brissot de Warville 25
Turford's grounds of a holy life 20 The Tennassee government, a description of,
with a map. 1. Underwood's diseases of children 1. United States Register 50
Universal asylum and Columbian magazine, containing a history of the American
revolution, for the years 1775, 76, 77, 78, 79 and 80. It also contains a great
variety of original communications, in prose and verse, original translations,
and extracts from foreign publications, otherwise little known in this country;
being a repository of miscellaneous articles, on government, politics,
agriculture, commerce, music, arts, philosophy, medicine, history, etc.
Illustrated with copperplates, and a complete index to each volume. By a
society of gentlemen. In six volumes; price when bound 10. Varlo's new system
of husbandry from many years' experience, with tables showing the expense and
profit of each crop; that a farm of 150 acres will clear 400l. sterling. per ann;
how to stock farms to the best advantage; how the crops are to follow each
other by way of rotation; of trench ploughing, showing how to raise crops
without manure; on rearing, breeding, and a new discovered cheap food for
cattle; of cabbage and turnip husbandry; of the naked wheat, with many other
new-discovered grains and grasses suitable for the land and climate of America;
also, showing the great profit of rabbit warrens, and how to stock them; a
farmer's and garden calendar. Of all sorts of manures, marls, clays, sands,
etc. a new invented threshing floor; also many chosen receipts, in physic and
surgery, some for the human species, and others for the cure of all sorts of
cattle, 2 vols. 8 vo. 2. Vocal remembrancer, being a choice selection of the
most admired songs, embellished with an elegant pastoral seen, 12 mo. 67
Vocabulary, English and Latin. By Thomas Greenwood, author of the English
grammar, and late sur master of St. Paul's school, London: illustrated by a
number of engravings, 12 mo. 33 Voyages and travels; containing the voyage of
Peter Kolben to the cape of Good Hope; a voyage to China, by Lewis Le Compte;
and anecdotes of the elephant, from Wolfe's travels, 18 mo. 25 Vicar of
Wakefield, in 2 volumes; a tale, supposed to be written by himself 75
Vindication of the associate Presbytery 25 Voyages, the seven, of Sinbat the
sailor; and the story of Aladdin, or the wonderful lamp 25 Willison's
explanation of the assembly's shorter catechism; offered as an help for
instructing the young and ignorant in the principles and duties of the
christian religion 50 Willison's treatise concerning the sanctification of the
Lord's day, etc. etc. to which are added, by way of appendix, meditations for
the sabbath day, taken from the author's manuscript 56 1/^ Willison's afflicted
man's companion, or a directory for families and persons afflicted with
sickness, or any other distress 50 Workman's American accountant, or
schoolmaster's new assistant, comprised in four books, including all the
questions in the Philadelphia edition of Gough, with many others. The whole
adapted to the commerce of the United States; and comprehending every thing
necessary to a complete knowledge of the science of arithmetic. The second
edition, revised and corrected by Robert Patterson, A. M. professor of
mathematics in the university of Pennsylvania. 1.33 Woolman, John, the life of
1. Whitenhall's Latin grammar 33 Watt's hymns 40 -- psalms, 12 mo. 50 -- ditto,
18 mo. 40 -- ditto, 24 mo. 33 -- psalms and hymns, improved by Barlow, each
separately 33 Whittenhall's Greek grammar 33 Wrongs of Africa, Anra, and
Slavery, 3 poems, stitched 20 Wheatley's, Phillis, poems 12 Watt's logic 80
Whitfield's and Slee's sermons 12 Water's system of surgery 2.50 Winchester's
dialogues on universal salvation 62 Young clerk's magazine 67 Zimmerman on
solitude, considered with respect to its influence on the heart 80 Ditto, ditto
-- fine 1.
ADDITIONAL BOOKS.
Advice concerning bills of Exchange, wherein is set forth the nature of
exchange of moneys, the several kinds of exchange in different countries,
diverse cases propounded and resolved, objections answered, etc. By John
Marius, notary public. Land. 1654. 50 Desengano del Hombre 4.50 Enfield's
sermons 62 Guion's madame, short and easy method of prayer 33 Freneau's poems
1. -- miscellanies 1. Northcote, on the diseases of armies 40 Adventures of
Joseph Andrews 80 Memoirs of Dr. Franklin, written by himself 67 Grandmaison'^
treatise on the military service of light horse and light infantry, in the
field and in fortified places; bound 75 Platte's discovery of subterraneous
treasure, containing useful explorations concerning all manner of mines and
minerals 25
PAMPHLETS.
Bingham's letter on American commerce 12 ^/^ Citizen Godenau's oration upon
religious worship 6 Hamilton's letter to the considerate citizens of New York,
on the politics of the times 12 Hamilton's second letter to ditto 12 Judge
Burke's address to the freemen of South Carolina 12 Mirabeau's reflections on
Price 6 Mirabeau's considerations on the order of Cincinnatus 12 Observations
on ditto 12 Raynel's revolution of America 12 Lord George Germain's rights of
Britain asserted 12 Sermon preached by the Rev. Dr. Ewing, at the ordination of
the Rev. Ashbel Green 17 The acts of the synod of New York and Philadelphia, A.
D. 1787 and 1788 7 Slender's journey from Philadelphia to New York, a poem 7
Wetherill's divinity of Jesus Christ, in opposition to Doctor Priestly 2^ A
narrative of the extraordinary sufferings of mr. Robert Forbes, his wife, and
five children; during an unfortunate journey through the wilderness, from
Canada to Kennebeck river, in the year 1784; in which three of their children
were starved to death. [Taken partly from their own mouths, and partly from an
imperfect journal and published at their request.] By Arthur Bradman 6
Affecting history of the dreadful distresses of (...) Manheim's Family. To
which are (...) the sufferings of John Corbly's family. An encounter between a
white man and two savages. Extraordinary bravery of a woman. Adventures of
captain Isaac Stewart. Deposition of Massey Herbeson. Adventures and sufferings
of Peter Wilkinson. Remarkable adventures of Jackson Johonnot. Account of the
destruction of the settlements at Wyoming 25
PLAYS and FARCES.
Child of nature 20 Cato 20 Confederacy 20 Day in Turkey 20 Dead alive, or the
double funeral 18 Deserter 18 Every one has his fault, a comedy 20 Farmer 12
Gamester 20 Gentle shepherd 12 Girl of spirit 18 Grecian daughter 18 Inflexible
captive 20 Lionel and Clarissa, an opera 20 Lord of the manor 20 Love-a-la-mode
12 1/^ Love in a village 20 Lorenzo 20 Maid of the mill 20 A song, no supper 12
Merick in Prussia 18 (...) 12 (...) 18 (...) 12 Suspicious husband ^0 (...) ^0
True born Irishman ^^^ Wild ^ats ^^
Small Histories, and Chap Books.
ABC books in German 1^ American academy of compliments ^^ Catechisms in German
17 Hymns for children; to which is added, Watt's divine songs for children 18
London cries 4 History of a school boy 12 Mother's gift, or a present for
little boys 7 Destruction of Troy 20 New England primer 6 1/^ Oliphant's
sacramental catechism designed for communicants, old and young 18 History of
little goody two shoes, otherwise called mrs. Margery Two Shoes. To which are
added, some choice hymns for the amusement of children 18 Robinson Crusoe, with
10 cuts 20 Ditto, ditto, another edition 17 Ditto, ditto, in German 17 History
of Paddy from Cork 6 Wars of the Jews 20 Smart's hymns for children; to which
is added, Watt's divine songs for children, 18 mo. 18
Maps and Charts.
War Atlas, containing maps of the United provinces, the Netherlands, France,
Germany, Spain, Italy and the West Indies 2. Map of Kentucke 1.67 Map of France
40 Map of New Jersey 50 Map of Vermont 37 Map of Connecticut 3^ Map of Delaware
37 Map of Georgia 37 A chart of the West Indies 50 Map of New Hampshire 40 Map
of North Carolina 37 Map of Germany 50 Map of the seat of war in France 25 Map
of France divided into departments 40 Map of Switzerland 12 Map of Italy,
Sicily and Sardinia 37 Map of Spain and Portugal 37 Map of Turkey in Europe and
Hungary 25 Map of Ireland 25 Map of Poland 25 Map of Russia 25 Map of scripture
geography 75 Map of the world 50 Chart of the world 50 Map of Europe 25 Map of
Asia 25 Map of Africa 25 Map of South America 25 Map of Cooke's discoveries 18
Map of countries round the north pole 12 Map of Sweden, Denmark and Norway 25
Map of the seven United Provinces 37 1/^ Map of the Austrian, French, and Dutch
Netherlands 37
PRINTS.
Falling out 25 Swing swang 25 Favorite cat 25
FINIS.

