THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COMPANY OF PRINTERS, OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, Franklin's-Head, No. 36,
Chesnut-Street, South Side. 1794.

THE CONSTITUTION.
ASSURED that the interests of every profession, depend, in a high degree, on
the union and cooperation of its members; impressed with the necessity of
associating for the purpose of securing those advantages, which are at present
attached to the Printing Business, as well as for the purpose of extending
them; and persuaded that such association will conduce to insure the harmony
and good fellowship of those by whom it is composed; We, the subscribers,
Printers of the City of Philadelphia, do hereby constitute ourselves a society,
under the name of the COMPANY OF PHILADELPHIA PRINTERS.

ARTICLE I.
THE Company shall be formed of such Printers of the city and liberties, as are
present at the adoption of this constitution; of such as shall join the Company
within one month subsequent to said adoption, and of such as shall be hereafter
elected in conformity to the third article.

ARTICLE II.
EVERY person previously to his being considered a member, shall subscribe the
Constitution, and by such subscription solemnly engage to comply with the
articles thereof, as well as such regulations as may be made under the same.

ARTICLE III.
A PRINTER may become a candidate for admission into the Company, either on
application by letter, or on the nomination of a member; in either case his
name shall be submitted to the Company at one regular meeting, and be balloted
for at the next regular meeting; should, however, an unanimous voice be
expressed for proceeding to an immediate election, all delay shall thereby be
suspended. If the votes of two-thirds of the members present, be in his favor,
he shall be elected a member.

ARTICLE IV.
A MEMBER on admission shall pay the sum of two dollars, and the sum of one
dollar annually, afterward, during his membership.

ARTICLE V.
THERE shall be four regular meetings in every year, viz. on the second Tuesday
of January, April, July, and October, and on such other days as the Company
shall fix by adjournment* or as shall be fixed by the said meetings.

ARTICLE VI.
SIX members shall be sufficient to proceed to business.

ARTICLE VII.
THERE shall be chosen by ballot, on the second Tuesday of January in every
year, a President, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and a committee of three members,
who shall be called the Committee of Enquiry.

ARTICLE VIII.
SHOULD any vacancies occur in said offices, they shall be supplied at the next
regular meeting.

ARTICLE IX.
IT shall be the duty of the President, or in his absence, of a Chairman, to
preside at all meetings; to preserve order among the members; to call a special
meeting when he sees it expedient; or at the request of three members, to sign
orders on the treasurer, whenever the Company shall so direct; and in case the
members are equally divided on any question to have a casting vote. On the
death, resignation, or absence from the city, of the President, such of his
duties, as are necessary to be exercised between the meetings of the Company,
shall devolve on the Secretary.

ARTICLE X.
IT shall be the duty of the secretary, under the direction of the President or
Chairman, to keep a fair statement of the proceedings of the Company. In the
absence of the Secretary, a Secretary pro tempore shall be chosen.

ARTICLE XI.
IT shall be the duty of the Treasurer, to receive such sums of money as shall
accrue to the Company; to pay the same on the order of the Pesident or
Chairman, and to keep a fair statement of the funds of the Company, subject to
the inspection of any member.

ARTICLE XII.
IT shall be the duty of the Committee of Enquiry, to obtain all information in
their power, respecting the adherence to, or violation of this Constitution,
and the resolutions adopted in pursuance thereof, by the members of the
Company; and to obtain information of the state of the Printing Business, in
reference to Printers not members, and to report the same to the Company.

ARTICLE XIII.
A MOTION made shall be addressed to the President, which, when seconded, shall
be submitted by the President to the consideration of the Company. The question
shall then be put, and be decided by a majority of votes.

ARTICLE XIV.
WHEN the Company are organized, they shall have power to regulate the prices
at which its members shall execute printing work; to determine the terms of
employing journeymen; to fix penalties for the violation of their regulations;
and, in general to adopt such rules as may be considered conducive to the
prosperity of the printing business.

ARTICLE XV.
ANY member may withdraw from the Company, by removal from the city; by a
relinquishment of the Printing business; or, by signifying his disposition
thereto at a regular meeting: provided, that, in the last instance, he do not
cease to be a member until the next regular meeting; and also, provided that on
such secession he place in the hands of the treasurer, the sum of ten pounds,
for the use of the Company: should, however, two thirds of the members present
dispense with the payment of this sum, it shall not be demanded.

ARTICLE XVI.
ANY proposition of amendment to this Constitution, shall be made at a regular
meeting, and not be brought to decission until the next regular meeting;
previously to which, notice shall be given to the members by the secretary,
that it is proposed to alter the Constitution.

ARTICLE XVII.
A MEMBER may be expelled for misconduct by a majority of the Company, provided
that such expulsion be made at a regular meeting, and that such meeting be not
the one at which it is proposed to expel him.

ARTICLE XVIII.
ON the adoption of this Constitution, the Company shall proceed to the choice
of officers, who shall hold their appointments until the day fixed upon for the
annual election of officers.

Adopted, Sept. 11, 1794.
NAMES.
W. YOUNG, ROBERT COCHRAN, RICHARD FOLWELL, SAMUEL H. SMITH, WILLIAM GIBBONS,
HOFF AND DERRICK, JACOB JOHNSON, WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, MORDECAI JONES.

