TWO SERMONS VIZ. I. The present State of Europe compared with Ancient
Prophecies; PREACHED ON THE FAST DAY IN 1794; WITH A PREFACE, CONTAINING THE
REASONS FOR THE AUTHER'S LEAVING ENGLAND. II. The Use of Christianity,
especially in difficult Times; BEING THE AUTHER'S FAREWELL DISCOURSE TO HIS
CONGREGATION AT HACKNEY.


By JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, L.L.D. F.R.S. etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. MDCCXCIV.

The present State of Europe compared with Ancient Propheciecs; A SERMON,
PREACHED AT THE GRAVEL PIT MEETING IN HACKNEY, FEBRUARY 28, 1794, Being the Day
appointed for a General Fast. WITH A PREFACE CONTAINING The Reasons for the
Author's leaving England. THE FOURTH EDITION.

B. Quo fugis? Expecta. Liceat condiscere causas
Dissidii. Tu nostra, puer, nisi ^allor amabas
Pascua.
P. Parce, Parens, damnare tuum. -- Tibi laetior annis
Tunc animus fuerat. Nunc intractabilis, asper.
Petrarch on taking leave of his patron, the Cardinal Colonna. Nos patriae
fines, nos dulcia linquimus arva.
Virgil PREFACE.
THIS discourse, and those on the Evidences of Divine Revelation, which will be
published about the same time, being the last of my labors in this country, I
hope my friends, and the public, will indulge me while I give the reason of
their being the last, in consequence of my having at length, after much
hesitation, and and now with reluctance, come to a resolution to leave this
kingdom.

After the riots in Birmingham, it was the expectation, and evidently the wish,
of many persons, that I should immediately fly to France, or America. But I had
no conscioussness of guilt to induce me to fly my country If, instead of flying
from lawless violence, I had been flying from public justice, I could not have
been pursued with more rancour, nor could my friends have been more anxious for
my safty. One man, who happened to see me on horseback on one of the nights in
which I escaped from Birmingham, expressed his regret that he had not taken me.
expecting probably some considerable reward, when, as he said, it was so easy
for him to have done it. My friends earnestly advised me to disguise myself as
I was going to London. But all that was done in that way was taking a place for
me in the mail coach, which I entered at Worcester, in another name than my
own. However, the friend who had the courage to receive me in London had
thought it necessary to provide a dress that should disguise me, and also a
method of making my escape, in case the house should have been attacked on my
account; and for some time my friends would not suffer me to appear in the
streets.
On the contrary, I came directly to London, and instantly, by means of my
friend Mr. Russel, signified to the king's ministers, that I was there, and
ready, if they thought proper, to be interrogated on the subject of the riot.
But no notice was taken of the message.

Ill treated as I thought I had been, not merely by the populace of Birmingham,
for they were the mere tools of their superiors, but by the country in general,
which evidently exulted in our sufferings, and afterward by the
representatives of the nation, who refused to inquire into the cause of them, I
own I was not without deliberating upon the subject of emigration; and several
flattering proposals were made me, especially from France, which was then at
peace within itself, and with all the world; and I was at one time much
inclined to go thither, on account of its nearness to England, the
agreeableness of its climate, and my having many friends there.

But I likewise considered that, If I went thither, I should have no employment
of the kind to which I had been accustomed; and the season of active life not
being, according to the course of nature, quite over, I wished to make as much
use of it as I could. I therefore determined to continue in England, exposed as
I was not only to unbounded obloquy and insult, but to every kind of outrage;
and after my invitation to succeed my friend Dr Price, I had no hesitation
about it. Accordingly I took up my residence where I now am, though so
prevalent was the idea of my insecurity, that I was not able to take the house
in my own name; and when a friend of mine took it in his, it was with much
difficulty that, after some time, the landlord was prevailed upon to transfer
the lease to me. He expressed his apprehensions, not only of the house that I
occupied being demolished, but also a capital house in which he himself
resides, at the distance of no less than twenty miles from London, whether he
supposed the rioters would go next, merely for suffering me to live in a house
of his.

But even this does not give such an idea of the danger that not only myself,
but every person, and every thing, that had the slightest connection with me,
were supposed to be in, as the following. The managers of one of the principal
charities among the Dissenters applied to me to preach their annual sermon, and
I had consented. But the treasurer, a man of fortune, who knew nothing more of
me than my name, was so much alarmed as it, that he declared he could not
sleep. I therefore, to his great relief, declined preaching at all.

When it was known that I was settled where I now am, several of my friends,
who lived near me, were seriously advised to remove their papers, and other
most valuable effects, to some place of greater safety in London. On the 14th
of July, 1792, it was taken for granted by many of the neighbors, that my
house was to come down, just as at Birmingham the year before. When the Hackney
association was formed, several servants in the neighborhood actually removed
their goods; and when there was some political meeting at the house of Mr.
Breillat, though about two miles from my house, a woman whose daughter was
servant in the house contiguous to mine, came to her mistress, to entreat that
she might be out of the way; and it was not without much difficulty that she
was, pacified, and prevailed upon to let her continue in the house, her
mistress saying that she was as safe as herself.

On several other occasions the neighborhood has been greatly alarmed on
account of my being so near them. Nor was this without apparent reason. I could
name a person, and to appearance a reputable tradesman, who, in the company of
his friends, and in the hearing of one of my late congregation at Birmingham,
but without knowing him to be such, declared that, in case of any disturbance,
they would immediately come to Hackney, evidently for the purpose of mischief.
In this state of things, it is not to be wondered at, that of many servants who
were recommended to me, and some that were actually hired, very few could, for
a long time, be prevailed upon to live with me.

These facts not only show how general was the idea of my particular insecurity
in this country; but what is of much more consequence, and highly interesting
to the country at large, an idea of the general disposition to rioting and
violence that prevails in it, and that the Dissenters are the objects of it.
Mr. Pit very justly observed, in his speech on the subject of the riots at
Birmingham, that it was "the effervescence of the public mind." Indeed the
effervescible matter has existed in this country every since the civil wars in
the time of Charles I. and it was particularly apparent in the reign of Queen
Ann. But the power of government under the former princes of the House of
Hanover prevented its doing any mischief. The late events show that this power
is no longer exerted as it used to be, but that, on the contrary, there
prevails an idea, well or ill founded, that tumultuary proceedings against
Diffenters will not receive any effectual discouragement. After what has taken
place with respect to Birmingham, all idea of much hazard for insulting and
abusing the Dissenters is entirely vanished; whereas the disposition to injure
the Catholics was effectually checked by the proceedings of the year 1780. From
that time they they have been safe, and I rejoice in it. But from the year
1791, the Diffenters have been more exposed to insult and outrage than over.

Having fixed myself at Clapton; unhinged as I had been, and having lost the
labor of several years; yet flattering myself that I should end my days here,
I took a long lease of my house, and expended a considerable sum in improving
it. I also determined, with the assistance of my friends, to resume my
philosophical and other pursuits; and after an interruption amounting to about
two years, it was with a pleasure that I cannot describe, that I entered my new
laboratory, and began the most common preparatory processes, with a view to
some original inquiries. With what success I have labored, the public has
already in some measure seen, and may see more hereafter.

But though I did not choose (notwithstanding I found myself exposed to
continual insult) to leave my native country, I found it necessary to provide
for my sons elsewhere. My eldest son was settled in a business, which promised
to be very advantageous, at Manchester; but his partner, though a man of
liberality himself, informed him, on perceiving the general prevalence of the
spirit which produced the riots in Birmingham, that, owing to his relationship
to me, he was under the necessity of proposing a separation, which accordingly
took place.

On this he had an invitation to join another connection, in a business in which
the spirit of party could not have much affected him; but he declined it. And
after he had been present at the assizes at Warwick, he conceived such an idea
of this country, that I do not believe that any proposal, however advantageous,
would have induced him to continue in it; so much was he affected on perceiving
his father treated as I had been.

Determining to go to America, where he had no prospect but that of being a
farmer, he wished to spend a short time with a person who has greatly
distinguished himself in that way, and one who from his own general principles,
and his friendship for myself, would have given him the best advice and
assistance in his power. He, however, declined it, and acknowledged some time
after, that had it been known, as it must have been, to his landlord, that he
had a son of mine with him, he feared he should have been turned out of his
farm.

My second son who was present both at the riot, and the assizes, felt more
indignation still, and willingly listened to a proposal to settle in France;
and there his reception was but too slattering. However, on the breaking out of
the war with this country, all mercantile prospects being suspended, he wished
to go to America. There his eldest and youngest brother have joined him, and
they are now looking out for a settlement, having as yet no fixed views.

The necessity I was under of sending my sons out of this country, was my
principal inducement to send the little property that I had out of it too; so
that I had nothing in England besides my library, apparatus, and household
goods. By this, I felt myself greatly relieved, it being of little consequence
where a man already turned sixty ends his days. Whatever good or evil I have
been capable of, is now chiefly done; and I trust that the same consciousness
of integrity, which has supported me hitherto, will carry me through any thing
that may yet be reserved for me. Seeing, however, no great prospect of doing
much good, or having much enjoyment, here, I am now preparing to follow my
sons; hoping to be of some use to them in their present unsettled state, and
that Providence may yet, advancing in years as I am, find me some sphere of
usefulness along with them.

As to the great odium that I have incurred, the charge of sedition, or my
being an enemy to the constitution or peace of my country, is a mere pretense
for it; though it has been so much urged, that it is now generally believed,
and all attempts to undeceive the public with respect to it avail nothing at
all. The whole course of my studies, from early life, shows how little politics
of any kind have been my object. Indeed to have written so much as I have in
theology, and to have done so much in experimental philosophy, and at the same
time to have had my mind occupied, as it is supposed to have been, with
factious politics, I must have had faculties more than human. Let any person
only cast his eye over the long list of my publications, and he will see that
they relate almost wholly to theology, philosophy, or general literature.

I did, however, when I was a younger man, and before it was in my power to
give much attention to philosophical pursuits, write a small anonymous
political pamphlet, on the State of Liberty in this Country, about the time of
Mr Wilkes's election for Middlesex, which gained me the acquaintance, and I may
say the friendship, of Sir George Savile, and which I had the happiness to
enjoy as long as he lived.

At the request also of Dr. Franklin and Dr. Fothergill, I wrote an address to
the Dissenters on the subject of the approaching rupture with America, a
pamphlet which Sir George Savile, and my other friends, circulated in great
numbers, and it was thought with some effect.

After this I entirely ceased to write any thing on the subject of politics,
except as far as the business of the Test Act, and of Civil Establishments of
Religion, had a connection with politics. And though, at the recommendation of
Doctor Price, I was presently after this taken into the family of the Marquis
of Lansdowne, and I entered into almost all his views, as thinking them just
and liberal. I never wrote a single political pamphler, or even a paragraph in
a newspaper, all the time that I was with him, which was seven years.

I never preached a political sermon in my life; unless such as, I believe all
Dissenters usually preach on the fifth of November, in favor of civil and
religious liberty, may be said to be political. And on these occasions, I am
confident, that I never advanced any sentiment but such as, till of late years,
would have tended to recommend, rather than render me obnoxious, to these who
direct the administration of this country. And the doctrines which I adopted
when young, and which were even popular then (except with the clergy, who were
at that time generally disaffected to the family on the throne) I cannot
abandon, merely because the times are so changed, that they are now become
unpopular, and the expression and communication of them hazardous.

Father, though I by no means disapprove of societies for political
information, such as are now every where discountenanced, and generally
suppressed, I never was a member of any of them; nor, indeed, did I ever attend
any public meeting, if I could decently avoid it, owing to habits acquired in
studious and retired life.

From a mistake of my talents and disposition, I was invited by many of the
departments in France, to represent them in the present National Convention,
after I had been made a citizen of France, on account of my being considered as
one who had been persecuted for my attachment to the cause of liberty here. But
though the invitation was repeated with the most flattering importunity, I
never hesitated about declining it.

I can farther say with respect to politics, concerning which I believe every
Englishman has some opinion or other (and at present, owing to the peculiar
nature of the present war, it is almost the only topic of general conversation)
that, except in company, I hardly ever think of the subject, my reading,
meditation, and writing, being almost wholly engrossed by theology, and
philosophy; and of late, as for many years before the riots in Birmingham, I
have spent a very great proportion of my time, as my friends well know, in my
laboratory.

If, then, my real crime has not been sedition, or treason, what has it been?
For every effect must have some adequate cause, and therefore the odium that I
have incurred must have been owing to something in my declared sentiments, or
conduct, that has exposed me to it. In my opinion, it cannot have been any
thing but my open hostility to the doctrines of the established church, and
more especially to all civil establishments of religion whatever. This has
brought upon me the implacable resentment of the great body of the clergy; and
they have found other methods of opposing me besides argument, and that use of
the press which is equally open to us all. They have also found an able ally
and champion in Mr Burke, who (without any provocation except that of answering
his book on the French Revolution) has taken several opportunities of
inveighing against me, in a place where he knows I cannot reply to him, and
from which he also knows that his accusation will reach every corner of the
country, and consequently thousands of persons who will never read any writings
of mine Mr. Burke having said in the House of Commons, that I was made a
citizen of France on account of my declared hostility to the constitution of
this country, I, in the public papers, denied the charge, and called upon him
for the proofs of it. As he made no reply, I said, in the preface to my Fast
Sermon of the last year, p.9, that it sufficiently appeared that he had neither
ability to maintain his charge, nor virtue to retract it. A year more of
silence on his part having now elapsed, this is become more evident than before.
They have had another, and still more effectual vehicle of their abuse in what
are called the treasury newspapers, and other popular publications.

By these and other means, the same party spirit which was the cause of the
riots in Birmingham, has been increasing ever since, especially in that
neighborhood. A remarkable instance of this may be seen in a Letter addressed,
but not sent, to me from Mr. Foley, rector of Stourbridge, who acknowledges the
satisfaction that he and his brethren have received from one of the grossest
and coarsest pieces of abuse of me that has yet appeared, which, as a curious
specimen of the kind, I inserted in the Appendix of my Appeal, and in which I
am represented as no better than Guy Fawkes, or the devil himself. This very
Christian divine recommends to the members of the established church to decline
all commercial dealings with the Dissenters, as an effectual method of
exterminating them. This method has been actually adopted in many parts of
England. Also great numbers of the best farmers and artizans in England have
been dismissed because they would not go to the established church. Defoe's
Shortest Way with the Dissenters A tract written in a grave ironical style,
advising to hang them all.
would have taught the friends of the church a more effectual method still. And
yet this Mr. Foley, whom I never saw, and who could not have had any particular
cause of enmity to me, had, like Mr. Madan of Birmingham, a character for
liberality. What, then, have we to expect from others, when we find so much
bigotry and rancour in such men as these?

Many times, by the encouragement of persons from whom better things might have
been expected, I have been burned in effigy along with Mr. Pain; and
numberless insulting and threatening letters have been sent to me from all
parts of the kingdom. In one of these I was threatened with being burned alive
before a slow fire.
It is not possible for any man to have conducted himself more peaceably than I
have done all the time that I have lived at Clapton, yet it has not exempted me
not only from the worst suspicions, but very gross insults. A very friendly and
innocent club, which I found in the place, has been considered as Jacobine
chiefly on my account; and at one time there was cause of apprehension that I
should have been brought into danger for lending one of Mr. Paine's books. But
with some difficulty the neighborhood was satisfied that I was innocent.

As nothing had been paid to me on account of damages in the riot, when I
published the second part of my Appeal to the public on the subject, it may be
proper to say, that it was paid some time in the beginning of the year 1793,
with interest only from the first of January of the same year, though the
injury was received in July, 1791; when equity evidently required, that it
ought to have been allowed from the time of the riot, especially as, in all the
cases, the allowance was far short of the loss. In my case of it fell short, as
I have shown, not less than two thousand pounds. And the losses sustained by
the other sufferers far exceeded mine. Public justice also required that, if
the forms of law, local enmity, or any other cause, had prevented our receiving
full indemnification, it should have been made up to us from the public
treasury; the great end of all civil government being protection from violence,
or an indemnification for it. Whatever we might in equity claim, the country
owes us, and, if it be just, will some time or other pay, and with interest.

I would farther observe, that since, in a variety of cases, money is allowed
where the injury is not of a pecuniary nature, merely because no other
compensation can be given, the same should have been done with respect to me,
on account of the destruction of my manuscripts, the interruption of my
pursuits, the loss of a pleasing and advantageous situation, etc. etc. and had
the injury been sustained by a clergyman, he would, I doubt not, have claimed,
and been allowed, very large damages on this account. So far, however, was
there from being any idea of the kind in my favor, that my counsel advised me
to make no mention of my manuscript Lectures on the Constitution and Laws of
England, a work about as large as that of Blackstone (as may be seen by the
syllabus of the particular lectures, sixty-three in all, published in the first
edition of my Essay on a Course of liberal Education for civil and active Life)
because it would be taken for granted that they were of a seditious nature, and
would therefore have been of disservice to me with the jury. Accordingly they
were, in the account of my losses, included in the article of so much paper.
After these losses, had I had nothing but the justice of my country to look to,
I must have sunk under the burden, incapable of any farther exertions. It was
the seasonable generosity of my friends that prevented this, and put it in my
power, though with the unavoidable loss of near two years, to resume my former
pursuits.

A farther proof of the excessive bigotry of this country is, that, though the
clergy of Birmingham

(...) I, however, foreseen what I am now witness to, I certainly should not
have made any attempt to replace my library or apparatus, and I soon repented
of having done it. But this being done, I was willing to make some use of both
before another interruption of my pursuits. I began to philosophize, and make
experiments, rather late in life, being near forty, for want of the necessary
means of doing any thing in this way; and my pursuits have been much
interrupted by removals( never indeed chosen by himself, but rendered necessary
by circumstances) and my time being now short, I hoped to have had no occasion
for more than one, and that a final, remove. But the circumstances above
mentioned have induced me, though with great and sincere regret, to undertake
another, and to a greater distance than any that I have hitherto made.

I profess not to be unmoved by the aspect of things exhibited in this
discourse. But notwithstanding this, I should willingly have awaited my fate in
my native country, whatever it had been, if I had not had sons in America, and
if I did not think that a field of public usefulness, which is evidently
closing upon me here, might open to more advantage there.

I also own that I am not unaffected by such unexampled punishments as those of
Mr. Muir and my friend M. Palmer, for offenses, which, if, in the eye of
reason, they be any at all, are slight, and very insufficiently proved; a
measure so subversive of that freedom of speaking and acting, which has
hitherto been the great pride of Britons. But the sentence of Mr. Winterbotham,
for delivering from the pulpit what I am persuaded he never did deliver, and
which, similar evidence might have drawn upon myself, or any other dissenting
minister, who was an object of general dislike, has something in it still more
alarming. I trust that the friends of liberty, especially among the Dissenters,
will not fail to do every thing in their power to make Mr. Winterbotham's
consinement, and also the sufferings of Mr Palmer and his companions, as easy
to them as possible. Having been assisted in a season of persecution, myself, I
should be very ill deserving of the favors I have received, if I was not
particularly desirous of recommending such cases as their to general
consideration. Here difference in religious sentiment is least of all to be
attended to. On the contrary, let those who in this respect differ the most
from Mr. Winterbotham, which is my own case, exert themselves the most in his
favor. When men of unquestionable integrity and piety suffer in consequence of
acting (as such persons always will do) from a principle of conscience, they
must command the respect even of their enemies, if they also act from
principle, though they be thereby led to proceed in an opposite direction.

The case of men of education and reslection ( and who act from the best
intentions with respect to the community) committing what only state policy
requires to be considered as crimes, but which are allowed on all hands to
imply no moral turpitude, so as to render them unsit for heaven and happiness
hereafter, is not to be confounded with that of common felons. There was
nothing in the conduct of Louis XIV. and his ministers, that appeared so
shocking, so contrary to all ideas of justice, humanity and decency, and that
has contributed more to render their memory execrated, than sending such men as
Mr. Marolles, and other eminent protestants, who are now revered as saints and
martyrs, to the galleys, along with the vilest miscreants. Compared with this,
the punishment of death would be mercy. I trust that, in time, the Scots in
general will think these measures a disgrace to their country.


But I trust that conscious innocence would support me as it does him, under
whatever prejudiced and and violent men might do to me, as well as say of me.
But I see no occasion to expose myself to danger without any prospect of doing
good, or to continue any longer in a country in which I am so unjustly become
the object of general dislike, and not retire to another, where I have reason
to think I shall be better received. And I trust that the same good Providence
which has attended me hitherto, and made me happy in my attended and bless me
in what may still be before me. In all events, The will of God be done.

I cannot refrain from repeating again, that I leave my native country with
real regret, never expecting to find any where else society so suited to my
disposition and habits, such friends as I have here (whose attachment has been
more than a balance to all the abuse I have met with from others) and
especially to replace one particular Christian friend, in whose absence I
shall, for some time at least, find all the world a blank. Still less can I
expect to resume my favorite pursuits, with any thing like the advantages I
enjoy here. In leaving this country I also abandon a source of maintenance,
which I can but ill bear to lose. I can, however truly say, that I leave it
without any resentment, or ill will. On the contrary, I sincerely wish my
countrymen all happiness; and when the time for reflection (which my absence
may accelerate) shall come, my countrymen, I am confident, will do me more
justice. They will be convinced that every suspicion they have been led to
entertain to my disadvantage has been ill founded, and that I have even some
claim to their gratitude and esteem. In this case, I shall look with
satisfaction to the time when, if my life be prolonged, I may visit my friends
in this country; and perhaps I may, notwithstanding my removal for the present,
find a grave (as I believe is naturally the wish of every man) in the land that
gave me birth.

FAST SERMON,
FEBRUARY 28, 1794.
REPENT YE, FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND! Matt. iii.2.
THIS was the great burden of the preaching of both John the Baptist and of our
Savior. But as that kingdom of heaven, the approach of which they announced,
and which, by our Savior's direction, is the subject of our daily prayers, is
not yet come, but much nearer than it was in their time, there must be a
greater propriety in urging this exhortation at present, than there has ever
yet been. It is nothing but repentance that can prepare sinful men (and all men
are more or less sinners) to derive any advantage from this kingdom, in which
Christ and the saints shall bear rule; that new state of the heavens and of the
earth, in which righteousness only will dwell. And being a second time called
upon by our rulers to humble ourselves before God, on account of the calamities
we already feel, and those that we have reason to fear, and repentance being
the only means of averting his anger, and procuring a cessation, or mitigation,
of his heavy judgments, I shall take this opportunity of urging it, from that
very critical and truly alarming situation, in which almost the whole of Europe
now finds itself, and this country of ours, as having most at stake, perhaps
more than any other.

If we can learn any thing concerning what is before us, from the language of
prophecy, great calamities,such as the world has never yet experienced, will
precede that happy state of things, in which the kingdoms of this world will
become the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ and these calamities will chiefly
affect those nations which have been the seat of the great antichristian power;
or, as all Protestants, and I believe justly, suppose, have been subject to the sea of Rome. And it appears to me highly probable, as I hinted in my last
discourse on this occastion, that the present disturbances in Europe are the
beginning of those very calamitous times. I therefore think there is a call for
unusual seriousness, and attention to the course of Divine Providence, that
when the judgments of God are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants thereof may
learn righteousness, so as to be prepared for whatever events the now rapid
wheels of time may disclose. Let us then, my brethern, make a serious pause.
Let us look back to the ancient prophecies, and compare them with the present
slate of things around us, and let us then look to ourselves, to our own
sentiments and conduct, that we may feel and act as our peculiar circumstances
require.

The future happy slate of the world, when the Jews shall be restored to their
own country, and be at the head of all the nations of the earth, was suit
distinctly mentioned by Isaiah, and other prophets who were nearly cotemporary
with him; but it was first denominated the kingdom of heaven, and announced as
to be administered by the Son of Man, or the Messiah, by Daniel. It was,
however, by other prophets, given to a descendant of David. All Christians
consider Jesus as this descendant of David, or the promised Messiah. The
mistake which the Jews were under, arose from their wholly overlooking the
suffering state of the Messiah, and imagining that his first coming would be
that mentioned by Daniel, in the clouds of heaven; and consequently that this
kingdom would commence on his first appearance.

Jesus, knowing himself to be the Messiah, never denied that, at a proper time,
he would appear as a king; nor could there have been a^ that time any
uncertainty about the meaning of the term king. When Pilate asked Jesus if he
was a king, he acknowledged it, and added that he was sent to bear witness to
that, as well as to other truths; though, to obivate the jealousy of Pilate,
and the Roman government, he said that his kingdom was not of this world; so
that it did not interfere with the governments which then existed in the world,
being that kingdom of heaven which was to take place hereafter, and to be
exercised upon maxims very different from those of the then existing kingdoms.

Jesus also said that, when he should reign, his apostles would reign with him,
and that they should 'sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.' Paul also said, that 'the saints shall judge the world.' And it is
remarkable that, in the original prophecy of Daniel, the administration of this
kingdom of heaven is not said to be confined to one person, but to be extended
to many, Dan. vii. 18. The saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and
possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever; ver.27. And the kingdom,
and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all dominion shall serve, and obey him, or rather,
'obey it.'

That this will be a proper kingdom, though a kingdom of righteousness, the
object of which will be the happiness of the subjects of it, is farther evident
from the other kingdoms which are to be overthrown in order to make way for it.
For had it been that purely spiritual kingdom which some suppose, what occasion
was there for the destruction of the other kingdoms; since they would not have
interfered with it, but might have subsisted at the same time?

In the first vision of Nebuchadnezzar, interpreted by Daniel, this future,
kingdom of heaven is represented by 'a little stone, cut out of a mountain
without hands,' which smote the image representing the preceding kingdoms, Dan.
ii. 34. and 'brake it to pieces,' when itself 'became a great mountain, filling
the whole earth.' In the interpretation of this vision, ver. 44, it is said, In
the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall
never be destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it
shall break in pieces, and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever; evidently in the place of the other kingdoms. It is, therefore, an
institution adapted to answer the purpose of them, but in a much better manner.

This kingdom, however, a kingdom of truth and righteousness, will not be
established without the greatest convulsions, and the violent overthrow of
other kingdoms. Every description, figurative or otherwise, of this great
revolution, clearly implies violence, and consequently great calamity. The
little stone smiling the image, and breaking it in pieces, is far from giving
an idea of a peaceable revolution, but one that will be effected with great
violence, and in a short time. The following language is peculiarly emphatical.
Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,(all the
materials of which the image consisted) broken to pieces together, and became
as the chaff of the summer floor, and the wind carried them away, and no place
was found for them; and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain,
and filled the whole earth. In the interpretation it is said, ver. 44. that
this new kingdom shall break in pieces, and consume all the other kingdom.

The same awful conclusion may be drawn from the language used in the
corresponding vision of Daniel himself, in the first year of Belshazzar, in
which the four great empires, which in Nebuchadnezzar's dream had been
represented by the four metals, of which the image that he saw consisted, are
represented by four beasts. and the last of them is said (Dan. vii. 11.)not to
die a natural death, but to be stain, and moreover, his body destroyed, and
given to the burning flame. As, in the former vision, the ten kingdoms, into
which the last, or the Roman empire was to be divided, were represented by the
ten toes of the image; in this vision of Daniel they are represented by the ten
horns of the last beast. These are said to be ten kingdoms, or thrones, and
these thrones are said to be cast down, Dan. vii. 9. clearly implying violence
in their dissolution.

In the language of prophecy, great, and especially sudden revolutions, in
kingdoms and states, are frequently represented by earthquakes; and also the
supreme powers on earth by the sun, moon, and stars in heaven. And, in
agreement with the preceding view, suggested by Daniel, the prophet Haggai, who
wrote after him, to comfort his countrymen in their low and distressed
circumstances, and gloomy prospects, when they were erecting a poor and
contemptible temple, compared with that of Solomon, assures them, that the
glory of the latter house, (meaning, I am persuaded, not the house they were
then building, for that was taken down by Herod; nor yet that of Herod, but the
last house, the glorious temple described by Ezekiel, as to be built after the
return of the Jews to their own country) should be greater than that of the
former house built by Solomon. Haggai describes the great revolution that is to
precede it in the following manner. Hagg. ii. 6. For thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the
earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all nations, and the
desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says
the Lord of Hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than that of
the former, says the Lord of Hosts; and in this place will I give peace, says
the Lord of Hosts. What can be this peace, but the future peaceful and happy
state of the world under the Messiah? and what can be this shaking of the
nations, that is to precede it, but great convulsions, and sudden revolutions,
such as we see now beginning to take place?

The last great power that is foretold, as to arise among the ten kingdoms into
which the Roman empire is to be divided, is represented by the little horn,
which is said to arise after the ten, signifying, I doubt not, the Papal power.
It is said, Dan. vii. 20, to have eyes, and a mouth that spoke very great
things, whose look was more stout than his fellows, which made war with the
saints, and prevailed against them, until the ancient of days came, and
judgment was given to the saints of the Most High, and the time came that the
saints possessed the kingdom. This power, in the interpretation of the vision,
is said to be one that should speak great words against the Most High, and to
wear out the saints of the Most High, and to think to change times and laws. It
is added, They shall be given into his hand until a time, and times, and the
dividing of time, the very period for the duration of the great antichristian
power in the Revelation.

When the termination of this last power is described, it is said, ver. 26, The
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to
destroy it unto the end, which clearly implies nothing of a peaceable nature,
but something exceedingly violent and calamitous.

This is, no doubt, the same awful period that is spoken of in the last chapter
of Daniel, chapter xii. ver. 1. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
prince which stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time
of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation, even to that same time;
and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake. For that the resurrection, at least in part, will take place at the
commencement of this great period, is agreeable to the uniform language of
scripture on the subject.

All the prophecies in the New Testament concerning the fall of antichrist, and
the commencement of the proper kingdom of heaven, and of Christ, exactly
correspond with those which I have quoted from the Old Testament. The second
coming of Christ is represented by the apostle Paul, 2 These. i. 7, as an event
exceedingly awful, and dreadful to the wicked. He will be revealed from heaven,
with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God.

That the great antichristian power is to be destroyed at this second coming of
Christ, and not properly before, and therefore that its final destruction will
be sudden, is evident from what the same apostle says afterward, 2 These. ii.
8. Then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, even
him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that
perish; characters sufficiently evident of the church of Rome.

The account that is given, in the book of Revelation, of the commencement of
the last great period, signified by the blowing of the seventh trumpet, when
the kingdoms of the earth are to become the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Rev. ii. 15, is immediately preceded by the third, and probably far the
greatest of the three woes, the first of which was occasioned by the conquests
of the Saracens, and the second by those of the Turks, as the order of the
events described under the preceding trumpets evidently implies. And the state
of things at this time is described in the following emphatical language of the
four and twenty elders, who are said, on this occasion, to fall on their faces,
and to worship God, Rev. xi. 17. We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, who
art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power
and have reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the
time of the dead that they must be judged, and that thou should give reward
to thy servants the prophets, and should destroy them that destroy the earth
On this subject I refer my readers to two sermons lately published by the Rev.
Elhanan Winchester, entitled The Three Woe Trumpets, deserving the serious
consideration of all Christians, who are attentive to the signs of the times.
.

We have here a wonderful concurrence of great events, and among these is the
anger of the nations, followed by the destruction of them that have destroyed
the earth. Now how has the earth been destroyed by the men who have destroyed
it, but by desolating wars, and the destruction that has thereby been made of
mankind? In like manner, then, may we conclude that those destructive powers
will themselves be destroyed, probably by one another, in those wars which the
apostle James says arise from men's lusts, the lust of ambition and revenge.
And when, my brethren, have we seen, or heard of, such anger and range in
nations, such violence in carrying on war, and such destruction of men, as at
this very time? It is thought that the last campaign only has destroyed many
more men than all the eight years of the American war, and probably more than
the long war before it; and from the increased armaments of the belligerent
powers, and their increasing animosity, it is probable that the approaching
campaign will be more bloody than the last.

What has more eminently contributed to destroy the earth, than the
antichristian and idolatrous ecclesiastical establishments of Christianity,
that have subsisted in these western parts of the world; many more persons
having been destroyed by Christians, as they have called themselves, than by
Heathens? And do we not see one, and one of the principal, of those
establishments already, and completely, destroyed?

A more highly wrought picture of the destruction and slaughter of men, that
will precede this glorious period in which 'God will take to himself his great
power and reign,' we find in the 19th chapter of the Revelation, which
describes the triumph of the saints on the occasion. After these things I heard
a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia, Salvation, and glory,
and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God; for true and right are his
judgments. For he has judged the great whose, which did corrupt the earth with
her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. That
this has a connection with the second coming of Christ, appears from what
immediately follows, ver. II. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse, and he that sat upon him was called faithful and true, and in
righteousness he shall judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame of fire,
and on his head were many crowns, and he had a name written which no man knew
but he himself. And he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and his name
is called THE WORD OF GOD. And the armies which were in heaven followed him
upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean; and out of his mouth
goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he shall
rule them with a rod of iron, and he treads the wine press of the fierceness
of the wrath of Almighty God. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh, a
name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

That there will be literally great slaughter of men on the occasion, is
clearly indicated in what follows, figurative and hyperbolical as the language
is, ver. 17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather
yourselves together, unto the supper of the great God, that ye may eat the
flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains; and the flesh of mighty men, and the
flesh of horses, and them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free
and bond, both small and great.

The same is evident from the account of the pouring out of the third vial,
Rev. xvi. 14, etc. And the third angel poured out his vial on the rivers and
fountains of water, and they became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters,
say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, who art, and wast, and shall be, because thou
have judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou
have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

That this great slaughter will be made on the destruction of the antichristian
power, called in this book the beast, supported by the kings of the earth, is
evident from the next verses, ver. 19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of
the earth, and their armies, gathered together, to make war against him that
sat on the horse, and against his army. And the beast was taken, and with him
the false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived
them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his
image. These were both cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.
And the remnant were stain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which
sword proceeded out of his mouth, and all the sowls were filled with their
flesh.

After this follows the description of the millenium, chap. xx. ver. 4. And I
saw thrones and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them; and I saw
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word
of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had
received his mark upon their forehead, or in their hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again
until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed
and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection. On such the second
death has no power, but they shall be priests of God, and of Christ, and they
shall reign with him a thousand years.

To me it appears not improbable, that several circumstances in our Savior's
prophecy concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and the desolation of Judea,
relate to this great and more distant period. For it was delivered in answer to
a question put to him by his disciples, which respected both the events, on the
idea of their being coincident. 'Tell us,' say they, Matt. xxiv. 3, When shall
these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of
the age? In answer to this, he says, first, as it is in Luke, whose account in
this case seems to be the most orderly and distinct of any, chap. xxi. ver. 9.
But when ye shall hear of wars, and commotions, be not terrified; for these
things must first come to pass, but the end is not by and by. Then said he unto
them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and great
earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and famines, and pestilences, and
fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from heaven. But before all
these they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up
to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for
my names sake.

I am the more inclined to think that some things in this prediction have this
farther reference, because in them Jesus expressly quotes the language of
Daniel recited above, which unquestionably has this reference; as when he says,
Mat. xxix. 20. There shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever shall be: And except those
days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved, but for the elects
sake those days shall be shortened.

It seems still more evident that this prediction admits of this
interpretation, from what follows, which exactly corresponds to the more
ancient prophecies. Mat. xxiv. 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those
days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken; which
are almost the very words of the prophet Haggai quoted above. And then shall
appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven. And then shall all the tribes of
the earth mourn. And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of
heaven, with power and great glory. And he shall send his angels with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect, from the four
winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

That this great tribulation was a distant event, and did not respect the Jews,
but the Gentiles, is probable from Jesus calling it, Luke xxi. 25, 'the
distress of nations,' or 'the nations,' i.e. 'Gentiles,' 'men's hearts,' he
subjoins, failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth. For the powers of heaven shall be shaken, that is, there
will be great convulsions, and violent revolutions, in kingdoms and states; And
then shall they see the (...) Man coming in clouds, with power and great glory.

That this tribulation is coincident with that which is to precede the
restoration of the Jews, is probable from his saying immediately before, ver.
24. Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, that is, till it shall come to be their turn to be
punished; the destruction of the Gentiles, who had oppressed the Jews,
commencing with the restoration of that highly favored nation.

Jesus farther says, Luke xxi. 22. These be the days of vengeance, that all the
things which are written may be fulfilled Now the only days of vengeance
particularly announced by the ancient prophets, to which Jesus here alludes,
relate to the judgments of God upon the Gentiles who had shown enmity to the
Jews, and especially in their opposition to their re-settlement in their own
country.

There is nothing more clear in the whole compass of prophecy, as I have shown
on another occasion, than that after the destined period for the dispersion and
calamities of the Jews, the heaviest of all the divine judgments will fall upon
those nations by whom they shall have been oppressed; and this will involve
almost all the nations of the world, but more especially those of these western
parts, which have been subject first to the Roman empire, and then to the sea
of Rome.

Moses says, Dent. xxx. 7. The Lord thy God will put all these curses (those
which were threatened to fall upon them) upon thine enemies, and upon them that
hate thee, and persecute thee. Isa. xliii. 25. I will contend with them that
contend with thee, and I will save thy children. And I will feed them that
oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own
blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy
Savior, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. Zeph. iii. 19. Behold at
that time I will undo all that afflict thee. Jer. xxx. 11. Though I make a full
end of all the nations whither I have scattered thee, yet I will not make a
full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure. Ezekiel, speaking of the
happy times that will take place on the restoration of the Jews, says, chap.
xxviiii. ver. 26. Yea they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed
judgments upon all those that despise them round about them, and they shall
know that I am Jehovah their God. Lastly, Zechariah says, chap. xii. ver. 9. It
shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations
that come against Jerusalem.

That there is to be a day of visitation for all the nations in this part of
the world (all of whom have distinguished themselves by their oppression and
massacre of the Jews) will now, I presume, be sufficiently apparent, if there
be any truth in prophecy. You will therefore naturally ask, whether there be
any ground for thinking, that those judgments are now about to take place; if
so, how long they will probably continue, and when will be the commencement of
the glorious and happy times that are to follow.

That those great troubles, so frequently mentioned in the ancient prophecies,
are now commencing, I do own I strongly suspect, as I intimated the last time
that I addressed you on this occasion; and the events of the last year have
contributed to strengthen that suspicion; the storm, however, may still blow
over for the present, and the great scene of calamity be reserved for some
future time, though I cannot think it will be deferred long.

As to the precise time when the scene of calamity will terminate, and the
proper kingdom of Christ will commence, he himself did not know, either before
his death and resurrection, or afterward. When he was questioned on the
subject, he expressly said, Mark xiii. 32, But of that day, and that hour,
knows no man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father. When, after his resurrection, the disciples asked him, saying, Acts i.
6, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? he
replied, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power. It is enough for us to know the certainty of these
great events, that our faith may not fail on the approach of the predicted
calamity, confident that it will have the happiest issue in God's own time. For
the same Being who foretold the evil which we shall see come to pass, has
likewise foretold the good that is to follow it.

That the second coming of Christ will be coincident with the commencement of
the millenium, or the future peaceable and happy state of the world (which,
according to all the prophecies, will take place after the restoration of the
Jews) is evident from what Peter said, in his address to the Jews, on the
occasion of his healing the lame man at the gate of the temple, Acts iii. 19.
Repent ye, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall
send Jesus Christ, who before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must
receive until the times of the restitution of all things, which God has spoken
by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. Now nothing is
more evident than that the only period that can be called the time of the
restitution of all things, or the paradisiacal and happy state of the world,
foretold by the ancient prophets, will follow the restoration of the Jews to
their own country. This, and nothing else, is the great burden of all ancient
prophecy.

That this will be a joyful event to the Jewish nation, when they will be
convinced, perhaps by his personal appearance among them, that he is their
promised Messiah, actually coming in the clouds of heaven, appears from what
our Savior himself says, Mat. xxi. 9. Luke xiii. 35. Verily I say unto you, ye
shall not see me until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord; the very cry at which the Scribes and Pharisees
were so much offended in the children, when Jesus entered Jerusalem. This very
cry would then be that of the whole nation.

But though our Savior could not fix the time of his second coming, or the
commencement of his proper kingdom, he sufficiently forewarned his disciples of
the signs of its approach, and of some circumstances that will immediately
precede it, to which it certainly behooves us to be attentive.

Before this great event the gospel is to be preached to all the world. Mat.
xxiv. 14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached through all the
world, for a witness to all nations, and then shall the end come. If by the
whole world, we mean the Roman empire, this was accomplished before the
destruction of Jerusalem, and therefore may refer to that event. But it may
have a farther reference, and now there is hardly any nation that has not had
an opportunity of having the gospel preached to them; and the late wonderful
extension of navigation, by which the whole of the habitable world has been
explored by Christians (though this was by no means the object of the
navigators) will, no doubt, be the means of carrying the knowledge of the
gospel to a greater extent than ever; and the troubles of Europe will greatly
contribute to the same end. Times of trouble make men serious. With these
serious impressions on their minds many will fly to distant countries, and
carry the knowledge of the gospel with them; and, it may be hoped, in greater
purity, and consequently more worthy of their acceptance, than it has hitherto
appeared to them.

Another preceding event, and of a more definite kind, is the great prevalence
of infidelity, Luke xviii.8. When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith in
the earth. Now the prevalence of infidelity of late years has been very
remarkable in all countries in which antichristian hierarchies have been
established. And certainly all civil establishments of Christianity, in which
power is claimed to prescribe articles of faith, to make laws to bind the
consciences of Christians, and inflict temporal punishments for the violation
of them, are properly antichristian. For, as Christians, we are commanded to
acknowledge no man master upon earth, since one is our master, even Christ.

Moreover, such absurd doctrines have been established by human authority, and
such horrid punishments have been inflicted upon men for obeying the dictates
of conscience, under all those hierarchies, protestant ones not excepted, that
the minds of men have revolted at them; and, shocked at such enormities, have
thrown off the belief and profession of Christianity altogether. This was long
ago the case in Italy, where the enormities of the court of Rome were the most
conspicuous; and many of the cardinals, and some of the popes themselves, are
well known to have been unbelivers.

That this has long been the case in France, is what no person acquainted with
that country the last fifty years will deny. It is now become more generally
known, because it has had a better opportunity of showing itself. That, in
similar circumstances, the same, or something approaching to it, would not
appear to be the case with us, is more than those who are acquainted with the
state of things in this respect will vouch for.

When I was myself in France in 1774, I saw sufficient reason to believe, that
hardly any person of eminence, in church or state, and especially in the least
degree eminent in philosophy, or literature, (whose opinions in all countries
are, sooner or later, adopted by others) were believers in Christianity; and no
person will suppose that there has been any change in favor of Christianity
the last twenty years. A person, I believe not living, and one of the best
informed men in the country, assured me, very gravely, that (paying me a
compliment) I was the first person he had ever, met with, of whose
understanding he had any opinion, who pretended to believe Christianity. To
this all the company assented. And not only were the philosophers, and other
leading men in France, at that time unbelievers in Christianity, or deists, but
atheists, denying the being of a God. Nay Voltaire himself, who was then
living, was considered by them as a weak-minded man, because, though an
unbeliever in revelation, he believed in a God.

When I asked these gentlemen what it was that appeared to them so incredible
in Christianity, that they rejected it without farther examination (for they
did not pretend to have employed much time on the subject) they mentioned the
doctrines of transubstantiation, and the trinity, as things too palpably absurd
to require any discussion. It is, without, doubt, the civil establishment of
such Christianity as this, at which the common sense of mankind will ever
revolt, that makes so many unbelievers of persons who will not take the trouble
to read the scriptures for themselves, or who have been so long put upon them.
These systems, and the blindness and obstinacy in the governing powers, in
rejecting every proposal for reforming the most palpable abuses, and the most
manifest oppressions, make unbelievers much faster than all rational Christians
can unmake them.

Nothing, however, can ever counteract the fatal influence of such corrupt
Christianity, as is supported by these hierarchies, which are also intolerbaly
expensive and oppressive, but the exhibition of rational Christianity, with its
proper evidence, by unitartian Christians. But these are yet so few, compared
with the bulk of Christians, who are trinitarians, that superficial observers,
as unbelieve's in general who judge by the great mass are, pay little regard to
their representations.

Happily, this infidelity is, in its turn, destroying those antichristian
establishments which gave birth to it; and and when this great revolution shall
be accomplished, genuine unadulterated Christianity, meeting with less
obstruction, will not fail to recommend and establish itself by its own
evidence, and become the religion of the whole world. True Christianity stands
in no need of the aid of civil power.

This was the idea of the great Sir Isaac Newton, as appears from the evidence
of the excellent Mr Whiston, in the following passage of his Essay on the
Revelation,2d edition, p.321. Sir Isaac Newton had a very sagacious conjecture,
which he told Dr. Clarke, from whom I received it, that the overbearing tyranny
and persecuting power of the antichristian party, which has so long corrupted
Christianity, and enslaved the Christian world, must be put a stop to, and
broken to pieces by the prevalence of infidelity, for some time, before
primitive Christianity could be restored; which seems to be the very means that
is now working in Europe, for the same good and great end of Providence.
Possibly he might think that our Savior's own words implied it: When the Son
of Man comes shall he find faith on the earth? Luke xviii.8. See Constitut.
Ap^^^. vi. 18; vii. view.32; or possibly he might think no other way so likely
to do it in human affairs: it being, I acknowledgeledge, too sadly evident,
that there is not at present religion enough in Christendom, to put a stop to
such antichristian tyranny and persecution, upon any genuine principles of
Christianity.

The concluding observation of Mr. Whiston appears to me to be very just. It
seems probable that no Christians, not even the freest, and boldest, would ever
have done what was necessary to be done, to the overturning of these corrupt
establishments of Christianity, and what unbelievers have lately done in France.

This great event of the late revolution in France appears to me, and many
others, to be not improbably the accomplishment of the following part of the
Revelation, chap. xi.3. And the same hour, there was a great earthquake, and
the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men (or
literally, names of men) seven thousand, and the remnant were affrighted, and
gave glory to God.

An earthquake, as I have observed, may signify a great convulsion, and
revolution, in states; and as the Papal dominions were divided into ten parts,
one of which, and one of the principal of them, was France, it is properly
called a tenth part of the city, or of the mystical Babylon. And if by names of
men, we understand their titles, such as those of the nobility, and other
hereditary distinctions, all of which are now abolished, the accomplishment of
the prediction will appear to be wonderfully exact. It is farther remarkable,
that this passage immediately precedes what I have quoted before concerning the
nations being angry, and the wrath of God being come, for the destruction of
those who have destroyed the earth.

It is no less remarkable, that the kings of France were those who gave the
Popes their temporalities, and the rank they now hold among the princes of the
world. And it is foretold, Rev. xvii. 16, that those kings who gave their power
and strength unto the beast, shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God has put it
in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree to give their kingdoms unto
the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

May we not hence conclude it to be highly probable, that what has taken place
in France will be done in other countries? But the total destruction of this
great antichristian power seems to be reserved for the second coming of Christ
in person, by the brightness of whose appearance, and not before, he is,
according to the apostle Paul, to be completely destroyed. And with this view,
as well as others, every Protestant Christian should say, 'Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.' In the mean time, let us attend to the solemn admonition in the
Revelation, xviii. 4. I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities That the opinion here advanced, concerning the danger of the civil
powers of Europe, in consequence of their connection with antichristian
ecclesiastical systems, has been long entertained by me, may appear from the
following extract from my History of the Corruptions of Christianity, vol. ii.
P. 484. It is nothing but the alliance of the kingdom of Christ with the
kingdoms of this world (an alliance which our Lord himself expressly
disclaimed) that supports the grossest corruptions of Christianity; and perhaps
we must wait for the fall of the civil powers before this most unnatural
alliance be broken. Calamitous, no doubt, will that time be. But what
convulsion in the political world ought to be subject of lamentation, if it be
attended with so desirable an event? May the kingdom of God, and of Christ,
(that which I conceive to be intended in the Lord's Prayer) truly and fully
come, though all the kingdoms of the world be removed in order to make way for
it.
.

As the second coming of Christ will be during the general prevalence of
insidelity, so it will be sudden, and most unexpected. This is the language of
our Savior himself, Mat. xxiv. 37. As the days of Noah were, so shall the
coming of the Son of Man be. For as in the days before the flood, they were
eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, unto the day that Noah
entered into the ark, and knew not till the flood came, and took them all away,
so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Luke xvii. 28. Likewise, also as
it was in the days of Lot. They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, he
rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall
it be when the Son of Man is revealed. The apostle Paul also says, 1 These. v.
2. Yourselves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in
the night. For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.

But sudden and unexpected as the coming of Christ will be, it will be most
conspicuous. Speaking of his return, he says, Mat. xxiv. 26. If they shall say
unto you, Behold he (i.e. the Messiah.) is in the desert, go not forth. Behold
he is in the secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning comes out
of the east, and shines even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the
Son of Man be. As the ascent of Jesus was conspicuous, and probably leisurely,
so will be his descent. While the disciples were viewing him as he ascended, we
read, Acts i. 10, two men stood by them in white apparel, who also said, Ye men
of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, who is taken
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven. Here is no figurative language, no ambiguous expression. Neither is
there any in what the apostle says concerning the resurrection of the virtuous
dead, which will take place at the coming of Christ, and which, in the
Revelation is called the first resurrection, 1 These. iv. 14. If we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also who sleep in Jesus shall God
bring with him. For this we say unto you, by the word of the Lord, that we who
are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall have no advantage over
those who are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead
in Christ shall rise first. Then we who are alive, and remain, shall be caught
up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall
we ever be with the Lord. Again he says, 1 Cor. xv. 51. We shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump. For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

The certainty of this great catastrophe should be a sufficient motive with all
Christians, who, as such, entertain no doubt with respect to the fact, to keep
it constantly in view, and to regulate their whole conduct with a view to it.
But if we apprehend it to be in a stricter sense of the word really near,
which, from the present aspect of things, I own I am inclined to think may be
the case, our attention is drawn to it in a most forcible manner. Did we really
expect to see this great event, viz. the coming of Christ in the clouds of
heaven, we should hardly think, or speak, of any thing else; and the present
commotions in the political world, extraordinary as they certainly are, would
appear as nothing in comparison with it. What would otherwise be great, would,
with respect to this, event seem exceedingly little, and insignificant.

What then, my brethren, is the practical inference that we should draw from
finding, or even suspecting, ourselves to be in this situation, the kingdom of
heaven being at hand, but to repent, and by a change of heart and of life to be
prepared for it; that when our Lord shall return, and take an account of his
servants, we may be found of him without spot and blameless, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming? 'Seeing,' as the apostle Peter says, we look for
these things, what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation
and godliness.

The aspect of things, it cannot be denied, is, in the highest degree,
alarming, making life, and every thing in it, peculiarly uncertain. What could
have been more unexpected than the events of any one of the last four years, at
the beginning of it? What a total revolution in the ideas, and conduct of a
whole nation! What a total subversion of principles, what reverses of fortune,
and what a waste of life! In how bloody and eventful a war are we engaged, how
inconsiderable in its beginning, how rapid and wide in its progress, and how
dark with respect to its termination! At first it resembled Elijah's cloud,
appearing no bigger than a man's hand; but now it covers, and darkens, the
whole European hemisphere!

Now, whatever we may think, as politicians (and with us every man will have
his own opinion, on a subject so interesting to us all) I would, in this place,
admonish you not to overlook the hand of God in the great scene that is now
opening upon us. Nothing can ever come to pass without his appointment, or
permission; and then, whatever be the views of men, we cannot doubt, but that
his are always wise, righteous, and good. Let us, therefore, exercise faith in
him, believing that though clouds and darkness are round about him,
righteousness and judgment are for ever the habitation of his throne. All those
who appear on the theater of public affairs, in the field, or the cabinet, both
those whom we praise, and those whom we blame, are equally instruments in his
hands, and execute all his pleasure. Let this reflection, then, in our cooler
moments, (and I hope we shall endeavor, in all the tumult of affairs, to make
these as many as possible) lead us to look more to God, and less to man; and
consequently, in all the troubles in which we may be involved, repose the most
unshaken confidence in him, and thence 'in patience possess our own souls,'
especially when it is evident that it is wholly out of our power to alter the
course of events. If we be careful so to live as to be at all times prepared to
die, what have we to fear, even though, as the Psalmist says, the earth be
removed, and the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea? Whatever turn
the course of things may take, it cannot then be to our disadvantage. What,
then, should hinder our contemplating the great scene, that seems now to be
opening upon us, awful as it is, with tranquillity, and even with satisfaction,
from our firm persuasion, that its termination will be glorious and happy?

Lastly, the more there are who indulge these enlarged and just views, who
cultivate a sense of piety to God (which will always lead us to suppress
resentment, and to promote good will toward men) the more favor, in the
righteous administration of Providence, will be shown to the country in which
they shall be found. God, we know, would have spared even Sodom, if so many as
ten righteous men had been found in it; and our Savior, alluding, as I am
inclined to think, to these very times, which seem to be approaching, says,
that for the elect's sake they will be shortened. For our own sakes, therefore,
for the sake of our friends, of our country, and of every thing that is dear to
us in it, let us attend to the admonition of my text, 'to repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.' It is 'righteousness that exalts a nation,'
and 'sin' only is the 'reproach,' and will be the ruin, 'of any people.'

APPENDIX.
HAVING originally got the leading ideas that are enlarged upon in the
preceding discourse from Dr. Hartley's Observations on Man, a work published in
1749, I think it may not be amiss to subjoin to it some extracts from that
work, as, from his authority, the serious apprehensions with which I have, ever
since I read it, been impressed, will receive more weight, than they could
acquire from any person, who, writing in these times, might be supposed to be
particularly influenced by the aspect of them, and by his own situation with
respect to them. I wish likewise by this, as well as by every other means, to
direct the attention of my readers to that most excellent work, to which I am
indebted, if I may so say, for the whole moral conformation of my mind.

How near the dissolution of the present governments, generally or
particularly, may be, would be great rashness to affirm. Christ will come in
this sense also as a thief in the night. Our duty is therefore to watch and to
pray; to be faithful stewards; to give meat, and all other requisities, in due
season, to those under our care; and to endeavor by these, and all other
lawful means, to preserve the government, under whose protection we live, from
dissolution, seeking the peace of it, and submitting to every ordinance of man
for the Lord's sake. No prayers, no endeavors of this kind can fail of having
some good effect, public or private, for the preservation of ourselves and
others. The great dispensations of Providence are conducted by means that are
either secret, or, if they appear, that are judged feeble and inefficacious. --
No man can tell, however private his station may be, but his servent prayer,
may avail to the salvation of much people. But it is more peculiarly the duty
of magistrates thus to watch over their subjects, to pray for them, and to set
about the reformation of all matters civil and ecclesiastical, to the utmost of
their power. Good governors may promote the welfare and continuance of a state,
and wicked ones must accelerate its ruin."

"The sacred history affords us instances of both kinds, and they are recorded
there for the admonition of kings and princes in all futur times." Vol. ii. p.
368.

"There are many prophecies which declare the fall of the ecclesiastical powers
of the Christian world. And though each church seems to slatter itself with the
hopes of being exempted; yet it is very plain that the prophetical characters
belong to all. They have all left the true, pure, simple religion, and teach
for doctrines the commandments of men. They are all merchants of the earth, and
have set up a kingdom of this world, abounding in riches, temporal power, and
external pomp. They have all a dogmatizing spirit, and persecute such as do not
receive their own mark, and worship the image which they have set up. They all
neglect Christ's command of preaching the gospel to all nations, and even that
of going to 'the lost sheep of the house of Israel;' there being innumerable
multitudes in all Christian countries who have never been taught to read, and
who are in other respects also destitute of the means of saving knowledge. It Is
very true that the church of Rome is Babylon the great and the mother of
harlots, and of the abominations of the earth. But all the rest have copied her
example more or less. They have all received money like Gehazi; and therefore
the leprosy of Naaman will cleave to them, and to their seed for ever. And this
impurity may be considered, not only as justifying the application of the
prophecies to all the Christian churches, but as a natural cause for their
downfall. The corrupt governors of the several churches will ever oppose the
true gospel, and in so doing will bring ruin upon themselves." P. 371.

"As the downfall of the Jewish state under Titus was the occasion of the
publication of the gospel to us Gentiles, so our downfall may contribute to the
restoration of the Jews, and both together bring on the final publication and
prevalence of the true religion. Thus the type and the thing typisied will
coincide. The first fruits and the lump are made holy together." P. 375.

The downfall of the civil and ecclesiastical powers must both be attended with
such public calamities, as will make men serious, and also drive them From the
countries of Christendom into the remote parts of the world, particularly into
the East and West Indies; whither, consequently, they will carry their
religion, now purisied from errors and superstitions. P. 377.

"That worldly-mindedness, and neglect of duty in the clergy, must hasten our
ruin, cannot be doubted, These are 'the salt of the earth,' and the 'light of
the 'world.' If they lose their favor, the whole nation, where this happens,
will be converted into one putrid mass. If their light become darkness, the
whole body politic must be dark also. The degeneracy of the court of Rome, and
secular bishops abroad, are too notorious to be mentioned. They almost cease to
give offense, as they scarce pretend to any function or authority besides what
is temporal. Yet still there is great mockery of God in their external pomp,
and prosanation of sacred titles; which, sooner or later, will bring down
vengeance upon them. And as the court of Rome has been at the head of the great
apostasy, and corruption of the Christian church; and seems evidently marked
out in various places of the scriptures, the severest judgments are probably
reserved for her. But I rather choose to speak to what falls under the
observation of all serious, attentive persons in this kingdom. The superior
clergy are in general, ambitious, and eager in the pursuit of riches;
slatterers of the great, and subservient to party interest; negligent of their
own immediate charges, and also of the inferior clergy, and their immediate
charges. The inferior clergy imitate their superiors, and in general take
little more care of their parishes than barely what is necessary to avoid the
censure of the law. And the clergy of all ranks are, in general, either
ignorant, or if they do apply, it is rather to profane learning, to
philosophical or political matters, than to the study of the scriptures, of the
Oriental languages, of the fathers, and ecclesiastical authors, and of the
writings of devout men in different ages of the church. I say this is in
general the case; i.e. far the greater part of the clergy of all ranks in this
kingdom are of this kind. But there are some of a quite different character;
men eminent for piety, sacred learning, and the faithful discharge of their
duty, and who, it is not to be doubted, mourn in secret for the crying sins of
this and other nations. The clergy, in general, are also far more free from
open and gross vices, than any other denomination of men amongst us,
physicians, lawyers, merchants, soldiers, etc. However, this may be otherwise
hereafter. For it is said that in some foreign countries the superior clergy,
in others the inferior, are as corrupt and abandoned, or more so, than any
other order of men. The clergy in this kingdom seem to be what one might expect
from the mixture of good and bad influences that affect them. But then, if we
make this candid allowance for them, we must also make it for persons in the
high ranks of life, for their infidelity, lewdness, and fordid selfinterest.
And though it becomes an humble, charitable and impartial man, to make all
these allowances, yet he cannot but see, that the judgments of God are ready to
fall upon us all for these things; and that they may fall first, and with the
greatest weight, upon those, who, having the highest office committed to them
in the spiritual kingdom of Christ, neglect it, and are become mere merchants
of the earth, and shepherds that feed themselves, and not their flocks. P. 450.

"These are my real and earnest sentiments upon these points. It would be great
rashness to fix a time for the breaking of the storm that hangs over our heads,
as it is blindness and insatuation not to see it; nor to be aware, that it may
break. And yet this insatuation has always attended all falling states. The
kingdoms of Judah and Israel, which are the types of all the rest, were thus
insatuated. It may be, that the prophecies concerning Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire,
Egypt, etc. will become applicable to particular kingdoms before their fall,
and warn the good to flee out of them. And Christendom in general seems ready
to assume to itself the place and lot of the Jews, after they had rejected
their Messiah, the Savior of the world. Let no one deceive himself, or others.
The present circumstances of the world are extraordinary and critical, beyond
what has ever yet happened. If we refuse to let Christ reign over us, as our
Redeemer and Savior, we must be slain before his face, as enemies, at his
second coming." 455.

To these passages from Dr. Hartley, I shall add another from an excellent
Sermon preached in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge, December 13, 1793,
the day appointed for the commemoration of the Benefactors that of Society. P.
13* etc.

"Nature recoils with horror at the spectacle now presented by their
unfortunate country [France]. Under the guidance, however, of divine
revelation, the contemplative mind may discern the signs of these times, and
the hand of Providence directing the madness of the people. The oracles of
truth, when foretelling the persecutions to be endured by Christians, assure
us, He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. They have
shed (says the angel) the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink; for they are worthy. Destruction awaits the persecutor.
And it must excite our astonishment to see vestiges of this righteous
dispensation in what is passing before us. Lions is recorded in early history,
as the spot where a company of Martyrs glorisied God. Lions is now devoted, and
its name erased from the memory of man. Paris once streamed with the blood of
the Hugonots: Paris has since been dyed with the slaughter of that court and
clergy, which instigated the unutterable deed."

"Let us, too, be honest in declaring, whether if the massacre of Saint
Bartholomew, the revocation of the edict of Nantz, or a spanish act of faith,
were dictated by the spirit of Antichrist; the deprivation of the TWO THOUSAND
ejected Ministers; the severities which forced our countrymen to take refuge in
the wilds of America, and the two religious conflagrations which have disgraced
our own days, demonstrated the presiding influence of a mind like that which
was in Jesus."

"One particular in which the prophecy appears to enlighten us, is the fate of
the Gallican church. The revolted city of the apocalypse is supposed to
represent the antichristian community established in the European territory of
the western Roman empire, still subsisting in its pollarchical and dismembered
state. Of this city it is written, that the fall of a tenth part would a short
time precede that of the rest; and that its overthrow would be accompanied by
an earthquake, and the destruction of seven chiliads of the names of men. As
France was one of the ten kingdoms founded on the ruins of the western empire;
as violent commotions are now agitating the political world, from the
Borysthenes to the Atlantic; as seven classes have lately been deprived of
their privileges and titles; the curiosity of the Christian scholar is beyond
measure excited; and will be gratified with the discovery of various
circumstances which will confirm his faith; but which a desire of brevity
obliges me to refer to his private consideration. One question, however, I
cannot help proposing; that if we be of that chosen people who have in truth
come out of Babylon, who partake not of her sins, and merit not her plagues,
why should we appear unprepared, or disinclined, to comply with the angelic
mandate, and begin, at least, some prelude to that song of triumph, 'Rejoice
over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for God has avenged
you on her.'

The legislators of France are Deists! While they expatiated freely in every
region of useful science, they were enjoined to " take for granted" those
controversial matters of religion, their forefathers had some good reason for
adhering to This is quoted from a speech of Dr Milner, Vice Chancellor of the
University of Cambridge, on the trial of Mr. Friend.
. -- "They were not permitted to distinguish the doctrines of our Lord from
those of their church. Their mind arrived at maturity in some points, disdained
the puerilities on which they dared not speculate; and rejected the gospel, on
account of the meretricious dress in which it was introduced to them."

"The legislators of France are Deists! Much as we may lament their infidelity
in their private capacities, we rejoice that, as lawgivers, they are
unbelievers. Indifferent alike to all professions, and all sects, they will not
form an unnatural alliance with one, nor proscribe all others with civil
incapacities, imprisonment, and death. Every persuasion will enjoy their equal
and wise protection; and genuine Christianity undisguised with absurd
confessions, and not made contemptible by ridiculous ceremonies, will exert her
proper energies; will present to the understanding of the individual her
miraculous credentials of prophecies completed in our time; and gain her
establishment, not in word, but in deed; not in the civil code, but in the
heart; not as a necessary engine of the state, but as the truth, and the way to
eternal life. Superstition will no longer rear her mitred front in their courts
and parliaments Alluding to Mr. Burke's encomium on the Church of England.
; but the dominion of Christ, triumphant in that country, will be an earnest of
his obtaining the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for his possession.

The Use of Christianity, especially in difficult Times; A SERMON, DELIVERED AT
THE GRAVEL PIT MEETING IN HACKNEY: MARCH 30, 1794. BEING The Author's Farewell
Discourse TO HIS CONGREGATION.

PREFACE.
HAVING been requested to publish this sermon, I have annexed to it my letter
of resignation, for the sake of introducing the answer of the congregation, and
the addresses that have been sent to me, on occasion of my leaving this
country, from the two united congregations at Birmingham, from the Unitarian
Society, and from the young men and women who have attended my private lectures
on the subject of natural and revealed religion. I wish to express my gratitude
for the affection that has been shown me, by perpetuating, as far as I can, the
marks that I have received of it. These addresses will also serve to show that,
though calumniated, and execrated, by many, this has been more than compensated
by the warm attachment of others; which may encourage persons in similar
situations to persevere in what appears to them to be right, fearless of any
consequences that may result from it. These addresses contain some expressions
that are too highly complimentary. But, as Dr. Franklin used to say, undue
praise may serve to balance undue censure.

It is painful, no doubt, to take leave, as I do in this discourse, of such a
congregation as that with which I have been so happily connected, and which
promised increasing satisfaction. But such genuine marks of esteem and
affection, as I have received from the members of it, cannot be unattended with
pleasure. No joy, or sorrow, in this life, can be expected to be wholly
unmixed. This is a world of trial and discipline; and we should be willing to
take the painful, as well as the pleasurable ingredients in it. It will be
happy if we be improved by them, and be thereby prepared for a state, in which
this kind of discipline will not be necessary; where there will be no more
pain, and where all tears will be wiped from our eyes.

I also take this opportunity of expressing my satisfaction in the candid
attention with which I have of late been heard by unusually crowded audiences,
consisting chiefly of strangers; thinking it to be a symptom of abating
prejudice, and of the prevalence of better information than has hitherto
obtained. The time, I hope, is approaching, when all delusion will vanish; when
men and things will be seen in their true light; and the prevalence of truth
will, no doubt, be attended with an increase of general happiness.

FAREWELL DISCOURSE.
AND NOW, BRETHREN, I COMMEND YOU TO GOD, AND THE WORD OF HIS GRACE, WHICH IS
ABLE TO BUILD YOU UP, AND TO GIVE YOU AN INHERITANCE AMONG THEM THAT ARE
SANCTIFIED. ACTS xx. 32.
MY CHRISTIAN BRETHREN,
BEING now to resign my pastoral charge among you, my thoughts are naturally
turned to the sentiments expressed by the apostle Paul, when he was in a
similar situation with respect to the church of Ephesus. I do not pretend to
his zeal or activity; but my wishes for your best interests are sincere and
ardent, and I cannot show it better than by directing your attention to
sentiments most interesting to us all as Christians, and most conducive to our
common edification.

With Paul I commend you to the good providence of God; praying that he would
direct you in all your ways, and especially that you may be led to a right
knowledge of the gospel, that you may imbibe the genuine spirit, and practice
the duties of it, as the only way to ensure your present and future happiness.
In his own emphatical language, in my text, I commend you to God, and the word
of his grace, which is able to build you up, and and to give you an inheritance
among them that are sanctified. By securing the latter, you cannot entertain a
doubt of your title to the former. For, as the same apostle observes, all
things work together for good to them that love God, the great object of the
dispensation of the gospel being to purify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works.

This is also the great object of all Christian churches. They consist of
persons who form themselves into societies for the purpose of promoting their
mutual edification, and with this view they provide themselves with such
ministers, or assistants (for such is the real meaning and nature of our
office) as they deem best calculated to promote that end; giving them proper
leisure for the study of the scriptures, for storing their minds with such
knowledge as will best qualify them to instruct others, and for the acquirement
of every other accomplishment that can enable them to do it to the most
advantage. An office and employment the most truly useful, and therefore
honorable.

The great importance of this object of Christian societies is strongly
expressed by the apostle in my text. It is nothing less than to build up the
members of them, that is, in faith and holiness, to raise and improve their
characters, in order to give them an inheritance among them that are
sanctified; i. e. to prepare them for future happiness. It is, as it were, to
take men out of the world, to wean them from the low pursuits and
gratifications of it, and to make them citizens of heaven; to raise the sons of
men to the high character, and honor, of the sons of God, and make them heirs
of a happy immortality. And is not every other object low and mean compared
with this? Give it, then, that place in your regards to which it is entitled,
and, amidst all the necessary cares of this life, never lose sight of your
great destination for another. Suffer not your minds to be fascinated by any
thing that this world can present to you; but, as the apostle exhorts, holding
all other things in deservedly low estimation, walk worthy of God, and be
fruitful in every good word and work to do his will. 'Seeing,' as another
apostle observes, that all these things must be dissolved, since all our
connexions here must soon be broken, at least by death, and an infinitely more
important state awaits us beyond the grave, what manner of persons ought we to
be in all holy conversation and godliness?

All the connexions we form here, the most endearing and important ones, are
slight and transient. We may flatter ourselves that we are planning our
destination for a long time to come, and make our arrangements accordingly, as
I did when I was settled at Birmingham, and again with you; but unforeseen
circumstances occur, and all our plans are deranged, new ones must be formed,
and a great portion of life is often employed, and in, a manner wasted, in
making new arrangements, which may prove to be as temporary, and to as little
purpose.

But, my brethren, the gospel, the study and practice of which it has been my
business to recommend to you, holds out to us an object as much more fixed and
stable, as it is in itself of more value. On habitations here are perishable,
liable to be destroyed by lawless violence; but there are houses not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. Here we have no continuing city, no place of
absolute security, where we can depend upon not being disturbed. But in heaven
is a rest for the people of God, a place where 'the wicked cease from
troubling,' and where those who are weary with their unceasing persecution may
depend upon being unmolested. Let us, then, when we are harassed and disturbed
here, and especially when we are exposed to disturbance because we ourselves
are disposed to be quiet, wishing to live at peace ourselves, and desirous of
promoting a disposition to peace in others, look forwards to that peaceful and
happy state, and cultivate a temper of mind most suited to it.

Permit me to add, that I flatter myself our approaching separation may furnish
and additional motive for doing every thing in our power to secure a happy
meeting, and a more permanent connection, in a world of greater stability than
this. On my part, I have thought the connection a happy one, and was far from
having any wish ever to change it on this side the grave; and such, I would
hope, has been your disposition with respect to me. And what is it that makes
heaven itself most desirable, but the society of such friends as we wish to
live with here? This world, in its present state, would be sufficiently
paradisiacal for men, if they were what they ought to be, and what they are
capable of being, if they were as improved in all respects as we have reason to
think they hereafter will be. If, then, our present separation be painful, let
us be looking, and preparing, for a state in which no event so mutually
disagreeable will occur.

Our present situation, and that of the Dissenters in general, calls in a
particular manner for the exercise of Christian principles. The cause of the
Dissenters may now be be said to be, what Christianity itself originally was,
and long continued to be, viz. a sect every where spoken against. We are
exposed to insult and outrage, though not to open and avowed persecution, on
this account. But this situation, though not to be desired by us, is most
favorable to the cultivation of that temper of mind which is most eminently
Christian, to the virtues of patience, fortitude, meekness, forgiveness of
injuries, and heavenly-mindedness; virtues of the most exalted kind,
contributing most to the dignity of human nature, but for which there is
comparatively but little call, or occasion, in a season of prosperity.

'Woe unto you,' says our Savior, when all men speak well of you. But, blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my name's sake. Let us, in the first place, then, show
that the evil that is spoken of us is falsely spoken, that is, give reasonable
evidence of it; for to satisfy the violently prejudiced is impossible, and not
to be expected of any man. It is what our Savior himself and the apostles were
unequal to. But this being done, with respect to those who are at all candid,
and who will hear reason, conscious integrity is abundantly sufficient to
support a man under any calumny.

Moreover, conscious of our own integrity, we can look down upon our enemies,
not with hatred or ill will, but with compassion, as beings in a depraved and
imperfect state, neither qualified to be happy themselves, nor to communicate
happiness to others.

All persons under the influence of malignant passions are necessarily, and by
the invariable law of our natures, in an uneasy state. Their habitual feelings,
even when gratified, are unpleasant. But the feelings of those who are merely
exposed to the malignity of others, without feeling any thing of the kind
themselves, are serene, and highly pleasurable; besides being attended with a
consciousness of superiority of character, and of greater advances in
intellectual improvement.

The man who obeys the first impulse of natural appetite, corporeal or mental,
gives no proof of his being even a rational agent; for brutes are governed by
appetite. But the man who refrains from gratifying his appetite, and natural
desire, whether that of revenging himself upon his enemy, or any other, must do
it by the help of reason. He must have some degree of comprehension of mind,
which takes in distant objects; and this is the thing that manifests a
superiority of character.

The man who can even defer his revenge, and merely restrain his passion, is
superior to him who gives way to the first impulse of it. But he who can so far
make allowance for the hatred of his enemies, as to feel compassion and
good will toward them, while he knows the ill will they bear him, is
infinitely superior. We are not moved to anger by the anger of a child.
Neither, then, should we be by the anger and malignity of those grown persons,
whom, with respect to intellectual and moral improvement, we regard in no
higher a light.

On account of the low rank of every sentiment bordering on anger and
resentment (requiring only particular impressions to excite them, and much
reflection to suppress them) such as zeal for any particular cause, even that
of religion, it is easy to excite it, and lead men to act upon it with the
greatest violence, so as to hate and persecute others who differ from them. Men
who have no real religion at all can do this, as is evident in all
persecutions, in the history of the crusades, when hundreds of thousands,
moved, as they imagined with holy zeal, went to drive the infidels from the
Holy Land, and also in the riots in Birmingham. Also to suffer in any cause
with the spirit with which men die in battle, that is, with obstinacy and
hatred, is not very difficult. Mahometans fight for their religion, and the
North American Indians die with the greatest heroism in this respect. But to
suffer and die with meekness, with resignation to God, and good will to men,
not excepting our persecutors; to die praying with our Savior, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do, is a far more difficult attainment, but
by no means uncommon among Christians.

Still less shall we be disturbed at the malignity of others, when we consider
that our enemies, as well as our friends, are acting the part assigned them by
the Supreme Ruler of the universe, that they are in their proper place as well
as we in ours (though, being instigated by their own bad dispositions, this is
no apology for their conduct) and that the plan of the great drama, in which we
are all actors, is so arranged, that good will finally result from the evil
that we experience ourselves, or see in others. 'The wrath of man,' says the
Psalmist, shall praise God.

All the opposition we meet with makes part of the useful and necessary
discipline of life, and no great character could be formed, or any great good
be done, without it. Our Savior, the apostles, the reformers from Popery, and
the Puritans and Nonconformists, were equally exposed to it. And shall we
complain? We ought rather to think ourselves honored by it, and, with the
apostles, rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer for the name of the Lord
Jesus; reflecting, that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him,
and be glorified together. Of our Lord himself it is said, that for the joy
that was set before him he endured the cross, despising the shame. Ought we
not, then, I will not say be displeased, and complain, but ought we not to
rejoice, and be thankful, for every part of that dispensation of Providence,
which we cannot doubt is calculated, and intended, to be so highly beneficial
to us?

If we take a calm retrospect of our own past experience, we shall all of us, I
am persuaded, be satisfied that many events, seemingly the most disastrous,
were, in fact, the most beneficial to us; that they were really mercies, though
in the disguise of judgments. And shall we not then conclude, that every other
evil, coming from the same hand, equally leads to good, though we may not for
the present see it to be so. When Jacob lost his beloved son Joseph, he said,
All these things are against me; though it appeared afterward to be eminently
for him. As the psalmist says with respect to God, Clouds and darkness are
round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.

Thus instructed by the unerring word of God, and our own experience, as far as
it goes, concurring with it, we may be prepared to adopt the noble language of
the prophet Habakkuk; who, after enumerating the loss of every thing valuable
to man, and that not only tended to his comfort, but was seemingly necessary to
his existence in this life, could say, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy
in the God of my salvation. With respect to the society of friends, and every
thing else that is most dear to us (and many of these I shall be deprived of in
leaving this connection) we must say with Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord
takes away, and blessed be the name of the Lord. Something may arise our of
our afflictions, or even accompany them, that shall be an abundant compensation
for them. And if they only reach us patience, fortitude, and trust in God, it
is alone an abundant compensation, though they should bring nothing else along
with them.

While we are sensible that we live under the government of a good Being, we
cannot doubt, but that every thing that befalls us is intended for our good. We
must not forget, that it is only by discipline, and often very severe
discipline too, that great and excellent characters are ever formed; and no man
can tell how much, or how severe discipline may be necessary for himself. David
could say, that 'before he was afflicted he went astray.' And there is a source
of satisfaction even in adversity, or nearly connected with it, that persons in
prosperity and affluence have no idea of.

Of this I am myself not without some experience. My violent expulsion from a
favorite situation at Birmingham was, to appearance, sufficiently disastrous,
and I was not without feeling it to be so. Yet I have had more than a
recompense, internal and external; so as to make me consider it even now as no
evil upon the whole; and I am far from wishing, if it were possible, that it
might not have happened.

Among other resources afforded me by a kind Providence, was the seasonable and
generous reception I met with among you; an event which I hope you are
convinced I have endeavored to improve.

Having, without any previous expectation, found a sphere of usefulness, and a
source of happiness, here, I shall not despair of finding a similar situation
in America. But there is no situation in the world, in which they who are
disposed to exert themselves in the service of mankind (which is the most
proper service of God, our common creator and parent) may not find an
opportunity of doing it, to more or less advantage; and no man is answerable
for more than it is in his power to do.

But a state of suffering is a state of usefulness, no less than one of the
most active exertion; and very frequently it operates in the most effectual and
distinguished manner. Did not our Savior effect more by his death, the
apostles by their sufferings, and the Protestant martyrs by their various
persecutions, than by their preaching? It is commonly, and just observed, that
"example is before precept." And what is it that demonstrates the real force of
religious principles so much as patient suffering for them? It is a clear proof
of the value that the sufferer sets upon them, and such as is more likely to
impress others than any argument. And the experience of ages confirms the
observation, so as to have given rise to the proverb, that "the blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the church."

Was the persecution of the early Christians, of the Protestants in France, in
the Low Countries, or in England, of any disservice to their cause? Did the
persecution of the Puritans by queen Elizabeth, and the Stuarts, diminish their
numbers, or their zeal? It increased both, as appeared at the time of the civil
wars. What do we learn on this subject from the different treatment that
Dissenters have met with in late times? They have constantly melted away in the
sunshine of prosperity, and have become numerous and zealous in adversity. It
is even probable that their numbers were diminished one third, if not one half,
and the rest were grown very lukewarm, in the reigns of George I. and II.
princes who were friendly to them; but of late their numbers, and their zeal,
are greatly increased.

Shall we hesitate, then, to suffer in the cause of important truth, when we
see it to be so greatly promoted by this means? If we have any value for our
principles, we shall rejoice in the opportunities that are afforded us of
serving the cause of truth in seasons of persecution (occurring in the course
of divine Providence, and not sought by ourselves, for that would be
ostentation and presumption) as the only way in which many persons have it in
their power to promote it, to any great purpose. For all can advance the cause
by suffering, though but few have sufficient ability to argue for it. But
doubly honored is the man whom Providence enables, and disposes (for all is of
God) to serve the cause of truth in both these ways.

Besides, such a degree of persecution as that to which we are exposed, will
tend to purge our societies of lukewarm and unworthy members of men who prefer
the world, and the things of it, to the cause of truth, and a good conscience;
and such are many of the richer sort among us, and in all societies; men who,
by associating with other rich and worldly-minded men, and especially those who
are within the influence of a court, and the honors and emoluments derived
from it, catch too much of their spirit, become assimilated to their manners,
and adopt their views. Let all such go to their proper place: we want them not.
We want not even their wealth. True Christianity does not suppose, or require
it. But in all cases of persecution, some of the most wealthy have proved the
most zealous.

True Christians, devoid of superstition, will meet for public worship, and
edify one another, even without the aid, or expense, of regular ministers.
These are, no doubt, a convenience, but by no means necessary, even to the
administration of the ordinances of baptism, or the Lord's supper. And, in
situations in which ministers cannot be had, Christian laymen will, I hope,
have the good sense to do themselves every thing that has been usually done by
their ministers. And at this time, there are helps abundantly sufficient for
the purpose, even though Christian societies should be as destitute of talents,
as of wealth.

This excellent lesson will be taught more effectually in a season of
adversity, than of prosperity. And we ought to be thankful for every situation
in which such valuable instruction is best inculcated. In the first and best
ages of Christianity, not 'many wise men after the flesh,' and 'not many mighty
were chosen.' And our Savior even thanked his heavenly Father, that the gospel
was hidden from the wise and prudent;' not the truly wise, but from worldly
wise men, those who have the world and the things of it for their chief object.

When riches and honors are the reward of Christianity, it will be thought by
the world, that the profession of it is adopted for the sake of those riches
and honors, and no other reason of their conduct will be so much as looked
for. But when a man's faith is attended with persecution, and abuse in every
form, it will be evident that it has some other foundation, and such as will be
thought worth enquiring into. And a dispassionate inquiry is all that truth,
and Christianity, if it be founded on truth, requires. The same is the case
with respect to any particular mode or form of Christianity. It disclaims all
connection with civil power, and worldly emolument.

It may justly be our pride, that, as Unitarians, our religion has been so far
from being befriended, that it has, in all ages, and in all nations, been
frowned upon, by the civil magistrate; and yet in these seemingly unfavourable
circumstances, it has constantly gained ground, and of late in a tenfold
proportion to what it has ever done before, with thinking and serious men. Can
there be a surer indication than this, that it will continue to gain ground,
till it establish itself universally? But even then, it will, I trust, be as
independent, as it is at present, of that civil power which is now hostile to
it. Hereafter, when time shall have abated the force of prejudice, it may be
recorded to your honor, that you received not myself, as an individual, but an
Unitarian, so obnoxious to popular odium as I have been, as well as to have had
such a man as Dr Price (whose eulogium I need not make to you) for your
minister.

Having shown this Christian fortitude, and acted with so much true judgment, I
hope you will continue to act the same part, unmoved by the censures of an
unthinking world, and promoting the peace and welfare of your country; with
being enemies to which we are most unjustly charged.

Should those calamitous times, the approach of which, (led, as I conceived, by
the light of scripture prophecy compared with the present aspect of things,) I
expressed my apprehensions of in my late Fast Sermon, ready come, the Christian
principles which I have, in this discourse, endeavored to recommend to you,
will be your best security; teaching you both how to act, and how to suffer, as
circumstances may require. In this case, though absent, I shall not exult in my
safety from the storm, but sympathize with you, and almost wish to suffer along
with you. For it is not any dread of this nature, but other circumstances, as
you well know, that induce me to leave you.

In all events, our separation, and that from any of our friends, by death, or
otherwise, is, in the eye of reason, of short continuance. For what are the
remains of life which separate us from the dead, to any of us? It is, a, the
apostle says, but as a vapor, which appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away. And then, my Christian friends, you will rejoin your late most
excellent pastor, Dr. Price, and all your deceased worthy pastors and friends,
where you will not stand in need of our instructions, but derive knowledge from
purer sources than ours, by nearer approaches to the great fountain of light.

There every cloud of error and prejudice, and especially those which lead us
to mistake each other's characters, and to think worse of one another than any
of us, I hope, ought to do, will disappear. And the happy consequence of this
will be many persons embracing one another as brethren, who were here the most
hostile to each other.

Then every truth will be seen, not only in its whole evidence, but in its
proper importance. Bigotry, consequently, will be unknown, and no mistakes but
those of the heart will be thought to be of any moment at all.

Could we imbibe these sentiments here below, we should make earth itself a
perfect heaven; and our doing this as well as we are able, will be our best
preparation for that blissful state. To have assisted any of you in this most
important preparation, for what the apostle in my text calls 'the inheritance
of the saints in light,' would be my greatest praise; as to meet you there
would be my greatest joy.

As an evidence of your having imbibed the true spirit of Christianity
yourselves, and of your being sensible of its importance, you will, each of
you, exert yourselves in your several spheres, to extend the knowledge of it to
others, and also endeavor to infuse the same spirit into them. Do not imagine
that this is the business of ministers only, Clergy and laity, in the sense in
which the terms are now used, are unknown in the scriptures. All Christians are
there distinguished by the phrase that is now rendered clergy. All Christians
are there said to be 'kings and priests unto God;' and every man who can teach,
should be a teacher; and without any ordination, besides the request of his
fellow Christians, administer every Christian ordinance.

But independently of this, which may be said to require some talents and
ability, not possed by all, there is a method in which all Christians, without
exception, may be teachers of Christianity, and recommend it to others. It is
by the open profession of it, and by a life and conversation conformable to it.
This, though a silent, is, in many respects, the most effectual, method of
preaching. Let your light shine before men, that they, seeing your good works,
may glorify your father who is in heaven.

But the mere open profession of Christianity by persons of respectable
characters, that is, persons in general esteem for their good sense and good
conduct, in an age like this, abounding with unbelievers, is of itself of great
importance. Gladly would unbelievers have it to say that all men of sense are
with them. On the contrary, I am confident that, whatever may be said with
respect to good sense, or natural ability, which is often employed to the worst
of purposes, men of real knowledge and reflection, as well as men of virtue and
integrity, men who have given the most serious attention to the subject, and
men of the most upright and unbiassed minds, without which natural ability will
avail but little, are with us.

But to recommend Christianity to men of reason and reflection, it must be made
to appear a rational thing. Men cannot embrace as sacred truth any thing at
which their common sense revolts. Nor can that be considered as a truth of
revealed religion, which is contrary to the most obvious and acknowledged
truths of natural religion. And the greatest part of the unbelief of the
present age, has evidently arisen from the gross abuses and corruptions of
Christianity, especially such as are supported by the civil establishments of
it. These it is the duty of every enlightened Christian, as he values his
religion, and wishes to extend the knowledge of it, strenuously to oppose. And
the present state of things calls for this in a peculiar manner.

Unbelievers must be shown that their triumph over such Christianity as is
supported by the state, will avail them nothing. It is only their triumph over
error and superstition, which are the bane of Christianity. What do they gain
by exposing such doctrines as those of transubstantiation, and the trinity?
These are not the doctrines of the scriptures, but the absurd devices of men;
doctrines which, indeed, naturally arose in the state of things in which
Christianity was embraced by heathens, previously tinctured with their peculiar
notions, but contrary to the plainest maxims and axioms of the scriptures.

The doctrine of the unity of God, is the one great object of the whole of the
Jewish religion, and assumed as a fundamental principle in Christianity. The
first of all the commandments is, 'Thou shall have no other gods besides me;'
and who was the speaker, but Jehovah, the great creator of heaven and earth,
the same great Being who in the New Testament is styled the God and the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and surely not Jesus Christ himself; because then
there would be no such person as God the father at all; whereas the apostle
says, To us there is one God, even the Father; and one mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus.

Again, in all the civil establishments of Christianity, the character of the
one God and father of all has been greatly debased by the idea of his
arbitrarily selecting certain individuals of the human race, as the objects of
his especial favor, while all the rest are left under an irreversible sentence
of condemnation; and also by the idea of the inexorableness of his disposition,
in not receiving penitent offenders, till satisfaction had been made to his
justice by the death of Christ. Whereas his most solemn declarations to Moses,
and all the prophets, as a God merciful and gracious, who 'for his name's
sake,' and 'his mercy's sake' only, pardons offenses, though ever so great; and
all the discourses and parables of our Savior, especially his most instructive
parable of the prodigal son, exhibit him in a very different and much more
amiable light, as requiring no atonement, or satisfaction whatever, besides the
repentance, and return, of the worst of sinners.

If we have any real value for Christianity, we should exert ourselves to free
it from these great encumbrances, which have already done it the greatest
injury, and endangered its very existence. And if other well-meaning persons,
from the fault of their education, and early impressions, exert themselves with
great zeal in maintaining these spurious doctrines, we ought to show no less
zeal in favor of the great truths of which they are an infringement. If they
imagine that they maintain the honor of Christ by asserting his divinity, are
not we maintaining the honor of God, by refusing to allow any being whatever
to share with him in those honors, which he has declared that he will not give
to another?

Let this, however, be done with all due allowance for the innocent prejudices
of others; so as to think no worse of the moral characters of men, or their
final state, on account of any mere difference of opinion. True piety and
benevolence, or the love of God and of our neighbor, to produce which is the
great object of all religion, are not confined to Unitarians; though, thinking
more favorably of the character of the Supreme Being, and not thinking any man
the object of his displeasure on account of his opinions, these great virtues,
the foundation of all the rest, may be expected to find an easier entrance into
our breasts, than into those of Calvinists and Trinitarians, who, thinking
those who differ from them to be the objects of the divine abhorrence, may
imagine that they cannot do wrong in entertaining the same sentiments
concerning them; and this is the foundation of all persecution.

It is to the honor of this society, an honor which I hope you will never
lose, to be generally understood to hold the Christian faith in the purity that
I have described; having obtained the honorable denomination of an Unitarian
Society. For this implies all the rest. The opinions of single persons are
often overlooked, or disregarded; but a Christian church is as a city set on an
hill, that cannot be hid; and when these churches shall become numerous (and
they are continually increasing) they cannot fail to attract universal
attention. And this cannot but operate in the most favorable manner for the
interest of Christianity in general. Indeed, it is sufficiently obvious at this
day, that it cannot stand on any other ground.

I cannot conclude this Discourse, the last that I shall probably deliver from
this pulpit, or in this country, without expressing my satisfaction in your
choice of my successor. The Rev. Thomas Belsham, Professor of Divinity in the
New College, Hackney.
. It has been such as cannot fail to do you honor with the truly enlightened
part of the community. I would not, and least of all in this place, flatter
you, or him. But this I will say, that by making choice, as you have done, of a
person to succeed me, who will conduct your devotions, and carry on plans of
instruction, public and private, as I am persuaded he will, on the same
principles, and in all respects as much to the satisfaction of the judicious
part of the audience, you have greatly lessened the pain that I shall feel from
our separation. It will appear to me, as if I were still with you in his person.

May the connection be long, and happy. Under his ministry, and that of his
worthy colleague, may you be built up in the pure faith of the gospel,
inspiring the genuine spirit, and discharging all the duties of it, that when
the Great Shepherd shall appear, and take an account of his servants, you may
be found of him without spot and blameless, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming. And then, in the mean time, though absent from you, I may hear of
your welfare, which, next to continuing with you, and promoting the same great
cause myself, will make me most happy.

Having now closed my discourse to the proper congregation, I shall take the
liberty to address a few words to the many strangers, who, as I expected, I
perceive to be present.

Most of you, I presume, are come hither from an innocent curiosity to see and
hear a person of whom you have heard much evil, and perhaps some good, and whom
you do not expect to see or hear any more. Others, though I hope not many, may
have come for some less innocent purpose. These, let them have come whenever
they pleased, must have found themselves disappointed; and I hope agreeably so;
as instead of finding any occasion of harm to me, they may have found some good
to themselves. Nothing else can they have heard here; nothing but what is
calculated to confirm the faith of all Christians, and to inculcate those
sentiments of the heart, and that conduct in life, which are the proper fruits
of that faith. All the doctrines that have been taught here, are those relating
to the being, the attributes, and the providence of God; the divine missions of
Moses, and the prophets, of Christ and the apostles, and that future state of
righteous retribution, which they preached. These great articles of faith you
have heard not only asserted, but, if you have attended frequently, repeatedly
proved by rational arguments.

This a person disposed to cavil will allow; but he may say that he has
likewise heard many things heretical, and offensive to him. This is very
possible: for every tenet contrary to that which any particular person has been
used to consider as true, will, of course, be by him (...) false, and therefore
heretical, and more or less offensive. But are we not at liberty in this
country to think and judge for ourselves? And as to every reasonable cause of
offense, all doctrines are to be judged of by their moral tendency, agreeably
to the rule of our Savior, By their fruits ye shall know them.

Now, what is the apparent moral tendency of the doctrines concerning God, and
his moral government, that have been constantly taught in this place, but a
life of obedience to his will? And is this moral tendency lessened by the
belief that this God is one Being; or is it at all improved, or strengthened,
by the belief of there being three persons in the Godhead? On the contrary, is
not the understanding confounded, and distracted, by the very attempt (which,
after all, must be unavailing) to reconcile the doctrine of three divine
persons, with the fundamental doctrine of the scriptures, that there is but one
God. And by what conceivable operation can the temper and disposition of mind
be improved by such confusion of ideas, and such embarrassment; to say nothing
of the absurdity, and impiety, of the doctrine?

You have heard great stress laid upon the doctrine of the divinity of Christ.
But besides that this is plainly setting up another God than the one God and
Father of Jesus Christ; what is gained by it? Are the doctrines and precepts of
the gospel of less force because the persons who taught them were not
themselves gods? On this principle, the law of Moses would have no obligation;
and every thing taught by the apostles, who certainly were not gods, must be
disregarded; whereas, it is the authority by which doctrines are taught, and
not the persons, or instruments, by whom they are taught, that is to be
regarded; and this authority we all consider as properly divine.

Lastly, will the human character sustain any injury with respect to his love
of justice and equity, in consequence of being taught that God, whom we are to
resemble, is impartial in his regards to all his creatures of mankind, and
shows no especial favor to any but for their superior virtue? Or will any man
be less kind, or merciful, by believing God to be more so? Making the Divine
Being our pattern, and pray that he would forgive us as we forgive others,
shall we not be even more disposed to entertain proper sentiments toward our
offending brother, when we are taught that if he only repent we must forgive
him; rather than if we were to be led, in imitation of the supposed conduct of
God, to demand some other atonement, or satisfaction, of him?

These, however, are the most offensive doctrines that have ever been heard
from this place, or inculcated in any of my writings. Judge then yourselves of
the ground of the offense that has been taken.

As to the charge of sedition, nothing that can, by any construction, be
supposed to have that tendency has ever been delivered from this pulpit; unless
it be sedition to teach what the apostles taught before, viz. that we are 'to
obey God rather than man,' and that in what relates to religion, and
conscience, we disclaim all human authority, even that of king, lords, and
commons. In these things we acknowledge only one father, even God, and one
master, even Christ, the messenger, or ambassador, of God. If any doctrine be
really false, being contrary to reason and the scriptures, it is not an act of
parliament that can make it true. Or, if any action be morally wrong, as being
contrary to natural justice and equity, it is not an act of parliament that can
make it be right. But while we thus render 'to God the things that are God's,'
we render to 'Caesar the things that are Caesar's.' We are 'subject to every'
civil ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, though not to their ordinances
relating to religion. And whether we think any particular civil regulations to
be wise, or not (and with respect to things of this nature, as well as others,
different men will think differently) we submit to the decision of the
majority, and are the friends of peace and good order.

Learn, then, not to give ear to mere calumny; but, according to the old
English maxim, suppose every man to be innocent till he be proved to be guilty,
and in all matters of opinion, allow to others the liberty that you take
yourselves. As to us, I trust that we have learned of Christ to bless them that
curse us, and to pray for them that despitefully use, and persecute us. In the
language of the liturgy we pray, that God would forgive our enemies,
persecutors, and slanderers, and turn their hearts.

Whether, then, you come as friends, or as enemies; whether we shall ever see
one another's faces again, or not, may God, whose Providence is over all,
bless, preserve, and keep us. Above all, may we be preserved in the paths of
virtue and piety, that we may have a happy meeting in that world, where error
and prejudice will be no more; where all the ground of the party distinctions
that subsist here will be taken away; where every misunderstanding will be
cleared up, and the reign of truth and of virtue will be for ever established.

APPENDIX.
To the Congregation of Protestant Dissenters at the Gravel-Pit Meeting in
Hackney.
MY CHRISTIAN FRIENDS,
AFTER spending little more than two years with you, I find it expedient to
leave you. But you will believe me when I assure you, that this resolution is
not occasioned by any complaint that I have to make with respect to you. On the
contrary, it was singularly generous in you to receive me when you did, driven,
as I was, by violence from a favorite situation, and likely, from the
prejudice of the times, to bring suspicion on any congregation that should make
choice of me.

I have been happy to find that, though many (as, on several accounts, was very
natural) objected to the conduct of the majority, and left the society, some
partially, and others altogether, your numbers are not on the whole diminished;
and especially that, contrary to the expectations of most, I have found a
sufficiently ample field of usefulness in the classes of young persons who have
attended my lectures. These I leave with peculiar regret, having had peculiar
satisfaction in my attention to them, and in their improvement in religious
knowledge; many of them, I doubt not, being well qualified to instruct others.
I hope that, in your choice of a successor to me (in which I pray for your best
direction) their interest will not be neglected; more substantial good, I am
from long experience, well persuaded, being done in this way, than in the best
discharge of any other part of the ministerial duty.

Distant as is the country to which I find it expedient to remove, I shall
always rejoice to hear of your welfare, both as men, and as a Christian
society. But infinitely happier will it be if our conduct in life be such, as
shall secure our meeting where the wicked will cease from troubling, where all
the prejudices and misunderstandings that disturb the harmony of Christians
here will vanish, and where we shall never be separated from one another any
more.

I am, my Christian friends, Your affectionate pastor, J. PRIESTLEY.
Clapton, Feb. 21, 1794. P. S. As the time of my departure is uncertain, though
not far distant, I cannot fix any particular time for the dissolution of our
connection; but I hope no great inconvenience will arise from this degree of
uncertainty.



The Answer of the Congregation.
REV. AND DEAR SIR,
WE have received with extreme concern the communication of your intention to
resign your pastoral office in this congregation; a connextion, from which we
had promised ourselves a great degree of benefit and happiness, and which our
short experience has abundantly justified.

Whatever are the circumstances which have induced you to think of removing, it
is some consolation to find, that it is not owing to any complaint to which we
have given occasion; since you are pleased to bestow more praise upon our
conduct, than is its due.

We shall always reflect, with the highest satisfaction and with real
gratitude, on your public services among us; and on none more than your
establishment of lectures to the different classes of young persons. Convinced,
as we are, that the most important advantages are likely to be derived to the
rising generation, from this institution, we shall be careful to keep this
great point in view, in the choice of your successor.

In lamenting the separation which is about to take place between us, we feel
particularly concerned, that your removal is to be to a country so distant, as
wholly to cut off our personal intercourse with you: but we trust that
Providence intends, by this event, to open to you a scene of greater
usefulness; and it is this consideration, which better reconciles us to the
great loss, which we ourselves are about to sustain.

Remote as may be the situation to which you find it expedient to remove, our
hearts will go with you, and our affections embrace you; and nothing will
afford us greater comfort, than to hear of your happiness and increasing means
of doing good. If the attachment of those with whom you are about to live, is
at all in proportion to the regret of those whom you are about to quit, you
will have a sure pledge of future satisfaction.

We can take no merit to ourselves for having been ambitious to receive you
into this society, at a time when persecution raged against you; since we
consulted herein our duty and our best interests. But it gives us the deepest
regret, that it was in this country that you should have suffered for the
freedom of well-intentioned inquiries on subjects, respecting which every man
is bound diligently to search for truth, and on which no man can assume a right
to think for his neighbor. Without free discussion, truth cannot be
ascertained, and it is the absence of free discussion which alone can
perpetuate error.

Unable to deny the propriety of your retiring from a scene of things, where
you can promise to yourself so little comfort, or perhaps even safety, we are
at least bound to bear testimony to your irreproachable conduct, and to the
patience with which you have borne your sufferings. At the same time, we must
lament the stigma which our nation will have brought upon itself, both with
Europe and with posterity, for having forced one of the first of men, of
Christians, and of philosophers, to seek in foreign countries an asylum from
the insults and injuries, which he had experienced in his own in the pursuit of
religious truth.

In the pleasing hope of a happy and indissoluble union hereafter, to which
time cannot put an end, we remain with every sentiment of gratitude and esteem
in behalf of the congregation,

Rev. and Dear Sir, Your respectful and sincere friends and fellow Christians.
Hackney, 16th March, 1794. Signed by all the members of a Committee deputed
for this purpose by the congregation.



The Address of the Young Men and Young Women, who attend the Lectures on the
subject of Natural and Revealed Religion.
To the REV. DR. PRIESTLEY.
REV. AND DEAR SIR,
YOUR intention of quitting this country being now made known, accept the
warmest sentiments of gratitude from those who, besides having benefited by
your pastoral services, have also profited by your Lectures to young persons on
the subject of religion. The merit of this institution, which is all your own,
has its best evidence in the impression it has made on the minds of us your
pupils. Through your means we not only feel confirmed in our faith in religion,
but better disposed to the performance of our various duties; the knowledge of
which you have thus rendered clearer to our judgment, and the practice of which
you have enforced to us by new and animating motive exemplary in your own life,
and firm under persecution, you have hereby superadded the strongest proof of
the sincerity and the efficacy of your different precepts.

It is not permitted to us to deprecate a separation which is judged necessary
for your comfort and safety, and which Providence has perhaps designed, in
order to extend your usefulness; but we must at least lament, that our own
happiness is no longer to remain so intimately connected with yours.

It is some consolation, however, that we can at least give you pleasure, by
endeavoring to pursue your pious and wise instructions, and showing that you
have not labored in vain to make us firm Christians and virtuous characters.
Among other marks of our attachment, we shall hold it as a principal duty to
promote at all times, in the congregations to which we belong, the institution
of Lectures to young persons, of which we consider you as the founder, being
firmly persuaded, from our own experience, of their religious and moral
advantages.

Permit us to add our thanks for the present you have made to the library, of
your valuable works, by the perusal of which, both ourselves, and those who
follow us, must endeavor to mitigate the memory of the loss sustained, by the
discontinuance of your personal instructions.

That your voyage may be safe and expeditious, and that, during the remainder
of your life, you may enjoy an uninterrupted series of happiness, is the
earnest wish, and ardent prayer, of

Reverend and dear Sir, Your grateful and affectionate Pupils.
Signed by forty-one names.



The Address of the Unitarian Society. To the REV. DR. PRIESTLEY.
REV. AND DEAR SIR.
YOUR friends, the members of the Unitarian Society, address you on the present
interesting occasion, to express the regret with which they are penetrated, at
your approaching departure from this country, and their warmest wishes for your
happiness, in the place of your future destination.

So little as you have at any time interfered in national politics, it is but
too obvious that the outrageous violence which you have experienced, and the
atrocious calumnies which have been circulated with such unexampled industry to
injure your character, and to render your residence in your native country
unpleasant, and even unsafe, are entirely owing to that manly spirit, with
which you have avowed and defended, what you firmly believed to be the pure and
rational doctrines of the gospel; and to that truly Christian zeal, with which
you have entered your protest against those prevailing errors, by which the
religion of Jesus has been corrupted, and debased.

But you, Sir, have instructed us, both by your doctrine and example, to refer
events to a higher cause: and while we regard with pity the conduct of men,
who, under the cover of religious zeal, are gratifying their own perverse
passions, we also view them as instruments, under the direction of a superior
power, for the accomplishment of purposes, the most distant from their own
intentions; and we bow with humble acquiescence to the allwise wise disposing
will of Heaven. The history of the Christian church from its first origin,
through the revolutions of successive ages, has taught us this lesson: that it
is the order of Providence, that religious truth should be promulgated and
confirmed by the sufferings of its most enlightened, and most zealous
advocates. In this part of the world, you, Sir, have kindled a resplendent
light, which no length of time, nor violence of opposition, will be able to
extinguish; and you have been honored as the instrument of dissusing religious
knowledge, beyond almost any individual in later ages: we anticipate therefore,
with pleasing hope, the extensive success of your future labors in America.
Favored as we have been with your rising, and your meridian luster, we ought
not to envy our brethren on the western continent, the benefit of your evening
say,

Hitherto, Sir, you have been our pattern in every meritorious exertion in the
investigation of religious truth, in every thing open and courageous in the
profession of it. And when you are removed to a distant region, we trust that
you will occasionally hear, that your illustrious example has not been so long
exhibited before us in vain. We shall think it our duty upon every proper
occasion, and at all hazards, to avow our attachment to the genuine truths of
the Christian religion; and if, in the discharge of this duty, we should be
exposed even to severer persecutions than those which you have encountered, we
hope that our conduct will not disgrace the honorable cause in which we may
suffer.

We, Sir, rejoice with you, in the assurance of the ultimate triumph of the
kingdom of God, and of Christ, and of the universal dominion of truth and
virtue, of order, liberty, and peace. And though we deplore the probable
distresses of the intervening period, we are happy in the persuasion, that
infinite wisdom will direct and control the storm, and that all the
intermediate calamities will be as an evanescent point, in comparison with that
glorious and happy state of things, of which they are the necessary means, and
to which they ultimately tend.

In the mean time, we shall regard it as our indispensable duty, to prepare
ourselves and others for these interesting events; not only by the zealous
propagation of what we judge to be important truth, by every fair and
honorable method, but likewise by exemplifying in our whole conduct, the
tendency of the principles of the Christian religion, when properly understood,
to form the human mind to that strength and elevation of character, in which
the true dignity of our nature consists; and by which we may most effectually
put to shame the calumnies of malignity, the prejudices of ignorance, and the
scoffs of infidelity.

That your voyage may be prosperous, that your future lot may be happy, beyond
the most sanguine expectations of your warmest friends; and that your sphere of
usefulness may be widely extended, and prolonged to the most distant period of
human exertion, is the ardent wish, and servent prayer, of

Reverend and dear Sir, Your affectionate friends, The Members of the Unitarian
Society. T. LINDSEY, Chairman.
London, 18th March, 1794.
The Address of the United Congregations of Protestant Dissenters at Birmingham.
DEAR SIR,
KNOWING the near approach of your departure from this country, we cannot but
think we should be guilty of a culpable neglect, did we not previously bid you
an affectionate farewell.

We have beheld with mingled indignation and regret, that spirit of persecution
which kindled the flames of ninety-one, spreading through the realm its baneful
influence, and pursuing into his retreat, the friend and ornament of his
country.

A spirit which was thought, in this country at least, to be for ever extinct,
inspiring its barbarous violence into a lawless mob, drove you from this place,
and broke those bonds, which form the sacred connection of a pastor with his
flock.

Wanton in malice, the same spirit has continued to persecute you with private
molestation, and with public calumny. The prostituted abilities of Mr. Burke
have industriously seized each public occasion of exciting against you the
public odium, while the dark assassinating spirit of anonymous abuse, has been
busy in the public prints, and found means to assail and wound the tranquillity
of your most private retirements.

From a country where you have met with injustice instead of reward, with
calumny and persecution instead of praise and esteem -- we cannot wonder you
should depart.

The hope, that in America you will find that asylum which is here denied you;
the confidence, that a free country will receive a veteran son of liberty, with
all the respect that is due to his worth; the belief that those who have fought
and bled for their own rights will reverence one who has been deprived of his;
the certainty, that the implacable enemies of liberty will never permit you, in
this country, to enjoy repose; and the strong suspicion, that they would gladly
seize an opportunity, to aim not only at your personal freedom, but even at
your life itself, -- reconcile us to the prospect of your departure, by
demonstrating its necessity.

Wherever you go, renown will attend you. In England alone are you calumniated.
In every other land, each grateful science will crowd around, and offer a
garland to him, whose genius has enlarged their sphere, or added to their
stability. Liberty will warmly welcome you to any of her dominions. Virtue and
Religion will hail, with joyful smiles, the arrival of their intrepid champion,
their ardent votary.

We have, on a former melancholy occasion, expressed our sense of the services
you rendered us -- we expressed less than we felt, and we again send you our
thanks. -- While tyranny will rejoice; while bigotry and superstition will clap
their hands at your departure -- all that have been enlightened by your labors
will give, in the tribute of a silent tear, more than those powers, with all
their boasted influence, can bestow on their most favorite vassals.

Though you depart, your labors remain. The propagation of truth is silent,
and slow, but it is irresistible. The feed that you have strewn around, will
not lie buried in the earth for ever. It is arising, and it will arise, till it
ripen into a glorious harvest.

To your talents, your integrity, and love of truth, we shall, while we live,
bear testimony. We rejoice, that of these no enemy can deprive you. While it
will afford consolation to you to reflect, that no virtuous effort you ever
made can possibly be lost, it shall be some consolation to us, that we have
enjoyed, that we do still enjoy, so many of their effects.

Though the waters of a wide sea will soon roll between us -- your example,
your precepts, and your principles, shall not be absent. These shall continue
present in our minds, and shall inspire our conduct.

May he who curbs the ocean, who stills the wild winds, and the tumultuous
biliows, grant you a prosperous passage, and safely land you on the shores of
America.

Signed by the unanimous desire of a numerous meeting of subscribers, belonging
to the two societies of Protestant Dissenters, assembling in the Union Chapel,
Livery-street.

RADCLIFFE SCHOLEFIELD, JOHN EDWARDS.

Birmingham, March 25 th. 1794.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, WRITTEN BY Dr. PRIESTLEY.
1. THE History and present State of Electricity, with original Experiments,
illustrated with Copper Plates, 5th Edition, corrected, 1l. 1s. in boards.

N. B. A continuation of this work, with original Experiments by Mr. Nicholson,
in 1 vol. 4to. is in the Press. -- The Continuation will be sold alone, 1l. 1s.
in boards.

2. A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity, 5th Edition, 8vo. 2s.
6d. sewed.

3. The History and present State of Discoveries relating to Vision, Light, and
Colors, 2 vols. 4to. illustrated with a great number of Copper Plates, 1l.
11s. 6d. in bds. 1l. 18. bd.

4. Experiments and Observations on different Kinds of Air and other Branches
of Natural Philosophy, connected with the Subject, 3 vols. 1l. 1s. in boards,
being the former Six Volumes abridged and methodi^ed, with many Additions.

5. Philosophical Empiricism: containing remarks on a Charge of Plagiarism
respecting Dr. H -- s, interspersed with Observations relating to different
Kinds of Air, 1s. 6d.

6. Experiments relating to the Decomposition of Dephlogisticated and
Inflammable Air; and on the Generation of Air from Water, 1s.

7. Heads of a Course of Lectures on Experimental Philosophy, including
Chemistry, 3s. 6d. in boards.

8. A Familiar Introduction to the Theory and Practice of (...), with
Copper Plates, 2d Edit. 5s. boards, 6s. bd.

9. A New Chart of History, containing a View of the principal Revolutions of
Empire that have taken place in the World; with a Book describing it,
containing an Epitome of universal History, 4th Edition, 10s. 6d.

10. A Ch^rt of Biography, with a Book containing an Explanation of it, and a
Catalogue of all the name, inserted in it, 6th Edition, very much improved,
10s. 6d.

N. B. These Charts mounted on Canvas and Rollers, to be hung up in a Study,
etc. are 14s. each.

11. The Radiments of English Grammar, adapted to the use of Schools, a new
Edition. 1s. 6d. board.

12. The same Grammar, with Note, and Observations, for the use of these who
have made some proficiency in the Language, 4th Edition.

13. Lectures on History and General Policy; to which is prefixed, an Essay on
a Course of Liberal Education, for Civil and Active Life, 4to. 1l. 1S. in
boards, or in 2 vols. 8vo. 12S. in boards, or 14S. bound.

14. Observations relating to Education: more especially as it respects the
Mind; to which is added, an Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil
and Active Life, 2d Edition, 3s. 6d. in boards.

15. A course of Lectures on Oratory and Criticism, 4to. 10s. 6d. in boards,
14s. bound.

16. An Essay on the first Principles of Government, and on the Nature of
Political, civil, and Religious Liberty, 2d Edition, much enlarged, 4s. in
boards, 5s. bound. In this Edition are introduced the Remarks on church
Authority, in answer to Dr. Balguy. formerly published separately.

17. Letters to the Rt. Hon. Mr. Burke on his Reflections on the Revolution in
France, 8vo. 3d Edition, 2. 6d. sewed.

18. Familiar Letters, addressed to the Inhabitants of the Town of Birmingham,
in resutation of several Charges advanced against the Dissenters, and
Unitarians, by the Rev. Mr. Madan. -- Also Letters to the Rev. Edward Burn, in
Answer to his on the Insallibility of the Apostolic Testimony concerning the
Person of Christ. And Considerations on the differences of Opinion among
Christians, in Answer to the Rev. Mr. Venn, 2d Edition, 5s. sewed, 6s, bound.

19. An Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind, on the
Principles of Common Sease, Dr. Beattie's Essay on the Nature and Immutability
of Truth, and Dr. Oswald's Appeal to Common Sense, in Behalf of Religion, 2d
Edition, 5s. in boards, 6s. bound.

20. Hartley's Theory of the Human Mind, on the Principle of the Association of
Ideas, with Essays relating to the Subject of it, 8vo. 6s. in boards, 7s. bound.

21. Disquisitions relating to Matter and spirit. To which is added the History
of the Philosophical Doctrine concerning the Origin of the Soul, and the Nature
of Matter; with its influence on Christianity, especially with respect to the
Doctrine of the Pre-existence of Christ. Also the Doctrine of Philosophical
Necessity illustrated, 2d Edition, enlarged and improved: with Remarks on those
who have controverted the Principles of them, 2 vols. 8s. in boards, 10s. 6d.
bound.

A Free Discussion of the Doctrines of Materialism and Philosophical Necessity,
in a Correspondence between Dr. Price and Dr. Priestley; to which are added, by
Dr. Priestley, an Introduction, explaining the Nature of the Controversy, and
Letters to several Writers who have animadverted on his Disquisitions, relating
to Matter and Spirit, or his Treatise on Necessity, 8vo. 6s. in boards, 7s.
bound.

23. A defense of the Doctrine of Necessity, in two Letters to the Rev. Mr.
John Palmer, 2s.

24. A Letter to Jacob Bryans, Esquire. in defense of Philosophical Necessity, 1s.

25. A Philosophical Enquiry concerning Human Liberty, by W. Collins, Esquire. with
a Preface by Dr. Priestley, 2s. 6d.

The three preceding Articles may be properly bound up with the the second
Volume of Disquisitions on Matter and Spirit.

Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever, containing an Examination of the
principal Objections to the Doctrines of Natural Religion, and especially those
contained in the writings of Mr. Hume. Also a State of the Evidence of Revealed
Religion, with Animadversions on the two last Chapters of the first Volume of
Mr Gibbon's History of the Decline and fall of the Roman Empire; and an Answer
to the Letters of Mr. William Hammon, 2 vols. 8vo. 7s. sewed, or bound in one
volume, 8s.

27. Letters to the Philosophers and Politicians of France, on the Subject of
Religion, 1s.

A Harmony of the Evangelists in Greek. To which are prefixed, Critical
Dissertations in English, 4to. 14s. in boards, 17s. bound.

29. A Harmony of the Evangelists in English, with Notes, and an occasional
Paraphrase for the use of the Unlearned. To which are prefixed, Critical
Dissertations, and a Letter to the Bishop of Ossory, 4to, 12s. in boards, 15s.
bound.

N. B. Those who are possed of the Greek Harmony, may have this in English,
without the Critical Dissertations, 8s. in bds.

The Greek and English Harmony with the Critical Dissertations, complete, 1l.
1s. in boards, or 1l. 4s. bound.

30. Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion, in 2 vols. 8vo. 2d Edition,
10s. 6d. in boards, 12s. bound.

The third Part of this Work, containing the Doctrines of Revelation, may be
had alone, 2s. 6d. sewed.

31. An History of the Corruptions of Christianity, with a general Conclusion,
in two Parts. Part I. containing Considerations addressed to Unbelievers, and
especially to Mr. Gibbon. Part II. containing Considerations addressed to the
Advocates for the present Establishment, and especially to Bishop Hurd, 2 vols.
8vo. 12s. in boards. or 14s. bound. Or, bound uniformly with the three
following Defenses of it, in 3 vols. 1l. 4s.

A Reply to the Animadversions on the History of the Corruptions of
Christianity, in the Monthly Review for June, 1783; with Observations relating
to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, concerning the (...) of Christ, 8vo.
1s.

33. Remarks on the Monthly Review of the Letters to Dr. (...); in which the
Rev. Mr. Samuel (...), the writer of that Review, is called upon to defend what
he has advanced in it, 6d.

34. Letters to Dr. Horsley, Archdeacon of St. Albans, in three Parts,
containing farther Evidence that the Primitive Christian Church was Unitarian,
7s. 6d. sewed.

N. B. These last three Articles together in boards, 9s. or 10s. 6d. bound.

35. An History of Early Opinions concerning Jesus Christ, compiled from
Original Writers; proving that the Christian Church was at first Unitarian, 4
vols. 8vo. 1l. 4s. in boards, or 1l. 8s. bound.

36. A General History of the Christian Church, to the Full of the Western
Empire, in 2 vols. 8vo. 14s. in boards, 16s. bound.

37. Defenses of Unitarianism, for the Year 1786; containing Letters to Dr.
Horn, Dean of Canterbury; to the Young Men, who are in a Course of Education
for the Christian Ministry, at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge: to Dr.
Price; and to Mr. Parkhurst; on the subject of the Person of Christ, 3s.

38. Defenses of Unitarianism for the Year 1787; containing Letters to the Rev.
Dr. Geddes, to the Rev. Dr. Price, Part II. and to the Candidates for Orders in
the Two Universities, Part II. Relating to Mr. Howes's Appendix to his
Under-Graduate of Oxford, Dr. Croft's Bampton Lectures, and several other
Publications, 2s. 6d.

39. Defenses of Unitarianism for the years 1788 and 1789; containing Letters
to the Bishop of St. David's to the Rev. Mr. Barnard, the Rev. Dr. Knowles, and
the Rev. Mr. Hawkins, 3s. 6d.

N. B. The three preceding articles together in boards 9s. or bound 10s. 6d.

40. A View of the Principles and Conduct of the Protestant Dissenters, with
respect to the Civil and Ecclesiastical constitution of England, 2d Edit. 1s.
6d.

41. A Free Address to Protestant Dissenters, on the Subject of the Lord's
Supper, 2d Edit. with Additions, 2s.

42. An Address to Protestant Dissenters, on the Subject of giving the Lord's
Supper to Children, 1s.

43. A Free Address to Protestant Dissenters, on the Subject of Church
Disipline; with a preliminary Discourse concerning the Spirit of Christianity,
and the Corruptions of it by false Notions of Religion, 2s. 6d. sewed.

44. (...)

45. A Letter to a Layman, on the Subject of Mr. Lindsey's Proposal for a
Reformed English Church, on the Plan of the late Dr. Samuel Clarke, 6d.

46. Three Letters to Dr. Newcome, Bishop of Waterford, on the Duration of our
Savior's Ministry, 3. 6d. sewed.

47. Letters to the Jews; inviting them to an amicable Disucssion of the
Evidence of Christianity, in two parts, 25.

48. Letters to the Members of the New Jerusalem Church, founded by Baron
Swedenborg, 1s. 6d.

49. Letters to a Young Man, occasioned by Mr. Wakefield's Essay on Public
Worship, 1s. 6d.

50. Letters to a Young Man, Part II. in Reply to Mr. Evanson on the Dissonance
of the Gospels, 2s. 6d.

51. An History, of the Sufferings of Lewis de Marolles, and Mr. Isaac ^e
F^^re, upon the Revocation of the Edict of Nantz: with a Preface by Dr.
Priestley, 8vo. 3s. sewed.

52. Forms of Prayer, and other Offices, for the Use of Unitarian Societies,
8vo. 3s. swed.

53. Discourses on Various Subjects, viz. On resigning the Pastoral Office at
Leeds -- on undertaking the Pastoral Office at Birmingham -- The proper
Constitution of a Christian Church, with a Preface on the present State of
those who are called rational Dissenters -- The Importance and Extent of Free
Enquiry -- The Doctrine of Divine Influence on the Human Mind -- Habitual
Devotion -- The Duty of not living to ourselves -- the Danger of bad Habits --
The Duty of not being ashamed of the Gosple -- Glorying in the Cross of Christ
-- Taking the Cross and following Christ -- The Evidence of Christianity from
the Persecution of Christians, 8vo. 6s. in boards, 7s. bound.

54. Discourse; on the Evidences of Divine Revelation, 8vo. 6s. in boards.

55. A Sermon on the Slave Trade, preached at Birmingham, 1788, 1s.

56. Reflections on Death. A Sermon on the Death of the Rev. Robert Robinson,
of Cambridge, 1s.

57. A View of Revealed Religion. A Sermon on the Admission of the Rev. W.
Field, of Warwick, with a Charge by the Rev. Thomas Belsham, 1s. 6d.

58. The proper Objects of Education in the present State of the World,
represented in a Discourse delivered April 27, 1791, to the Supporters of the
New College at Hackney, with a Prayer, by the Rev. Mr. Belsham, 1s.

59. A Discourse on occasion of the Death of Dr. P^^^, delivered at Hackney,
May 1, with a short Sketch of his (...) and Character, and a List of his
Writings, 1s.

60. A Particular Attention to the Instruction of the Young, recommended in a
Discourse at Hackney, Dec. 31, 1798, on entering on the Pastoral Office there,
1s.

61. The Duty of Forgiveness, a Discourse intended to have been delivered soon
after the Riots in Birmingham, 1s.

62. A Discourse on the Evidence of the Resurrection of Jesus, 1s. 6d.

63. A Sermon on the Fast Day, 1793. 1s.

64. A Sermon on the Fast Day, 1794; with a Preface,

65. An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Riots in Birmingham, in 2
parts, price 3s. 6d. each, sewed, or 8s. bound together.

66. A Catechism for Children and Young Persons, 5th Ed. 4d.

67. A Scripture Catechism, consisting of a Series of Questions, with
references to the Scriptures, instead of Answers. 2d Edit. 4d.

Dr. Watts's Historical Catechism, with Alterations, 2d Edit. 9d.

69. Considerations for the Use of Young Men, and the Parents of Young Men, 2d
Edit. 2d.

70. A Serious Address to Masters of Families, with Forms of Family Prayer. 1s.

71. An Appeal to the serious and candid Professors of Christianity, on the
following subjects, viz. 1. The Use of Reason in Matters of Religion. 2. The
Power of Man to do the Will of God. 3. Original Sin. 4. Election and
Reprobation. 5. The Divinity of Christ: and 6. Atonement for Sin by the Death
of Christ; a new Edition: to which is added, A Concise History of those
Doctrines; and An Account of the Trial of Mr. Elwall, for Heresy, and
Blasphemy, at Stafford Assizes, 3d.

72. A Familiar Illustration of certain Passages of Scripture, relating to the
same Subjects, 2d Edit. 6d.

73. A General View of the Arguments for the Unity of God, and against the
Divinity and Preexistence of Christ, from Reason, from the Scriptures, and from
History, 2d Edit. 3d.

74. A Free Address to Protestant Dissenters as such. By a Dissenter. A new
Edition enlarged and corrected, 1s. 6d.

75. A Free Address to those who petitioned in 1780 for the Repeal of a late
Acts of Parliament in favor of the Roman Catholics, 2d, or, 12s. per Hundred
to give away.

N. B. The last Ten Tracts, No. 66 to 76, may be had together in boards, by
giving Orders for Dr. Priestley's Smaller Tracts, price 5s. or 6s. bound.


