THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM SCUDDER, AN OFFICER IN THE LATE NEW YORK LINE, Who was
taken Captive by the Indians at FORT STANWIX, On the 23d of July, 1779, and was
holden a Prisoner in Canada until October, 1782, and then (...) sent to
New York and admitted on Parole: WITH A small Sketch of his Life, AND SOME
OCCURRENCES OF THE WAR, Which chiefly happened under his Notice previous to his
Captivity. CONTAINING ALSO, SOME Extracts from History, Novels, etc.

PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. M DCC XCIV.

TO THE PRINTER.
Sir,
I HAVE sent you a JOURNAL, which I kept whilst a prisoner in Canada; and also
a small Sketch of th^^ war until I was taken, which last was chiefly written by
the strength of memory after returning home, or in 1784, except that part which
relates to the death of Miss Jane M'Crea and Lieut. Tobias Van Vactor, which I
found in a pocketbook where some remarks were made. One thing ought to plead
in my favor viz. -- that such occurrences as the Journal contains, and which
were penned whilst a captive in particular, were written as they now stand, I
not having waste paper to enable me to make the necessary corrections and
amendments: therefore, whatever shall appear amiss, I trust will be excused,
more especially, as I never designed it for the press; but the memorandums
which I kept, by lending and much handling, beginning to be defaced, I have
concluded to commit it to print. At the same time, from a conviction of its
many imperfections, I cannot but feel the greatest diffidence in suffering it
to appear before a discerning public.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant, W. SCUDDER.
New York, May 10, 1794.
THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM SCUDDER.
I WAS born at Westfield, in New Jersey, and for a number of years in my youth
could never say that I enjoyed a state of health; however, my days glided on
until at the age of twenty-two years, when I was united in the bands of
matrimony to a person who was not my choice. Here it may not be improper to
caution all parents against too much rigidness in the choice of their
children's marrying. In case of any accident, persuasions and good arguments
ought justly to be exercised; but to lay a positive command, and put it in
force, brings an endless and living sorrow upon the married pair; at the same
time I would particularly recommend it to all young people, to live a virtuous
and religious life, as the reverse brings on sorrows and reflections not easily
erased -- The spring of life being gone, which thought is very oppressive to a
feeling mind, at least when not spent to that purpose for which the Great
Author of our existence designed it. It is certain, that in the time of youth,
the greatest comforts are to be enjoyed; for in general, health is shooting
forth her blooms, which renders the prospect before us pleasing and
entertaining; there is so great a field for improvement in the time of youth,
that if properly cultivated, will lay in such a rich harvest, as will bring us
on the great theatrical stage of life, upon so good a foundation, that honor,
peace and tranquillity, will pursue by a continued course of doing well until
our glass is run: we shall die in peace, and leave a blessing behind us --
Virtue, thou fairest of jewels! it ought to be written with a golden pen, and
printed with a diamond. I would never advise a person to marry altogether for
fancy's (...), judgment with a feeling regard, ought to take (...) lead: for
instance, although a man or woman may not be so comely, still by a virtuous and
an ^^conomical life, their affections will cement and rest proximate together.

After my marriage, my two brothers being settled some distance from home, my
father thought proper to continue me in his house, and being of a fretful
disposition, and growing old and his faculties failing, added to my
afflictions: for let me do right or wrong, I was almost sure of meeting with
blame, although he was a tender hearted man, and the poor often experienced his
benevolence. I would ever advise a new married pair, not to live under the same
roof with their parents, (especially farmers) as it frequently creates a
discord, they having two separate interests, generally speaking. Thus I
continued until the tenth day of November, 1775, when I engaged in the first
Jersey regiment, under Captain Andrew M'Myers, what was called a first
sergeant, and I thought it a great office; however, a number of my
acquaintances suspected I would not continue in the service; but being a whig,
and all for liberty, I left home, which was by no means irreputable, as my
father had a handsome estate, and plenty of assistance.

After recruiting some young men of good characters, we were quartered in the
barracks in Elizabeth-Town. We went that winter to ^empstead Plains, on Long
Island, to disarm some inhabitants who it was reported were unfriendly to the
common cause, under the command of General Heard, who brought the Middlesex
militia with him, and our regiment, which was under Lord Stirling, made up
about twelve hundred men, with which we boldly marched on; our martial
appearance so struck the poor inhabitants, that they came running in with their
old rusty firelocks and swords, some appeared not to have been fired off since
the days of Oliver Cromwell. In a few days we made a conquest, and returned
back gallant and victorious, not having a man killed or wounded, only a brother
sergeant of mine fainted away, on the Plains, from a report that some regulars,
were in Hempstead, entrenching themselves.

In February our regiment was ordered to New York, and began to fortify the
town. In the same month I met with an old friend of mine, who had formerly been
well acquainted at my father's house* and had just received a captain's
commission from the New York provincial congress; he solicited me to accept a
commission and go with him, which I had no objection to, as I had often to
stand cap in hand to some officers whom I did not think my equals before they
received their commissions and became men of consequence; I therefore
immediately made application to Lord Stirling, who interceded with General Lee,
then commander in chief, and on producing a warrant from the New York Congress,
obtained a discharge. I then purchased a sword and became an officer. I went on
recruiting rapidly, so that by the assistance of one ^^^jeant and corporal, I
got sixty-one stout, able bodied men, all quartered in Westfield, on the
inhabitants, at one dollar each man per week; so that I judge, in the whole
moneys expended, I lost one hundred pounds, part of which I had to pay in hard
money, after the close of the war. In April we were ordered to New York, and
from thence to Stillwater, where we lay about six weeks, and then went to
Ticonderoga. In June I had the command of some batteaux (by order of Colonel
Co^^^eli^e Wynkoop, of the 4th New York regiment, to which we belonged) that
were loaded with provisions to go to Crown Point, where our army then lay,
under the command of General Sullivan, having t^treated from Canada, -- an^
such a scene of mortality as was exhibited at that place, I never had beheld.
The hospital I judged to be about one hundred and fifty feet in length; on the
lower floor in two ranges on each side (...) the poor sick and distressed
soldiers. Their disorder was chiefly the smallpox -- Some groaning and begging
for water, some dying, and others dead and sewed up in their blankets; let it
suffice to say, that by the middle of the afternoon they would begin to carry
the dead from the hospital: I counted twenty-one carried out at one time, and
it was common to bury fifteen or twenty in a day. At Fort George the same
disorder prevailed, with other epidemical diseases, which were as fatal as at
Crown Point. My memory will not permit me to assert, but as near as I can
recollect, it was judged that near six thousand persons died in that campaign,
which was in the year 1776. In New Jersey that year, the mortality was great,
although General Washington's army was more healthy.

What a surprising event the independency of America ha^ produced! A country
then unarmed, undisciplined, epidemical disorders prevailing, and in the fall
of 1776 the army almost disbanded, our fortifications take^^ and at least
twenty thousand fine British troops, well disciplined and found, to withstand.
Surely no man but an Atheist, can deny the interposition of Providence in our
behalf.

In July or August General Gates took the command at Ticonderoga, and the mount
on the opposite side of the lake was fortified. In the fall of the year our
regiment, with a company of nine-months men, commanded by Capt. Collins, were
ordered to Skeensborough, where we lay until the beginning of the winter, when
we were disbanded, and every ^^an went where he pleased.

The same fall, a battle was ^ought on-Lake Champlain, by the two fleets, but
the British gaining the victory, it put an end (on our part) to any further
armament by water in that quarter. General Arnold ^ought with his own vessel
well, but it was supposed that experience in that way of righting was wanting.
General Waterbury was taken, with a number of prisoners, who were all sent to
their own homes on parole, by Sir Guy Carlton. I will just make this
observation -- that I am of opinion* had Sir Guy Carlton came out Commander in
Chief, at the commencement of the war, America would never have obtained her
independence; for as soon as any prisoners were taken, he would, if not at too
great a distance from him, wait on them himself and treat them with much
philanthropy, and tell them they were a deluded set of people, and to return
home and stay quietly on their farms; but at the same time, if they were again
taken under arms without being properly exchanged, the law o^ nations ^ould be
put in force against them: in fact, his treatment was so mild, that I very much
doubt whether we should have been able to have kept an army up, as every
soldier would have been sure of returning home after being taken. However these
are my own sentiments.

The same fall, an appointment of officers took place in the York line, and I
received a lieutenant's commission, under Col. G. Van Schaick, who ordered me
on the recruiting service, at which, being a stranger in the state of New York,
I thought to stand a better chance in Jersey, where I was acquainted, but found
it impracticable to list any men in that quarter of the world, as General How,
lay in Brunswick, and General Washington, in Morris-Town. During my stay in
Jersey that winter, a great many skirmishes happened between the British and
Americans, chiefly foraging parties. I was at a place called Hanover, where
some of the Jersey militia lay, and an express arrived with intelligence that a
party of the enemy from New York, were coming on to Morris-Town, which spread a
general alarm; however, it turned out to be about three hundred prisoners, who
were chiefly taken at Fort Washington, and had been confined in sugar houses,
cold jails, etc. The poor objects presented a shocking view; for their appeared
nothing in them but monuments of cruelty -- emaciated with cold, hunger and
poverty, being so feeble as scarcely to be able to support their cold and
benumbed limbs, and to be short, their hardships had been so severe, that the
major part of them died after returning home, in spite of every effort for
their relief. What a difference between the treatment of the prisoners in
New York, and those who were taken under General Carlton's command: The one
treated with benevolence, the other hurried into jails, dungeons and prison
ships, where horse-cart loads would (...) buried in one day: nay, it is a fact,
that the friends o^ the poor prisoners in New York, were prohibited from giving
them any relief. I remained in Jersey until toward spring, when I joined my
regiment at Fort George, and lay there until Ticonderoga was evacuated.

Our army retreated by Skeensborough to Fort Edward. We lay about fifteen days
at Fort George after the evacuation, and then burnt four fine new brigs, which
had been built for the defense of the lake, together with the barracks, and
blew up the fort. We then marched to Kingsbury and encamped near Fort Edward
for a few days, having previously sent all our stores from Fort George to Fort
Edward, even the cannon-balls, before we decamped.

The second day after we encamped at Kingsbury, a guard, about a mile from us,
toward Fort Ann, was attacked by some Indians, who killed twelve of them. Our
regiment was immediately ordered to march where the ^^ring was, and to the
honor of our Lieutenant Colonel (Vandyke) and the regiment, they were soon
under a full march to the spot, where every one, in my opinion, expected we
should have an attack; but on our approach, the Indians fled. The men who were
killed were all from New England, fine, young, genteel persons. A few days
after, we retreated toward Fort Miller; the army was then under the command of
General Schuyler. I am at a loss exactly where we encamped; but I judge about
three miles from Fort Edward. The next morning, it being my tour to go on duty,
I was ordered with a party of men to go about half way from camp to Fort
Edward. Some jocular conversation happened between my good friend Licut. Tobias
Van Vactor and myself; he remarked that I was going forward to be a terror to
the wo^ds, etc. After quitting camp about one mile, a heavy discharge of
musquetry was given just ahead, on which we mended our pace, and to our
surprise, found six men and an officer expiring with their wounds, all being
scalped. They were on their way to Fort Edward, where some of our troops then
lay; and as they had gone without orders, and a report spread in camp of the
affair it was taken for granted that it was my party which was cut off, and
that I was killed; it was mentioned at head quarters, by the Colonel of our
regiment, that myself and party must have fallen. After viewing the melancholy
sight, we proceeded a little further, and according to orders, secreted
ourselves in the woods until evening, when we returned to camp, to the no small
joy of our brother officers and soldiers.

The next day, my friend Lieutenant Van Vactor, was on duty, and a party was to
go to the heights beyond Fort Edward. The duty lay between him and another
officer. Some proposals were made to draw lots, but poor Tobias, scorning any
thing which had the least appearance of fear, cheerfully set out with his
guard; and in the same jocular way, in return to him, I remarked -- "Now
Tobias, surely the savages will tremble at your approach" -- But I little
thought on what I was saying; for the heights where he lay, about the middle of
the afternoon, were attacked by the Indians, and being overpowered, was himself
killed and all his guard, except one man. The Indians then proceeded within gun
shot of Fort Edward, and took the mother and daughter by the name of M'Crea
(the young lady's christian name was Jane) and carried them on the spot where
the above bloody scene was transacted, and there murdered and scalped both
mother and daughter. They stripped poor Van Vactor, and after scalping him,
stabbed him in several places; they then fastened a tomahawk in his breast,
sharpened a stick and erected him on his feet, by bracing the sharp part of the
stick under his chin, and left him a standing monument of their barbarity.

Thus was my dear friend, who ventured his life in the cause of freedom and his
country, treated! Good God! what a scene presented! to meet him thus mangled,
together with Miss M'Crea, side and side in a horse-cart! Melancholy thought!
The theme is too mournful to dwell on. -- After this unheard of cruelty,
vengeance was sworn against the Indians, which I am of opinion was of
advantage, as they never acted with that boldness afterward. The death of Miss
Jane M'Crea, spread a general alarm, particularly through the New England
states, and I believe drove many to arms, who before seemed to appear in
suspense. Her death also made some disturbance amongst the British; for it was
reported she was waiting at Fort Edward, for the British army to come forward,
as a Mr. Jones, was in said army to whom she was shortly to be married. The
next day I was a pall-bearer to assist in conveying my good friend to his last
retreat, which could not be done with dry eyes; he was buried with the honors
of war. Miss M'Crea was also buried in the same grave with him. The two
harmless monitors lay silent as the night, not an intervening cloud to disturb
their repose. Lie there hapless pair, and as your rest appears cordial together
under the cold clods, may your better part be triumphing in that haven, where
all sorrows are wiped away, and but one continued repose, will be your
everlasting bliss. On this occasion I will set down a few verses par^^
translated Mrs. by (...).

Blessed souls! though victims to a cruel death,
Beneath this dust lay quietly and rest;
May I the last debt of friendship to your hearse,
In flowing tears and never dying verse.
From me too soon an object is removed --
Some angel snatched him to the spheres above;
Yet on his ashes, I these tears bestow,
And in officious strains express my woe.
While we who once the living hero knew,
Repay to him an honor justly due;
Each pious muse unto his manes let sing,
That from this tomb, may a rich harvest spring.
Mr. Van Vactor was born and brought up in Brunswick, in New Jersey, but had
lived some time with General Schuyler, in a reputable office and character.

This scene puts me further in mind of a piece of poetry I read on the tomb of
two Pennsylvania officers, who were killed and scalped at Crown-Point, unarmed:

Brave sons of America, lie quiet here,
Britannia blush, Burgoyne let fall a tear;
And tremble Europe, sons of savage race,
Death and revenge, awaits you with disgrace.
The officer who was killed going to Fort Edward without arms or orders,
belonged to the New England line. The day we decamped from the ground where Van
Vactor was buried, the British took possession of Fort Edward. We marched to
the heights opposite Col. M'Crea's, and lay for a few days. The morning our
regiment left that place, it was my tour to go on duty as far as our last
encamping ground, and on my arrival, General Arnold, with a number of militia
was on the opposite side of the north river; the General ordered me to cross
the river, which I did on a raft of boards, leaving an Ensign with the party,
and was informed some British and Indians had a few minutes before parted from
a house within small gunshot of where we then were, on that side of the river.
And, after receiving some orders from the General, returned with the party
(consisting of about thirty men) with precaution, as we had to march some
distance through the woods, within about two miles of five hundred Indians, and a
number of Burgoyne's army. On our arrival on the ground, the army had marched
to Fort Miller; however, we overtook them, as the grass did not grow under our
feet. The militia aforementioned whom we left on the opposite side of the
river, appeared in high spirits, and were carelessly walking about, as the land
was clear and they apparently out of danger. Some Indians appeared in about
half an hour after our departure, the same side we were on; the militia fired
and whooped at them through derision, but about thirty of their most expert
warriors crossed the river, unperceived, and by the assistance of stumps, etc.
got opposite the militia before they discovered themselves; they then ^ired and
gave the war whoop, which so frightened the militia, that without firing a gun,
every man took to his heels promiscuously for near two miles; the Indians
followed in close pursuit and killed a number of men; but being met by the
brave Capt. John Graham and some volunteer troops from General Pomeroy's
brigade, with a field piece, a check was given the Indians, and in turn our
people planted several of them. If I mistake not, General Arnold's aid-de-camp,
as a volunteer, was wounded in the neck. The reason why I make use of the term
volunteer, is -- that it being impossible to put the whole army, or even a
large command, on so sudden an emergency, in motion, with that expedition which
appeared necessary, a few therefore voluntarily assembled to make an immediate
advance. My party at the same time had not reached the main body, although we
had a fair view of part of the militia's retreat; but the river being
impassable and our number so small, that we supposed any attempt in vain, as we
were unacquainted with the number of the enemy. I do not think that General
Arnold had any command of the militia, but himself and aid were on a
reconnoitering (...) through a clear country (or nearly so) and (...) returned
before the attack. -- This part of my memoirs, however, is written in the year.
1784, after a long captivity, with only the strength of memory; if I err,
whoever shall read this journal hope will pardon me.

We afterward by regular retreats, arrived (...) Fort Miller, Saratoga and
Still-Water, without any interruption with all our ordnance, baggage, etc. etc.
and in justice to General Schuyler and the army general, must say that they
behaved with all t^^ regularity and decorum which could have been expected from
a well regulated army under those circumstances. We had encamped a few days at
Still-Water, when an express arrived from Fort Stanwix, on the Mohawk river, if
I mistake not, by a Serjeant-Major from Colonel ^ansevoort's regiment, that the
fort was besieged by the British and Indians, under the command of Colonel St.
Ledger; on which news Colonel Van Scha^ck's regiment, to which I belonged, and
the first Massachusetts and part of another regiment of the same line, with two
brass pieces of artillery, were ordered for the relief of the garrison, under
the command of General Arnold. The artillery was commanded by Captain Dunbar,
and Lieutenants Driskel, and Kemper. Accordingly, about the middle of the
afternoon, we marched, and by a hard route on the third day arrived at the
German Flats, opposite what was called Shoemaker's, ^here we heard almost a
constant firing. A young man, I think by the name of Schuyler, who held a
commission in the British service, had come to the Flats where he was
acquainted, to persuade the people from their allegiance to the states,
particularly so, after the sad overthrow of so large a number of the militia,
who were inhabitants of that county, under General Herkimer; but it appeared
the people stood firm, although it might be said their place was invaded; they
were certainly in great danger, but were still so determined as to make
Schuyler a prisoner; he was tried by a court martial of the officers under
Arnold's command, and condemned to be hanged as a spy; a gallows was
accordingly erected for that purpose. Arnold however, concluded to grant him a
reprieve, on condition that he would leave an hostage behind to hang in his
place, if he did not perform the business he was going to send him on, with
punctuality, and return: otherwise, if an hostage was produced, and a
noncompliance on Schuyler's part, the hostage should die in his stead. A man
appeared and entered into Schuyler's place, on which General Arnold gave
Schuyler the following directions -- "That he the said Schuyler, should go
immediately to the commander of the British, lying before Fort Stanwix, and
inform him, that he the said Arnold, had under his immediate command, thirteen
hundred well disciplined troops, with a good train of artillery, and that if he
did not, without delay, raze the siege, they might expect he would march his
army and (...) them off, or make prisoners of the whole" -- wh^^ Schuyler
performed with punctuality, and returned the next day with intelligence that
the British, on hearing the report, had razed the siege and gone off, which was
authenticated by an express from the said fort. Schuyler was sent to Albany and
the army put under marching orders. -- I am not certain that the above are the
words of Arnold's orders to Schuyler, but are to the purport, as far as I could
learn.

During the siege at Fort Stanwix, General Herkimer, as I before mentioned, met
with an overthrow. Having embodied the major part (...) the best inhabitants of
that county (amounting to about seven hundred men) into a brigade, in order to
go to the relief of the said fort, they were met on their march by the Indians,
who totally defeated them; four hundred men or more were killed in the action,
supposed to be through misconduct, as part of the militia ran away in the first
onset: those who stood were almost to a man cut off. The General received a
wound in his leg, which was amputated; but it being warm weather, and he a
corpulent man, died of the wound.

The battle happened about eight days before our arrival, and after we marched
for the sort. Hearing the siege was razed, we left our artillery in order to
make what force we could, expecting to come up with the rear of the enemy; we
had to march over the ground where Herkimer's battle was fought, and as the
dead had not been buried, and the weather warm, they were much swollen and of a
purple color, which represented the frailty of man in a very figurative sense;
we must have marched over and very near, about four hundred dead bodies; which
brought on this reflection -- to what a pitch of vanity must they arrive, who
are so doatingly fond of the lump of clay which they possess; as it is daily
subject to putrefaction and decay.

We continued our march, without any molestation, until our arrival at the
fort, where we congratulated the old besieged officers and soldiers with joy
for their being relieved. The next morning, about five hundred men were sent
down Wood Creek after the enemy, but they had gone off.

General Arnold and the New England troops continued a few days at the garrison
and then marched down to join the main army, at Stillwater, leaving our
regiment at the Fort, not knowing but the British might again return to the
siege. I feel for Arnold -- he behaved like a disciplinarian, a sold^^ and real
friend to his country on this occasion. H^^^^duct with the northern army, after
their adv^^^ under general Gates, was certainly heroic and prudent, and his
services in the capture of Burgoyne, truly essential and successful -- But how
has he fallen! His glory is forever set, and his name as a man of true honor
and fidelity, ought to be obliterated.

Our arrival at Fort Stanwix, I judge to be about the latter end of August or
beginning of September, in the year 1777, at which place we continued until
October; we were then ordered to march to Albany, during which time we received
no interruption from the enemy. We left the fort about the 12th of October and
on our arrival at Schenectady, heard with astonishment that General Burgoyne
and his whole army had surrendered prisoners of war. Never were me^ more
thunderstruck at news; for we had not heard a hint of the affair, but lived in
^^^ly expectation of hearing of Burgoyne's arrival (...) Albany, as we had no
express for a considerable time. This was news of a most pleasing nature --
What a contrast in the countenance and behavior of every individual! Joy sat
on every brow; elevation and cordiality intermingled in all our conversation.
The committee on the Mohawk river did not receive the news until after we had
passed them.

General Washington's army met with a considerable loss that campaign, at the
Brandywine; but hutted themselves very snugly the winter following, at a place
called Valley Forge, whilst General How lay in Philadelphia.

We marched from Schenectady to Albany, where the main body of General Gates's
army in a few days arrived, having sent Burgoyne's troops, who surrendered on
the 15th of October, to Boston. -- Our army lay about two or three weeks, and
then marched from Albany to join General Washington, except the regiment to
which I belonged. The army, from information, had a tedious, rainy, cold march,
as it must have been some time in December before they arrived at their
cantonments, and had then to hut themselves; but a braver set of troops perhaps
never existed.

Our regiment lay a few weeks after the army had marched to the southward, and
then returned to Schenectady, where we were quartered all winter, although some
troops continued in Albany.

On the 18th day of April, 1778, we (...) orders to march to Albany, and there
embarked for (...), at which place we arrived in about ten days; we continued
there a week or upwards, when, to our joy, we were ordered to proceed to head
quarters, which we did by flow and easy marches -- having (...) regiment of
men, consisting of five hundred and eighteen rank and file; we crossed at (...)
through Blooming-Grove, Warwick, Sussex, East-Town, and so to Valley Forge,
where we arrived about the middle of the afternoon, but I am not certain as to
the day of the month; we were ordered to proceed on to a place, near the
Blue-Ball eighteen miles from Philadelphia, and were quartered in houses, where
we lived comfortably, amongst a sociable set of inhabitants, until July; when
orders were received for us to join the main army, to proceed after the British
who had evacuated Philadelphia, under the command of Sir Henry Clinton. We
pursued them until we came near Princeton; a draught was made to form a light
infantry, to be commanded by General Lee, and it being my tour of duty, it fell
to my lot to go into the said infantry; and accordingly, having twenty-two men
of my choice from our regiment, joined them. The next day we arrived at
English-Town, near Monmouth Courthouse, within little more than a mile of the
out wing of the British army; our regiment was commanded by Colonel Richard
Butler, Lieutenant Colonel Harmer, and Major Benjamin Ledyard, who was a Major
in the regiment to which I belonged; the other gentlemen were of the
Pennsylvania line. About break of day on the 28th, we were all under arms, and
a little after sunrise came opposite to Monmouth Courthouse on the left,
having passed through woods where some of the British had that night encamped.
However, previously to our proceeding so far, General Lee joined us with the
main body of infantry, and the whole being formed into sections four deep, made
a grand and extensive appearance; it was not easy to determine our number
particularly: a foot officer cannot form a judgment with as much precision as
an officer on horseback; but if I mistake not, the calculation was at least
five thousand men. On our front appearing opposite the enemy, who were marching
on the main road; it apparently struck them with consternation; was the rear of
their army, where were a number of wagons, etc. On our first approach, we
received a few shot from their musquetry on the right in the fields. We
continued our march to the heights on the left of the courthouse, and halted
in a piece of woods; General Wayne being forward, I heard him give orders to a
horseman, to inform General Lee of the situation the British were in, and that
a fairer prospect of attacking them with success, never could be exhibited! but
to our astonishment, General Lee, had wheeled the whole of the infantry off to
the right, except our regiment, and came on the rear of the enemy; but we, not
knowing Lee's maneuvers, marched down into the fields. Our dragoons, about 50
in number, were forward, and appeared to form some distance on the right of our
regiment, on which the British made a charge on them, and being overpowered by
numbers, they retreated; our regiment supported them, and the British in turn
were forced to give way, leaving two horses shot dead. We retreated into the
edge of a wood, where we sustained a cannonade from their artillery for nearly
an hour, during which time the British were maneuvering to form all their force
together, in order to advance for battle. At length, a strong party appeared in
order to attack us, which our officers perceiving, and finding the whole army
was in motion, we retreated on the right of where Lee was; but, in fact, we had
marched near two miles before we discovered him; he was then making a stand,
but on the approach of the enemy (their dragoons being in front and making a
charge) our infantry immediately retreated, by order of General Lee, as was
said, and it is a matter I do not doubt, as the army continued to retreat until
the British came fairly in sight of our main army, commanded by General
Washington. -- I mentioned that our regiment was on the right flank, some
considerable distance from Lee; indeed we were the whole retreat opposite the
main British army; and on their making a halt, we also halted, about half a
mile from them, in an orchard, when a party of British about equal to our
number, advanced within muskes shot of us, and a firing commenced on both
sides, in the open field (except a few apple trees.) One circumstance which
took place in the action, I remember: -- A certain William Orr, who was a
corporal in the first York regiment, appeared to be fitting down, and I,
supposing he was wounded, went to him and asked what was the matter; he told me
nothing; -- that he was only fixing his gun, on which he immediately fired; and
as near as I could tell, the ball first struck the ground, and by bouncing,
killed an officer who was standing a small distance from a large old trunk of a
tree, as at that very instant the officer fell. It was judged that we continued
in the field, and sustained a constant fire, for about fifteen or twenty
minutes, when Colonel Barber came and said, it was the commander in chief's
orders, that we should retreat. At this time, if I mistake not, the Colonel, on
his return to the main army, received a flesh wound. We were ordered to go and
take refreshment, on which we marched about two miles in the rear of the army,
the day being excessive hot, and having lost a number of men; out of three
hundred and sixty, we did not march more than one hundred and sixty to camp,
but numbers returned the next day, having been so overpowered with the heat, as
to sink under the fatigue. The party of the British with which we were engaged,
could not have been the troops who were first sent to attack us, as this party
appeared to be detached from their main army, and were approaching us when we
halted, and what became of those in our rear, I never could learn.

I remarked in a former part of this memoir, that the British appeared to be
struck with consternation; and those sentiments are still retained, as I
imagine they were not aware of our army's being so near them, particularly in
so early a part of the day; indeed I believe they thought we would not attack
them at all: but had we engaged them with the whole of our infantry at our
first approach, I am of opinion, nor can it be reversed, that we might have
taken a large body of the rear of their army; and at that time my judgment was
not alone. As to Lee, I can say by him as Michael did to the devil -- "that he
would bring no railing accusation against him, but the Lord rebuke thee:" so I
will not rail against the conduct of Lee, but if he has any conscience, let him
feel the rebuke of his country.

In the afternoon, on the same day, the New York brigade, and some of the
New England troops, were ordered to march and make an attack on a party who had
advanced on the right wing of the main army, nearly on the same spot where we
had been in the morning's skirmish, where it was expected a general battle
would be brought on; but it did not happen, although the American troops had
certainly the better of the ground; a number fell on both sides, particularly
the British. My respectable friend Colonel Van Schaick, I understood behaved
with calmness and true courage during the action, as well as the officers in
general of the York. (...); indeed the whole division received the thanks of
the commander in chief, for their good conduct. That night we lay on our arms,
expecting the next morning to have a general battle, but the British had
retreated from the ground in the dead of night, and left their killed on the
field; the next day orders were given to bury them, and it was a melancholy
spectacle, to see so many dead bodies lay exposed to the elements, and the
excessive heat added to the sight. We judged the British lost about five
hundred men, and our army somewhere between three and four hundred. There is no
doubt with me, from the best information I could obtain, that had not the
British retreated that night, the next day a general battle between the two
main armies would have been inevitable, and the consequence, on one side or the
other (and perhaps on both) would undoubtedly have proved very serious. Thus
much may be said, that our main army lay in sight of the British for about two
thirds of the day, and supported a heavy cannonade from their artillery, during
which time the balls, etc. were continually screaming in the air, and striking
amongst them, together with the almost intolerable heat of the day; all which
they appeared to support with undauntedness and true courage. Our artillery in
turn was so well served on them, that the British condescended to say, that in
time they would become equal to veteran troops: but my opinion is, that a
better set of artillerymen never went into a field, than what America could
that day boast of. In fact the American army, generally speaking, gained the
most unfading laurels. This account of the battle of Monmouth, may prove very
imperfect to a critical eye; but as it is only written for amusement, and on
the strength of memory, after the term of five years has elapsed, those who are
better acquainted with the facts herein related, will, I trust, excuse me.

After the battle, the army was put under marching orders, and in two days
arrived on the heights, above the town of Brunswick. Our regiment encamped on
the east side of the Raritan river, the light infantry having again reverted to
the several regiments to which they before belonged.

On the fourth day of July, being the second anniversary of our independence, a
sue-de-joye was displayed by the army, it being formed in two lines on the
south side of the river, on the heights opposite the bridge, and having the
artillery placed with the several brigades, a running fire began from the right
to the left, and so on, through the two lines. My health on that day being
somewhat impaired, I did not join the army, but was a spectator on the opposite
side of the river. The regularity of the firings, as an easy and steady running
fire of musketry, and a discharge of the artillery of each brigade at the
instant the musketry on their line ceased, together with a continued flame and
smoke, added to the grandeur of the prospect, and bespoke the appearance of a
warlike people, contending for true liberty -- What horrid engines of death
appeared! -- as if Mo^^^ Etna was vomiting forth from her volcanoes, fire and
smoke. Surely, said I, this is all through the pride and ambition of a few
aspiring mortals.

From Brunswick, the army moved by divisions through Jersey, to Dobbs's Ferry,
where they crossed the North River, and passed on to the White Plains. By
general orders, a draft was again made to form a light infantry brigade, which
was commanded by General Scott; old Doctor Skinner, was our head Surgeon, both
of whom would now and then swear a word. Capt. John Graham, Lieut. Charles
Person, and myself, were drafted* and we joined Colonel Richard Butler's
regiment. We marched down toward Kingsbridge, to a place called Tuckehowe, and
were stationed in that part of the country to watch the motions of the British,
who had arrived at New York. They kept a strong garrison at Kingsbridge, and
were often out into the country foraging, or marauding. Commands from our
infantry were every day or two ordered out to watch the motions of the enemy,
and guards were also kept out some distance from our encampment, which made the
infantry duty pretty hard. I think it was in September, when a party was sent
out toward Kingsbridge, under the command of Major Stewart; we proceeded
within one mile of the fort, when we were suddenly fired on by the British,
they being in the woods and our party in a long open field; it appeared the
enemy were almost round us before they began to fire. Major Stewart, with a few
men, were on horseback; and although he never was called a coward, yet he
turned his horse with what dragoons were with him, and left us in the open
field to shift for ourselves. There was a captain by the name of Odale, a
Lieutenant Williams, from Col. Graham's regiment of nine months or three years
men, but am not certain, and if I mistake not, Lieutenant John Hardenbergh --
however, there were no more officers except myself, and I think about
forty-five or fifty privates. We were immediately charged on by a body of
British dragoons, but every soldier stood his ground; and after the horse had
fired on us with their carbines, they retreated to load and charge on the party
again. We had at that time some Stockbridge Indians in our army, and if they
had risen out of the ground they could not have appeared more unexpected. The
head warrior came foremost, calling us cowards, because we did not pursue the
horse when they retreated; they being intoxicated with liquor, all arguments
proved ineffectual; the horse made another charge, and then retreated, which
the Indians perceiving, ran whooping and bellowing after them. Capt. Odale
thought it best to march a party forward in order to support the Indians, and
accordingly took I think sixteen men; but the foot appearing to be marching in
the same direction to assist the horse, they gave one more charge; on which the
Indians took to their heels, and the field being very long the horse came up
with them, and orders were given by the officer who commanded the dragoons, to
give no quarters to the copper-heads, which was put in force, as they killed
every one, except three, who were in the party, and most inhumanly too. Poor
Odale and his party were taken prisoners; but the rest of us made our escape
through a cornfield.

In a few weeks after, a considerable party of what was called Ya^gers, were
out on their old trade, and our people falling in with them, killed and took
every man. They were chiefly of the Hes^ian dragoons. I was not in the party,
and of consequence got no share of the prize; although I made a purchase of one
of the horses, saddle and bridle, that were taken; and to be sure, when I was
mounted on my beast that was near sixteen hands high, with my Dutch saddle, I
must have cut a figure. The saddle was composed of two pieces of wood in the
form of a half moon, the back part resting on the horse, supported by a pad and
sheep-skin, and the top covered by a sheep-skin in the same manner; so that
when mounted, it was not easy to retreat from the seat, as a bowsprit appeared
not only in the bow, but also in the stern, and the bridle weighed at least
twelv^^ pounds. Thus we went on from pillar to post, and from post to pillar,
until the latter end of November, when our regiment was ordered to go to Fort
Stanwix; of consequence, the York troops had to join their regiment which then
lay at Peeks-^ill, and from thence began our march and proceeded on to
Fish-Kill, and in time arrived at Albany.

An anecdote occurs to my mind. On our passage up the North river, we came to
anchor not far from Claverack, and a number of officers, among whom I recollect
were Lieut. Person, and James Bingham, and some others whose names I have
forgotten; however, we all went on shore, and walked near or quite two miles
into the country, to a public house, to refresh ourselves with supper, etc. and
I think not a person had his side arms or any kind of weapon of defense; but
being in our dishabille on board, went so on shore, or at least we had not our
regimentals. Upon our arrival at the Inn, we asked for something to drink; the
landlord pretended he had nothing but sower cider, which we took for granted,
and called for some, and sower enough it was; indeed it was so bad we could not
drink it. We then asked if he could mull some of it in eggs (using their
phrase.) Why yes, he believed he could; but appeared to do it with reluctance,
and when it came, it was curdled, and to make short, we could not drink it. We
had called for victuals, but received very surly answers -- that there was no
provision in the house, and so on. At length the house was surrounded with
armed men, and a Captain of the militia came in and enquired very strictly
where we came from, and which way we were bound. We were at a loss what
construction to put on such questions, but finally told them the regiment we
bel^^ged to, and which way we were bound, but found great difficulty in making
them believe us; and, if I mistake not, they would put no confidence in what we
said, until they had sent down and seen the sloop, etc. However, after they
found us out, the Captain addressed us in the following manner -- "Well
gentlemen, as I suppose you be, for I am now convinced; you see here is my
neighbor landlord, and I supposed he would not give you any thing to eat or
drink, and he his not to blame, let you think what you will; for you know,
neighbors, (for I must now call you so) that a number of vagrants are running
through the country pillaging, and what not; and then they run down to the
British, or somewhere else, and we were not certain but you were of that kind
of people, as our neighbor landlord, sent me word as soon as you came to his
house, as how a party was there, and was distrustful; and therefore we came to
see who you were, and which away, and so on. Why you have no regimentals, you
have no swords, no bayonets, nor them long sticks with sharp iron on the end, I
forgot what they are called." We told him, we supposed he meant espontoons --
"Ay, (...) espontoons. Well, well, landlord, I believe the men are honest, let
them have what they want." On which our generous landlord produced good liquors
and an excellent supper. We took care how we ventured on shore again without
our side arms, at least.

We continued a short time in Albany, and then marched to Schenectady. Our
baggage was put in batteaus to go up the Mohawk river. On our arrival at Fort
Johnson we received the news that Cherry Valley was besieged, which occasioned
our regiment to march early the next morning; and on our arrival at Colonel
Clock's an express came with information that the enemy had retreated. We
continued on, as the weather was very cold (it being some time in the middle of
December) several small snows fell during our march; but finally we arrived at
the garrison, not far from Christmas, where we were welcomed by Colonel
Gansevoort's officers, who, poor fellows, had been for a long time pent up in
that garrison. The next day they marched for Albany, (a distance of one hundred
miles, a considerable part of which was through the woods) -- We had not been
long at Fort Stanwix, before our friendly Indians made application to have a
fort picquetted in their town for them, as a defense against the Indians, who
adhered to the crown of G. Britain; and the request was thought so reasonable
that a party of about forty men under the command of Captain John Wendell,
Lieutenant Van Valkenburgh and myself, were sent to the Oneida castle. Our
Lieutenant Colonel (Van-Dyke,) and my Lord Hanson; our issuing commissary for
the garrison, accompanied us, and the next evening we had a grand ball or
dance. I had never fairly seen one of their dances before, only a small sketch
at Skeensborough, and was so elevated that I became an assistant in their
music; but I had to extend my pipes so high, and now and then being plied with
a glass of rum, (which I thought the Colonel orordered the oftener, to fix me)
I finally grew fatigued with my birth, and suddenly made my escape; two Indians
followed to catch me, in order to return to the dance, but had not the good
fortune to find me out that night. For a description of their method of
dancing, I shall refer to where I was a prisoner among them.

The next day all hands went to work, some one way and some another, in order
to erect our fort. It was the soldiers' duty to break the ground and dig the
trenches for the piquets, which was done by giving every soldier his task, and
that was, to cut twelve feet each man a day, two feet deep; and having so many
hands, we made fast work, although the snow and frost were very deep. The
Indians drew the logs for picquets, and old Daniel Tucker laid out the fort;
and such another I guess was never seen; but be it as it will, it had several
corners something in form of Bastions. In one corner the Indians would cut a
man's face on the picquets, which denoted one thing, the other corner another,
and so on; one was good news, another was bad news; and one was this name, and
the other that; they called me Carrawhaxet, that is, Bad News; I have forgot
the names given to the Captain and Van Valkenburgh. We continued there about
two weeks, when we were relieved by Captain John Copp, and returned to the
garrison. As this fort business is of such consequence, I must not forget to
mention, that one corner was called Congress, another General Washington, but
Lee, I believe was left out. The winter was passed with a good degree of
harmony in our quarters; we were so industrious as to cut and draw our own
firewood for the garrison, at least the soldiers did it for us. One very
handsome ball happened amongst us, which was in my room; I only lost my benches
and window-glass, which was made of paper, and a few other trifles.

In the latter end of March I was ordered on express to Fort Herkimer; but it
being in the afternoon when I left home, and having to ride thirty miles, night
came on before I could cross the river, at what was called Oriska, and a heavy
snow storm commencing, I had to stay the whole night in the woods alone,
without either fire or covering, except the canopy of Heaven, amid the solemn
shades of a dark and beating storm, exposed to wild beasts, and worse than all,
the savages were frequently making incursions on the course I was ordered,
which added not a little to the gloom of my situation. The day appearing, I
pursued my journey, and swam my horse across the Mohawk at Shoemaker's; I rode
on that side of the river to the fort, where I was (...) across by a boat from
the garrison. In the afternoon I returned to Oriska, and tarried all night at
an old Dutchman's house; the man was from home, and the old lady spoke but very
little English. She asked me if I could speak Dutch; I told her (in Dutch) a
little, which was all the Dutch I could produce from my skill in that language,
and I got sadly paid for it: for all the English eloquence I was master of,
would not convince her but I could talk Dutch; and she was so offended, that I
went to bed supperless. The morning being clear and cold, I arose by break of
day, and gave a boy a dollar to go with me to the river, as he said there was a
canoe in which I could cross myself, and swim my horse; but on coming to the
river, the canoe was gone. The ^oy then ^old me, that some distance up, the
people ^ode across; and went to conduct me; and seeing a ^^ath, took it ^or
granted that it was a fording place; ^^ut on urging my horse, he went into the
water al^ost entirely under, and brought me nearly midway ^^th my body in the
water; the horse, however, ^^covered, and swam across; and, to be sure, the
^^idness of the current and depth of the water (as (...) was where people
crossed with sleighs on the ice) (...) me a very great fright; for I had no
idea of its (...) deep. It was then eighteen miles to our ga^^^n, and not a
house on the way; and, as I observ^^ (...) morning. I do not recollect of every
be^^ so near freezing as at this time; for I had not (...) more (...) before
(...) were (...) hard as ice could make them. I traveled a rough road, in that
situation, until I arrived, and shall ever think that I took such a cold on the
occasion, that I never recovered until my return from captivity. About this
time, some troops arrived at our garrison, but their intention was unknown. If
I mistake not, they were part of Colonel Gansev^ort's regiment, and one or two
rifle companies. The Indians appeared very inquisitive to know the meaning of
their arrival, and was answered -- 'to reinforce and make an addition to the
fort' -- which the Oneidas appeared pacified with.

On the night of the 16th of April, some batteaus were crossed from the Mohawk
river to Wood Creek so privately, that scarcely any one in the garrison, except
the guards, knew any thing of the affair; but, previous to the movement of the
boats, every officer and private received orders to hold themselves in
readiness to go on command. Some time before day, the garrison troops and those
who joined them, consisting of about five hundred men, were under way to Wood
Creek: the baggage was put on board the boats, and the main body marched to the
Oneida lake, a party being left, sufficient to manage the boats; I was with
them; we arrived at the lake and took refreshment about day-light-in, and then
the whole of the troops embarked on board the boats, and made their way on the
lake. About ten o'clock, we arrived at an island opposite Fort Brewington, at
the mouth, being the furthest end of the lake, which is computed to be
thirty-six miles in length. The party was immediately put on shore, and under
way for the Onondaga town, commanded by Colonel Van Schaick of the 1st New York
regiment, and Lieut. Col. Willett, of the 2d New York regiment; Major Co^hran
was the other field officer. I was ordered to stay and take the command of the
boats. The party proceeded and lay on their arms that night; the next morning,
by ten o'clock, they surrounded and took a number of prisoners, and brought
them off, with some valuable trinkets which belonged to the Indians; they burnt
their town, destroyed their corn, and what they met in their way of cattle,
grain, etc. They returned the day following to the boats, when we all embarked,
crossed the lake, and the next day arrived at our garrison.

I would here remark -- that this expedition was conducted with such secrecy
and judgment, that an instance of the kind was not common, and received the
thanks of the commander in chief.

Nothing material happened from that time (except that sergeant Bogert and some
privates, were taken prisoners by the Indians on the 4th of June,) until the
fatal 23d of July, 1779. It was my tour to go on command, as a guard to a party
of men who were making hay, in the meadow about half a mile below the fort. The
ground on which the men were at work, was a narrow strip, having the woods on
one side, and the Mohawk river on the other, and extended about one mile in
length; the party under my command, consisted of one sergeant, one corporal and
twenty-eight privates. We saw that morning over the Mohawk river, an uncommon
smoke, and the sentinels at the fort, said they had seen some Indian dogs,
which was not common: however, therein I believe they were mistaken; for the
Indians never take dogs with them to war, or, at least, I never heard of it:
still I had a suspicion that an enemy was near, and expressed my sentiments to
Captain John Graham. We left the fort by sunrise in the morning, and marched
within about one hundred yards of where the guard had lain the day before. It
had been a rule to send fourteen of the guard as sentinels along the woods; and
although I thought at that time it was improper, I dare not break the rules
which had been established, of consequence the sentinels were placed, with
orders (in case of an alarm) to make immediately for the party. There were
still some hillocks of a ^ortification at the landing place, which had been put
up the last French war, and the party were ordered if attacked, to all make for
that place first; but no sooner were the sentinels placed, than the Indians
laying then in ambush, immediately rushed on them and took every man, and fired
on us; the party received orders not to discharge their pieces, but we had a
mulatto fellow who started to run, and on being ordered to his ranks, returned
and fired into the woods, and the whole guard fired likewise; on which the
Indians made their appearance in the ^ield. We were only musket shot from the
woods, and their number amounted to three hundred and sixty Indians; the guard
in spite of any further effort endeavored promiscuously to make their escape,
but were every man taken: -- and in fact, to see so many savages appear rushing
on toward us almost naked, and painted up with their warlike figures, with
such engines of death in their hands, and whooping and yelling like so many
infernal fiends, must make the stoutest heart that ever existed, quake with
sear; in particular, when there appears no kind of relief. After all of us were
taken, we were led from the meadow, and the Indians received several shot from
the cannon of the fort. Captain Graham, came out with a strong party from the
garrison for our relief, but it was all in vain; indeed the garrison used their
utmost endeavors to re-take us again; but I am of opinion, had any of the
Indians been killed, the whole of the prisoners would have been immediately put
to death. I will further remark, that had we have had our bayonets (which for
some reason were not with the guard) and all of us been in one body and not
discharged our pieces, the Indians would have never entered in the open field
against us.

We were immediately taken beyond the sluice, at an old fort which had been
built last French war, called Newport, where poor old Monday, a soldier, being
wounded, was immediately tomahawked and scalped. The Indians then had five
scalps, but I never could find out what men were killed, except the one just
mentioned. We were then stripped, except a shirt and small-clothes; my sword
and chain with my hat were taken from me by the Indian who took me first; but
as to my other clothes, boots, etc. they were taken from me so suddenly, that I
did not know who had them. The weather was so extremely warm, I could never
have undergone the march, had not my clothes been taken from me. We afterward
had all our arms pinioned, and a tump line, or slat braided string, put round
our necks; I received from a Mr. Larama, a Frenchman, with the rank of a
Lieutenant in the British service, a cap and pair of mockisons; several of the
prisoners received mockisons from Mr. Larama, who was a kind tender hearted
man. When the prisoners were ordered to march, they consisted of one
lieutenant, two sergeants, one corporal and twenty-eight privates, in all
thirty-two, as the mowing party was also taken. We suddenly heard a heavy
firing in our rear, which I took to be our party from the fort, and then
expected instant death, which feelings are so awful, that language is
inadequate to express them; but when reflecting on the torture which I expected
we must all undergo (as I had no other thought left, but of being burnt and
tortured to death in the manner the Indians generally do) I must confess I felt
a calm resignation to the fatal stroke; but the skirmish proved by Mr. Larama's
account, to have been our Indians, and the party who took us, making a
sham-fight, as the Indians from the fort, pretended they must fight, or our
great people, the rebels, would blame them, and then gave a whoop, pretending
the enemy were too strong for them, and ran off to the garrison. Our arms being
all pinioned, we started, and went on a trot^^ every step to the Pine Ridge,
where we made a (...) minutes halt, it being about ten miles; we then turned
off to the right, and went, as I judge, a north northwest course, until about
twelve o'clock, marching very fast; as it is customary for Indians when they
take prisoners, to run with them for a considerable distance, pretending the
enemy may follow them; although I am persuaded they were under no such
apprehensions on this occasion. After we halted, I was offered some parched
corn, pounded coarse and put in water; but being very unwel with a billious
complaint, which had been on me from the time the Onondagas were cut off, I
could not eat; nor had I, for a long time before, lived on any thing but boiled
milk in spikenard, with a trifle of bread; any food of a coarse nature, was
like embers in my bowels. The Indians took several horses from the fort, and
had them with them. We rested about one hour, and then pursued our march very
fast. The weather was warm and suffocating, particularly in our situation,
being confined with a large number of Indians in the woods, which rendered the
air more condensed than usual: I was almost faint unto death. We marched until
sun-down, and by Mr. Larama's account, were forty miles from Fort Stanwix. They
made fires and cooked some wheat meal, and a few small pieces of pork boiled up
in water, and made not unpalatable soup, with a few cakes baked, which the
prisoners each had a small share of. After supper, one of the chiefs arose, and
made a lengthy speech, during which I felt very uneasy, as I expected, after he
had finished, the torture on the prisoners would commence; but to my
inexpressible joy, for that time, Mr. Larama told me that the purport of his
speech was, to divide the prisoners among the different nations, which he was
in hopes would not massacre us. The party consisted of Conosedagoes, Mohawks,
Tauwaus, Caughnawagoes, Jebowees, and Tuskaroras; two Canadians and a white
woman were with the Indians, besides Mr. Larama. I fell to a chief of the
Conosedago nation; and on being delivered to my master, he gave three long
whoops, seemingly with a mournful tone, and in an instant, a dismal yell, which
the whole joined in. At this time in their ceremonies, I was informed that
death or mercy was the event; and, as they had concluded on mercy (which I was
ignorant of) joy rebounded through the camp. Good God! what a scene was this to
withstand! -- No language can express, no eloquence can paint, no tongue can
utter, what horrid ideas must impress the mind at so awful a crisis -- the
thought of being bound in thongs, and put to death by inches, is terrible
beyond all imagination. The whole of the prisoners were handed to their
different masters in the same manner that I was, by giving three long and
mournful whoops, and then three loud yells; and after they had finished
dividing the prisoners, they gave three long, loud, distinct yells, which, by
Mr. Larama's information, was a token of mercy.

After they had done, I desired Mr. Larama to ask permission, in my name, for
me to address them in a few words, which was consented to; and I stood up and
thanked them for their kind care and goodness to the prisoners. I told them,
that if I lived to return home, I would mention it to our great people -- that
I was something unwel when taken, but knew their goodness so well, that they
would march a little flower, rather than I should die like a beast, in the
woods -- that it was not common for warriors to murder their prisoners; it was
only cowards reckoned among us, who abused prisoners; and that I had no doubt,
after this uproar was over, we should meet and shake hands: which Mr. Larama
interpreted for me. They thanked me for my speech; and my chief said he would
protect me through the woods, if I was not able to march; but I did not put much
faith in what he said. That night some of our Oneida Indians came from Fort
Stanwix after their horses, which they said belonged to them, and it being
confirmed by the prisoners, they were given up; on which the Oneidas (by Mr.
Larama's account) inquired whether the Indians had any of the British among
them; and was answered in the negative. The Oneidas told them it was very well;
and if they came without ^^^tish soldiers, they might take as many of the Yan^^
as they pleased, for they would meet with no hindrance from them. -- After
this, the Oneida Indians took the horses back, which, in fact, belonged to the
garrison. I was asked whose horses they were, but answered that I could not
tell; as I supposed, being an officer, had I have told them a lie, they,
perhaps, would have made a serious matter of it. After all these ceremonies, I
had my arms unpinioned, with the rest of the prisoners, and a cord tied to each
arm; an old blanket ^as spread for me, and I laid down between two Indians, and
soon sell asleep. I was awakened the next morning, by day break, to prepare for
marching, which was done by an Indian rising and calling how, how, how; on
which, in an instant, every Indian was on his feet under way, in Indian file;
indeed some warning for marching was given beforehand, when they all sat with
their knapsacks ready fixed, but from the time the word was given to denote
march, I am certain the whole party was under way in a minute, and then a
continual firing was kept up for (I judge) four miles. We traveled till about
ten o'clock, and by going a very fast walk, I was exceedingly faint; but eating
some of their do cakes, I felt revived. We halted about half an hour, and then
set off and traveled until two o'clock, when we again halted for an hour. We
then started, and continued a steady march until about sun an hour high, when
John Gross, a soldier from Captain John Copp's company, was so fatigued that he
was unable to proceed; he said he had the cramp, but if he could rest a few
minutes, he should be able to go on again. I was allowed to stand and talk with
him a few minutes, but was ordered to march on. About sun-down we halted, when
I was informed that poor old Gross was tomahawked and scalped. He belonged to
the nation I was committed to, was about fifty years of age, and had a family
near Albany; and what made it appear more serious, he went on duty as a
volunteer, in the place of another man. We supped on our usual diet, and being
faint and fatigued, and reflecting also on the treachery of the Indians in
their conduct toward Gross, as they left some young men with him, who
pretended they would stay until he recovered and assist him, but on the
contrary, they killed him in a few minutes after the party passed by; and being
in the midst of their whoopings, screamings and yellings, I could sometimes
scarcely think myself among human beings, as I could not have supposed so
uncommon a contrast in the display of mortals, ever possible. I was again tied,
as usual, and having a blanket spread for me, soon fell asleep. I was awaked at
the break of day, and informed that our provisions grew scant, and having left
some on their way, they were going to make a force march to the place where
their provisions were left, which was a long day's journey; and being on the
twenty-fifth day of July, my birthday, gave me some reflections on the manner
in which it was customary (for officers in particular) to celebrate the day of
their birth, which is generally in festivity; or at least, if any notice be
taken of a birth day it must be done in merriment, and commonly with excess,
which is certainly contrary to a right understanding of the day; for surely, at
the expiration of each year we are so much nearer the close of life, and must
so much sooner give an account, not only of our conduct the year past, but also
the whole of our miss-spent time.

We were soon under way, and marched very fast until ten o'clock, when we made
a halt. The weather being very warm, I was never nearer fainting* but eating a
piece of their do cake, and resting about half an hour, felt more revived,
although I was the whole time in great distress in my bowels, as my food was of
little use to me. We started and traveled till two o'clock, when we arrived at
one of their encampments, where we rested about half an hour, eat some
victuals, and again proceeded on our journey. About sun-down we arrived at
another of their encampments, where were the provisions they had left on their
way. We all supped on soup made of a few pieces of pork cut into small pieces
(like crumbs of bread) some beans, and flour, boiled together, which was a
great repast. I must say the prisoners were used well, considering the
situation we were in. My chief gave me that day, a callico waistcoat. The
Indians appeared to be more sociable; and Mr. Larama informed me, that by ten
o'clock the next day, we should reach the boats on Lake Ontario. I slept that
night very comfortably.

At break of day on the 26th, we were called on to march. My feet were sore,
having only a thin pair of mockisons, made of deer's leather, and the land
being rooty and braky, with several low intervales, some pine lands and several
hemlock swamps, although the land in general was level, or there were no
mountains to pass, and few stones. We marched until about nine o'clock, and
forded a large creek, an entire rock on the bottom, as smooth as a slate; but
in some places there were pretty large holes where the salmon kept; our Indian
boys catched several and brought them on their march. This creek empties into
Lake Ontario. After we passed the creek some distance, we halted and rested for
about fifteen minutes, at which time, some of the ablest of the prisoners were
sent off with a party of young Indians, to get to the boats and prepare
victuals against the whole came up. We pursued our journey; the land being more
uneven than what we were accustomed to, made it more toilsome, as we walked
fast; but about half past twelve o'clock, to our inexpressible joy, we arrived
at the boats, where the party that had gone before us had some victuals ready
cooked. We all refreshed ourselves on some fish, and our usual diet, and I felt
myself greatly revived, particularly with the thoughts of the fatiguing march
being (...). -- This part of the Journal is written in Provost at Quebec, in
September, 1779, and it is on the strength of my memory; but however far I may
err in judgment, it was the opinion of Mr. Larama, sergeants Weed and Deferest,
(the two last were prisoners) that we traveled one hundred and fifty miles;
they said, perhaps one hundred and seventy, but at a moderate computation, it
was what was first mentioned, through excellent land, some white-oak timber,
but the main part beech and maple; the soil black and rich, very little
mountainous or broken lands, and clear of stones; I did not notice any but
would admit of improvement.

Our boats lay in a creek, about two miles from Lake Ontario; and, as near as I
can judge, about twenty leagues from Bucks, or what the British call Carlton
Island; they consisted of British batteaus and Indian canoes. The canoes were
made of birch bark, lined with splints, and sewed together with strings made
out of the roots of elm. Some of their canoes will carry twenty and some thirty
men; and are so light that two of their boys could carry them. After refreshing
ourselves, we embarked on board of the boats, about two o'clock; I was placed
in the stern of their bark canoe, next to the steersman, and was not allowed to
row. We stood, as near as I could guess, after coming into the lake, about a
north course, across the east end of Lake Ontario, rowing fast until the sun
went down. One thing I thought much of, the Indian who took me first was in the
canoe, and was a young, smart likely fellow; before I gave up, he was within
about six rods of me, and frequently ordered me to stop, but not obeying him,
he levelled his piece to fire at me, and she snapped; on which I saw him fixing
her to fire, and finding no possibility of escaping, handed my sword; he
returned it to me again, and left me in charge of another Indian on the meadow,
and ra^ to take another prisoner. There were some gulls flying over the lake,
and one hovering over us, he made signs for me to take his gun and shoot it, it
being the same he had snapped at me; I took the gun and shot the gull; and
after it was brought into the canoe, there being one Indian on board who spoke
a little English, I made him understand, that when the owner of the gun snapped
it at me, it did not go off; the Indian who understood me, telling him of it,
he immediately pointed upwards, and made several jestures. I asked what it
meant, and the Indian told me, that the man said the Great Spirit would not let
his gun go off when it was pointed at me.

We came to an island, and put up a few miles from the mouth of the river St.
Lawrence, at which place we catched salmon and Oswego bass. On the morning of
the 27th, we embarked and rowed about ten miles, when we came to an island,
within sight of the garrison, called Carlton Island. The Indians painted
themselves and all the prisoners, except myself; I spoken to Mr. Larama about
my clothes, and mentioned, that if the Indians would let me appear amongst the
British like an American officer, I would be happy, and they could take my
clothes again; On which Mr. Larama, took me to the different boats, and my
clothes, even to my boots, were returned; but having a long beard, and my linen
not of the whitest kind, I did not make so great a figure. We then embarked,
and sailed under a small breeze, for the fort; we were met about a mile from
the garrison, by a large gun-boat. The Indians lowered all their ^ails, which
appeared like a small fleet, as that morning every one put up something in
shape of a square-sail, and of different colors -- Some were red, with one or
two white streaks through them; some of one, and some of another color. The
boats were all in a line, about one hundred yards apart; those who had scalps,
hoisted them up at the bow of their boat: the scalps, were ^ut round and
fastened on a pole, with the flesh part painted red. Immediately on their
lowering sail, on the approach of the gun-boat, she and all the Indians lay on
their oars, when a general silence ensued. At length, an Indian on the right of
the line, gave as many long whoops as the nation to which he belonged had
prisoners and scalps; the next nation in turn gave the same whoop, and so on
through the six nations, three times over, which took I judge, near an hour; it
seemed when they began with their whoop, they would hold their breath for a
minute, and the intervals between the nations, made the scene melancholy
indeed; when ^hey had done with their long whoops, they all gave three dismal
yells, beginning on the right and continuing to the left. As soon as they had
finished that part of their ceremony, the gun-boat turned and made sail for
shore; the Indians then began a (...) fire from right to left three times over,
with (...) great degree of regularity, and then the whole as one voice, gave
three yells, and was answered from the garrison by the discharge of three
cannon. The whole line then began to row by a strife, which should first get
into the harbor, screaming and yelling like so many infernals (from the
representation we have of them) as no kind of an idea, amongst the ba^^st of
white people, could bear an affinity to the hediousness of their noise, and the
different attitudes of those who were not rowing, made the novelty
extraordinary to me, if no one else, as their positions were ^or an attack, as
soon as they struck the shore. I was ordered to stand up in the canoe, on our
near approach to the garrison, and had no objection, as there were a number of
tories, old deserters from our army and country, etc. who were making their
remarks on us in general, which was not done in a very familiar way of
conversation. We passed some little distance along the island before landing,
and on going ashore, which the Indians pretty nearly struck together, and were
then as still as the Pacific ocean, in a calm. On my landing, I was surrounded
by a great number of gazing spectators, as if I had come from some planet or
other. A tory officer asked me for the first question, the strength of Fort
Stanwix; I returned for answer, that being a prisoner of war, it was the rule
of all christianised nations to treat them well, and that he in a regimental
dress, which bespoke him an officer, certainly must suppose the question
improper: however, I received from the rabble some heavy denunciations, as
rebel, etc. which is improper to commit to a journal. My having on the
regimentals of our regiment at the time, I suppose occasioned more curiosity
amongst them, than perhaps would have otherwise been shown; but I was not long
in that situation before a young gentleman by the name of Smith, an Adjutant of
a British regiment, came and informed me, that the commanding officer desired
me to repair to headquarters. I went with him, and on entering the room was
met by Major Naron, the commanding officer, who accosted me very civilly, and
invited me to breakfast, which I readily accepted of; and I believe the whole
of the garrison officers of the British line were at breakfast. I continued at
headquarters until one o'clock. Mr. Smith made me a present of a silk
handkerchief. The Major asked me in private, a few questions relative to our
main army, and General Sullivan's movements; but I knew but trifling about
either, and was rather more ignorant at that time than common. I mentioned to
one of the officers, that I thought the Indians must be of great expense to the
crown, as the scout that took us had expended a great deal of provision, and
were on their return back, constantly firing and wasting their ammunition. He
told me that he had made a computation of the expense the party was at that had
taken us, and it could not fall much short (if any) of one thousand eight
hundred pounds sterling money, or that would be the expenditure by the time the
Indians gave the prisoners all up. It seems that we had three young kings in
the party, and they being all Canadian Indians, (which I was ignorant of until
we got to Lake Ontario) leave was asked to address the commanding officer;
which was consented to; and after the Major had seated himself, the three young
Blood Royals were admitted to a seat not far from him; an interpreter was at
hand, and an old Chief arose with a great deal of composure, and addressed his
Kings in a long and spirited speech, whilst the old Major who was a Scotchman,
and as much of a gentleman as walked the British army, sat knitting his brows,
not understanding a word, as I took it; and after the Chief had finished, the
Major addressed the interpreter -- "weal and what is all this? Whey do they
want now." The interpreter mentioned, that the purport of their speech was,
that they and a number of their ancestors had been old servants to their Great
Father, who lived across the big water, and that they (the party) had now
seriously taken up the hatchet for his defense, and meant at all times to hold
themselves in readiness to go out against the people who sat around the council
fire, and who had taken up the hatchet against their Great Father and his
warriors, (meaning the King of Great Britain and his army) and, that as it was
the first time they had gone out, and had done their best in taking prisoners
and scalps, they wished to have a barrel of milk (that is rum) to make
themselves merry with.

The old Major, after a short pause, expressed himself as follows -- "And what
is it they want -- a barrel of rum, to get all drunk and kill the prisoners.
The De'il on them and their rum, they sha^^a have only one gill a man, and let
them gang home, or the curse of Scotland will be afoul of them, if they hurt a
prisoner: let them do it on their peril, and I will cut their heads from their
shoulders" -- or words to this purport; as I was in the room and heard the
whole -- on which a dram was given to every one in a cup. About one o'clock, my
chief came for me to go to the boat, in order to set off. I took my leave of
the gentlemen, who treated me with a great degree of politeness, I mean those
of the line in the British army; as to the tory officers, there was not common
notice taken of them. We all sat off, and went on our way down the river St.
Lawrence, which is very deep and of an easy current. I received, as we glided
along shore, some very insulting language from men who had deserted from our
regiment. The river I supposed two miles wide. -- We rowed about thirty miles,
and lay that night on the western shore; the Indians shot some fowls, such as
gulls, and a few other kinds, and catched some fish.

On the morning of the 28th, before day, we were all under way down the river,
and sun about half an hour high, shot some ducks that could not fly, as I was
informed, they had shed their feathers. They were fine and fleshy, but of what
kind I cannot tell; some gulls also, were killed, and indeed the Indians would
shoot any fowl -- crows, hawks, etc. and eat them, but I never was offered any
but such as were good birds. About nine o'clock we came too, and cooked our
fowls. Our boat that morning was ahead, and the batteaus being heavy, were
generally in the rear. I cool^^d a duck, and found it delicious food. We
embarked in about an hour, and rowed steady until four o'clock, when we arrived
at Oswegotia, a British garrison, about thirty-five leagues from Car^ton
island, and the whole of the way a gradual still current; the river appeared so
deep, that I judge a vessel of heavy burden might pass up and down. I was
invited into the quarters of Captain Robertson, who was commanding officer, and
received ^^e into his room with hospitality, as himself and a Captain Frazier,
who was there, had been taken prisoners, at St. John's, and were through
Elizabeth-Town; and after being informed that it was my native place, they
appeared to give me every mark of their friendship, as well as the other
prisoners, who all arrived a short time after us. I continued at head quarters
until about midnight, and fared as well as I could wish. I told Capt.
Robertson, I thought it best for me to go and lodge with my chief -- He replied
that a bed was provided for me. But as I knew we must start by daylight, and
my clothes being none of the neatest, having been so long with the Indians, I
prevailed and took my leave, and slept with my chief as usual.

On the morning of the 29th, before daybreak, we arose, eat some victual^ and
as soon as it was light enough, embarked and rowed down the river St. Lawrence
about six or eight miles, with nearly the same current; the river then begins
to run stronger, and at the distance of two miles further, becomes a mere rapid
in some places, by reason of large rocks lying in the river, some of which it
is supposed, are not more than four feet below the surface of the water, which
occasions the water to heave into swells, and obliges the boats to keep in
shore, or by the islands, as there are several in that part of the river; we
judged that we drove down with the current ten or twelve miles an hour. We
continued along shore for better than an hour, the water growing something
smoother; the Indians in our boat saw a large buck swimming, they made after
him and he was soon overtaken and killed. About two o'clock came too and
dressed the venison; he was divided into as many parts as there were Indians
and prisoners, and after being boiled, every person had their piece. We then
sat off, and in half an hour arrived at an Indian town called Tuskerora, where
one of the nations that were in the party lived; six of the prisoners fell to
them, and were put on shore; we tarried half an hour, and then proceeded,
leaving the six prisoners mentioned, with them; the current not being so rapid,
and after having a small thunder-gust (which occasioned a fair wind) we put up
our sail and ran about ten miles, to a small Lake in the river, about thirteen
miles in length, and four in breadth, which we crossed that afternoon and
evening. About ten o'clock at night we came too on the west shore by an Indian
house, as near as I could calculate, thirty leagues from Oswegotia.

On the thirtieth, early in the morning, we embarked and went about fifteen or
twenty miles down the river with a forcable current. Two Indians, with one of
the prisoners and myself were put on shore; we traveled about two miles and
stopped at a Frenchman's house, who gave us some bread and milk, and each a
twist of tobacco. We then went on about eight miles and came to our boats,
which were two miles up the river, that leads out of the Lake of two mountains
into St. Lawrence; there were two nations at this place called Conosodagoes and
Mohawks; the other three nations, lived farther down the river St. Lawrence --
we embarked and rowed up the river near thirty miles, and passed several French
settlements and Indian huts, but were met about ten miles from the Lake, by two
canoes, having some of their chiefs on board, who congratulated their friends
and brothers, as they were from the same town to which our party belonged. We
all rowed until we came to the lake, and put up on an island about two miles
from their town, where the Indians painted themselves and the prisoners. We had
a visit from a number of boats from the town, having Squaws on board, who
brought cakes for their friends and the prisoners; the squaws appeared to have
the immediate rule and conduct of the prisoners; I was put into a canoe with
some of the chiefs' wives. We then rowed for the town, leaving all the Indians
and prisoners behind on the island. When we came on shore, a young richdressed
squaw came and took me by the hand, and led me part of the way through the town
into a house, and passing one room, entered a genteel parlor, handsomely
papered, with a good desk, chest and chairs, in as fashionable a manner as an
English room, although I believe it was the only decent apartment in the town,
as I saw none of the like in the other houses. After being a few minutes seated
by the mother of the young squaw in a decent chair, and some drink being
prepared for me, I made signs that I wanted to go to the door to see the
prisoners come in; which was granted. Previous to the approach of the Indians,
a cannon that was in town, was loaded and prepared, and also, a large
flag-staff was standing with the colors flying. The Indians appeared on the
lake, moving very slowly all in a line, and on their near approach, gave a
running fire from right to left, and was answered by the discharge of their
cannon, which was repeated three times over. They then exerted themselves to
get on shore, in the same manner as at Carlton Island. An Indian boy took one
of the prisoners by the hand and ran to the flag-staff; they appeared
promiscuously to every one catch at the first prisoner they could get hold of,
and immediately run to the staff, until they had all arrived; the whole of the
Indians and prisoners then danced round the flag for about fifteen minutes, and
all at once, each Indian who had his prisoner, sat off running and pulling his
prisoner with him as fast as possible to the council house, and all the rest of
the Indians after them yelling and screaming with all their might; they
continued dancing with the prisoners for near half an hour, the whole time
singing a war song, and then each Indian took his prisoner home with him,
without being the least abused or hurt, and gave them pl^^ty of provisions. --
What a happy circumstance was this! for instead of being bound in thongs, and
suffering the most excruciating tortures, by having the finger nails torn out,
and pine knots drove into the flesh and sat on fire, with many other unheard of
tortures, we were all treated like christians, not even having been compelled
to run what is termed the gantlet, although it is customary for the Indians to
form two lines, about six feet apart, between which the prisoners must run and
receive blows with fists, clubs, and sometimes tomahawks, and a^e frequently
killed. What a heart of gratitude, I felt on this occasion, to my God and the
Great Preserver of men. One thing I would not wish to omit on this occasion,
and which I suppose was a favor to the prisoners. There were in the town, a
large chapel, or house of worship, and three Roman clergymen resided among the
savages, by which means the town is under strict and religious regulations,
according to their manner of worshipping, and appears with solemnity. I was
visited by the three gentlemen, and invited to dine with them, which I readily
accepted of, and was received with as great a degree of cordiality as I ever
met with in any place. I continued to dine and sup with them during my stay at
the place, as it was customary to breakfast at home on bread and milk, and
sometimes tea -- The catholic priests make no formal breakfast, as they
generally, and I believe always, attend to prayers from 6 until 9 or ten in the
morning, and then take a cut of bread and cheese, or some light diet, but
regularly dine at twelve on rich food, except Friday and Saturday; they eat no
meat on those days, but fish, butter, eggs, etc. is their diet. The Indians are
very attentive on mass, and sing melodiously, particularly the women; every
morning and evening they all attend worship, and on their bended knees seem to
offer sincere devotion to the King of Kings. I was strictly attentive to their
mass, as it would have even displeased what we deem the wild savage of the
woods, not to have paid my devotion with them.

On the first day of August, a large Indian came to my quarters and ordered me
by signs to take off my coat and jacket, which I at once complied with; he then
brought me a long coat, waistcoat, and leggons, and dressed me in the manner of
themselves, and then took me to the flag-staff, where, after giving three long
and solemn whoops, the whole of the town appeared instantly to assemble. One of
the chiefs made a lengthy and loud speech, and from what I could gather, the
purport was, -- that after a loss comes gain; stating the success they had
gained by their arms, and that now, having prisoners in possession, they could
be put in the place of some of their lost relatives: on which I was adopted by
one of the chief's instead of an uncle he had lost about a year before, and who
I understood died a natural death. They have no very formal way of adopting,
except by laying their hands on the prisoner's head, and a few ceremonies of
the like in the time of their orations, and then he is delivered to the man by
whom adopted, who in a friendly manner takes him by the hand and kisses him,
and then the squaws, (every one who bears any relation to the family wherein
the prisoner is adopted.) The whole of the prisoners were served in the same
way. I am of opinion, should this journal be read, some will say that when the
Indians adopt, they are not apt to give their prisoners up; but let it suffice,
that what is written can be proved by living and substantial witnesses. A
handsome room was provided for me, but I believe it is customary for the
civilized nations to be more particular in their furniture. I remember an
instance in the Onondago nation, of a family (their names I do not recollect)
whose house was fashionably furnished, after the manner of white people; and
would further remark, that where the Indians place their confidence or good
will, they are very particular, and warmly attached; their uncommon friendship
to an adopted prisoner will prove my assertion. Occasionally a remark on the
savages of America, is worthy of our attention. If the whole of the Indians
were under religious government, and civilized, what a great family of people
they must be; although I am of opinion* they could never be brought to live in
the manner of the white people, as their constitutions appear to be adapted for
the wilderness; and it has often been noticed, that they decrea^^^ in an old
settled country: but what I mean, is respecting their moral principles, and
manner of worship: but this will be a work of time, although a friendly aid
would not be amiss.

After being adopted, by my cousin, a room in his house was provided for me;
therefore I had to leave my parlor, although I was often a visitor, and in
fact, was, with the other prisoners, treated with great friendship by the whole
of the inhabitants. The town lies on an elbow, much in the manner of New York,
having a handsome lake in the front, lying south from the town, and on the
north side, the river which is said to lead from Michilimachinac, of a large
extent, and opposite the town middling wide; it runs bye, and empties into the
lake, and from thence to the river St. Lawrence, and I imagine lies about 45
leagues from Oswegotia, about a north course.

The Indians do but very little labor in the summer, and have dances almost
every day, in a long house built for that purpose; the men dance by themselves
in a long ring, as their houses are lengthy, but not wide. They have a narrow
rim, in shape of a drum, with two heads to it and a small mallet with which one
strikes on the head; four men have each two sticks, and strike them together;
another one has a hollow gourd with shot or corn in it; he first sets his music
to play, by giving his gourd three or four shal^^ quick, with a song
accompanying his time, and then more slow, on which the drum sets in, with the
four who have sticks, and all strike together; their song and whole music beats
together, which make it not disagreeable, as their dances are very regular. The
Indians have small bells around their ancles to make a jingling, and stamp^^ard
on the ground, as a wooden floor would discommode their method of dancing. They
have a great number of attitudes and positions in their whole dance, which
lasts sometimes two hours, and from the first commencement of it until the
whole are on the floor, does not exceed fifteen minutes; the women slide on
their heels and toes, by forming a ring, and will go round in that manner for a
great number of times; they have no other method of dancing, and I think have
no instrumental music, but sing merrily, and are very jocular and sociable in
their dances. -- There are a few French families in town.

In the fall of the year, all the Indians, men, women and children, except a
few old and decrepit persons, go up the river four, five, and sometimes six
hundred miles, and stay all winter, where they live by hunting, and in the
spring return down the river with their peltry, meats, etc. and by what little
grain they raise, and the profits they get on their furr, with the fish which
they catch in the lake before the town, (which are plenty) all contribute to
make them live easy the whole summer, and to appearance plentiful, particularly
as to bread, as they had a baker in town, and many bought constantly. The first
sabbath I went to mass, my cousin dressed me in a long scarlet coat, velvet
jacket, and a large cocked hat, all trimmed with broad tinsey lace, with
scarlet leggons, mockisons trimmed very gay with ribbons and the like, and a
silver headed sword, a ruffled shirt, and I must say, that I felt quite
important through the day. After the forenoon exercise was over, a white woman
came and asked me in English, what part of America I lived in when at home. I
informed her near Elizabeth-Town, in New Jersey. She said she (...) from
Piscataway, (...) a small girl, by the Indians, and think as near (...) I can
remember, her name was Randolph; I had not more than a minute's opportunity of
speaking with her, before I was called away by the priests to dinner, and had
her promise of calling to see me again; she was married to a Frenchman. I was
desirous of visiting her, as she lived across the river, not far from the town,
but was not permitted. She appeared a very ancient and respectable lady, and
according to what I could find out, was taken from said place in Jersey, in the
time of what was called the old French war. In the town there was a negro
fellow who ran away from his master in Albany, but could not find out from
whom; he spoke good English, and was an interpreter, or the Indians* ^inguist.
The Sunday evening after my being dressed as before related, I was asked by the
Indian to whose house I was first introduced, whether I was willing to stay
with them and go that winter up the river a hunting; on which he undertook to
describe the pleasure I should meet with, by seeing the deer and all kinds of
game brought into camp* and that I should have no ne^d of labor* but to
accompany those wh^^ stayed in huts, that were comfortable and convenient* and
even went so far as to offer me his daughter in marriage; but I replied, I had
a wife and children at home, and would prefer going to Montreal, on account of
getting to them again; on which no further reply was made; but the next morning
my fine clothes were changed, and in place, received a middling coat, jacket,
hat, etc. They kept my regimental clothes, sword, boots, stock-buckle, and in
lieu thereof, I received a pair of old mockisons and ^eggons, which I kept
during my stay with them. They had amongst the Roman priests, a German, who
spoke considerable good English, and appeared to be a man well bred, and much
of a gentleman, as were the others; and I understood they were supported by the
crown of France, to disseminate what knowledge they could amongst the Indians:
as the town consisted of two nations, there were a number of people assembled
to worship. Every morning I took a walk by the side of the river and lake,
which gave a beautiful prospect, being about thirty miles in length, and ten in
breadth, and on the point is a small breastwork built of stone, where their
cannon is placed, I suppose an indulgence from the English. There are in the
town a number of bark canoes, which I understood were built the last French
war; the bark itself is ^irch, and the inside is lined with cedar splints about
four inches wide, and sowed together with the strippings of spruce, and
tamarack roots; they first boil the roots and then split them. By pacing the
length of some of the boats, I found them sixty feet; with a proportionable
width, and would undoubtedly carry fifty men or more, with provisions. About a
mile from the town, is a small building on an eminence, with a cross near it,
where they all go once a year in procession to worship, in the manner of the
Roman Catholics.

On the ninth of August* in the evening, I was informed that the next day we
were all to embark for Montreal; and on the tenth, after dining with the
priests and a gentleman from near Montreal, I took any leave of them and the
town, although my cousin, his wife, with every prisoner's relation, came on
board of can^^^, and accompanied us to Montreal. We row (...) that afternoon
about ten leagues, and lay on the northeast shore, where the lake was not more
than two miles wide. We lodged at a French woman's house; her husband was from
New England, and was gone to Michilimachinac trading. She used me very well,
and I was accommodated with a genteel room, a good supper, and liquors: the
prisoners all fared very well, and next morning we sat out on foot, after
breakfast, and traveled to Montreal. We passed several churches and French
settlements, from the lake of two mountai^^ to Montreal; they were cutting
their wheat, which was of a middling size. The drought was so severe that the
grass appeared to be scorched; the land looked like a white loam. About eleven
o'clock, we arrived at Montreal, after traveling better than ten miles. I was
conducted to Mr. Luke Le Corn's house, who treated me to a glass of good old
Madeira. Doctor Huntly who has the care of the nun's hospital, came into Mr. Le
Corn's, and recommended me to said place for the recovery of my health, as I
was far from being in a sound state of body. A French gentleman who had a
British commission, and had been taken with General Burgoyne, was also at Le
Corn's, and walked with me to Colonel Campbell's quarters, who had the command,
or rather was an agent of the Indian department, and treated me with
politeness. Whilst I was at the Colonel's quarters, Alexander Campbell came
into the room, and as I had quartered in his house at Schenectady, we were
acquainted with each other, and then living in Montreal, he obtained permission
for me to go home with him; and on our arrival, Mrs. Campbell appeared rejoiced
to see me, and we all dined together as mutually as formerly. After dining, I
took my leave of Mrs. Campbell; Mr. Campbell walked with me to the nun's
hospital; after my arrival, a sentinel was placed at the door to keep me from
deserting. The nuns never marry, and when they enter the hospital it is for
life, if they behave well; they take in the sick of the town, and are supported
that way, and the patient pays according to his abilities, from a low to a high
price. There are no people more faithful to their patients; two of them are up
at a time the whole night, to give them drink and medicine, according to the
directions of the physicians. Their hospital is kept very clean, and in warm
weather, cool, by sprinkling the floor with vinegar, or something to make it
agreeable; the beds are neat, and in two rows, as the house is long but not
wide, an entry way is between the beds, having green curtains, which is a great
help to the eyes of persons, particularly when weak; each patient has his bed,
and is never offered victuals or medicine, before the person who gives it asks
a blessing on it. They are constant in prayer at six o'clock every morning, and
frequent mass, all which is performed on the bended knees, to appearance, with
great devotion; in fact, through all their secular duties of domestic life,
they appear to invoke the Great Arbiter of the universe for a blessing; and
what is singular, amongst so many women, and for so long a duration, all is
harmony and concord, not so much as a contradiction, which must proceed from
that regularity of system which is kept up among them, both civil and
religious. In the evening I was visited by Stephen Tuthill, (who formerly lived
at Saratoga, he left the Americans in the spring of 1779, and married Major
John Graham's sister) who gave me a bottle of Madeira; indeed I owe a debt of
gratitude to several gentlemen, who frequently paid me their visits, and were
kind and liberal; but would rather suppose it imprudent to mention their names
in this journal, for fear of accident: for notwithstanding I am sensible that
in this province there are many sincere friends to the cause of America, yet
the major part of the military dons in particular, are vastly important, and
even knit their brow at the sight of a rebel, and portend with great composure
his fate to be desperate.

August 12th. -- This afternoon I had a visit from a French lady, who made me a
present of a handkerchief, and several other things; she was acquainted in
Elizabeth-Town, and appeared to be a person of distinction. Colonel Campbell
and my cousins visited me; the Indians also came to take their final leave of
me; my cousin Indian made a speech, the purport as follows -- that he had come
to pay me his last visit, and was in hopes that after the uproar between the
Great King and my council and warriors was over, that we might meet again, and
be great friends, as he looked upon me as an uncle, and I was going to be for a
long time (if not forever) lost from him, for which reason he could not help me
any more; he left me as long as I remained prisoner, to the care of the great
men, who acted under his Great Father, over the big water, (meaning the king of
England) -- he wished me very well, and that if ever I returned home again to
my friends, which he was in hopes I should; he advised me not to get drunk and
from my senses again, in fighting against his Great Father and mother (meaning
the King of England and people) which he looked on as wrong; and that our men,
who sat around the Great Council Fire, and held the big knife, under whom I
acted (meaning Congress) were all drunk and from their senses, in fighting and
acting against his and our Great Fathers and mothers -- and then himself and
wife bade me farewell, shook hands, kissed me, and shed plenty of tears. Surely
said I this is friendship indeed; it brought to my mind the beautiful
description of Doctor Young, in his night thoughts, on friendship.

The next day Colonel Campbell sent me a blue broad cloth coat, under clothes,
stockings, shoes, buckles, etc.

On the 14th, being still unwell, and as there was scarcely any one to converse
with, (for what was spoken, was chiefly in the French language) I made
application to go to the general hospital, which was granted; and Mr. Jones,
master of Provost, walked with me; we had a sociable conversation together on
the war between England and America. He appeared to be a man of sense, and
seemed to speak feelingly on the unhappy dispute. On my arrival at the
hospital, I was introduced to Captain Gideon Brownson, an American officer, who
was wounded in the foot, having one of his toes shot off, and eleven wounds in
his body by small shot; a sergeant being with him from the fame regiment, who
had received a ball through the knuckle of his left hand. It seems that a party
on the 15th of July, 1779, consisting of Major Hopkins, Captain Brownson,
Captain Smith, Lieutenant Dunning, two sergeants and some privates, (two of
whom had wives) went to the fourteen mile island, on lake George, on a party to
fish and gather some berries which were plenty there. The wind blew up ahead
toward night, accompanied with rain, and they having no apprehension of
danger, drew their boats on shore, which they turned over and lay under all the
night; but it appeared the Indians that day had discovered them, and on seeing
an old batteau on a small island below, swam to it, and fixed it so as to be
able by the assistance of that boat to go to the island where the party was,
and just as the day broke, landed and fired on the whole as they lay under the
boats without any expectation of an enemy being near; they killed the Major, a
sergeant, five privates, a little boy, and the two women, one of whom had a
sucking child in her arms which was also killed. The men were scalped, but it
is said the women were not; the remainder were brought into Montreal,
consisting of Captain Brownson, Captain Smith, Lieutenant Dunning, Sergeant
Curtis, and three privates; they belonged to Colonel Warner's regiment. Captain
Smith and lieutenant Dunning were confined in the Provost at Montreal, amongst
all sorts of prisoners. The same day Colonel Campbell visited me, and made me a
present of some stockings and a half-joe -- In justice to that gentleman, I
must say, that I was treated with a great degree of attention, benevolence and
philanthropy. I cannot omit mentioning the goodness of Mr. James White,
merchant in Montreal, when at the nun's hospital; he every morning sent me a
good dish of green tea and toast, with some port wine, which, considering the
nature of my disorder, was to my benefit, which bounties appeared to be
dictated by the feelings of humanity, and not from an ^^ea of being deemed a
friend to the American cause. I had a few turns of the fever and ague, but
Doctor Morrington, head physician of the hospital, gave me relief so as to
prevent their return. Captain Brownson and myself, can have no reason of
complaint respecting our treatment at that place, as we were found with such
necessaries as were for our comfort, and we also daily received small presents
from particular gentlemen.

August 21st. -- About ten o'clock this morning we received orders to be ready
to embark for Quebec, and at four in the afternoon went on board the Snow
Liberty, Captain Moore, commander, where I was introduced to Captain Simeon
Smith* formerly from Litchfield, in Connecticut, and Lieutenant Michael
Dunning, from Ballstown, in the state, of New York; Captain Brownson was from
Vermont, sergeants Weed and Deforest, with seven privates who were taken with
me, were on board; also seven old men from the Mohawk river, and sergeant
Curtis. The officers are the gentlemen who were taken on the fourteen mile
island, and were, before the unhappy catastrophe, quartered at Fort George;
they and Major Hopkins, were ever esteemed brave good officers; but it was
certainly imprudent to lay in such a place without a sentinel planted; still
from what has been before mentioned, they being so secure in their own minds,
pleads for the neglect; yet I hope it will prove a warning for the future, to
all persons who shall ever hear of the circumstance. On board of our vessel was
a guard of sixteen men, of what was called Scotch emigrants, of Colonel M'Leans
rigiment, the guard was commanded by an ensign named M'Graw. In the said corpse
were fifty men who were taken from our army, on the attempt to storm Quebec;
the rest consisted of all nations, all sorts, and all sizes, (speaking not far
from within bounds.) We lay that night before Montreal; some of the officers
slept on the quarter deck, exposed to the night air, but I went into the hold
of the vessel and the easiest birth I found, was the coil of a large cable; I
laid myself on that and took some rest, as our Captain appeared to be one of
those sort of people who wish to make a short affair of conversation or
politeness; for he neither gave us a friendly answer to a question, although
asked ever so civilly, nor had the manners to ask a man to his cabin door, nor
to eat or drink with him; and to make short of my text, he was the most
accomplished brute I ever met with, or ever shall.

Early the next morning we weighed anchor, and having a fair wind with a strong
current, sailed fast, and passed several small settlements, having churches in
each settlement; about three o'clock in the afternoon we came to anchor before
Sorell, it being about fifteen leagues from Montreal. Our commander went on
shore, and in one hour returned, weighed anchor and proceeded on our voyage
until the setting of the sun, when he again came to anchor at the mo^th of a
small lake, called Saint Peter.

On the 23d we made sail, with a fine fair breeze, and passed the lake which is
shoal, except the channel. It was said, that part of the lake which is under
water in the Spring, is mowed in the Summer; every sail on board was set. At
eight o'clock, we passed a settlement, named Mashish, where the tories live, or
many of them; it is a small town, called the tory settlement, a particular
assylum for women who are from the American states, and destitute of a home. By
eleven o'clock we passed the three rivers, where the tide flows about two feet,
although it makes no current up. We proceeded on the whole day, and by sailing
in a fine river, the banks and houses affording a beautiful prospect, together
with several large topsail merchant vessels which we passed, laden with goods,
provisions, etc. from Ireland, chiefly for Montreal, made it more agreeable,
and seemed to elevate at times our disagreeable situation. At sun-down, the
vessel came to anchor, within ten miles of Quebec; the flood ran so strong that
no head way to signify, could be made.

The twenty-fourth, weighed anchor early in the morning, the wind ahead, but
beating with a strong ebb, we anchored before Quebec at ten o'clock in the
morning, it being sixty leagues from Montreal. The common ebbing and flowing of
the tide at this place, is ten feet perpendicular, and the spring tides, often
fifteen. The current runs with great force, both in the flood and ebb, and
often in the winter fails of freezing across. The river is narrower at Quebec,
than in any place from the mouth to Montreal, which occasions the tide to run
with more velocity at Quebec, than in any other part of the river, although
there is a great current from Quebec to Newfoundland in particular. In about an
hour's time after first coming to anchor, we hauled along side of a large
letter of marque* mounting twenty-six guns, named the Brilliant; some gentlemen
who were on board of the ship, sent us four bottles of porter. There were
thirty pieces of cannon with carriages, hoisted out of the Brilliant, and put
on board of the Snow. That night we still suffered more than formerly, as there
was no place to lie on but those carriages and guns; however, on the next day,
a long boat came along side and took us all from our pleasant Captain, and we
were put on board of a ship, named the York, mounting twenty-six guns,
commanded by Richard Brewer, an English gentleman, who formerly sailed out of
South Carolina, for a gentleman (I think) by the name of Cox. Captain Brewer
and the first mate being on shore, the ship was then under the command of a Mr.
Johnson, second mate, who confined us all down in the hold of the vessel, in
the gun room; there were twenty-one of us: the dead lights were chained and
locked up, which made our situation disagreeable, as it was dark, and we could
not stand strait up, by reason of the deck being so low. However, two of the
prisoners were admitted on deck at a time, as our guard was put on board to
keep us safe; we had to go up through a small scuttle, which would not admit
more than one person to go up at a time, and on deck stood a brave soldier,
with a fixed bayonet, to attend on the maneuvering of the prisoners who went on
deck. It was truly laughable to see sixteen soldiers under arms on deck, to
guard twenty-one poor disarmed prisoners, and the ship's crew contained not
much short of one hundred men; however, as we were men of importance, safety
was necessary, and the guard continued on board during our stay. About sunset,
Captain Brewer came on board, and sent for those who were officers when taken
prisoners, and invited the whole into his cabin, where we remained during our
stay on board, and received the politest treatment I ever met with in the whole
of my captivity, as we were treated with the best of diet, and drink of every
kind; the Captain frequently had other Captains of vessels to dine and sup with
him, and we were sharers in his entertainments; in a word, no men could be
better used; and the other prisoners also experienced the bounty of that good
man. In justice to the first mate, Mr. Colereach, Mr. Johnson second mate, and
the doctor, whose name is Mua, I must say that they were friendly, kind-hearted
men; in fact it sometimes appeared that we were not prisoners as there was so
much friendship from the officers and ships crew to the prisoners as will never
be erased. The character of Johnson, the second (...), was droll and singular;
he is a New England man, and would walk the deck sometimes for an hour, the
whole time praying to his Maker, so loud that he could be heard in any part of
the ship, and seemed to be in great earnest, asking forgiveness of his sins;
and penetential expressions appeared to flow from his lips with a sincere
contrition of heart; but in the midst of these ejaculations, if he saw a sailor
doing any thing amiss, especially on the yard arm or round top, he would swear
at him with such vehemence, that he would appear to damn him, the yard arm,
round top, masts, ship and crew, and the next minute praying and asking
forgiveness for all his sins; in short, he was a very good natured man, but an
old seaman, and was so addicted to swearing, that he often told me he did not
know when he swore: he put me in mind of a man named Tom Pope, who would use by
turns ill language, and then asked forgiveness, and said he must pay as he went
on. However, relative to poor Johnson, I have reason to believe the man was
heartily sorry for his allowing himself in such language; but it seems the
sailors were rather remiss in obeying his commands, until he made use of such
expressions, on purpose to make their merriment. He often lamented to me, that
it was his lot to be a seaman on account of the practice which generally
prevails among that class of men, in using profane language, and said, that
when he was young, he had no fear of God before his eyes, and became one of the
profanest wretches that ever existed, but then seemed to lament his former and
present conduct: particularly his having taken God's name in vain; but being so
addicted to the practice, it seemed an impossibility to leave it off, although
he said it was his intention to quit the seafaring business, and take some
other calling by reason of the habit. The officers who dined and supped on
board the York, are named Drew, Scott and Gray; they were Captain's of large
ships; I think Drew commanded a Frigate, and was an acting commodore; they were
much of gentlemen, and I should be very happy if either of them should ever go
into the United States, that they might be treated with cordiality for their
politeness to the prisoners, as also the mates and doctor of the ship York. On
the thirtieth instant, Captain Smith, Lieutenant Dunning, Sergeant Weed, and
myself, petitioned our brethren, the Free-masons in Quebec, for assistance, in
particular some money, but no answer was received; and we have since been
informed, they deem us traitors, for taking up arms against their King.

September 1st. -- We hear that four thousand men from the British fleet laying
off Portsmouth, deserted on the fourth ult. The prisoners received a shirt and
jacket each; I had a blanket coat.

Tuesday 7th. -- Mr. Miles Prentiss, the Provost master in Quebec, came on
board with orders for us to leave the ship and go on shore; on which we made
ready, and embarked on board a large long boat, and landed in the town with our
guard, and were marched to the jail, being obliged to carry our bedding and
spare clothes on our backs through the town, and on our arrival at our place of
confinement, had a room for the officers adjoining where the other prisoners
who accompanied us were put. We were allowed, through clemency, the privilege
of taking two of the prisoners, by the name of Isaac Hubble and Jeremiah
Frazier, to cook for us; the doors were then locked fast; and for the first
piece of business, our room is measured, and find it twenty feet long, and ten
wide, having a dirty rough stone floor, and are obliged to keep the
window-shuts open for air, there being no glass except half way from the top
downwards, the frame being long; when our shuts are closed, we are obliged to
stand on our fine table, which is of oak plank, an inch and an half thick, and
was made for the soldiers the last French war, and is as black as grease and
dirt mixed together, can any way make it: -- on this piece of furniture we
often stand and look or peep out through the glass. Our dishes are wooden also,
and appear to have had a long servitude in the campaigning business. Our beds
and bolsters are stuffed with straw, and laid on bunks; pillows we have none;
-- thus are we fixed, which considering all things, does not appear very
agreeable. This afternoon Richard Murray, Esquire. commissary of the prisoners,
visited us and appeared to be much of a gentleman; gave us flattering promises
of a speedy release from our present situation, liberty of the yard, etc. but
he had a master by the name of Frederick Haldiman, who was General and
commander in chief of the province of Canada, a man exactly adapted to suit his
Britannic Majesty and ministry.

On the ninth of September, some small flights of snow. On the thirteenth some
prisoners belonging to our regiment were brought from Chamblee and confined in
a room ever our heads.

14th, Mr. Murray visited us; I mentioned to him the ^eak state of health I was
in, relating to the billious complaint, which has so long afflicted me, and had
the promise of having my case represented to the General, that I might be sent
to an hospital, or some way provided for; but to no purpose, as yet.

Return of the prisoners belonging to the first New York regiment, taken last
summer and this fall, from Fort Stanwix. Sergeants -- Ezra Weed, Gilbert
Bogert, Abraham De Forest, (since dead) Thompson Bacon. Privates -- Isaac
Hubble, Elihu Schuyler, Jeremiah Frazier, John House, Barney Griffess. Moses
Budle, (since dead) Anthony Crowder, Henry Seamore, Joel Ackley, William
Copeland, William Kincaid, Henry Wheeler, Hosea M'Farland (dead) John Helmer,
William Potter, William Dohaty, Abel Cain, Hendrick Cornelius, William
Tiperwine, Peter Winn, John Bettis; John Connelly, Garret Moselus, John Bangle,
Jacob House, Corporal Gray, John Mullere, Christian House, Jacob Wormly, George
Whisick, Philip Snell, (...) Murray, John Gross, (killed) John Bishop, Major
Watson, killed with the Indians. Philip Ketch, continued with Mr. Jones the
Provost master, at Montreal; John Sharp engaged on board the English fleet the
tenth of September, for England; and a man by the name of Hall, from Captain
Eustis's company of artillery, also engaged on board said fleet for England.

The currency in this place is* called Hallifax, the dollar at five shillings;
and for amusement, will put down some rules how to bring shillings into pounds.
For the first example -- in 7496 shillings, how many pounds?

7496 5 L374-16.

In the first place, I say that ninety-six shillings is four pounds sixteen
shillings; then multiply by five, saying five times four is twenty, and the
four pounds borrowed from the ninety-six, is twenty-four, and so on, by plain
multiplication, as above; therefore, if any person sets down a thousand
figures, and you can only see the two right hand figures, and let his hand be
over the rest, and by seeing one at a time, from the right hand, as he slides
his hand to the left, you may, by carrying the multiplication by five (although
not mentioned aloud) tell how many pounds there are in all the figures sat down
after his hand has slid off, as you can fast follow his hand.

Rule 2 d. How to bring dollars into pounds, York.

Example. -- In 557 dollars, how many pounds York?

557 4 L. 222 16

In 100 dollars, how many pounds?

100 4 L. 40 0

Remember, if the right hand figure be a cipher, cut it off.

In the first of these examples -- I say four times 7 is 28, and double the 28,
which makes 56, and call that two pounds sixteen shillings; I set down the 16
and carry 2, as in the before going example.

To bring lawful money, at six shillings the dollar, into pounds.

Example. -- In 757 dollars, how many pounds?

757 3 L. 227 2

Double the first figure by shillings, as in York.

To bring Prock, at seven shillings and sixpence per dollar, into pounds.

Multiply by 3 and divide by 8.

Example -- In 100 dollars, how many pounds?

100 3 8) 300 (37l. 10s. 24 60 56 4 20 8) 80 (10 8 00

In L. 37 10 prock, how many dollars?

L. 37 10 8 3) 300 0 100 Dollars.

To bring pounds prock into dollars, multiply by (...) and divide by 3: for
example, in 37l. 10s. prock, how many dollars? I say 8 times 10 is 80, which is
4 pounds, set down 0, and carry four, etc. as above.

Example -- In 60l. Halifax, how many pounds York currency?

L. 60 8 5) 480 (96l. York currency. 45 30 30 0

And to bring York into Halifax, reverse it as follows -- In 96l. York, how
many pounds Halifax?

96l. 5 8) 480 60l.

To bring York money in pounds into dollars, multiply by 5 and divide by 2.

Example -- In 1000l. how many dollars?

1000l. 5 2) 5000 2500 Dollars

Example -- In 40l. how many dollars?

40l. 5 2) 200 100 dollars, it is well known, is 40l.

General prices of the following articles at this place:

Green tea 8 s. (about 12 s10 York) bohea 4 s. (about 6 s8 York) pepper 2 s6
(which is 4 s. York) mustard 2 s3 (which is 3 s6 York) potatoes 4 s. pen
bushel; turnips ditto; imported tobacco 5 s. per pound, (which is a dollar)
York spirits 8 s. per gallon, common wine two dollars or 10 s. linens 3 s6, 3
s9, 4 s. and 5 s. per yard.

On the 19th, Mr. Murray visited us, when Captains Brownson and Smith, informed
him that they had no over-clothing, except a blanket coat, and had the promise
of more clothing. Mr. Miles Prentiss, sends us every day good fresh beef,
mutton or veal; we are allowed spruce beer, and potatoes by turns. Our bedding
is none of the best, as the sheets are as coarse as is any way needful, and
water I am certain they never touched. We really cut a figure, in particular
when our dinner is paraded; our black wooden dishes put on so shining a hue,
and graced with our mahogany oak, bespeak American officers indeed; and to
confirm my assertion, on the 27th, we received each of us a white flannel
jacket, and ammunition breeches.

October the 5th. -- Arrived from England, a small fleet, having a few German
troops on board. Captain Brownson went to the hospital for the recovery of his
health. On the 7th, Captain Brownson returned again. -- The number of prisoners
in this town (the largest number of which are militia, who were taken from
their farms) is about one hundred, although there are many seamen confined in
different parts of the jail, and numbers go on board of shipping for England.

On the 14th -- A report of the Seneca's country being cut off.

21st -- A hard frost last night. We were this day visited by a Doctor Apdell,
an acquaintance of Capt. Smith's and Lieut. Dunning's, who informs of a small
picket sort, belonging to the Americans, being taken by a British officer and
twenty men, with two hundred Indians, and says that the prisoners are brought
into Montreal; but cannot inform what garrison or what officer was taken. He
made us (for the first) a present of a dollar.

25th -- A pleasant day. It has been a remarkable warm, dry summer in this
province, by information; and this fall, grass, grain, and all kinds of roots
have much failed. We wrote a petition today to General Haldiman, desiring to
be sent this fall to New York, or admitted on parole. Yesterday, by account,
two Germans who were in the British service, went up the river and drowned
themselves. The same day two British officers fought a duel on board a vessel,
and one of them was killed.

26th. The fleet fell down the river this morning to Patrick's Hole, for
England. A Lieut. Col. Louder, of the militia, from Boston, and a French
officer, were brought in prisoners this day: they were taken at a place called
Konopscot, in New Hampshire. The Colonel says, he had a valuable packet going
to General Gates.

November 2d -- Snow the chief of this day. The 31st regiment arrived from St.
John's last evening, and relieved the German guards.

5th -- Colonel Louder and the French officer embarked this morning for
Halifax, and are to be sent to Boston for an exchange, by whom we sent some
letters; I forwarded two, one of them to Colonel Van Schaick, and the other to
Captain Eustis, of the artillery.

On the 6th, Mr. Murray visited us, and informed, that the General will not
admit us to go to New York, nor on parole, and gave directions for us to be
removed from where we then were, into the lower barracks; and about one
o'clock, we left our (...), table, and all our dishes, and went into a more
comfortable place, although a stone floor is one part of our charter; the room
is large, being twenty feet square.

The 8th -- The sun shines in our room, the first time we have seen him for six
weeks, as we could not have any reflections from his rays in our other
apartment, on account of the room fronting the north, and only a window in
front.

On the 11th -- Clear and cold. Mr. Murray gave some directions about our room,
to make it more comfortable, and thinks we shall be obliged to stay all winter;
which, under the situation of Captain Brownson and myself, as we are neither of
us healthy, makes the prospect gloomy before us; but patience in all
afflictions is right, for I have no idea that they spring from the dust. The
prisoners have several times received clothing, and appear to have good
attention paid them by Messrs. Murray and Prentiss, but the poor creatures
being so closely locked up, and having nothing but benches to fit on, makes the
time hang more heavy, in particular the prisoners of other rooms, as they have
only a pound of fresh beef, and a pound of bread a day, without vegetables of
any kind, or flour; and the beef in Canada is not equal to the English or
American, as vegetation is rapid after the snow leaves the ground, and the
cattle are commonly very poor in the spring, so that generally speaking, the
beef is made in one season, which is not more than five months at longest, and
tenderer flesh was never tasted by me. We have been indulged with the loan of
twelve dollars each, from government; and now and the^ I send the prisoners of
the York line some potatoes and tobacco.

November 12 -- We have a stove erected in our room, which at present is
disagreeable, as all our cooking and tea water is on the stove. An account in
the Quebec Gazette, that two thousand of General Washington's army of the best
troops, had laid down their arms; and that one whole regiment of continental
troops with their officers, had joined the royal army.

November 15 -- The weather more moderate. It is two hours from break of day to
sunrise. The sun sets at five o'clock.

November 25th, 1779.
Copy of a petition sent to General Haldiman, etc.
To his Excellency Frederick Haldiman, Esquire. Captain General and Commander in
Chief of his Majesty's troops in Canada, etc. etc. etc. The petition of Gideon
Brownson, Simeon Smith, Michael Dunning and William Scudder, late officers in
the American army, and now prisoners of war, HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT your petitioners would esteem it as a particular favor, if your
Excellency would please to indulge them so far as to permit them to be sent
this fall to New York; or should your Excellency he otherwise inclined, we beg
to be considered, on account of our close confinement, which we perceive to be
detrimental to our health, and take the liberty of mentioning, that if we could
be admitted on an enlargement on our paroles, we will pledge our sacred honors,
which we esteem as dear as the country which gave us birth, that we will not
transcend any limits or restrictions which we may be bound to observe. -- And
your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.

GIDEON BROWNSON, Captain. SIMEON SMITH, Captain. MICHAEL DUNNING, Lieutenant.
WILLIAM SCUDDER, Lieutenant.

Quebec, in Provost, October, 29th. 1779.
His Excellency Frederick Haldiman, Esquire.

We are informed, that in October, Lieut. Col. Statia and Captain John Wood,
were brought from Niagara and confined in Chamblee. The Colonel was taken at
Cherry Valley, by the Indians, where a number of our troops, and the
inhabitants, were inhumanly murdered; among whom were Colonel Alden, and Mrs.
Dunlap, wife to the Rev. Mr. Dunlap, an aged and worthy lady. But the instance
(from information) of Capt. Wood, is truly remarkable. A number of the Goshen
militia, consisting of many of the first characters in that country, went in
pursi^^^ of some Indians who had committed depredations on the back
settlements; the party was led into an ambush, and every person cut off, except
Captain Wood; the man is a stranger to me, but a circumstance so particular,
must demand his warmest tribute of praise to his and our Great Benefactor, for
so (...) and wonderful a preservation; and it is my sincere desire, that he may
again return to his native home, family and connexions, full of gratitude to
the Great Preserver of men, and be a worthy and useful citizen to our new and
rising empire. Weep, O Goshen! for a number of your most valuable inhabitants
are fallen. Sergeant Deforest is unwel, and appears under anxious impressions
for the event of his future state, which is a reasonable reflection; and may he
press forward toward the mark, and not lose sight until he arrives at the
haven of everlasting repose.

A proposal of Major Rogers, to discover a navigable passage through the
continent, from the Atlantic Ocean to China, or the great Pacific Ocean,
setting out from Schenectady with two hundred men, well officered, and a
sufficient number of batteaus and necessaries for so great an attempt. -- He
proposed to leave Schenectady in May, 1772, and ascend the Mohawk river to Fort
Stanwix; from thence descend the Wood Creek to the Oneida lake, and pass the
same down the Onondaga river to Oswego, on Lake Ontario, and coast along the
southern shore of that lake to the post of Niagara; from thence transport their
boats across the portage there, by the Great Falls to the river issuing from
Lake Erie, and ascend that river, and coast along the northern shore of Lake
Erie up the river Detroit, then across the small lake of St. Clair, into the
river Huron, and ascend to Lake Huron, and coast the western shore of this
great lake, to the Straits and ports of Michilimachinac; from thence, cross the
north end of Lake Michigan to the Green Bay, enter the Takis river, and stem it
to the carrying place, then transport the batteaus across the portage there to
the river Oasconsoens, then pursue the course of this river to its junction
with the Missisippi, and ascend that river to the falls of St. Anthony, where
he expected to arrive by the middle of September, and there pass the first
winter. There the men will be employed in housing themselves for the winter,
catching of beaver, gathering wild rice, curing of buffaloes and venison
against spring, for subsistence onward. -- He proposed to depart from St.
Anthony's Falls in April, 1773, and to enter the river St. Pierre, and ascend
thereby to its source, in about latitude 44; from thence carry their batteaus
across a portage of twenty miles into a branch of the river Missoures, and
ascend the same north-west, to its source; then carry their batteaus over a
portage of about thirty miles, into the great river O^rigan, and follow that
river through a most populous country, or tract of Indian land, to the Straits
of Annian, and the gulf or bay projecting from thence northeasterly into the
continent, and there pass the second winter. Here he expects to traffic with
the Indians, and produce all necessary articles for subsistence, gain^ what
intelligence he can, catch codfish and other provisions, and cure them against
spring; and a purchase of boats or vessels peculiar to these parts will be
made. The next spring, the party will proceed to explore every inlet, nook or
bay, from th^se straits to Hudson's Bay, between which he expects to find the
communication or passage in question, and from thence, if disappointed, will
continue his researches along the coast of the great Pacific Ocean, to the
utmost projection of the continent. -- He is induced to begin the attempt from
the western coast of America, and to trace the direction of the Straits of
Annian, and of the bay or gulf projecting from thence toward Hudson's Bay, the
better to avoid exposure to the intolerable rigor of the winds, which on the
coast of Hudson's Bay, blows almost incessantly from the pole. He proposed to
leave^ the greater part of the party at Hudson's Bay, a^^ the entrance of the
passage, to pilot the vessels designed for that purpose into the great Pacific
Ocean if practicable, which would prove satisfactory; but if an ^ntoward and
hostile disposition in the savages there, or an impossibility of subsisting
Europeans during the winter in these inhospitable latitudes should render the
return of the party the only alternative, -- he thinks the charts and maps will
answer a good end and purpose, although it should prove less satisfactory --
but should he find a passage into Hudson's Bay, the constant direction of the
winds on the western shore of America from the Pacific, will render it eligible
to return northwestwardly, between the islands of Japan and the Pole, through
the great Archipelago, bounded on the sea heretofore supposed a continent
between America and Kamschatska, the northeast point of Asia, and return to
Great Britain through Russia. Major Rogers proposed effecting the whole of the
voyage in three years, by returning to Europe or the way he sat out; he
supposed the utmost bounds were in 55 degrees north latitude. This is an
abbreviation taken from Rogers's proposal, as I was scant of paper, although it
is the purport of his intended research.

Monday 29th -- Clear and pleasant. Five British prisoners, who on their
passage from England endeavored to take the vessel, were taken from provost and
sent up the river. It is said their intention was, if they had got the command
of the vessel, to have sailed her to Boston.

December 2d. Six prisoners, one of whom is Sergeant Bogert, broke jail. I am
in a poor state of health.

13th -- On the 10th instant a deep snow fell, and this day it again snows. An
account is received that General Washington and General Clinton have had a
battle, and that our army were driven fifteen miles; but at last the British
retreated and lost some of their baggage.

14th -- The snow is about fourteen inches deep on a level. -- Sent the
prisoners some potatoes and tobacco, which is not the first time.

Copy of a letter written to Mr. Coffin, a gentleman in town, by desire of Mr.
Prentiss.
SIR,
We the subscribers, take the liberty of informing you, that in July last we
were taken prisoners of war from the American armies, by the savages, and
experienced severe hardships; we have ever since been under close confinement,
which is very detrimental to our health and comfort; and being credibly
informed of your good character, and of your influence with his Excellency the
Commander in Chief, will accept it as a particular favor, if you will be
pleased to intercede with the general for us to be permitted on parole, on
which we will pledge our sacred faith to be punctual to any restrictions his
excellency shall bind us in. You compliance with this desire, will be
gratefully acknowledged, by

Sir, Your humble servants, GIDEON BROWNSON, SIMEON SMITH. MICHAEL DUNNING,
WILLIAM SCUDDER.


Mr. I. COFFIN, Quebec.

December 25. The six prisoners who made their escape from jail, were yesterday
brought back and confined in irons; they were taken at Three Rivers, in the
middle of the day. An account of the British and French grand fleets having had
an engagement; but the particulars are not known.

It being Christmas day, we invited Mr. Isaac Van Arnum and his wife, to dine
with us; they are prisoners confined in another room, and were taken from their
farm at New Haven Falls, on Utter Creek, in the New Hampshire Grants. They had
their house, with its furniture, grain, hay, etc. all destroyed by fire, by the
British, and are people of character. Mrs. Van Arnum's father's name is Moses
Pierson, from Morris county, in New Jersey, who some years ago moved from that
place and settled on Lake Champlain. We spent the day agreeably, considering
our situation, all being in close prison. -- This week's paper gives an account
of a battle being fought at the southward, and that General Lincoln is killed,
and the Americans lost seven thousand in killed, wounded, and prisoners.

January 1, 1780 -- It being New Year's Day, we passed it as agreeably as
possible, considering our circumstances. Capt. Brownson and myself are still
unwel: For my part I am much afflicted with a pa^n in my bowels, which has been
constantly on me ever since the Onondaga nation were cut off, and the Great
Parent of all men knows how much longer I am to be thus situated.

January 17th -- On the 10th instant, a gentleman in town (his name is unknown
to me) sent me a present of a bottle of Turlington's drops. We had permission
this day, to have three gentlemen, who are prisoners, to dine with us; they are
James Cassedy, Thomas Wigan, and a Doctor Debiere, the last was taken from
Colonel Alden's regiment at Cherry Valley, and is a French gentleman; the other
two, with William Bostwick, Gerard Cochran, and Bommaventure Fouches, are
confined on suspicion of being enemies to the British crown.

For amusement, I will write down now and then some abbreviated accounts of
remarkable parts of the world, taken from Brooks' Universal Geography.

CEYLON, a large island in the East Indies, lying between 78 and 82 degrees of
east longitude, and between 6 and 10 north latitude, being 250 miles in length,
and 195 in breadth. In general the air is good, and the country is full of
mountains; there are pleasant valleys, but the mountains are very high and
barren. It is particularly remarkable for its plenty of cinnamon, which is all
in possession of the Dutch, who drove out the Portuguese and usurped the
dominion of the country. The island is situated in the Indian Sea, near the
southeast coast of the continent of the hither India. The Dutch are possessed
of all the sea coast, and have shut up the king in the middle of the island,
who resides at his capital city, of Candy. There are, in some places, rich
mines, from whence are got rubies, sapphires, topazes, and cats eyes; the
island abounds with all kinds of cattle, as in other parts of India: elephants
are of the same. They have very dangerous serpents and ants, which do a great
deal of mischief. The most remarkable tree in this island, is called the
Tallipot, one of whose leaves will cover ten men and keep them from rain; they
are very light and travelers carry them from place to place and keep them for
tents. The inhabitants are divided into several tribes, from the nobleman down
to the maker of matts, and all the children follow the same calling as their
father's; nor is it lawful to marry into any other tribe. They have each a
particular mark in their dress. Their religion is idolatry, and though they
acknowledge a Supreme ^od, they worship inferior beings; among these are the
sun and moon; their pagods and images are very numerous, etc. etc.

A few reflections on matters of a serious nature, by turns, will not be amiss,
as I am fully persuaded of the immortality of the soul, and that an account
must be rendered to our Great Lord and Master, of my stewardship. -- The first
and several remarks are chiefly borrowed from Antoninus, a Roman Emperor, and
are styled the Meditations of Antoninus the pious -- He says, "Let me thus say
to myself every morning, that I may in every respect act as one aware that I
may in a short time depart out of life, and that if I should have to do with
some intermeddler in other men's affairs, with an ungrateful, or insolent, a
crafty, an envious, or an unsociable, selfish man, these bad qualities have
befallen him through ignorance of what things are really good or evil, and that
by a constant guard over myself, I cannot be hurt by any of them, since none of
them can involve me in any thing dishonorable or deformed.

I am informed that John Helmer, a corporal of our regiment, is taken prisoner
and brought into Chamblee, and confined in prison.

Sabbath, 23d -- Six months since I was taken a prisoner, and have not enjoyed
a well day.

28th -- The coldest weather I ever knew; the sentinels are relieved every half
hour. We were permitted to dine with the gentleman whom I mentioned being with
us a few days past; but are again closely locked, having large double doors,
lined with sheet iron, and bolts of iron, with looks sufficient to bar against
the most felonious beings that ever existed: However, one thing is some comfort
to us; they cannot look up our tongues or thoughts, and, as the old saying is,
every one will have his day. This we are fully sensible of, that if Sir Guy
Carlton was commander in this place, our treatment would be very different, as
no man can be more humane to prisoners than he. I can truly say, that were I in
a good state of health, my confinement would appear trifling to what it does at
present; still I will not despair, and my greatest anxiety is relative to my
distressed country, as our money, from every report, is reduced to a mere
shadow in value; and should it entirely fail, an impossibility of subsisting
the army must take place, except a foreign support can be procured.

Saturday, 12th -- Received of Richard Murray, Esquire. commissary of prisoners,
nine dollars and one third, from government.

Tuesday, 15th -- Cloudy weather. Sent the prisoners some vegetables and
tobacco, and lent the sergeants two dollars.

Monday, 21st -- There are in three rooms, about forty prisoners, who have
communication with each other, and were yesterday discovered digging through the
wall, which is ten feet thick; they had got within one foot of the outer part
of the wall, and intended, on the second night from the time they were
detected, to have made their escape.

The city of Quebec, stands on an elbow, but the largest side of the town is on
the river St. Lawrence, in north latitude 47 35. three hundred miles northwest
of Boston, and five hundred and fifty nine miles from New York. It was
attempted by the English in the reign of Queen Ann, but it being in a late
season of the year, and wanting good pilots, they failed in their attempt, by
which means some transports and several hundred soldiers were lost. There are
two towns, the Upper and Lower, and I judge it to be about half as large as
New York. There are both Protestant and Roman Catholic churches in it, and is a
place of considerable trade; but I know of nothing remarkable in it, except the
citadel, which General Haldiman is fortifying; and I am informed he is
undermining the ground to a considerable distance out of the town, by which
means large quantities of powder may be put in order to blow up an army, in
case of an attempt to storm, and the garrison will sustain no harm: it can
contain ten thousand men and provisions for seven years -- So much for British
information. I am of opinion it is a strong fortification, as nature has done a
great deal toward securing its strength.

Friday, 25th -- Cold, hazy weather. Drew four dollars for the sergeants, and
sent the prisoners potatoes and tobacco, which latter article some appear to
suffer most for, and I must give credit to their complaint from the information
of so many tobacco chewers; but were I to be sole judge* from the taste* (for
nothing, except aloes, is more disagreeable to me) I should suppose them (...)
or crazy.

We had this day a visit from the Adjutant General, who appeared a very
accomplished gentleman, and asked if we wanted any thing to make us
comfortable. We mentioned that our greatest want was more enlargement, and he
promised to speak to the General for us, which we have reason to suppose he
did, with a number of other influential gentlemen; but old Frederick's heart is
as hard as a two-sold Satan. We had also a visit from Stephen Tuthill and Mr.
John Ross, merchants, in this town, who, with a number of other gentlemen, have
made us presents several times, of liquors, etc. Mr. Tuthill has lately been to
Fort Edward with a flag, and has brought a few letters (though none sor (...))
and informs, that cornstalk rum is sixty dollars a gill. I made myself merry on
the occasion, and asked some British officers, if they ever expected to conquer
a set of people who could contrive such a method to make themselves happy.

MADAGASCAR, is supposed to be the largest island in the world, situated
between 43 and 51 degrees of east longitude, and between 12 and 26 degrees of
south latitude, 300 miles southeast of the continent of Africa, and is about
one thousand miles in length, from north to south, and generally between two
and three hundred miles broad: it abounds in cattle, fish, fowl, and all manner
of animals and vegetables that are to be found on the continent of Africa.
There are a great variety of hills and valleys, and is well watered with rivers
and springs; nor does there want for good harbors: and yet, not any European
nation has thought it worth while to plant colonies there, it producing no
merchandise that will bear the expense of so long a voyage, except negroes,
which are purchased there as well as on the continent. There are also white
men, and a tawny generation upon the coast, who are supposed to be descended,
from the Arabs, from their language and religious rites, having a mixture of
Mahometanism, Judaism, and Paganism; but they have no mosques or temples, or
any stated worship. The country is divided among a great many petter
sovereigns, to whom the seamen that touch there, give the title of kings and
princes, who, making war on each other as they do on the continent, sell the
prisoners for slaves to the shipping which call there, taking clothing,
utensils, and other necessaries in return. European pirates formerly frequently
had their station in the harbors of th^^ island, amongst whom was Avery, so
much talked of a number of years ago, and to suppress whom five English men of
war were sent thither; but the pirates seemed to be as powerful as any of the
princes of Madagascar, and bid defiance to their enemies who came to attack
them by sea or land. It was conjectured the pirates would have formed a petty
state in this island, having six or seven ships with them, on the northeast
part of Madagascar, whither they used to carry in the prizes they made in the
Indian Seas, and fortified the avenues to the harbor where they secured them.
But what has become of them, is uncertain; whether they remain there or have
left the island: but by this time it is supposed they are generally dispersed
and dead.

February -- A report is much talked of, that three of the members of Congress
are gone to England to negociate a peace between that power and the Americans;
but the truth is not ascertained; in fact we are shut up in this place so
recluse from the world, that we can neither hear or find out much relating to
politics.

Partly from Antoninus. He says -- let me consider as one who shortly must die,
not to dote on this fleshly part, which has a tendency to soon decay; but at
all times, either in prosperity or adversity, never suffer (...) noble part to
be enslaved or moved by unsociable passions, and to never repine at what
befalls us; for whatever God ordains, is full of wife providence; and let
these thoughts also continue, that I am a part of the Universe, and am
preserved to fulfill that place which God has given me wisdom so to do, and to
remember how long I have put off these things, and how often I have neglected
to use the opportunities offered to me by God in his providence.

We had a visit from a Mr* John Defo, formerly from Albany, who made us a
present of half a guinea.

WOLGA, a river of Russia, and thought to be the greatest in Europe; it rises
from a small lake in ^ithuani^, and running southeast, passes by the cities of
Jeraslaf, Kasan, and Bulgar, and entering into Asiatic Russia, continues its
course due south, to Kamisinea, from whence it runs southeast, and passing by
Ashican, falls into the Caspian Sea, fifty miles below the city, having run a
course of between two and three thousand miles, being deep enough, great part
of the way, to carry large ships, but the mouth of it is so choked up with
sands, that loaded ships cannot enter; for which reason, the Russian ships lie
at an island without the mouth of the Wolga. At the mouth of this river, near
Ashican, are prodigeous large sturgeon, and it is confidently affirmed, that
one of the roes will weigh three hundred pounds, out of which they make
caviare, so well known in Europe.

March 15 -- It has snowed almost every other day this winter. R^^eived of
Richard Murray, Esquire. eight dollars, from government.

17th -- being St. Patrick's Day, we must be in the fashion; therefore had a
dinner better than usual on the occasion, and a few bottles of porter.

Friday, 27th -- This day is called good Friday, the Church of England fasts,
and the Roman Catholics do not ring their bells, pretending they have gone to
Rome. The day is held sacred on account of our Savior being crucified,
according to their account, on this day.

30th -- The bells begin to ring again, and I am of opinion that many ignorant
Catholics believe the bells have been to Rome and returned again. Received of
Richard Murray, Esquire. a violet suit of clothes, charged twenty dollars.

We are informed, that three German soldiers were this day flogged, by running
the gantlet, one of them received three thousand two hundred lashes, and the
two others sixteen hundred each; but as to the truth I cannot ascertain,
although I believe it: still, running the gantlet is not so severe a
punishment, generally speaking, as being tied up; for two files of soldiers are
placed a distance apart, so that the man who is to be punished, passes between
the files, and every soldier has a whip and gives him a stroke.

An account in the Quebec paper, that twelve thousand Hessians were coming to
Carolina, with the Queen of England's brother to command them.

The Indians call the Americans Kitchemuccommou; the signification is a great
knife. The snow is about five feet on a level.

GAU^ES, a people of Asia, in Persia, and in the East Indies, who are the
remains of the ancient Persians, and are noted for their worshipping of fire
and the Sun; for they say God is light, and pretend to have a fire (which is a
large lamp) that has never been extinguished for four thousand years; they
make tilling the land an act of religion, and look upon it as the most
agreeable to God: They affirm Zoraster to be the founder of their worship, and
believe two principles, the one good and the other bad. They are a mild,
innocent set of people, and have been very patient under persecutions, and live
under the conduct and direction of their elders and priests, and look upon
Alexander the great, and the great Mahomet, as two wicked men. They marry none
but of their own religion, and are allowed but one wife, unless the first
proves barren: however they do not trouble themselves how near relation their
wives are. The employment of their priests, is to take care of their sacred
fire, which they say was first lighted by Zoraster, their great prophet, whose
return they daily expect. They never bury their dead, but expose them to the
open air in places surrounded with high walls, to be devoured by birds of prey.
etc. etc.

April 15th. -- Clear and pleasant. The snow goes fast: A French gentleman, who
is a considerable merchant at Montreal, and of a reputable character, by the
name of Francis Cazeau, is brought to the Provost, and confined in the room
with James Cassedy and others; Charles Hay, an inhabitant of this town, and
brother to Colonel Udney Hay, of our army, is also brought and confined in
Provost: they are both suspected of being friends to the Americans. Mr. Hay is
confined in a room where are some French gentlemen, viz. John Peter Laterriere,
confined nineteen months, Valentine Jautard, attorney at law, Fleury Misplet,
Printer, from Montreal, confined fourteen months, Eleazer Davis, an American,
taken near the Missisippi, (as he says) confined fifteen months, broke his
parole from the Isle of Orleans. -- We have passed a long tedious winter, and
what has added to the gloomy prospect, is the great length of the nights in
this country, as in the shortest days, the sun scarcely appears before it is
gone again, and we have sixteen hours and thirty six minutes night in every
twenty-four hours.

Monday, May 8th. -- Seventeen prisoners who were taken from their farms, were
taken out of Provost and sent down the river to a place of Major Aron's, a few
days ago; seven went on said farm: they were all taken from lake Champlain.

Friday, May 14th. -- Mr. Murray, for the first, obtained liberty for us to
walk one hour in the yard.

24th. -- Received of Mr. Murray, eight dollars. An account in the Quebec
papers, of eleven Spanish men of war and a number of merchant ships, being
taken from the Spaniards by the English (...) the amount of six millions in
value, and also, Charleston being taken, with seventeen thousand men, and that
General Lincoln is again killed, and poor old Gates, is missing.

Saturday, 27th of May. -- Bought shad at three pence a piece, and sent a
number to the prisoners, who had all an airing this day, except Messrs. Cauzeau
and Hay.

Saturday, June the 3d. -- Colonel Peter's has often visited us, and appears to
be a gentleman of sociability. An account that General Washington was taken
prisoner on his way from Virginia to the American army, with fifty who were his
guard. This morning being something cool, about six o'clock a black and heavy
cloud appeared in the north-west, which blew over without much wind, and
directly the whole horizon appeared of a yellowish cast, and grew dark,
comparatively like the twilight between daylight and candlelight, so that a
fowl which was feeding in the yard, sat down and appeared asleep, and continued
for two hours in that position, although it was not the whole time quite so
da^k. We breakfasted at eight o'clock, and could scarcely see our victuals, and
many in the city lighted up their candles. About nine o'clock the cloud blew
over, and the day resumed again its usual appearance; although it was a solemn
interval. Great numbers were much alarmed at so uncommon a phenomenon; some
conjectured an unknown eclipse (as there was no account of any at this time.)
From every information, so remarkable an appearance was never known before in
this country.

From Antoninus, who says -- let me consider who the President of this universe
is, and endeavor to understand what sort of a whole I am a part of, and that
there is a certain time appointed for men, which i^ not employed in making all
calm and serene within, it will pass away, and we along with it, and never more
return; therefore, never suffer the mind to wander, but keep justice in view in
every design, and in all imaginations which may arise, preserve the judging
faculty safe. Does any one despise me, let him see to it; I should endeavor not
to be found acting or speaking worthy of contempt. Does any one hate me, I
cannot help it any better way, than of being kind and good natured to all, and
ready to show this man his mistake, and not to upbraid or make a show, but from
a genuine goodness.

MUA, an ancient and very famous town of Arabia, in Asia, and the place of
Mahomet's nativity, seated on a barren spot in a valley, surrounded with hills,
about a day's journey from the Red Sea; that which supports it, is the resort
of a great many thousands of pilgrims, every year. The hills about the town are
very numerous, and all consist of a blackish rock; on the top of one of them is
a cave, where they pretend Mahomet usually retired to perform his devotions,
and hither they pretend a great part of the Alcoran was brought him by the
Angel Gabriel; the town has plenty of water, and but little garden stuff,
although plenty of sundry fruits. The temple of Mua, has forty-two doors, and
its form resembles the royal exchange in London, but is near ten times as
large; it is open in the middle, and the ground covered with gravel, except in
two or three places that lead to the Beat Alah, through certain doors, and
these are paved with short stones; this Beat stands in the middle of the
temple, and is the principal object of the pilgrim's devotion, and is open but
two days in six weeks, one day for the men, and the other for the women; about
twelve paces from the Beat, is the (...) of Abraham, as they pretend, and they
affirm that he erected the Beat Alah, and when they have performed their
devotions here, they repair to a hill, they being no less than seventy thousand
in number, and after several ceremonies, receive the title of saints; the next
morning they move to a place where they hold that Abraham offered up his son
Isaac, and pitch their tents, and each one throws seven stones against a small
square building, in defiance of the Devil. Every pilgrim takes an offering with
him -- a sheep or lamb, etc.

Friday, 9th -- Cloudy, cold weather for the time of year. An account that Sir
John Johnson, with a large party of men had lately penetrated as far as
Johnstown, and taken a number of inhabitants, with a Captain's command that was
going to Fort Stanwix, which last were all killed by the Indians. Major Fonda's
and several other houses were burnt.

Monday, June 12 -- Was shut up close all day yesterday; it being sabbath, the
General was fearful we should play truant, he being (from information) a man of
zeal; but, if we may judge, it cannot be from a religious cause. We sent
another petition, a copy of which is as follows:

To his Excellency Frederick Haldiman, Esquire. Captain General and Commander in
Chief in Canada, etc. The Petition of Gideon Brownson, Simeon Smith, Michael
Dunning, and William Scudder,
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT your petitioners, having for a long time been prisoners under close
confinement, which situation we submit to your Excellency, and the tediousness
of being so closely continued from such exercise as our constitutions really
require, and we doubt not will speak feelingly in your breast, and beg the
consideration of your Excellency in our behalf; as we solemnly declare, that
whatever our attachments may be, we hold our country and our honors too dear to
forfeit any trust your Excellency may repose in us, and humbly beg for an
enlargement, as we are determined a steady line of conduct shall mark our
characters during our being prisoners of war, which shall not only prove
satisfactory to your Excellency, but to the honor and firmness of the country
which gave us birth. Should it not meet with the pleasure of your excellency to
enlarge us, under your immediate command, we will accept it as a particular
favor, to be sent to New York, or across the lake, on our paroles; and should
we meet with the last indulgence, we can only pour into your Excellency's
breast the character we have hitherto sustained and hope to not tarnish, by the
forfeiture of our sacred faith, which we will never break, whatever may meet
with your Excellency's indulgence in our behalf, and as in duty bound will ever
pray.

G. BROWNSON, S. SMITH, M. DUNNING, M. SCUDDER.

Quebec, in Provost, June 12, 1780.

Wednesday, June 14 -- Cool for the time of year. A report that fifteen sail of
the line, of French, are at the mouth of the river St. Lawrence, having on
board fifteen thousand troops: -- good news, if true; but I doubt it.

Monday, 19th -- So cold that the sentinels whip their hands. A hot press last
night. Some Hessian troops arrived from Montreal today; they came down the
river by water. A considerable bustling appears, but no Jack Frenchman is any
more talked of.

26th -- Eight fail of shipping arrived yesterday from New York, and of
consequence the fleet is not where it was reported to be. An American ship is
brought in as a prize, named the Harlequin, mounting twenty-four guns (four
pounders) commanded by Putman Cleves, was manned by ninety-three men, and had
taken a prize laden with salt, and sent her into Salem, from which port the
Harlequi^ sailed, and had been out five weeks, when the ship called the Hind,
fell in with and soon captured her.

27th -- The officers and seamen who were taken in the Harlequin, are brought
and confined in the room next to us.

July 3d -- Great news to day; the Quebec paper says, that General Clinton has
taken Charleston, in South Carolina, with seven thousand troops and three
thousand militia, without any kind of resistance, and the militia are all sent
home on their paroles of honor; and that Lord Cornwallis has penetrated the
country and taken Governor Rutledge, who is styled a mock Governor. So much for
that!

Tuesday, 4th -- Warm and sultry. It being the anniversary of our four year's
Independence, I gave the prisoners two gallons of rum. We had all the gentlemen
to take a glass of wine with us, and had several good toasts, which we have a
right to drink under locks and keys. This evening a prisoner is brought in, who
was taken at the isle of Aux Noix; he says he had come to join the king; his
name is Havilan. An old gentleman by the name of Matthew Conner, who was taken
from Cherry Valley, in the month of November, 1788, obtained liberty to return
home on account of being exchanged; he got a release from the Indians last fall
by paying ten dollars, and was brought to this place, and has ever since been
under close confinement; Mr. Conner is above seventy years of age, by his
account: four other aged men who were taken from their farms almost two years
ago, are permitted to return home; their names are George Wents, George Weaver,
Peter Suts, and William Henderson. Lieutenant Maynor, who was taken at Cobus
Kill, in the spring of 1778, embarked this day for New York. He has been on
parole in this town ever since he was taken: but remember, when he was brought
to town General Carlton commanded; or, by the life of Pharaoh, had old
Frederick had the command, he must have looked twelve months at least through
the grates. One thing is a comfort -- he will not live always; and I judge,
should he and old Jautard and Misplet, in particular, meet in another world,
there will be scratching work.

13th. -- Several transports sailed for New York. -- More news, and that is,
that General Washington has had a battle in Jersey, and has lost almost his
whole army. From a small calculation of accounts published in the British
Quebec Gazettes, the Americans have lost all their generals in a twelve month
past, and one hundred thousand men. I wonder they are not ashamed of such
glaring falsehoods. We are informed that Lieut. Maynor is detected in taking
private letters with him, and the map of the Quebec garrison and will be
brought back and put in irons.

22d. -- The report of Lieutenant Maynor, like all other accounts, proves to be
false. A German soldier who belonged to Capt. Finks company, in our regiment,
came this day to see me. He deserted from Fort Stanwix on the 22d of last May,
and thirty-one more of the Garrison, with their arms and accoutrements. Our
people and some Indians pursued the party that deserted, and overtook them
crossing Goose Creek, when they fired and killed fourteen of the deserters; the
remainder got to Buck's Island, except two, who are supposed to have been lost
and perished in the woods. He says they blamed Lieut. Col. Vandyke.

July 20. -- So cool as to have flights of snow.

23d. -- Still cool. One year since being taken a prisoner, and considering the
state of health I was in when taken, and ever since, with the treatment I have
met with, by suffering so long a confinement with my brother officers, contrary
to the manner in which the British officers are used, makes the time
disagreeable and wearisome indeed; but why should I repine? -- Rather let me
consider in what a state death shall find me, relating to the soul; observe the
shortness of life, and the vast emensity of the preceding and ensuing duration;
and in every thing that is just and lawful be inured to attempt, even what I
may despair of executing; alway^ remembering how like a stranger is he who is
surprised at any thing which may happen in life, and not form designs as if my
existence here was for a thousand years. Death hangs over me while I live, and
while I may become good. These sentiments flow from a heart of gratitude to my
righteous God, who will see me, my fellow officers, and all who are contending
for their just liberties, righted, together with the poor prisoners, and all
sufferers in so good a cause.

A few days ago, two British ships, the Wolf and Hind, were in chase of an
American privateer, when the Wolf struck a rock at the mouth of the river and
stove all to pieces; the Hind saved the crew, in doing which, it is said she
lost both her ^^les, but throwing out her spring cable, the chains catched to a
rock and brought up the Hind, or she must also have been lost. A German
Lieutenant, by the name of George Kress, visited us to day, and gave as a
present four bottles of wine, and a dollar to the boy; he was taken by the
Americans at Trenton. Philip Lansing, Stephen Tuthill, and John Ross, were all
on a visit yesterday to our room and treated us with some good wine^ indeed we
are in gratitude bound to say, that a number of respectable gentlemen have
frequently paid us their visits, and made us presents.

August 15. -- A report that one hundred Germans have deserted. An American
prize named the Eagle was brought in today. Three gentlemen visited us, two of
whom were a Col. Mann and his son, and the other a Mr. Smith, from the English
Neighborhood* and is a lieutenant in Rogers's rangers. Young Mr. Mann says
that he is a captain in the second battalion of loyal Americans, and reports,
that before he left New York, General Kniphausen, with a body of seven thousand
troops, landed in Elizabeth-Town, from Staten Island, and in a few days was
joined by General Clinton, from Charleston, and about nine o'clock at night
began a march against the Americans, drove them seventeen miles, and bayoneted
a number of the militia: General Washington's army consisted of only four
thousand men, therefore he made no kind of registance, but retreated to
Pompton. Mr. Mann, says he was in the party, and on their return burnt a small
village, with about thirty houses, but cannot recollect the name of the place.
From what we can learn, I believe it to be true that Springfield in Jersey, is
burnt; but no more of this story is worth hearing.

Three of the officers of the Eagle, and seventy-three seamen, are brought and
confined in prison. Two officers of a prize called the Jack, and thirty men,
are also locked up. Our family increases fast. We have the liberty to walk in
the yard by day.

Hearing that Colonel John Campbell is in town, I wrote him a letter, a copy of
which is as follows:

SIR,
INFORMATION of your being in town gives me an opportunity of presenting you a
few lines, which flow from a heart of gratitude toward your person and
character, and from the sincere marks of friendship I have received from you
when at Montreal, and do therefore take this method of returning you my warmest
thanks and gratitude for your signal marks of respect, not only to myself, but
to the prisoners taken with me from the American armies; and may you survive to
a good old age, and die in peace, with a distinguished blessing to crown your
last repose; and believe me, your goodness shall ever rest on my heart with
that respect which you are so richly deserving of. I am sensible you are not
unacquainted with our long confinement, from a particular favor shown to me
since at this place; and know your friendship for humanity and the American
prisoners, being taken in arms, it is, through soldierly dictates, your earnest
desire may be treated well; and we can have no great reason of complaint, our
confinement excepted, which we have for a long time experienced, and will thank
you to continue your friendship by speaking to General Haldiman, for us to be
admitted on parole.

I am, sir, with every sentiment of esteem, your most obedient, and very humble
servant, W. SCUDDER.

To Col. John Campbell, of the British forces at Montreal. Quebec, in Provost,
August 20, 1780.

All the gentlemen are locked up close on important affairs; two of which are
as follow: -- Mr. Laterriere is charged with going out of the gate three doors,
with a sentinel; and Mr. Cazeau is charged with walking down stairs contrary to
his word -- and further the deponent says not.

Thursday, Sept. 7th. -- Colonel Peter's informs us, that Mr. Coffin has not
received the letter we wrote to him, therefore have sent him another, but
expect it will be of no use. An account in the Gazette, that a number of French
ships of war are taken on the coast, off Rhode Island, and five thousand
troops; and also, that General Washington was a few weeks past, alive, and has
had a battle at the White Plains, and is cut all to pieces: -- the old story
over again. I am not so much concerned about the British sword as I am about
the continental famine, as no news can be obtained how it goes with old
Congress paper cash. I judge it must be near or quite dead, and if no foreign
resource can be obtained, it will be a dark time indeed. We hear the Dutch are
going to war against the English.

JERUSALEM, an ancient and famous town in Asia. The old city being ruined, the
Emperor Adrian built a new city near the ruins of ancient Jerusalem; it was
taken by the Persians in 614, and by the Siracens in 636; and in 1099, it was
retaken by the Latins, who founded a new kingdom, which lasted eighty-eight
years, under nine kings. Saladin, king of Egypt and Syria, got possession of it
in 1187; the Turks drove away the Siracens in 1227, and have kept possession of
it ever since; they call it Eleons, that is, the Holy City. It is now inhabited
by Turks, Arabs, Jews and Christians. It stands on a high rock, with steep
ascents on every side, except the north; it is surrounded with valleys,
encompassed with mountains, and at present is about three miles in
circumference, and includes Mount Calvary, which was formerly without the wall.
The only thing which renders it considerable, is the great resort of pilgrims.
The church of the holy sepulcher, which the pilgrims come to visit, is a large
structure, with a round nave, which has no light but what comes through the
top; the dome is covered with lead on the outside, and with cedar within. The
opening of the dome is closed with wire, to hinder the birds from coming into
the church; in the middle of the nave, and directly under the opening of the
dome, is the holy sepulcher, which is placed in a chapel whose door is three
feet high and two feet broad, and is so small that it will hold but three
persons, on their knees, at once; at the entrance on the right hand, is the
place where the body of our Savior was laid; the table which he was laid on at
first, is two feet and an half from the pavement, which is now covered with
white marble, because the Christians who came to view it were all for carrying
away a small bit. This chapel is cut out of the rock, and there are three holes
in the roof to let out the smoke of the lamps, which are forty-four in number,
and always kept burning; the whole is covered with white marble, both within
and without, and on the outside, there are ten fine columns of the same; it is
covered with a platform, the middle of which is exactly above the three holes,
and forms a small dome six feet in height, covered with lead and supported
with twelve columns of porphyry, placed by pairs on the platform, and so making
six arches, having three lamps under each. Before the gates of the sepulcher is
a silver lamp, so large that two men cannot fathom it; and shall only further
write, that every year on good Friday, all parts of our Savior's passion are
solemnized and acted: they first have a sermon, and then every one takes a
lighted taper in his hand, with crucifixes and other things to begin the
procession; and among the crucifixes there is one as large as the life,
exceedingly well done, being crowned with thorns and besmeared with blood; they
first visit the pillar of flagellation, next the prison, afterward the altar
of the division of Christ's garments; then they advance to the chapel of
derision, and from thence to Mount Calvary, leaving their shoes at the bottom
of the stairs; here is two altars, one where our Lord was supposed to be nailed
to the cross, and another where it was erected, and where they set up the
crucified image, which finishes the ceremony, only they pull out the nails,
take down the body, and wrap it in a winding sheet, and return it again to the
place from whence it was taken. The whole is done with great solemnity; and
here is seen the cleft rock which was made by the earthquake, when our Savior
expired.

What agreeable leisure does he procure to himself, who takes no notice of what
others say, do or intend, but attends to this only, that his own actions be
just and holy. How vain is it to be solicitous for a surviving fame; he
considers not that each one of those who remember him must die, and so must his
successor, till at last this remembrance will be extinguished: therefore
contentment without repining, is the criterion under which all our actions
should be shaped; for admitting a brilliant figure is made by some under
pompous titles and great estates, there is a ^arker worm at the root; and no
one is without his trials. The duration of life is a point, the senses obscure,
the body decaying, the whole is a dream. Let the inward part be always teaching
to shortly expect death, which is a dissolution that must be; it is natural,
and nothing natural can be evil. How important it is, to season the passions of
a child or youth, in particular, with devotion; for it seldom dies in a mind
which has received an early tincture of it; though it may seem extinguished for
a while by the cares of the world, the heat of youth, or alurements of vice, it
generally breaks out and discovers itself again, as soon as discretion,
consideration, age or misfortunes, have brought the person to himself; the fire
may be covered or overlaid, but cannot be entirely quenched and smothered.

On the fifth day of August, a flag arrived at this town from Boston, having on
board some gentlemen, among whom is a Capt. David M'Fall, who was taken at the
Bennington battle; and the said M'Fall was admitted to come to Quebec on his
parole, which is as follows:

I DAVID M'FALL, Captain, etc. in the service of his Britannac Majesty, do
acknowledge myself a prisoner of war to the United States of America; and
having obtained leave from the honorable the Council of the State of
Massachusetts Bay, to proceed to Quebec, in order to effect my exchange, do
hereby pledge my sacred faith and parole of honor, that I will proceed directly
to Quebec aforesaid; and that I will not, directly or indirectly, do or say any
thing detrimental to the United States aforesaid, or either of them, but that I
will in all respects behave myself as a gentleman in my situation ought ^o do;
and if I should not be able to procure the liberty and exchange of some officer
of equal rank (giving the preference to one of this state) belonging to the
army of the said States, I do hereby further engage, that I will return to this
place within six months, and deliver myself up again into the hands of the said
Council of Massachusetts Bay, or otherwise, as I shall receive their orders.
Given under my hand and seal, at Boston, in the state aforesaid, this first day
of July, Anno Domini, 1780.

(Signed) DAVID M'FALL, Capt.
Witnessed. JOHN GOOCH.

This may certify that the above is a true copy of the Parole given by Capt.
David M'Fall, previous to his sailing for Quebec, July 1, 1780. JOHN GOOCH,
D.C.I.


September 15th -- This day the sea-officers who were taken in the Eagle,
Harlequin, and Jack, were admitted to go on their paroles to Montreal, a copy
of which is exactly herein recited, not differing in word, spelling, or
punctuation.

"We the under Written Persons being Prisiners of War at this place and through
the Humanity of his Excellency the Commander in Chief released from confinemend
upon the following conditions We do promise in the most solemn Manner not to
attempt to Escape from the place assigned for Our residence where we where we
shall appear once evry twenty four hours before whoever shall be appointed We
likewise promise not to be aiding or assisting to others in making there escape
neither will we directly or indirectly say or report any any thing tending to
the prejudice of the British Government and we hereby further engage Ourselves
to be mutually responsible for the Conduct of each other as far as may relate
to the aforesaid premises in Witness whereof we hereunto set our hands at
Quebec this thirtieth Day of August 1709"

The evening before the officers left the prison to go on Parole, Lieutenant
Chapman, who belonged to the Jack, died.

Copy of a letter which I wrote to my brother JOHN SCUDDER, at Westfield, in
New Jersey, dated
Quebec, in Provost, Sept. 17, 1780. Dear Brother,
It would be needless to enumerate the many incidents which have happened to me
since being taken a captive from Fort Stanwix, and would be too lengthy for a
letter; let it suffice, that through God's blessing, I am far more comfortable,
as to a state of health, than heretofore I have been; still my constitution is
much impaired, but must say I enjoy a serenity of mind, considering the
situation I am in; as for some reason the commander in chief of this place has
thought it proper, ever since I was brought here, to keep me under close
confinement, with several other American officers; and it is very uncertain
when we may meet with a liberation, although we have often encouragement from
Richard Murray, Esquire. commissary of prisoners, who has, with Mr. Prentiss, the
provost master, treated us with a great degree of humanity. I wish you and Mr.
Noah Marsh, to remember, that I entrusted the education of my little boy to
your care, which I shall expect will be strictly complied with. If no good
school is at Westfield, send him abroad, let the cost be what it will; I shall
never, should I live to return to my native home, consider you as my friends,
if you neglect the great point of educating my child. This I suppose may be
depended on, that it must be a long time before I do return, if ever; as the
governor of this place seems not inclined to pay any attention toward the
exchange of prisoners, although though it would not be amiss for Mr. Noah Marsh
to go to General Washington in my behalf, to endeavor to negociate an exchange,
and I trust a brother will not want asking to go with him. I want some
alterations made relative to my temporal affairs; but the great distance I am
from home, and the uncertainty of matters of consequence reaching you, I shall
omit an attempt, and trust in a providential agency to support me through those
difficulties which are before me, and appear almost insurmountable: and will
never despair of his goodness. I am anxious about my aged and honorable mother,
who I fear is no more; and if her glass is run, and she has finished the
toilsome race of this earthly pilgrimage, may she be triumphing in plaudits of
hallelujahs to the Great Three in One, forever, and forever: but if she still
survives, lay these lines before her, and say I feel for her infirmities, which
she much labored under when I last saw her, and can do no more than lay the
person who was the means of giving me birth, close to my heart; and if ever I
forget her, may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. Tell good Ephrai^^ to
continue his christian race, as he has begun; my sisters also -- wishing you
all the earthly happiness this world can afford; with my brothers-in law, Jesse
Clark, John Inslie, and David Baker; may you all do well for this world and
that which is to come. My sincere compliments to Mr. Woodruff and family, and
all inquiring friends, wishing and waiting for a glorious peace between
Great Britain and America, which is the ardent desire of

Your most obedient brother, W. SCUDDER.
P. S. My sincere and particular compliments to my family, and hope a proper
attention may be paid to them.




September 27th -- Received for the four sergeants, a dollar each, which I
stand charged with. The town adjutant informs us, that we are shortly to be
sent on parole.

Thursday, 28th. -- Mrs. Van Arnum was delivered of a son, and his name is
called Frederick Haldiman; she is still in prison, but I imagine the poor
little fellow will not get a new coat. Three vessels arrived yesterday, one
from Jamaica, and one that our people had taken, which was retaken again, with
the vessel from Boston that took her -- Bad luck.

A gentleman from the Grants, by the name of Holt, paid us a visit today, with
our old friend John Ross, and made us a present of a bottle of wine.

Six prisoners were taken from provost to saw wood for Messrs. Murray and
Prentiss. Two German Doctors visited us; one is named John Freslick, and has a
brother with General Gates; the other gentleman's name is Frederick Santegan.
We also had another visit from Messrs. Holt and Bostwick. -- A Doctor from
Montreal is confined, and is so frightened that he is crazy.

SOUTH AMERICA, is divided into three large provinces; the first is MEXICO,
bounded by the Gulf of Mexico on the northeast, by Terra Firma on the
southeast, and by the Pacific Ocean on the southwest, being upwards of two
thousand miles long and six hundred broad; the highest mountains are near the
Pacific Ocean, and many of them volcanoes.

PERU is about fifteen hundred miles in length, and in many places, three
hundred in breadth, between the Andes and South Sea. It never rains where the
country is level, although the highest mountains are constantly covered with
snow, and there are several volcanos which burn continually: here the number of
gold and silver mines are prodigeous, as well as all other riches; and hither,
from the mountain called Potosi alone, which lies in 22 degrees of south
latitude, there were drawn two thousand millions of pieces of eight, the first
forty years they were wrought; there are also some precious stones. Those who
travel over the Andes where they are passable, find it so cold that they are
often frozen to death: and if they are aware of a storm approaching, which does
not last long at a time, they save themselves by killing their horses and
getting into their bellies: the jesuits bark is brought from here; the angle
worm is as long as a man's arm, and thick as his thumb; that bats are so large
as to suck the blood of beasts, and even men asleep; a bird that is called the
Condor, so large that it will measure fifteen or sixteen feet with its wings,
and will take a large Buck up into a tree, and sometimes children of ten or
eleven years of age, although they are not plenty. The capital city now, is
Lima, and both Mexico and Peru are under Spanish government; the land next the
sea is high, the Sierras or mountains beyond which, run parallel to the former,
are still higher, and the Andes beyond these, are the highest mountains in the
world. The land next the sea is for the most part a barren desert, except some
valleys into which the streams are turned from the hills. It is bounded by
Popayan on the north, by the mountains of Andes or Cordeleras, which separate
it from the country of the Amazons and Paragua on the east, by Chilli, and La
Plata on the south, and by the Pacific Ocean on the west. They have a kind of
animal, that has some resemblance of European sheep, but larger, and used to
carry burdens, etc. etc.

BRAZIL, a large country of South-America, with the title of a principality,
which is given to the presumptive heir of the crown of Portugal; the most
eastern part of South America is comprehended under this name, and lies between
the Equinoctial line and the Tropic of Capricorn, being about fifteen hundred
and sixty miles in length, and one thousand in breadth; but measuring along the
coast, it is near two thousand miles in length, and is bordered with mountains
that open from time to time and form good harbors, where vessels may lie with
safety. It was discovered in 1500, by chance; for Alvazez, a Portuguese, was
forced on it by a storm, and the kings of Portugal have continued masters of it
ever since. When the United Provinces revolted, they drove away the Spaniards,
and the Portuguese in turn drove away the Dutch. The waters in general are very
good, and the soil fertile. There comes more sugar from there, than all the
rest of the world besides; it produces tobacco, indian corn, several sorts of
fruits, and medicinal drugs: the cattle brought from Europe grow very well, and
all kinds of animals are found here, the same as in Europe; the goats are very
plenty, and plant out sentinels when they go to feed, and on an alarm of an
enemy approaching, they run and get into clefts of rocks, and turn their heads
outward and butt at their enemy so as to keep it off; the partridges are as
tame as the dunghill fowls, and can be called up as naturally. The three
provinces of Mexico, Peru and Brazil, extend along the sea shore not much short
of six thousand miles, and are from two hundred to one thousand broad. Peru is
bounded on the Cordeleras, which separate it from the country of the Amazons,
and Brazil is bounded on Paragua and the country of the Ama^ons: the river
Amazon rises in Peru, near the equator, and running eastward a course of three
thousand miles and upwards, within four degrees of the equator, falls into the
Atlantic Ocean by several channels, giving the country through which it passes
the name of Amazonia, or the country of the Amazons: the river overflows
annually, like others between the tropics, and is then one hundred and fifty
miles broad at the mo^th. Orellana sailed the whole breadth of South America,
from west to east, on this river, and arriving at the Atlantic Ocean, returned
to Spain; from whose account, confirmed by later voyages, it appears to be the
greatest river in the world, if we consider the length of its course and depth
of its water: but the account of the people being so much larger than those of
other parts of South America, is chimerical.

Copy of a PETITION which we wrote to the Lieutenant Governor of this Province.
To the Honorable HECTOR THEOPHILUS CRAMAHE, Esquire. Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Canada, etc. etc. The petition of Gideon Brownson, Simeon Smith,
Michael Dunning, and William Scudder, officers from the armies of America, but
now prisoners of war, Humbly shows,
THAT your petitioners have been prisoners for fifteen months, during which
time we have been under confinement, and we flatter ourselves that our
peaceable and quiet deportment under so long a captivity, will in some measure
recommend us to your honor's attention, which we have no reason to doubt, as we
are credibly informed of your former philanthropy to prisoners; and trust your
goodness will so far extend, as to intercede with the commander in chief for
our enlargement; and your petitioners will tr^ly say, that they have no other
reason for this application, only from what their constitutions naturally
require, and for want of which our health and spirits are much affected, which
we make no doubt will speak more feelingly in your honor's breast, than any
thing we can further mention on the subject -- and your petitioners, as in duty
bound, will ever pray.

G. BROWNSON, S. SMITH, M. DUNNING, W. SCUDDER.

Quebec, in Provost, October 12, 1780.

We are informed that Major Carleton, with six hundred men and two hundred
Indians, has gone into the frontiers of the states, and that Colonel Butler is
gone to Fort Stanwix, or to the Mohawk river. Colonel Peter's informs us, that
he is informed, a proposal from General Carleton has lately been made for the
exchange of prisoners, and it is our hearty desire it may be accomplished. --
Sent the prisoners four bushels of potatoes.

An express arrived last night from New York, by whom an account is received,
that General Gates is defeated at the Southward, with the loss of all his army,
etc.

Friday 27 -- Seventy five seamen who were confined in Provost, were this
morning taken out and put on board of shipping; but whether for England or
Montreal is uncertain. -- At eight o'clock a total eclipse of the sun began,
and at twelve o'clock it was so dark that a star was seen. We are informed that
one hundred and thirty prisoners are brought from Skeensborough, Fort Edward
and Fort George, into Montreal; they were taken by the party mentioned, under
the command of Major Carleton, who went up South Bay and appeared before Fort
Ann, which was commanded by Captain Adiel Sherwood, with eighty men, and is
said to have surrendered without firing a gun. They then proceeded to Fort
George, and some of the Indians making their appearance, forty-eight of the
garrison sallied out, including six officers, and fell in an ambush;
twenty-four were killed and scalped, seventeen wounded and taken prisoners, and
seven made their escape. The fort was commanded by Captain Chipman, of Colonel
Warner's regiment, who was obliged to capitulate, having only thirty men left.
Mr. Murray visited us today from a fit of sickness of two months.

31st. -- All the prisoners except in Mr. Hay's room, had an airing today of
two hours.

From the Spectator. -- A state of temperence, sobriety and justice, without
devotion, is a cold, lifeless, insipid condition of virtue, and is rather to be
styled philosophy than religion. Devotion opens the mind to great conceptions,
and fills it with more sublime ideas than any that are to be met with in the
most exalted science, and at the same time warms and agitates the soul more
than sensual pleasure. It has been observed by some writers, that man is more
distinguished from the animal world, by devotion, than by reason; as several
brute creatures discover in their actions something like a faint glimmering of
reason, though they betray in no single circumstance of their behavior any
thing that bears affinity to devotion; it is certain the propensity of the mind
to religious worship, the natural tendency of the soul to fly to some superior
being for succor in danger and distress, the gratitude to an invisible
superintendant, which arises in us upon receiving any extraordinary and
unexpected good fortune, the acts of love and admiration with which the
thoughts of men are so wonderfully transported in meditating on the divine
perfection, and the universal concurrence of all the nations under Heaven in
the great article of adoration, plainly show that devotion, or religious
worship, must be the effect of tradition from some first founder of mankind, or
that it is conformable to the natural right of reason, or that it proceeds from
an instinct implanted in the soul itself.

November 1st, 1780. -- The French keep this as a holy day; they call it all
saints, and pray for their dead relations that they may be relieved from
Purgatory.

Thursday, November 2d. -- The Quebec Gazette of this day says, that General
Gates, with three thousand continental troops and militia, has had a battle
with Lord Cornwallis; both armies, by endeavoring to gain an eminence, were
brought to a general action, and just in the evening, Gates and fifty men
escaped, and the remainder are killed and taken -- So much for that. Private
information is received, that Sir John Johnson, on an incursion on the Mohawk
river, had met with a repulse; being overpowered he was obliged to retreat with
the loss of fifty men: -- the first news since being a prisoner in which I can
put much faith -- but the British news runs further, and says, the French have
taken Long Island, in the name of the French King, for debts due to that crown;
and that General Washington was making preparation to drive them from the
island, as the British have declared to stand neuter until they know who is
vanquished. The news is too simple to commit to paper.

Wednesday, the 15th. -- Cloudy, cold and like for snow. An account that
General Arnold, having the command of Fort Independence, had contracted with
General Clinton to give up the fort under his command; and that General Clinton
sent his first aid-de-camp, named Andre, who entered the fort in the character
of a countryman, under Arnold's pass, and after agreeing in what manner the
fort should be given up, Mr. Andre, on his return, was taken by some
countrymen; and on Arnold's finding out that Andre was taken, he made his
escape to New York, where he informed against some principal gentlemen, who are
put in irons; and that General Washington has hanged Mr. Andre.

Thursday, 16th. -- A Colonel Bolton, of the 8th British regiment, a Major, and
several officers, and about seventy men, were overset in a brig crossing from
Niagara to Carlton Island, on Lake Ontario, and every one lost.

18th. -- The shipping sailed for New York, on board of which is Mr. Prentiss's
son, who has my letters.

Copy of a letter sent to Mr. William P. Smith in Elizabeth-Town, dated
November 16, 1780.
SIR,
A conveyance, by Mr. Prentiss, of sending you a few lines by the way of
New York presents, and I am happy in embracing the opportunity, not that I can
claim the indulgence so much from any acquaintance so particularly with your
person, as the known good character you sustain, which I trust will excuse,
whilst I proceed to make mention, that by the fortune of war, I was taken a
prisoner by the savages, on the twenty-third day of July, 1779, near Fort
Stanwix, by a party of three hundred and fifty, and being at the same time in a
weak state of health, rendered my situation deplorable; but through God's
blessing, in five days the party, consisting of thirty besides myself, all
arrived safe at Carlton Island, at a British garrison, where the party I had
the honor (when taken) to command, was treated with that humanity which has
ever marked the character of the British, and since my arrival at this place,
have no reason to complain, my close confinement excepted; as for some reason,
the commander in chief at this place will not liberate any continental officer
on parole. I will accept it as a great savor, if you will be pleased to make
known, not only my situation, but that of several gentlemen from Colonel
Warner's regiment, who are confined with me, together with your influence with
General Washington, to negociate with Sir Henry Clinton, for an exchange for
us, or that we may be sent to New York, where we may hope for an enlargement,
and can receive information from our families and friends. Your humanity with
his Excellency General Washington, relating to the situation we are in here,
and the great distance from our friends and connexions, will, I trust, speak
more feelingly to you, than any thing I can describe in a letter. My
compliments to your family, Mr. Woodruff and his family, with enquiring
friends. From Sir, your most

obedient, humble servant, W. SCUDDER, from Westfield.
Quebec, in Provost, November 16, 1780.

An account that General Washington is going to attack New York.

Thursday 30th -- More cool. An account in the Quebec paper, that Admiral
Rodney, and General Sir Henry Clinton, have taken Rhode Island, with seven sail
of French ships of the line, and six thousand troops -- so much for that.

December 1. -- Clear and very cold. About ten o'clock this morning Mr. Miles
Prentiss brought our paroles to sign, with orders for us to go immediately to
the Isle of Orleans, a copy of which is as follows:

WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, officers and private men in the
continental service, being made captive, and admitted on parole, do
respectively promise upon our sacred faith, not to transcend the limits
assigned us to remain in, during the time we are on parole; and we solemnly
promise not to say or do any thing, directly or indirectly, detrimental to his
Majesty King George the Third, etc. etc. etc. or of his government, nor to hold
any intercourse or correspondence with his enemies, during the indulgence above
mentioned. We likewise promise to appear as often, and at such times, as may be
required, before such person or persons as shall be appointed for that purpose.
Given under our hands, at Quebec, this first day of December, 1780.

(Signed) G. BROWNSON, Capt. S. SMITH, Capt. M. DUNNING, Lieut. W. SCUDDER,
Lieut.



In about an hour after we had signed our paroles, the master of the vessel we
were to have gone in to the Isle of Orleans, sent us word that the vessel was
aground, which delayed our setting out until sunset, at which time all the
American prisoners were marched from provost to the water side, and put on
board a gundaloe. The tide not being high enough, we were obliged to stay on
board in a very uncomfortable situation, the night being extremely cold; and
the next morning, the tide still not rising high enough, besides being hard
frozen up with ice, we received orders to return back again to our old
quarters, the provost: and carriols being provided for the officers (as it was
good sledding) we rode in state to Mr. Ritchey's, our old tailor, and drank a
glass of wine; and from thence to the old father of the faithful, Miles
Prentiss, where we had an excellent Dinner and plenty of wine, with a jovial
frolic, and back to our old quarters, as rich as the Mogul of Indostan, to
think we had been to the river and back again, which was near one hundred rods.

2d -- We had a visit from Col. Peter's, Capt. M'Fall, Capt. Sherwood, and Capt.
Jones, and had a long story to tell of our yesterday's journey and voyage.

Tuesday, 5th. -- We seem to resume our former times: here is a grunt, and
there a complaint of back-ache, headache, and a great many aches. A French
regular major was brought to town yesterday. Mr. Prentiss had a niece named
Frances, a genteel young lady, married to an old fellow, named Thompson.

Tuesday, 12th. -- A poor unfortunate man, who belonged to the artillery, shot
himself (supposed wilfully) yesterday. I have lent the prisoners a considerable
sum of money; besides, never has a week, I imagine, passed, but I have sent
them vegetables, tobacco, and such necessaries as possibly could be spared by
me, and for which I now stand accountable to government and private gentlemen,
for moneys borrowed, which the prisoners have pledged themselves to be
responsible to each other for. Capt. Brownson and Lieutenant Dunning, in
particular, have been liberal to the prisoners, there being some confined from
the regiment to which they belonged, and from the other corpse of the American
armies.

December 29. The weather has been exceedingly cold. The main river is shut up,
which, from information, has not happened in seven years.

January 12, 1781. This afternoon some sleighs, or (as the French call them)
carriols, came and took the prisoners' baggage, and all the prisoners, except
the officers, to go on to the Isle of Orleans.

January 13. This morning some sleighs came for us, with Canadians to drive us;
we left our room about nine o'clock, and passed about two miles on the ice, to
the isle of Orleans, where we overtook the prisoners who left the provost
yesterday; they are all ordered to go on board a ship called the Cancer, at
Patrick's Hole. The roads being badly beaten, and having but one horse to our
carriol, and three on board, renders the traveling very dull. About twelve
o'clock we arrived at a parish called Saint Lawrence, or as the French
pronounce it, Cileroy, where we halted for about an hour, and had a sight of
the Canadian houses, which look well on the outside, but within are not
altogether so comely. We next went to St. John's, where we rested again; and
after leaving the village of Cileroy, scarcely saw a house until we came to the
settlement of St. John's; indeed, from the best information I can gather, the
whole province of Canada is settled in village parishes, and near the churches
are generally the main part of the congregation, or within the compass of a
mile and an half, or thereabouts, each way, although scattering houses are to
be seen the whole distance on the road; but it is certain they settle thicker
in parishes, than in the states, and their houses make not an unrespectable
appearance considering the people are all hard laborers, and I believe the
whole province are under tenantable seniors, or large land-holders, who are
thus styled, although their taxes are very light. The people appeared to show
every mark of kindness to us who were prisoners; but our not being able to
speak a word of French made it singular to us, and likely to them, as the
English who are livers in the province of Canada, can speak French to a
proverb. We did not tarry long at this place before setting out, and the road
being heavy, made it dark before our arrival at St. Francis (the French spell
it Francois) a house in a parish the farthest end of the Isle of Orleans,
twenty seven miles, or nine leagues, from Quebec. We all lodged, drivers and
prisoners, in one house together, where, for the first, we saw and eat a supper
of their soup, etc.

Sabbath, 14th. Lieut. Dunning and myself were quartered in a house, the owner
of which was named Muso. Our new situation, not being able to hold any kind of
conversation with the inhabitants, together with the intense coldness of the
weather (the like all of us confessed never to have beheld or felt before) does
not seem to alter our comfort any great for the better, as it is almost
impossible to go far from the house; but there is this to say, we are not under
lock and key.

Wednesday, January 25. The first of receiving any provisions from government,
and that in part. The French or Canadians, have to every house a stove, which
is constantly kept with a good fire in the winter, and the heat of the stove
against the glass windows, forms a contrast between heat and cold; for the
inside of the pane being kept warm, and the frost on the outside, in such
extreme cold nights as are in this country, forms an ice on the pane in the
morning nearly double the thickness of the glass; and their rule to know in the
morning the degree of cold on the night past, is by the thickness of the ice on
the glass windows of their stove room; and the keenest and clearest nights will
form the greatest ice, and particles which will appear loose on the outside of
the ice, exactly resembling snow.

On the 17th, Capt. M'Fall, who is paroled from Boston, arrived at the next
house to live. I have begun to endeavor, as far as my abilities will admit, to
gain what knowledge I can in speaking the French language, and am of opinion,
were there no English to be spoken among the English officers and my brother
prisoners, I could readily gain a knowledge of the language, as I have a
dictionary and grammar; but it is said the Canadians speak very improper,
although not quite so bad as a Mr. Persons, whom I found in this place, on
parole from Boston, for he speaks six words of English and one of French;
although he has undertaken to learn us the language. We have for our commander
a Capt. M'Kenno, a Scotchman, who is vastly particular, as we must be in our
quarters every evening by nine o'clock; it shows he is a man of authority.

February 13. David Griswold, from the ship Cancer, came to live with and cook
for Mr. Dunning and myself, and informs us that the prisoners on board of said
ship suffer very much, particularly by sickness; two that were seamen are dead.

We have paid the Parson of this parish several visits^^ he appears to be a man
of extraordinary understanding, and is an aged gentleman; his name is Duran --
he speaks slow, but very proper English, as he has it all grammatically -- he
is a man said to have great education, but appears droll in his outward
conduct, and I think is fond of a glass of wine, by the looks of his nose.

February 24. The people from what I can learn, are making preparations for a
great feast of three days, previous to Lent Sabbath.

25th. This morning the French have begun their feast; it is styled monja groe,
or great feast: they visit each other and appear very generous, which is a
common characteristic of the inhabitants, generally speaking.

Monday morning, 26th. The inhabitants, from the oldest to the youngest, visit
one another, and every house is kept open for the reception of friends; they
have their dances promiscuously, without the formality of young people
assembling by themselves: the father, mother, son and daughter, will be in a
room and dance with a great degree of harmony; although the young people will
most commonly have a little assembly by themselves in the after part of the
day; but from the nature of their rejoicings, they are taught to regard this
part as rather a religious conviviality* than for the mere form of what is
vulgarly termed frolicking.

Tuesday, 27th. This day has finished the great feasting among the French, for
this part of the ceremony, and is the greatest in the year. How far their
superstitions may be thought by those of a different persuasion, to extend, is
unknown to me; but I can say that nothing has transpired in the eye of my
observation, which I should suppose ought to be condemned with that rancor
which many are pleased to exercise toward the Roman Catholics; although I
believe they carry many of their performances to too great a length of
enthusiasm; not only temporal but spiritual: particularly in this province, as
the inhabitants, especially the males, are destitute of education, and of
consequence are vastly ignorant, speaking within bounds from every information
I have gathered; but at present not being informed sufficiently to ani^adver^^^
this people, shall defer any further comment and occasionally, if I stay among
them, will make some further remarks.

February 28. This day Lent commences, which is in commemoration of the forty
days our Savior fasted on the mount. The people are not allowed (...) eat any
meat nor soup that has been made of it; eggs, fish, butter, cheese, etc. may
be used; but no kind of flesh, except a person is sick.

The weather is cold, and beyond any conception I had ever formed; for being
formerly in Albany, Schenectady, and Fort Stanwix, I thought I had felt severe
weather, but this is as far surpassing Albany, as Albany (in my opinion) does
in a common run of weather, Philadelphia, or still further southward. The
drifts of snow around houses, barns, etc. are in some places from six to twelve
feet deep, and on a common level five feet. Their cattle of every kind are kept
in close houses, and water is carried to them, from the horse down to the
sheep. The cattle are fed on straw, made from wheat, oats, barley, and pea
vines, and what I have seen, a mere trifle of hay is in their barns, to what is
made use of in the States. The men appear to smoke a great deal, and live easy
in the winter.

Saturday, March 10. This evening, about eleven o'clock, Capt. M'Kenno, our
commandant, Capt. Frazier, and a Lieut. Robertson, came to my quarters and I
was awaked from sleep, and heard the following important information: -- "That
four gentlemen had that day paid Capt. M'Kenno a visit, and said that the day
before they left Quebec they dined with general Haldiman, who had ever
appear-to keep news close to himself, but then said he had straight accounts
from New York, that two American generals, thirty colonels, and four thousand
of the best of General Washington's army, had revolted and joined Sir Henry
Clinton, and that the remaining part of the American army would undoubtedly
follow the example -- that the French, finding the situation of the Americans,
had taken Boston in the name of the French king, until the debt due from
America to France should be paid." Captain M'Kenno advised us immediately to
write to General Haldiman for protection, under a promise of becoming faithful
subjects to the crown of Great Britain; he was however fearful whether we
should receive pardon; he seemed to feel for Capt. Brownson, on account of his
being an aged and venerable looking man, that he should be hung; but did not
seem so much to lament the sat of Smith, Dunning, and myself. I must confess
that after the gentlemen were gone I had very serious reflections on the
report; and its being handed to me in such a manner, and at a late hour of the
night, with the reflection of the continental money being near or quite dead,
added to the gloom of the prospect; and I can truly say, that if ever I felt
for my country, it was at this crisis; and it would swell a volume to mention
the number of different opinions and reflections which presented themselves to
view on this occasion.

Tuesday, March 13. I am informed Sergeant Deforest died on board the ship
Cancer, on the 15th of February. Hosea M'Farland and Moses Beedle died about
the first of this month; and an old man by the name of Odle Squire is also dead:

My brother officers and myself have had a conference on the late news, which
the Quebec papers teem with a confirmation of, and which is in every Canadian's
mouth; but we agree it cannot be true, and to the honor of Capt. Brownson, he
appears to suppose it a mere bubble of noise without foundation; but I must
confess I have my fears that something uncommon has turned up.

April 8. Raw, cold, windy day from northeast; the wind generally blows up or
down the River St. Lawrance, which sets near a northeast course. The
inhabitants from each house took this day some green hemlock boughs to mass
with them, which receives several ceremonies, by being sprinkled with holy
water, and such manner of consecration as is in their church discipline, which
I hope to be more able to explain; let it suffice, that the use of those boughs
are to take to their respective homes, where they (...) generally fixed over
head to the beam of the floor, or the like places, which are handy to reach in
case of a thunder storm, as the boughs are prepared and made holy according to
their ideas, they fling a twig of the hemlock into the fire in case of a heavy
(...) of thunder, and the smoke of the twig will keep the lightening from
striking the house, as they say it (...) holy, and that thunder is of the
Devil's permission, and cannot strike or harm any thing that is made holy by
their church.

April 13. The wind hard at N. E. and snow all last night and to day. The young
women went last night to mass; two of them set in the church together for one
hour, and then are relieved by two more* the others stay in the parson's house,
and thus continue the night through. They hold it in commemoration of the
evening on which our Savior was betrayed.

April 14. We measured the depth of the snow in the woods today, and find it
three feet and an half on a level. Capt. M'Fall, the Captain of the militia,
and myself, went to Cileroy after provisions, as we have forty four days due,
and have lived the whole time on the inhabitants, and are also denied any
further supply in money from government. We dined with some German officers,
who treated us with a great degree of politeness: they are billeted at said
place with about one hundred men.

26th. The river St. Lawrance apposite where we live, is supposed to be about
five miles in width, and the ship channel is near this shore. Opposite to us,
about two miles from the main land, is an island called Madam, where the geese
on their way to Newfoundland and the Bay of Hudson stop to rest, and among
several other islands in the river. We went in company with Capt. M'Fall last
evening on to said island to hunt geese; but they appeared to know themselves
in danger by coming near sho^^ when the tide was up; for, as I before observed,
the tide ebbs and flows a great height, and the banks are of a gradual slope,
so that it leaves almost or quite half a mile between high and low water marks;
high water would come within small gunshot of the woods, and let it be ever so
dark, windy and rough, the geese would keep a certain distance from shore round
the whole island, which is at least two miles long, so that they were quite out
of gunshot, and at low water they would feed on the shore in fair sight of us,
but at too great a distance to touch them, and of consequence we returned as we
went.

April 29. The method of the people of this country respecting the sick, is as
follows -- When the minister is sent for to visit a sick person (particularly
if the patient is supposed to be dangerous) the priest dresses himself in a
white surplice and is accompanied by one of the parish, who carries a small
bell which is rung opposite every house the minister passes, on which the whole
family immediately turn out of doors and fall on their knees to prayer, with a
seeming devotion full of fervency for the recovery of the person he is visiting.

May 1. The ice at Quebec is supposed to be broken up, as the river is very
full of large cakes which float over a reef of rocks the other side of the Isle
of Madam, and make a clattering sound, like a wheeled carriage going over a
quantity of stones with great force.

5th. The first swallow that has been seen, and is something remarkable too, as
there is a great deal of snow on the ground in banks, though the fields are
mostly clear. A few people have begun to sow their wheat.

May 10. The wind has blown hard from the northeast for several days, and the
snow banks decrease but slow. The inhabitants allow the spring to be later than
common. I computed the tide this morning to rise eighteen feet perpendicular,
and some of the gentlemen supposed near or quite twenty. A large snow bank that
lies fair to the sun, we to day measured, and find it five feet deep; but it
has been a drift that was probably fifteen feet deep in the greatest depth of
winter.

The farmers are generally sowing their wheat, which is done in a manner
uncommon in the American States. The land in this country is level and clear of
stone, and all the plows that have come under my notice, have wheels to them,
and of consequence would be useless in stony ground; they guage their plows to
cut about four inches deep, and lay their furrows from seven to nine inches
wide, and turn the turf over as flat as possibly can be done, so that the
fields appear exceeding level. The plowing I am informed is done in the month
of October and lays until spring, when they sow their wheat without further
manuring of any kind, and after the wheat is sown, they have a light
three-square wooden-tooth harrow, much of the size of the American corn harrow,
and is quite easy for the draught of one horse only, and with this they go the
same way the ground is laid over, and scarcely more than twice in a place; they
make no pretensions to cross-harrowing; indeed from what I can see in their way
of putting their seed in the ground, it is a strife who shall sow and cover the
most bushels in a day, and not who shall do it best. I have walked over their
fallows and find a great deal of their wheat entirely uncovered. They will sow
from twenty to forty bushels, and I judge they do not sow more than a bushel to
an acre. The land is of a light gravelly marl, and I think would produce
spontaneously were it put under good cultivation. Some have plowed sword ground
over this spring, in order to sow.

Thursday, May 17. The people have done seeding their ground. A brig passed up
the river from England; Capt. M'Kenno, and Capt. M'Fall went on board, and
brought the news that some of the Dutch provinces had declared war against
England, and also, that the outward bound fleets to the East and West Indies
are taken from the English by the French and Spaniards

Monday, 21. The people in this country appear to go one-third of their time to
public worship; they have had to day a procession. In the first place they held
their mass, and the procession was performed by a young man's going foremost
carrying a cross, which was extended some distance in the air (I should suppose
twelve or fifteen feet) on a pole, and the cross was beautifully ornamented;
the priest next followed, and after him the men and women they walked quite
flow, with an apparent devotion, until they arrived at a small chapel about
half a mile from the church, and marched round said chapel, the priest
continuing a constant ceremony in a singing tone, and then returned to the
church as they came.

Wednesday, 23. The same ceremonies that were performed on the 21st, were
continued yesterday and today; but I cannot learn what part of our Savior's
passion they celebrate, and am very much clogged in being a historian of this
province, and what is written proceeds from my own amusement.

Captain M'Fall has received a letter from Col* Peter's, who mentions that
commissioners are arrived at the Isle of Aux Noix, on Lake Champlain, from the
United States of America, to negociate an exchange of prisoners; that the
Portuguese are going to war against England; that the Empress of Russia has
demanded her shipping, with the damages done to them, from the English; that
the French had left Rhode Island and landed at Chesapeake Bay, and that the
English fleet from New York had pursued them, and destroyed the whole French
fleet; that Mr. Arnold, supported by General Phillips, had lately a battle in
Virginia -- General Sumpter is wounded, and fifteen hundred is killed and taken
of the French and Americans, and those who are left are gone home to hoe their
tobacco.

May 31. The apple trees begin to bloom. -- There has not been any rain since
the snow left the ground.

Tuesday, June 5. The wind is raw and cold, from the northeast. This evening
the French finish, by appointment, their ten days praying for rain; they
assembled about sunset every day around the small chapel, and all kneeled to
prayer and sung a psalm; indeed for three days past they have kept a very
solemn fait, as it is termed in French, or have held mass every day, which,
from what I can learn, is to commemorate the three days our Savior lay in the
earth. The tenth day after he arose, will be the greatest day they can
celebrate, as on that day, they hold, he ascended up to Heaven.

Capt. M'Kenno has been to Quebec, and returned with the disagreeable news that
the commissioners for an exchange of prisoners have returned back without
effecting an exchange for us. I look upon myself as doomed to be a prisoner
during the contest.

Friday, June 8. Captain M'Kenno took his leave of us to go to Quebec, not to
return again.

Saturday 9. This day the French walked in procession round the chapel with
their holy water; the priest was with them praying for rain.

Tuesday, June 12. Capt. M'Fall has received some English papers from Quebec,
which mention, that the Americans have revolted to such a degree, that General
Washington has scarcely a guard left him; that proposals from Congress are sent
to the court of Great Britain, offering to accept of the proposals which were
made to them by the commissioners in the year 1778, but are refused: but I
scruple it.

Thursday, 14. This day is held as Ascension; but I believe every parish have
their holy days, and imagine they do not observe a particular day through the
whole province; for the Church of England hold the ninth of May as Ascension,
yet as every parish is named after a saint, so I believe they have their
standing holy time, to celebrate the different passions our Savior passed
through while on earth, or the most remarkable ones. A solemn mass was kept,
and about twelve o'clock the little boys, with handkerchiefs, etc. fixed in the
manner of flying colors, were arranged in two columns, a small distance apart;
the young women were placed two by two next to the boys; a large standard, with
two images handsomely decorated, was carried in front of the boys, and about
half way between the boys and girls, was a silver cross; the young men with
long white scarss or surplices, went on to carry the holy water and incense;
the next was the clerk and singers, and then the priest, under a canopy carried
by four men, holding a small glass, with a small image over it crowned with
thorns, the priest looking through the glass; the old and married men and women
walked after, intermixed, without any arrangement, in order to appearance, to
defend their holy procession. They moved very slow and solemn the whole way,
singing a slow and seemingly well adapted sound to grace the solemnity of their
devotion, and on the boys and young women arriving at the chapel, they filed
off to the right and left to admit the priest to pass through, falling on their
knees to prayer; the minister, canopy, and as many married people as could,
entered the chapel, where was the image, as I was informed, of the Virgin Mary,
richly decorated; they continued about fifteen minutes on their knees in the
chapel, and those who could not go in were the whole time on their knees at
prayer. The priest then came out under the canopy as he entered, and the
procession returned in the same manner as it came to the church. The whole
appeared to be conducted with the profoundest devoutness.

June 24. We who are prisoners went this day to St. John's, where was a great
day of worship, and where their bishop, with a number of priests and a great
concouse of people attended. On our return, my eyes never beheld the like of a
small catterpillar, or rather a worm. Millions of them were on the fences,
grass, and the young wheat; the stalks about sunset appear black with them,
which much alarms the inhabitants, as they say it is a very uncommon thing for
them to appear so thick, although they confess to be often troubled with some
of a like kind; but the severity of the drought, having had no rain to be of
any service since the snow went off, they imagine is one reason of there being
so many in the grass and wheat.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE FRENCH CATECHISM.
Suffer little children to come unto me, for the Kingdom of God is for such.
Question. What religion are you of?

Answer. By the grace of God, I am a Christian.

Q. Whom understand you by a christian?

A. Him who being baptized inwardly and outwardly, professes the faith and law
of Christ.

Q. When are we obliged to make an outward profession of our faith?

A. As often as God's honor requires it; for if we deny Christ before men, he
will deny us before his Father. St. Math. x, 33. etc. -- But should this
Journal ever be printed, the Catechism might as well be omitted; still I do not
think it would be amiss to put down the commandment, which is as follows:

"I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of
the house of bondage. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Thou shall
not make to thyself any graven thing, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth; thou
shall not adore or worship them --; I am the Lord thy God strong and jealous,
visiting the sins of the fathers upon their children, to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy to thousands of those that
love me and keep my commandments. 20 th Chapter of Exodus, 2d verse.

Question. Why put you all this in one commandment?

Answer. Because the sacred scriptures mentioning nothing which is the first
and second or third commandment; and these words, "thou shall not make unto
thyself any graven thing," being only an explication of the foregoing words,
"thou shall not have strange Gods before me" -- we therefore, with St.
Augustine, make of them but one commandment, which seems to have been done by
Moses himself -- Exodus, xx. 23. -- where he says, ye shall not make Gods of
silver, neither shall you make unto you Gods of gold, in which words he plainly
includes both in one.

Q. What is meant by those first words, "I am the Lord thy God," etc.

A. By those God declares to us that he is our true and supreme Lord, and
therefore we are obliged to obey him with all diligence.

Q. What are we commanded by this?

A. To love, serve and worship one only true and living God, and no more.

Q. What is forbidden by it?

A. To worship idols, or give any creature the honor due to God.

Q. What is the honor due to God?

A. Supreme and sovereign honor; we must worship him as our creator, redeemer
and last end.

Q. Is it lawful to honor the image of Christ and his saints?

A. Yes, if rightly understood; because the honor given them is referred to
things they represent: so that by the images or crosses which we kiss, and
before which we kneel, we honor and adore Christ himself.

Q. Do Catholics pray to images?

A. No, by no means. We pray before them indeed, to keep us from distractions,
but not to them; for we know they can neither see nor hear, nor help us.

Q. What benefit have we then by them?

A. They movingly represent to us the mysteries of our Savior's passion, and
the martyrdom of his Saints.

Q. What benefit have we by honoring and canonizing Saints?

A. It strongly moves us to imitate their examples, by showing their rewards.

Q. How do we honor Saints and Angels?

A. With an inferior honor, as the friends and creatures of God, not as Gods,
nor with God's honor.

Q. Is it lawful to honor relies of Saints?

A. Yes, with a relative honor, as above explained; for the handkerchiefs and
aprons which had but touched the body of Saint Paul, cast out Devils and cured
all diseases. Acts xix, 22.



The remaining part of the French Catechism, I have put down in full by itself,

June 29. Yesterday and last night the good hand of Providence has refreshed
this country with a plenty of rain, as there has been none worth mentioning
since last March. The drought has been so great, that nature must take a great
change if any crops to signify, come to perfection. The poor inhabitants appear
surrounded with conflicts and judgments, as the grasshoppers bid fair to
destroy the small remaining crops, together with the worms and a small insect;
but I must confess they are the most fervent in their prayers, that God would
impede his judgments, of any people I ever saw. Not an evening but they gather
either at the church or by a cross, and there pray and sing psalms. They hold
this as St. Peter's day, on which they say the keys of Heaven were given to
him, and expect he will open the windows of Heaven and grant them such
blessings as they most stand in need of. The day is kept as holy time.

July 2. This day there is a procession again, and prayers for the destruction
of the whole of the insects.

4th. Yesterday a procession, and also to day, for the insects to be destroyed.
It being the anniversary of our five years independence, Capt. Brownson, Lieut.
Dunning and myself, sent for Capt. M'Fall to dine with us, and spent the day
agreeably. Captain Smith was unwel.

6th. The peace in the garden begin to blossom; the wheat is earing out, and is
about eighteen inches high. There is a purple colored bug which has lately
made its appearance, which like the savages, are scalping the potatoes; they
appear very voracious, and devour the vines of the potatoes.

10th. The whole parish assembled and walked in procession, to endeavor to
defeat the insects, which appear as if they would destroy their wheat, oars,
flax, grass, and in fact every kind of vegetable. A poor woman in this parish
dying some time past, and not leaving a sufficiency in cash to redeem her from
purgatory, and her husband as is said, pleading poverty, took her clothes to
the church, where they were sold at public auction; my landlord was
vendue-master, and his daughter bought some of the clothes. The vendue was
conducted with an air of as much indifference, as if they were in a common
frolic, and the money handed to the priest.

There is a sort of worm in this place called the canker, which are long and
black, with white streaks; and I do not remember of ever seeing their likeness
in my country.

We catch plenty of trout on this island, although they are small; but are
delicious food. We begin to catch pigeons. The weather has got to be very
fine, but some days I think are more suffocating than I ever experienced in
Jersey; and the days are a great length, the longest being fifteen hours and
thirty-two minutes, in Quebec; sixteen hours and twenty-six minutes, in London;
and fourteen hours and fifty-two minutes, in New York. London is in 51 degrees
and 30 minutes, north latitude; Quebec is in 47 degrees and 35 minutes, north
latitude; and New York, is in 41 degrees and 40 minutes, north latitude.

July 25. I have lived to see another birthday; and on a reflection of the
apparent shortness of the time I have had an existence, or the knowledge
thereof; yet how many changing scenes have I passed, and what a variety of
flowers and thorns have ^hecquered my path; dangers escaped and blessings
innumerable received, demands my warmest tribute of praise. Doctor Young, in
his remarks on the striking of a clock, says -- "The clock strikes one: we take
no note of time, but from its loss. To give it then a tongue is wise in man."
Surely if every striking clock is so wisely to be observed, what improvement
ought to be made on the return of another year. But what a labyrinth of ideas
must present themselves to view in reflecting on a whole life, and that not
spent to the end which the Great Author of my existence sent me into the world
for: certainly, instead of rejoicing, I ought to line my heart and room in
mourning, for so long a misspent life.

The French continue their prayers and processions for the destruction of the
insects. They only walk from the chapel to the church, without any particular
ceremony.

Friday, August 17. This day the inhabitants commence harvesting. Their wheat
in common is not more than eighteen or twenty inches long; although I suppose
it to be much shorter than common on account of the drought; but from what I
can learn, they suppose their wheat to be good that is two and two and an half
feet high; and whatever was formerly raised from a bushel's sowing, I cannot
learn but it must have been much more than at present, for the inhabitants will
talk of their fathers selling five pecks for two and an half, and three livres,
which is a French shilling each livre, or about eighteen pence York, as near as
I can inform myself.

Many of the inhabitants of this place sowed from thirty to forty bushels of
wheat, and scarcely expect more than their seed; although they say it is not
the case through the province. The men and women, both old and young, have
their sickles, which is the only tool they know of in this province to harvest
with. To see the young ladies, with their mockisons reaping away, with a merry
song, is a fine lesson to promote contentment; for no doubt the next Sabbath
they will go to church in their silks, and have the chat of which has cut the
most wheat in the week past. I have been so particular as to put down all the
vessels I have seen pass up the river which came from sea, and I find that on
the 27th of August, 1781, there have ninety-six stout top-sail vessels (chiefly
ships) gone up since the ice broke up in the spring. The people have finished
harvesting pretty generally.

Sept. 4. We petitioned General Haldiman relative to our situation; being
deprived of money from government, and receiving no assistance from home, we
are almost destitute of clothing.

On the 10th Captain Brownson received a letter from Mr. Murray, informing him
that he is exchanged.

Wednesday, 19. Captain Brownson being promoted, is exchanged, as far as I can
learn in the rank of a Major; and this morning himself and the boy that lived
with us, by the name of Griswould, took their leave of us, to return to their
native homes. Poor Smith hangs his under lip; and in fact we all I believe feel
rather discomfited on the subject, although we are happy the Major is gone, on
account of his being released from his confinement, and from a wish that his
health may be restored: yet we hang our harps on the willows, not being able to
form any idea how the country whose prosperity we so often are wishing for, is
now situated.

I again wrote a letter to my brother, John Scudder, and Mr. Noah Marsh,
requesting them to be particular in the education of my children, which pledges
are the greatest anxiety and comfort to my inmost soul. We also sent a petition
to General Washington, relative to our situation and informed him, at least, we
were here, and many other poor prisoners also.

Sept. 26. We received a letter from Richard Murray, Esquire. in answer to one we
wrote to him last March, a copy of which follows:

Quebec, March 14, 1781. SIR,
I have received yours of the 11th instant, and should have answered your
former one had the man called according to promise. I am sorry it is not in my
power to give you such an answer to your memorial as you would perhaps expect;
but as no part of the money hitherto advanced has been returned, his Excellency
will not allow me to pay further sums: and any temporary distress you feel,
must be entirely owing to your own friends, as frequent opportunities have
offered, of either sending you a credit or cash; and sorry I am to find they
have neglected both: but in order to relieve you as far as lays in my power, I
have sent you by Blodget the articles you have asked for. I cannot promise you
a flag of truce will be sent from hence, but if you wish to write, I will take
care that your letters shall be forwarded, in case any opportunity offers.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, RICHARD MURRAY.
Articles sent.
Capt. Smith, 2 shirts, 1 pair stockings. Lieut. Dunning, do. Lieut. Scudder, 1
pair of shoes.


To Lieut. SCUDDER, on the Isle of Orleans.

The reason for not putting the copy of this letter down sooner is, we have
expected an exchange would be made for us, or relief given some way; but are
now in expectation of continuing another winter in this cold, dreary country,
where the inhabitants can scarcely get victuals to support nature; or at least,
if any family in the states of America were to live as they do, I judge they
would think it hard times indeed; but more of this another time: yet we are
obliged to frequently be dependent on the people where we are quartered for
some common necessaries of life. It is evident to me that every person who
takes up arms in the cause of his country, has an idea that he may meet with
the fate of war, either by being killed, wounded or taken prisoner; but it must
be a severe reflection to suppose, when he is thus voluntarily armed for the
cause of his country, that in case he should be made a prisoner, he will be
thus neglected by that country whose rights he was contending for, and
occasioned his imprisonment in cold jails, etc. without the common necessaries
of life. However, it is a lessen to learn silence, and wait with patience; for
whatever God ordains is full of wise providence. How many thousand years has
this globe rolled on its axis, floated with a vast ocean, high mountains,
cities and empires, with millions of the planetary heavens, all moving in order
under the guidance of so great an Architect, to plant them all in due form, and
say hitherto shall thou come and no farther: I say, when we consider that we
are the creatures of so g^^^t a Majesty, surely we ought to wait with calmness
until our change shall come.

Wednesday, October 3. Capt. M'Fall has left us; and since he has been
exchanged, has been our commandant: and in order to show he was a man of
authority, gave us strict orders not to be seen to carry any kind of arms,
except those of our own bodies, and left the same orders with the Captain of
the militia; pretending he hand orders from the commander in chief so to do;
and also that we should not be out of our lodgings after eight o'clock at
night. We thank him for such a signal piece of complaisance; but wool will not
grow from a hog's back. Poor Smith informs me that his thoughts at present are
on procuring the necessaries of life, having nothing but pork and bread to live
on; and after many perplexing cogitations how to proceed, his only alternative
is to go and dig potatoes. The Captain of the militia has despised the orders
left him by the last commander in chief over four of us, and permits us to go
fowling. I find plenty of ducks and plover.

Saturday, 13th. I have had a hard turn of a fever; but find myself recovering.
Having obtained permission from government, to have the liberty of asking
credit of merchants (which, until within six weeks we could not be permitted to
do, nor to write a line to any subject in Canada, except Mr. Murray, commissary
of prisoners) we wrote the merchants a pressing letter, setting forth our
indigent circumstances; yet no other attention was paid to it than to send us
word we could not have any credit. But I do not despair, although in a feeble
state of health.

Tuesday, 16th. Capt. Smith and myself took a walk to St. John's; and will
mention, that during the summer past, Mr. Smith and myself have had several
serious, and I trust agreeable, conversations together on matters of the utmost
consequence; we both agree, that for wise purposes man was permitted to fall;
for the more knowledge we obtain, the greater the sensation, and of consequence
happiness or misery is more natural to the soul, as we cannot agree to any part
of annihilation after death; for if the soul is miserable, why should it be so
if there is not that remorse of reflection on the duties and commands it
disobeyed whilst on earth? Therefore, of consequence, those who die happy are
unspeakably so, on the thought of having traveled through so many toils, and
so wearisome a pilgrimage while embodied in clay. We have often heard it
suggested, that the soul after departing from the body, knew nothing of what it
had passed through in this life: as well might the idea of annihilation be held
up; for it was the undoubted design of the Great Author of our existence to
send us through these thorny roads, to prepare us for an event of the greatest
importance: if we acted aright, happiness inexpressible must present to view;
and on the contrary, misery without end or description; and both on the
reflection of a well or ill spent life, the adoration on redemption, together
with being relieved from a sinful state and made entirely pure, are thoughts
unspeakable indeed; and also, if man had known no sin, he would have been
ignorant of so great a salvation. Mr. Smith is a deep-thoughted gentleman.

Friday, October 19. Capt. Smith and Lieut. Dunning this day commenced cutting
wood for the Canadians, at thirty coppers a cord, and find themselves. Poor
Smith again hangs his under lip.

Monday, 22d. I went to a wedding in this parish, and was immediately
introduced to the bride, and had to dance a minuet with her, which is the vogue
of this country; and their chief dances are minuets. No people that I have ever
seen appear to be more friendly than the Canadians, in particular on rejoicing
days, weddings, public meetings, etc. but remarkably more so to strangers than
any people I have ever met with in any part of the states which I have visited.
The marriage ceremony I believe to be nearly as the church of England, except,
that the Roman Catholics of this country always go to the church to have the
ceremony performed.

Friday, 26th. I went with Messrs. Smith and Dunning, and helped to cut wood,
which made my hands sore.

Monday, October. Agreeable to a former request, I wrote to Mr. Murray for
permission to go to Quebec for the restoration of my health, being in want of
clothing, etc. I received orders, and this morning embarked for said place, and
arrived in town in the evening. I tarried that night with Robert Co^^ran, and
next morning went to Mr. Murray's, from whence I went to Mr. Prentiss's, where
I took breakfast, and then proceeded to the jail hospital, and agreed with Mr.
Hill, who keeps the house, to live with him. I am locked up, not having
permission to go out without the company of Mr. Hill; but to make some
compensation, I have the company of Mrs. Hill, my landlady, who is from Boston,
and a very agreeable woman; and also a Doctor Duff, one of the Surgeons of the
hospital, who lodges up stairs, and appears much of a gentleman. There are
several prisoners in this place, among whom is a Mr. Williams, formerly one of
the custom-house officers; but being so far attached to the Americans, as to
speak something in their favor, has been for some time under close confinement.
Mr. Davis, whom I have before mentioned, is here; and his exploits and
connexions, would swell a volume as large as the Devil on Two Sticks, and the
whole to as little purpose.

November 3. Sergeant Weed informs me, that he has discovered a gentleman in
town, the first letter of whose surname is J, who is willing to assist the
prisoners; and being destitute of money, I immediately wrote him a letter,
stating the situation of my brother officers and myself. Mr. Weed soon
returned, and said the man had not more than half read my letter before he
appeared affected; he sent a half-joe for our present relief, and said that was
not the whole we might expect from him. I must confess, if ever my heart felt
gratitude, it was on this occasion. Last evening I knew not how to obtain a
single farthing, being an entire stranger; but have at present an ample supply,
with the rations I draw, for some time; and expect further assistance for Capt.
Smith and Mr. Dunning. This instance of humanity I trust will not be forgotten
by me during my stay on earth.

Nov. 8. I have had a visit from my good old friend James Cassedy, and have
some evenings the agreeable company of Capt. White, Mrs. White and the Miss
Robesoes; they are all genteel people, and came from Boston some time before
the commencement of the American war. Capt. White is brother to Mrs. Hill, and
master of a vessel from this por^.

PEGU, a considerable kingdom of Asia, in the East Indies, on the southeast
side of the Bay of Bengal, bounded by the king of Ava on the north, by the
mountains which separate it from Laos on the east, by the king of Siam and the
Bay of Bengal on the south, and by another part of the Bay of Bengal on the
west. It has a town of the same name, seventy miles within land, and above
twenty miles in circumference; but at present not one-twentieth part is
inhabited; for it was ruined by the inhabitants of Barma, whose king is a
potent prince. This country, like others between the tropics, is flooded when
the sun is vertical, but the mud and slime which the waters leave when they
retire, render the low lands fruitful as the Nile does those of Egypt. As to
the high grounds, they are soon parched up after the rains are over; and if
they sow wheat on them, as they sometimes do, they are forced to water their
fields by little channels which convey the water from their ^isterns and
reservoirs; but they sow much more rice than wheat, which is more suitable to
the flooded soil. The houses are frequently built on pillars by the river side,
and in the time of rains they have no communication with one another, but by
boats, in the flat country. The product of this country is like the other parts
of the East Indies. They have also good fish, pork and poultry. They wear no
European commodities but hats and ribbands. They have cottons, silks, and
silver, from Bengal and the neighboring countries. The government is arbitrary,
and the king's will is a law; yet he does not often abuse his power: he has a
large handsome palace at Ava, with four ga^es, each of which is appropriated
for people to pass through on different occasions; none but ambassadors pass
through the east gate, which is called the golden gate. The inhabitants are but
thinly clad, and the best among them wear neither shoes nor stockings. The
Barmaes go almost naked, and make figures in their skins, like the ancient
Picts, by pricking themselves with a bodkin, and rubbing them over with
cha^^coal. The women are much whiter than the men; small, but
well-proportioned. They wear petticoats which are open before; and this part of
the dress was said to be invented by a queen of this country, to draw the men
off from unnatural vices. The women are very fond of strangers, and any man may
have a wife for the time he stays there. The wife goes to market, dresses the
victuals, takes care of her husband's clothes, and sells his goods by retail.
If she proves false the husband may sell her for a slave; and if he goes
astray, she will give him a dose of poison. There are a vast number of temples
in this country, but most of wood, which are varnished and gilded. The priests
have ground allowed them, which they cultivate for their subsistence, and are
said to be strict observers of morality. They are called talapoins, and
inculcate charity as the highest virtue, affirming that religion to be best
which teaches men to do the most good. They have idols in their temples, in a
sitting posture, like tailors, and very large ears. They have curious sorts of
music; but the pipe and tabor are esteemed the best. They have one instrument
shaped like a galley, with about twenty bells of different sizes; and when they
strike them with a stick, they make no bad music. When any happen to be
shipwrecked on the coast, if they repair to the temples they will be taken care
of, and supplied with what they want. Their hills are covered with woods, and
they have a great deal of good timber; but their bamboes (a kind of hollow cane
which grows to the bigness of near a foot in diameter) is of the greatest use;
this they bend and form while young, making it fit for whatever they design it,
and particularly to hang their pelanquins upon: these are couches upon which
they lie when they travel, carried upon men's shoulders. They have but few
horses or sheep, and plow with oxen and buffaloes, and carry burdens on them as
well as on camels; nor does any place abound more in elephants, than this, and
the adjacent countries. They compute the strength of their armies by the number
and size of their elephants, etc. etc.

Monday, November 12. -- The whole of the prisoners, except three from Vermont,
and commissioned officers, are sent to Saint Paul's Bay, about thirty leagues
down the river, to be billeted with the inhabitants. I directed a line to
Doctor Mebane, the head surgeon of the town hospital, who came to see me; and
on representing to him that I considered myself bound on parole, but was locked
up like a prisoner that had no pretensions to a liberation; that I wished now
and then to be indulged to walk out in town with Mr. Hill, or some gentleman,
-- he gave Mr. Hill orders to permit me by turns to walk out with him, as the
governor will not permit any continental officer to be in town, without the
company of a British subject; it being of a dangerous nature: and as we
officers are people of such consequence, the British crown might totter to its
very center thereby. This is not the Doctor's excuse, but mine.

Monday, 26th. I received by the hands of Mr. Murray, three half-joes, from one
of the best of men, Col. John Campbell, at Montreal.

Yesterday Mr. Hill's child of ten days old was christened, and a number of
genteel people assembled in the church of England form, on the occasion; we had
plenty of good cheer, and as I recover my health fast, partook with
cheerfulness; and much sociable conversation took place. The parson appeared to
be an agreeable man, and talked with sense, and apparent sorrow for the unhappy
dispute between England and America, and gave me the news of young Butler's
being killed, with a number of his party.

Tuesday, 27th. I went with Mr. Hill to the provost, on a visit to see the
prisoners, and was introduced to Col. James Gordon, from Stillwater, of the
militia, who has been a prisoner better than twelve months; he appears to be a
genteel man: also to Capt. Romnsey, from Ballstown; Capt. Vroman, from
Schenectady; Lieut. White, and two Banters, from Ballstown, who were taken last
summer. I dined with the Colonel, Mr. Charles Hay, and Francis Cazeau; we
passed the afternoon agreeably, and in the evening Mr. Hill came and waited on
me to my old quarters, and of consequence I am now a man of importance.

INDIA, a vast country of Asia, which received its name from the river indus,
situated partly in the temperate and partly under the torrid zone, and
consequently the air is very different. Toward the north it is pretty
temperate; but toward the south, on the contrary, it is very hot, and it rains
almost constantly for three months in the year, which renders the heat more
supportable, and contributes to fertilize the ground, which produces abundance
of rice, millet, cotton, sigs, pomegranates, Oranges, citron, cocoa-nuts, and
many other fruits, of which there are none in Europe, but what have been
transported from thence. There are mines of gold and silver, and several sorts
of precious stones, borax and salt petre. They fish in the sea and rivers for
pearls. This country produces several sorts of animals, as well domestic as
wild; such as elephants, rhinoceroses, camels, dromedaries, buffaloes, lions,
tigers, leopards, panthers, and a vast number of monkeys. The trade is
exceeding great, and it chiefly consists of Indigo, salt petre, cotton, and
precious stones; but more especially in a prodigeous quantity of calicoes,
chintzes, and other stuffs of various kinds. The Europeans had little or no
intercourse with the Indies, until the year 1498, when the Portuguese
discovered a way by sea, round the Cape of Good Hope, and then soon began to
make settlements therein, and soon became very powerful, till the Dutch drove
them away from many of their factories. The Indians are generally gentoos or
idolaters, though there are a great many mahometans; in the places that depend
upon the Europeans, some of them have become Roman Catholics. Many of the
idolaters believe in the transmigration of souls, and will not kill or eat any
thing that has life; not the most trifling insect or animal. The principal
priests are Brachmans, and there are faquiers who make their principal devotion
to consist in the choice of the most troublesome postures, which they never
leave till they take their last exit. Some pass several years without laying
down night or day, resting only upon a cord which is stretched out; others shut
themselves up in a cave several days without eating or drinking; some hold
their arms lifted up so long that they can never stir them afterward; in short
others put burning coals on their heads, and let them be there till the fire
reaches the very bones. Sometimes those ^aquiers go in a body together,
followed by a great number of disciples, and they often make a merit of killing
Christians. It was a custom among the gentoos, for the women to burn themselves
with their deceased husbands; but it is not so frequent as it formerly was,
because the mahometans will not allow of it.

The people of Proper India, as well as those of China, who ought to know
better, prostrate themselves on the ground with great devotion, that the sun
and moon when eclipsed may not be devoured by a certain dragon to which they
imagine the defect of light is owing. The Pagans worship idols of various
shapes: some appear very monstrous, part human and part beast or fish, and
scarce any living animal but what they adore, particularly the ox and the
monkey. Paper will not admit of a further description.

Messrs. Lauckaling, Smith and M'Coy, paid me a visit, and we had an agreeable
conversation. I had previously wrote to my brother Masons, setting forth my
expectations of again going to the Isle of Orleans, and that I would be
thankful for some relief, not only for myself, but for Capt. Smith and Mr.
Dunning, and received a half-joe. I seriously thank my brethren for their
attention. I have been for some days past employed by Doctor Hunt, an old
sergeant, in drawing off accounts relative to the hospital department, as to
liquors and other necessaries for that purpose; and likewise some in the
medicine way, which, according to law, must be in English; and good English I
made of it, with a double entry, beyond a doubt; and it is a specimen of Hunt's
and my abilities: at any rate the British crown stands well charged.

December 18. This day I had my friend James Cassedy to dine with me.

25th. It being Christmas day, I went to church with Mr. John Hill, my
landlord, where were Lieut. Governor Clark and a respectable congregation.
After service we returned home and dined with several persons of Mr. Hill's
acquaintance. Some particulars of the Roman Catholics, relative to Christmas
evening and day, will not be amiss. The young women about sunset assemble at
the house of the parson of the parish, and are divided into small divisions of
three or four, according to their number; and the candles and lamps of the
church being previously lighted, the whole go into the church and pay their
devotion; after which, all but the first company retire to the parson's, and
the young women who are left, continue in devotion for one or two hours, and
are relieved alternately through the night, in commemoration of our Savior's
being this evening born; but no male or married woman, nor any female whose
chastity is suspected, is admitted that evening into church. The day is kept as
holy time, and the whole of the inhabitants attend divine service, by way of
returning thanks. I recollect of either reading or hearing of an author who,
speaking on the different methods of worshipping God, mentions something to
this purport -- that the Protestants endeavor to worship God as strictly as
possible by a few ceremonies, and the Roman Catholics by many ceremonies: and I
cannot but hope, and indeed do not doubt, but either denomination who are
sincere in their devotions to the Great Author of all existence, will find
mercy through the atonement of a dying ^edeemer; notwithstanding Deists scoff,
and Atheists blaspheme: although I am of opinion there is really at heart, no
such an idiot in existence as the latter. Some, I grant, in order to make
themselves conspicuous, make the like pretensions; but deserve the ridicule of
human beings.

January 1st, 1782. It being New Year's day, I again went to church; but must
mention, that this morning Mr. and Mrs. Hill received visits from several of
their relations and acquaintances, to express their joy, and congratulate them
on the day; and at the same time took occasion to mention, that they wished me
all the earthly happiness this world can afford, and with every mark of
fervency desired my release, and expressed a hope that before this year had
revolved round, a peace might be established between England and America, on a
firm and lasting basis. I am in duty bound to thank them for their tender
regards toward me and the prisoners in general; in particular, as I am
inclined to think them serious; ^or they have, fr^^ the best information I can
gather, shown themselves friendly to the cause, of America; and I do, with a
profound respect to the great Governor of the Universe, sincerely implore his
aid to impede the long and distressing judgments that have spread through the
lands of America; and that before another new year's day shall arrive, peace
with her balmy wings might bless the land; that the Thirteen United States may
be a free and independent people, and become a rising and happy empire, and an
example of goodness in returning their tribute of praise for so signal a
salvation from threatened ruin; and that my little lyre may join in praising
Jehovah. Amen. -- After service, I went with Mr. Hill, and dined with Messrs.
Gordon, Hay, and Cazeau, on an excellent dinner, and had a novelty of
soft-shelled walnuts, which is the first I ever tasted in this province. We had
also some excellent apples that grew on Mr. Cazeau's place at Montreal. The day
was spent agreeably. I have often wondered why Mr. Cazeau in particular should
be confined, for he appears to be one of the most friendly, inoffensive men I
ever met with, and seems to have too much goodness in him to be guilty of
harming the British or Americans. I am, through the goodness of Providence,
perfectly restored to health.

January 11. Mr. Prentiss came this morning and informed me, that the two
Banters were going on to the Isle of Orleans, and that it was the Governor's
orders I should go with them. I mentioned that I would rather stay till spring,
but it could not be granted; as I suppose the commander in chief thought it
might possibly ^e that I took some comfort; for no other views could have taken
place in his breast: but he will not always stay on earth; and I do not wish
him eternal punishment for the treatment he gives to the prisoners, but will
engage he will meet with the demerit of his conduct. I am now to prepare for
another ^rigid, cold, and poor country; therefore have called on my employer,
Doctor Sergeant Hunt, who is only a purveyor, or assistant, in the hospital,
and understands medicine something better than I do, but no great, and is
nothing at all on my part. He has put up for my services in posting books,
three pounds of green tea, sugar, port wine, etc. I expressed to Mr. and Mrs.
Hill, my sorrow at being obliged to go away, and they appeared no less to
regret my departure, as no people ever could have used a prisoner more friendly
than I was treated by them, and also by Doctor Duff. I mentioned to Duff, that
if I had his abilities, or understood any thing relative to medicine, I could
get a good living on the Isle of Orleans. He immediately replied that he would
make a Doctor of me in a few hours, and ordered several kinds of medicine put
up, and wrote particular directions on each medicine, and for what use; he have
me two crown lancets to bleed with, and Buchan's Family Physician, as a guide
in my practice. The medicine, phials, etc. being arranged in good order in my
chest, I felt important, and portended relief, although I had never thought of
being beneficial to mankind in this way before, and in the agitation of my
mind, never shall. We had not more than fixed the medicines and my other
affairs, before in came a Canadian for me, whom Doctor Duff addressed in the
following manner: "Sir, the gentleman who is going with you to the Is^e of
Orleans, is a great Doctor from the States of America, and has never discovered
it whilst living on the Is^e of Orleans, on account of not being able to speak
French, and also for the want of medicine and the like" -- on which I was
accosted with a bon jure; or how do you do Doctor. I then took my leave of Mr.
Hill, Mrs. Hill, Doctor Duff, with the family and poor prisoners, and went down
to the provost, took dinner with Messrs. Hay, Cazeau and Gordon; and about two
o'clock, bade them and the rest of the prisoners in that provost farewell. The
other officers might have gone to the Isle of Orleans, but chose to stay until
spring. The two Banters went in one carriol, and a Mr. Patterson of the British
line, and myself in another. Mr. Patterson is going down to be our commandant.
We had good horses and made headway fast over the ice, and struck the Isle of
Orleans with resolution as officers and physicians of consequence; and instead
of going by St. Lawrence, or Cileroy, we went by the parish of St. Peter (or
St. Pierre) where I had again to resume my jabbering of French, and a bungling
hand I make of it; and amof opinion, if the King of France knew how I tare his
language to pieces, he would tare my hair. We are at the Captain of the
Militia's house; the old man is something deaf, and has been so for about
twenty years. He is above sixty years old, but it matters not with me: I inform
him that his hearing can be restored, which makes him cheerful, and he promises
to become one of my patients. However, I took a little bay salt, which I
dissolved and put in his ears; I stuffed them full of wool before he went to
bed, and made him as deaf as an adder that night. The next morning, on taking
out the wool, he expressed himself much better, although I do not believe it.
After breakfast we took our leave; he asked my demands, which I said was
nothing. Our commander in chief, as yet, is not led into the secret of my
physical ideas, and does not know but I am the practitioner I pretend to be. It
being a very stormy, cold morning, with difficulty we arrived at St. Lawrence,
which place is as near from where we came to the island, as St. Peter's; but
the drivers had their views: and we have concluded, on account of being a
stormy day, to stay all night; and Mr. Patterson's being a very civil obliging
man, makes the time more agreeable, but I can find the Canadians look at me
with great attention, as my doctorship spreads fast through the land. Snow or
no snow, some think me a great man by one observation, and some by another:
indeed I can neither walk nor speak but notice is taken whether I am the
Surgeon, as is pretended. The French in Canada call all Doctors Surgeons. Many
complaints have this day appeared before me; but I led them into a secret, that
my medicines are all locked up; that they are of a good quality, new and fresh
from England, and some from France; and if they want to employ me, I will wait
on them at any time; but no advice can be given gratis, without it is to poor
people who have no money nor estate, which they think is bone, or right.

January 13. No cash yet. We le^t St. Lawrence, and having another horse, soon
arrived at St. John's, and went to the Captain of the militia's, where again
the fame of my being a vast Surgeon was rumored. The Captain's wife presented
to me a small dwarf of a child that had been six months unwel, and was covered
with sores. I informed her, that if she could prevail on her husband to send to
my lodgings at St. Francis, I would send relief, and restore her to good
health; but they all appear to be afraid of their cash. One thing I know they
ought to be more fearful of, -- that my doctoring will do them no good. We all
of choice sat out on foot, and left our baggage to be brought on the next day;
and on our way bought a quart of brandy to treat poor Smith and Dunning with,
and arrived at my old parish, sun about two hours high, where we found Capt.
Smith and Mr. Dunning; and after they were introduced to Mr. Patterson and the
Banters, we all sat down and took a share of the brandy, together with the
people of the house. I had to salute the French ladies of my acquaintance, and
had no objection, as it is a fashion in this country, and think it no harm in
any, when friends meet after a long absence. We that night had a dance; and Mr.
Patterson not being able to speak French, nor the Banters, my doctorship was
not discovered. The next day, I took my lodgings at Mr. Jauns^ings, the best
house in the parish, and the old man has been such a friend to the Americans,
that the priest of this parish will not confess him of his sins. Our chests
arrived to day, with the news of my being a doctor; and I have had to undergo
some strict examinations from the inhabitants, why I never mentioned it before;
but I made the same excuse that Duff did for me, and had previously advertised
Capt. Smith and Mr. Dunning of the affair, who assisted me in making fair
weather in the doctoring way. The house I am now living in, is the same that
Capt. M'Kenno first took his quarters at, when he came to this place; but the
landlady and he did not altogether agree. I think one of her legs is crooked,
though not lame; but she has a hawk of an eye. I thought it my duty to let Mr.
Patterson know the ^oundation of my pretensions to physic, and am determined to
do no harm to the inhabitants, if no good; indeed what Doctor Duff has sent, is
obviously simple, and Patterson appears pleased with the attempt.

JAPAN, a large country in the most eastern part of Asia, with the title of an
Empire, is between 130 and 144 degrees of east longitude, and between 30 and 40
degrees of north latitude. It is composed of several islands, the principal of
which, are Niphon and Sacock -- Niphon or Japan island, is about six hundred
miles long, and from one hundred to one hundred and fifty broad; the chief town
is Jeddo. The next largest island is Sacock, parted by a very narrow channel
from Niphon, lying south of it, and is about five hundred miles round; the
capital city is Bango. The third island in magnitude is Tonsa, divided from
Niphon and Sacock by a very narrow channel, and is near four hundred miles in
circumference; the capital city is Tonsa -- besides these, are a great many
lesser about them, subject to Japan. It was discovered by the Portuguese, in
the year fifteen hundred and forty-two, being cast on shore by a tempest. The
whole empire is divided into seven countries, which are subdivided into seventy
provinces. It is the richest country in the world for silver and gold. The air
and water are very good. Cedars are common, and so large that they are proper
for the masts of snips, and columns for temples. Their pearls are in great
esteem. Japan is counted one of the best countries in Asia; the inhabitants are
naturally ingenious, and have a happy memory; but their manners are
diametrically opposite to those of the Europeans. Our common drinks are cold,
and their's are all hot; we uncover the head out of respect, and they the feet;
we are fond of white teeth, and they of black: we get on horseback on the left
side, and they on the right; and they have a language so peculiar that it is
understood by no other nation. They value their lives so little, that when a
lord makes a feast the domestics dispute who shall have the honor of cutting
open their bellies before the guests. The sciences are highly esteemed amongst
them; but treat the women with a great deal of severity, and pun^^h adultery
with death; yet* a man may take as many wives as he pleases. On the other hand,
bad houses are plenty, and sins against nature are tolerated. Those who have
too many children make no scruple of destro^ing some of them; and many women
kill them before they are born, especially if they think they are of the female
sex. Their emperor is called Dairo, and resides at Meaco, and has no land, but
has a right of selling titles and dignities, and the idolatrous priests make
contributions. He wears a black habit, and a cap on his head; his feet must
never touch the ground, nor must he ever be exposed to the rays of the sun. He
never cuts his hair nor beard, nor his nails, and all his victuals must be
dressed in new vessels. When he goes abroad, he is carried by fourteen men in a
litter, and surrounded with curtains, so that he may see and not be seen. He
has twelve wives, who have each a palace, with singing and dancing women for
his diversion; he has also an unlimited number of concubines. His palace is
adorned with three hundred and sixty-five idols. The religion of the whole
country is paganism; but there are two different sects, and yet there is no
part of the world where there are more converts than here; but the women are
not chaste. The Dairo has sixty or seventy vassal princes or kings, as they are
called, under his dominion, and can depose or punish them as he ^ees fit; they
are obliged to attend the court one half of the year, and have each of them a
house in the verge of the king's palace. The eldest sons of the nobility have
their education at court, where they are kept till they are preferred to some
post. The Dairo is attended by five or six thousand of his guards when he goes
out, and keeps up an army of 20,000 horse, and 100,000 foot, though to what
purpose is not easy to conceive, having no enemies to contend with, unless he
suspects his vassals may prove malcontents. His revenues are greater than those
of any monarch upon earth. The Portuguese first trafficked with this country;
but these and all other Christians have been banished Japan these last hundred
years, on a pretense of a conspiracy the Portuguese and their Japan proselytes
had formed against the state; the Dutch only were admitted this privilege to
trade thither; and it is said they declared themselves not to be Christians,
and trampled on the cross to confirm the Japanese in this opinion; but the
Japanese are so suspicious even of the Dutch, that when any of their ships
arrive, they take away their sails, heim and guns, and carry them on shore
until they are ready to sail, and the Dutch factors are shut up on a little
peninsula, during the eight months their shipping is absent annually, and are
not suffered to have so much as a lighted candle in their houses in the night
time. The goods the Dutch, carry to Japan, are spices, sugars, silks, woollen
and linen cloth, elephants' teeth, and haberdashery wares, and receive in
return, gold, silver, fine copper, cabinets, and other japan and lacquered
wares. -- (This last account I have taken from an older date than Brooks'
Geography.) The Japanese use neither tables, beds or chairs, but set and lie on
carpets and mats, as the Turks do, etc. etc.

My landlady is the fiery dragon that conquered our great first commandant,
Captain M'kenno, who had under his immediate notice four continental prisoners;
a rigid S^o^^hman. He ^^^en appeared to lament that Captain Brownson should be
hung, on account of his being more advanced in life than either of us; but, as
to our part, it was not of so much consequence: one thing he was certain of, --
that the whole of the rebel officers would be hung: -- poor fellows, they must
first catch and conquer them.

Mr. Jaun^^ing, appears to be a good sort of a man, and the old lady must be
humored, She has two hawk-eyes, and crooked legs; but a lofty temper. They have
an only daughter, who is tall and short, crooked and straight, thick and thin,
handsome and ugly, sensible and foolish, rich and poor, walks well and ill, is
good and bad, generous and stingey, kind and disobliging, frank and a dupe,
pleasant and disagreeable, with a number of other good and bad qualifications:
but I must again resume my landlady. Her crooked back, and short petticoats, do
not fail to draw my attention; and certain I am her legs bend out near the
width of a water pail, and has feet like other Canadians. I am determined to
form an alliance with her; for should war on her part be proclaimed, I am at
once undone, having no forces to take the field.

Thursday, 24. An unfortunate young man, named Peter Emmo, or Perish, was, on
the morning of the 20th, cutting on a last, or rather trimming it, with the
point of the knife toward him; it took a glance and struck into his breast.
The wound appeared small; and I being present, he exclaimed, oh! Mr. Scudder, I
am killed; or in French ja mort. But from the looks of the orifice, I was
inclined to suppose him frightened, without the foundation of its being mortal.
He was at work with Mr. Dunning when it happened; I in earnest, immediately
desired the father of the young man, to send to Quebec for some doctor who was
experienced in their language, forms, etc. but to no purpose, until the third
day, when he was to appearance, on the close of life; though I went so far as
to offer him the barks -- yet nothing must be done for fear of a copper. The
father went to Quebec for a doctor, but before any relief could be obtained, he
expired in a distressed situation. He was in the bloom of life, and ha^l in
constitution, before the unhappy catastrophe. The minister of the parish
attended him, and notwithstanding many Protestants make their scoff and
ridicule of the Roman Catholic religion, I would not wish to be led into such
folly; for in my opinion, no man ever appeared more sincere than the parson,
who expressed himself as follows -- "Perish, place your trust in God, for he
alone is able to save you; we can do our duty, but the Almighty the whole." It
is generally construed, that the Roman priests give the last benediction to
dying persons, and forgive their sins, which Mr. Duran disapproves, any farther
than it is an ordinance and command, to lay the hands on the sick, pray over
them, and give the last sacrament, according to the order of Saint James; but
as to be instruments of forgiving sins, he utterly denies it; or why should
souls go to purgatory, everlasting misery, etc. A journal is intended to put
down what occurs to the mind; and sensible I am of sentiments, full of errors;
but to give justice its due weight, relative to my ^ellow mortals, in
particular as to the great article of religion and adoration to the Supreme
God, although they even vary from my opinion in points of their manner of
devotion, it demands my most strict enquiry, whether they are not as sincere in
their performances as myself and those who are brought up under the same
profession with me. Education has a strong propensity to form the mind, and
from daily experience, it is not easy to pursuade a person from that which was
cultivated in him from infancy. A chain of reflections on this may arise: but
this I hold -- that there is a just and merciful God, who is the former of
worlds unknown, and every part thereof, and that whoever bows the knee to so
great a Sovereign, with a heart full of humility, and has a reverential eye
toward him as their Parent of nature, humbly requesting a forgiveness of their
sins, mercy awaits them in their final exit from this world, whatever their
form of religion may be. Official characters, whose religion is their own, may
despise those sentiments, and call them deistical; but in such breasts,
philanthropy toward our fellow mortals must be wanting; for our Savior says
-- "when I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me:" yet I suppose a doubt
cannot exist in a human heart, that it was the meaning of our Savior, to draw
all men unto him that did not pay a reverential homage to the Supreme Lord, and
to cast their dependence on him only, and not on their particular manner of
worship; or rather the form of ceremonies. Still as I before observed, persons
are apt to be tenacious as to the mode in which they are educated, and have
reason to suppose, often lay so great a stress on them as to fall into error,
by placing too much dependence on their outward performances; and what still
adds to the presumption, those who are knowing to the contrary, will teach them
such for the sake of gain; and would only wish to be understood, that every
contrite heart will meet with a good reward; therefore, it is necessary to look
to ourselves, as well as of different persuasions, lest we discover the mote in
their eye, and not the beam in our own.

February 10. Great feasting commences again.

Monday, 11. The inhabitants assemble and feast with sociability.

Tuesday. Mr. Patterson and myself took a walk to the other side of the parish
this morning, where we found the people, to appearance, like stupid animals;
for they have eat and drank, danced, sung and capered, until they now appear
almost like stupid manuments; but as it is the last day of their feasting, and
then fasting for forty days commences, in the cogitation of my brain, in one
hour, two minutes and five seconds, they will begin to srisk., The fact is, in
this country, generally speaking, the inhabitants live vastly poor, to what
they do in the states of America: for their breakfast is constantly a piece of
bread, and if an onion can be had it is an excellent repast. Their dinner is at
twelve o'clock, which is made by boiling a small piece of pork or beef, but
mostly pork; and in the winter, the inhabitants have peace, with vegetables,
which are boiled* with the meat, and have also shred cabbage, onions, etc. and
to finish, a bowl of bread cut thin, which tastes palatable, and is for dinner
and supper; but in summer, meat is commonly scant. I have known hard laboring
families to breakfast on bread, dine and sup on any kind of vegetables that can
be gathered, such as long sorrel, and other wild herbs, before their gardens
come on: these herbs are boiled and bread is shred into them, with some milk,
and not a morsel of meat; but I am informed the whole province do not live in
so poor a manner; but they never make a dish of coffee or chocolate, and as to
tea, they are entirely ignorant of it. I am told it was formerly the custom for
the inhabitants to have a little cheap wine, which is called black strap, or
the dregs of port, to drink a glass of in the morning with their bread, or a
little rum; but I see none of the like on this island, except on such occasions
as their feastings, etc. I have attempted to inform them, in my way of
jabbering French, the way in which the Bostonians live (for such all the
American people are called by the Canadians.) In the first place, we have our
tea, coffee, or chocolate, in the morning, and a piece of beef, cheese or
shortcake; and for dinner, we have meat plenty, and very little soup, with
turnips, potatoes, cabbage, and garden roots, etc. In the afternoon, tea again;
and for supper, either meat, bread and vegetables, or a dish of mush and milk;
and in winter a mug of cider, and that we thought nothing of giving away a mug
or two in the evening's chat, to a neighbor, etc. and to be sure I told as
good a story of my native place as it deserved, and of the American States in
general, which drew great attention. I also informed them, that the ladies of
our country wore high-heeled shoes, and the richest cloth, and that every day;
which information they could stand no longer, and exclaimed, "La Bostona
montier cum la diabol:" -- that is, the Bostonian lies like the devil: for the
women of this country all wears mockisons every day, as well as the men.

They have potatoes in this country, but do not raise so plenty as in the
states, and I have seen very few turnips or garden roots, except onions, which
are generally raised, and are large; but the idea of garlics being much used in
this province, I believe is ill-founded, as I have never ^een any eat. No
people are more fond of gay gardens than the landlords, who are called seniors;
for the province generally is inhabited by tenants under great landholders, who
pay but a trifling rent.

Wednesday, 13. Soup meagre, or lent, commences, and I think it a happy
circumstance; for two days more must have given them such a surfeit, that
nature would scarcely have recovered, had they continued in the same way as the
three preceding days. It is astonishing how they will gluttonise, from the aged
to the children, in these times. It is common to rise on the first day, about
twelve or one o'clock at night, and no bounds are set, in particular as to
eating. They now appear like snakes just come out of the frost. However, the
forty days without any, meat will make an alteration in their appetites; but I
have some expectation yet to be called on as physician, to administer relief.

INDOSTAN, Proper India, or the Empire of the Great Mogul, is bounded on the
west by Persia, on the south by the western Peninsula, on the east by the
eastern Peninsula, and on the north by several kingdoms of Independent Tartary.
It is a vast country, and is at least two thousand five hundred miles in
length, and is very fertile in all kinds of corn, and all the commodities of
the East Indies are to be met with here. The inhabitants are more humane with
regard to strangers, and not so great enemies to Christians as the Turks,
although they dress in the same manner, and take several wives, being much
addicted to luxury. The Great Mogul, was the richest prince in the world,
especially in diamonds and precious stones, till Ko^ly Khan, the last king of
Persia, deprived him of all his treasures. The government is despotic, and the
Great Mogul is master of the lives and fortunes of his subjects. He often takes
away lands that any one has cultivated, and gives worse in their room. His
revenue is said to amount to near fifty millions a year, sterling, and has an
army of two hundred thousand soot, with five hundred elephants magnificently
harnessed. When a Mohammedan subject dies, all his effects belong to the
Emperor, himself being a Mohammedan, and there are a great number of governors
under him; some have the title of Nabobs, and he generally bestows on them
lands sufficient to maintain their dignity; and their troops and revenues are
so considerable, that these governors are like so many petty kings: but they
are obliged to make large presents to the Great Mogul, and make their court to
him, otherwise their riches would be taken from their families after death.
There are no fixed laws with regard to their succession, which produces many
intrigues and quarrels among the sons who are the descendants of Tam^rlane. The
empire of the Great Mogul contains twenty provinces, besides which, he has
many kingdoms and territories. Tamerlane was the founder of this empire, etc.
etc.

PETERSBURGH, a large handsome city, the capital of Russia, built by Peter the
Great, Czar of Muscova, in the year 1703. It is of prodigeous extent, and
contained not long ago, sixty thousand houses. It is seated on an island, which
lies in the middle of the river Neiva, where the land is considerably raised.
The worst of this place is, that the land is not high enough to escape
inundations, which at times has occasioned the loss of vast sums of money, by
reason of the fortifications being washed away before they were well finished.
The breadth of the river at Petersburgh, is about half a mile; and as it is
very deep and rapid, the building of a bridge over it was held impracticable,
whereupon it was proposed to the Czar, Peter the Great, to make a bridge of
pontoons or boats; but he would not consent to it, he said, because his
intention was to breed up as many watermen as he could, and these he prohibited
the use of oars, that they might learn to manage sails; but these boatmen being
ignorant peasants, many people were drowned in passing from one part of the
town to the other, at first. The nobility and people of distinction were
obliged to build grand houses here, but the generality were timber houses, till
they began to burn brick, and the town now appears with a much better face than
it did at first. The trade was small and provisions scarce, because the lakes
Ladoga and Onega, had not depth enough to carry large vessels, but Peter the
Great, remedied this inconvenience, in 1720, by cutting a canal from lake
Ladoga, of about seventy-five miles in length, seventy feet in breadth, and ten
in depth; ten years were employed in this work. It is a vast place of trade,
and flourishing. All kinds of religion are tolerated, and foreigners have the
same privileges with the natives. A new road is made between Petersburgh and
Moscow, in a straight line across the forests, planted with trees on each side;
five hundred and fifty miles in length, and at every eight miles is a large
post, sat up to direct travelers, and at every station are twenty horses kept
saddled and bridled for an immediate express. The inhabitants are reckoned at
one hundred thousand, from all countries, there being not many original
natives. It may seem strange that Peter the Great, should fix upon this place
to build his capital city, it lying in a barren country, and so ^ar to the
north, that they scarce enjoy the light of the sun in the winter; but it was in
order to have a communication with the Baltic sea, and that his subjects might
traffic with the rest of the nations of Europe, for as yet there was no sea
that touched upon the territory of Russia, but that of Archangel, to which
shipping was obliged to pass through the frozen ocean. It was notwithstanding
the prospect of trade, with great difficulty that the Czar compassed this grand
design, his subjects showing the utmost averson to removing to this cold,
barren country, as he commanded them, from all parts of his dominions, and such
rubs were laid in his way by his nobility and officers, that it was thought
impossible he should effect his design. There was neither sufficient tools or
provisions provided for the workmen, who suffered all manner of hardships,
insomuch that it is computed no less than one hundred thousand people perished
in laying the foundation, and building this metropolis. However, all
difficulties were at length overcome, and the sixty thousand houses were all
built in less than four years, and is now one of the largest and most populous
cities in the world. The Czar established here an academy marine, to which he
obliged every considerable family in his empire to send one of their sons or
relations to be instructed in navigation; here also they learnt the dead
languages, were taught to ride and fence, and other exercises. He set up woolen
and linen manufactories, had paper-mills, powder-mills, laboratories for
gunnery and fireworks, places for preparing saltpetre and brimstone; he
erected yards for making cables and tackling for his navy, and a foundery,
where they are perpetually casting great guns, mortars, and small arms; the
country furnishing him with vast quantities of iron-ore. A printing house was
also set up to encourage his subjects to enquire into the state of the world;
and he sent many of them to foreign countries, to learn mechanic arts, giving
great encouragement to foreigners to come to Petersburg, and instruct his
people in every science; plays, operas, and music-meetings were also
introduced, in a country where none of these arts of diversions were seen till
the reign of Peter the Great. It is seventy-nine years from the time I am now
writing this Journal, since Peter the Great first laid the foundation of
Petersburg, after he had traveled through a great part of Europe, visited the
dock yards of Amsterdam and London, in both of which he worked with his own
hands. It is 355 miles N. W. of Moscow, 750 N. E. of Vienna, 525 N. E. of
Copenhagen, and 300 N. E. from ^^ockholm; long. 30. 23. E. lat. 54. 56. north.
[ Partly from Brooks's Geography, and the Modern Gazetteer.]

Thursday, 28th* It being a snowy day, which my eyes are often saluted with; I
take another turn of mentioning what superstition and gross ignorance, many
Canadians are led into. The following information is given to me as a fact, by
old people, and as many more as I have hairs in my eyebrows: In the parish on
the other side of the river, which is named St. Ann, is the statue of St. Ann
in the church, which they hold performs many miracles, such as restoring sight
to the blind, healing the sick; and lame persons who go into the church on
crutches are restored to health, and leave their crutches behind as a standing
monument of their being healed, which are any day to be seen in the chapel. I
was urged to take a tour thither, and was assured I would find the crutches
hanging up according to their word; but I never went, having no faith. However,
as they say, about six years ago, a man had a little son murdered; the sister
of the husband, who was privy to the murder of the child, told her brother, or
the bereaved, that his wife was the person who was guilty of the ^act; upon
which he took his wife so accused, into the woods, in order to murder her: but
she begged her life, and said if he would break both her arms, she would never
return until they were restored, which would be in three days, by praying to
St. Ann; and if not, she would starve in said place, which would declare her
guilt or innocence; and finally was persuaded to break both her arms. She
requested a book might be placed before her, fixed on a stick, so that by
blowing the leaves, she could turn them. As he was going from her, a thorn ran
into his foot, which she prayed might never be extracted but by her hands. The
husband went home, but no relief could be found; and he was obliged to return
to his wife although in the greatest pain. On his return he found her in the
same place, perfectly restored to health; her arms were well, and she
immediately pulled the thorn from his foot. They both recovered and returned
home with joy. They say the woman is now living in said parish. She was
constant in prayer to St. Ann, who not only restored her arms and health, but
told her who was the murderer of the child, and the young woman was hung, etc.

My doctoring has not added, as yet, much to my wealth. I have been called
frequently to administer medicines; but make a bad hand of it, in particular as
to bleeding. I was sent for by Mrs. Bunet (where Capt. Smith lives) to bleed
her, and it being the first time I had ever attempted any thing of the kind,
was much at a loss how to proceed; but receiving some directions from Smith,
etc. I went to the house, where my patient was sitting by a stove, with her
feet up to her knees in warm water. I asked her if she would be bled in the
foot; she said no, la braun* or arm; on which, for the first time, I tied a
garter, with judgment, as far as I knew at any rate. A large vein soon
appeared, and I gave it the lancet, which made the blood ^ly merrily. The woman
being very warm, bled freely and soon began to grow faint; on which I untied
the arm, but to no purpose; the blood ran, she fainted and cried out pinche!
pinche! that was to pinch the orifice. I immediately obeyed orders, and held
her arm from bleeding until she was lain on the bed; but the instant I took my
fingers away, the blood would fly. At last Smith discovered an old powder horn,
in which was common powder for hunting; he mashed some of the powder and put it
on the place, which instantly stopped the bleeding; and ever after that I
carried mashed gunpowder with me to stop the blood, and was esteemed still a
surgeon.

An old man on the other side of the parish who was unwel, sent for me. I gave
him a portion of Glaubers salts; but it had no effect: I gave rhubarb, and the
same I gave jallap, which the old man said stopped his mouth, for he had no
stomach to eat; but by giving a clyster, gave vent to the whole. He lived a few
days; but being old and low in health, and having for a long time been
irregular in his body, he left the world, and I hope in peace; at least I do
not judge that what I gave him hastened him out any sooner; if it did, I was
not to blame; for physic he would have. I have been examined by the parson of
the parish* to know if my abilities in physic are equal to my pretensions. I
observed that I was not able to talk with him in French, and Latin I was
sensible he knew, but supposed his study had been on divinity, and not on
physic; but if he scrupled me, to send for any doctor and I would be willing to
undergo an examination, but it must be a man who could speak English, and I did
not care how much Latin. He said it was well, and asked no further questions.

The Canadians are drowned in ignorance and bigotry, full of errors, as I
think; but I am sure are entailed to priestcraft, and apt to believe in
superstitious reports, which for my present amusement I am going to relate; and
which I have from a man of as good credit as any in this place, viz. -- That on
the 2d day of November, the whole of the Roman Catholics throughout the world
go to mass, and pray that the dead may be discharged from limbo or purgatory,
and that all from thence may receive absolution from Good. The same evening the
inhabitants all keep within doors, for fear of seeing souls going from the
lower to the upper world; and mentioned several who had been so presumptuous as
to be out on that night, who had seen ghosts, and some were converted even into
brutes, and continued so for several days. If any one has committed a flagrant
crime, and does penance for a long time in limbo, the dead so detained appears
to some surviving friend; and if they have stolen or taken any thing unjustly,
they desire them to discharge the debt, or make restitution, and entreat the
church in their behalf. The man by whom this story is relat^^, has (as he says)
been once or twice attacked by these nocturnal visitants, and has (if he lies
not) paid for a wrapper and petticoat which a woman had stolen, which was never
settled for, and was brought against her in limbo, by some spiritual register,
whom her policy could not deceive. She gave further directions that he must pay
for ten masses, which he and his wife, and several of the neighbors, declare he
paid the priest here and at Quebec; and this was discovered by the apparition
in his barn, at open day. It is surprising the Canadians should appear to
actually believe in such things, and for the gain of the priests (in being paid
for masses) encourage such folly. No people under the sun, in my opinion, stand
less to their word, than the Canadians; and they are not the most honest. Mrs.
Lebbe, with whom Dunning lives, tells us, that whilst she was pregnant with her
youngest child, she was very feeble, and promised St. Ann (who, if I
understand, was midwife at the birth of our Savior; but they seem to be at a
loss in that matter, although they believe her to be such) that if she would
deliver her of a living child, she would make a present of it to the saint; and
the child being alive, is this day to be carried and offered. She was
christened Mary St. Ann: indeed there is no girl but what the first part of the
christian name is Mary, and generally something that bears a scriptural sound
follows, though they are not generally called by the first part of their names:
such as Mary Angelec, are called Angelic, etc. They say, if a person is
excommunicated from the church, they turn into a mad animal; generally into
dogs, which will bite all that come in their way. Mrs. Bunet, my patient, says
that her brother was one day walking with a pitch-fork in his hand, when he was
pursued by one of those dogs. He endeavored to keep the creature off, but to no
purpose, until he stabbed him so far with the fork, that the blood ran, when he
immediately turned into the same person as before he was excommunicated, and is
now living, and that she is well acquainted with the person.

There is a difference between an historian and a journalist; as the first is
bound in honor to state facts, and the latter, to set down what comes under his
notice; and on this occasion I would only further remark, that the accounts I
give of the French Canadians, are related to me by them with a degree of
enthusiasm; and to doubt in their presence any of these stories, will create
warmth.

Some old men advised me not to sow my turnips until after the procession at
St. Pierre, which was on the 10th of June; for then they expected the insects
would disappear: accordingly, to please them, I waited until the 17th and sowed
with the neighbors; but they all shared the common lot: the grasshoppers took
the whole. The priests do not admit a person to be buried in their churchyard,
if they find out that the said person had not confessed all his sins. The
people will often go from one parish to another to confess; and if any one has
been guilty of some gross sin, and dies unconfessed of it, he or she is buried
on their place: and I am informed unbaptized infants are served in the same
manner. I often attend their mass, and never knew it fail, that some of them,
having before confe^^ed their sins, receive the benediction; or, in our words,
a pardon for their sins. The ceremony of the mass is performed with a seeming
solemnity. The priest stands before the altar, in the middle of which is a
small looking-glass; he puts his hand into a small locker behind the glass, and
takes out a cup, which I suppose is silver, and washes it; after the cup is
washed, he is for some time shuffling and speaking low: the clerks keep the
whole time singing; and after a considerable bowing and continued speaking for
a long time, the boys who wait on him bring a little white cup; he takes it,
and pours something into a glass, and after some low, and to appearance
inarticulate ^ounds being uttered, and bowing frequently, he drinks what is in
the glass; and after some time is again elapsed, he faces the congregation,
when all who receive the benediction, assemble at the front of the altar and
kneel down, when the priest, after a short ceremony, gives each person, or
rather puts into their mouths, a wafer. After all partake, they return to their
seats, and the whole congregation which, to appearance, at the whole of the
mass before the sacrament was administered, were in the profoundest devotion,
now sing a hallelujah, with transports o^ joy! The priest has two young men and
several boys, all clad in white surplices, to attend on him during the mass;
their business is to convey the books from one side of the altar to the other,
in burning incense, etc. etc. At certain times in their ejaculations, a small
bell is rang, which to appearance awakens them to a more ardent devotion. They
one and all (and I have talked with the most sensible of them) believe that our
Savior comes in person behind the glass which is on the altar, and there
sanctifies the sacramental wa^er; and that at the time the priest is uttering
his devotion in a low tone, he is that instant talking with Christ, face to
face, and hold that he is omnipresent, and can at one time be at a million, or
a million of millions of masses, and sanctify the wafer; and are so full in the
faith, that they fully believe, should they die the instant the wafer is put on
their tongue, they would immediately ascend to Paradise. It appears to be hard
to judge, lest I be judged; but one thing is certain -- if they are erroneous
in their doctrine, the common people are ignorant. However, this much can be
said of the Roman Catholics, that in all their worshipping, they believe, and
endeavor in one part and the other of it, to commemorate the passions of our
dying Lord. They never eat a piece of bread nor any kind of food, before they
lay their hands on their breast, make the sign of a cross, and ask a blessing
on the provision they are going to partake of (...) They never lie down at
night, nor rise in the morning, without going to prayer. I have often heard it
remarked by the Protestants, that the Roman Catholics depended on their
ceremonies to save them, and indeed some ministers will preach such doctrine.
According to my opinion of the nature of things, reason ought always to be the
clue on which sound judgment should rest; for through all the different scenes
of life, where on mature consideration, any thing appears unreasonable, it puts
the mind in suspense: for instance, one will preach up this kind, and the other
that kind of doctrine, to attain salvation; but certainly no one, can condemn
the great article of prayer. This we hold, that it is reasonable, rational, and
right, to bow the knee, but more particularly the heart, to the Supreme God;
therefore, so far as touches prayer the Roman Catholics, cannot be condemned;
and as to Christ's appearing in person, it must entirely be attributed to
ignorance, and the craft of priests. Solomon I think, somewhere tells us, that
every generation grows wiser, and I am of opinion that bigotry in a few years
will decrease fast, in particular through the United States, and that the
people's eyes will be more awakened, than to believe that there is no getting
to heaven only by a certain persuasion; in fact, the different denominations
have crept in through priestcraft, and to say such a mode is right, and no
other, deserves the ridicule and scorn of an enlightened people: still, as far
as has come to my knowledge of the different persuasions, I condemn none; and
for conscience sake, let all agree with Paul, that every man may be persuaded
in his own mind, and not condemn another. This I also believe, that it is more
justifiable to pray and worship God, than to live as thousands and tens of
thousands of the Protestants do, who seemingly go through the world without the
least affinity to devotion, and live and die like the wild asses colt. Good
God! what an awful scene must present itself to the poor soul that, aftertaking
its departure from this lodgment of clay, will meet thy everlasting wrath! Oh,
for some heavenly visitant to soften this stubborn heart, and bow the unwilling
knee! For ^ow can we escape if we neglect so great salvation?

Part of a copy of a letter I received from Col. Gordon, dated
Quebec, March 14, 1782.
THE talk here is, that a flag has lately come to St. John's; but where from,
o^ for what purpose, we do not yet learn. Peace, peace, is in every body's
mouth; but for my part, I have heard nothing that can induce me to believe it,
though I ardently wish it may be true. Mr. Hay and the other gentlemen, join in
compliments to you and the gentlemen on the island who are brother prisoners.

From your humble servant, JAMES CORDON.


The word peace is in every Canadian's mouth! -- Guardian Angel descend from
the golden rooss above and aid my patience, amidst the present thoughts of
transport and despair, and enable me full-orbed to pen this news; and may it
forever shine like a polished steel, and never be sullied! May the sweetest
flowers that ever bloomed in the month of May, cover those who have been
instrumental in bringing about so great an event. Such an import fills the
thoughts with such lively gratitude, that had I a golden pen, pointed with a
diamond, how freely could I write this news! though aid is wanting on my part,
but may I rise superior and bring all the animal passions subservient to the
will: and, if disappointed (which the Great Governor of the Universe forbid)
may I stand the shock like a stubborn oak, tossed by every wind, but still
stand firm, where can the heart that was bred in America be found, that will
not bless the maker of us all, and return thanks for being born in a land where
liberty is in a fair way of being displayed, and where we can all sit down
under our own vine and fig tree, in this once smiling wilderness, but now land
of plenty, where all the comforts of life in a few years may spontaneously
arise, by our industry, and a common providence; religion in its purity, our
own laws, etc. all happily combined together. We are apt to scorn atheists and
deists, and call them fools, etc. but what shall be said of tories, or enemies
to a country so greatly blessed by a kind providence, and to a cause so
miraculously supported thus far, by nothing short of a providential agency. He
that will not see these things, and return a heart of gratitude to our all
bountiful Jehovah, let him be an insidel.

March 16, 1782. We are making preparations to make sugar. I assure you,
Scudder, your hands would not labor in these cold and inhospitable climes, in
particular through the snow and such weather, to get a little sugar, if it
could be helped or necessity did not enforce it. My doctoring thrives slowly:
-- but let me see what of the clock. I suppose it to be thirty three minutes
after three. I must again attend at a certain house in the parish, where a
woman has for a long time been very ill, and I have frequently attended to
administer relief, having ordered in my serious and great judgment, flann^^
cloths dipped in warm herb teas, to be outwardly applied, and some bohea tea to
take as a collateral, which in the inflamatory situation she appeared to be in,
I thought must be vastly beneficial. I also ordered barley-water, and by turns
a few drops of acid of elixir in her bohea; yet, notwithstanding all these
prescriptions were conformed to with alertness and punctuality, she delayed: I
say she delayed; which occasioned another skillful physician to be sent for
from St. Farm; and after his arrival, I was notified to give my attendance,
which summons I immediately gave obedience to; and it being about three
quarters of a mile, I drove pretty brisk on foot, until I came to the house
where my bone fam, or good woman lay, and rapped at the door, and near as
possible to resemble a great man; and having a doctor's shaped hat, entered the
door, big with physic, and approached the doctor, who was seated in a chair: I
say I approached him, and that with the most profound respect. He arose to pay
me a compliment, on which I discovered he was a man of a good size, and by his
ruffles and dress, concluded he could speak French, and a noble aspect was in
his phiz. I read that two great doctors were saluting each other, by way of
bowing, nodding, and glancing at each other. Our present compliments ended by
my seating the doctor. I then asked my patient, with somewhat more emotion of
mind than was usual, how her health was. She answered deces maw, or slowly. I
made strict inquiry whether my orders had been attended to, and was fearful
some neglect had taken place; but was answered satisfactorily. I felt of her
pulse, examined her tongue and eyes, calling on my brother doctor to stand by
and hear the examination, showing my medicine, except my tea, which I told him
was an American herb, and pronounced her micure, or better: at which she said
she thought she was, although seeble. We agreed she was feeble, but was in
hopes of her recovery -- on which we feated ourselves, and I had another view
of my brother doctor. His eyes were of a lightish cast and bespoke malice,
although apparently full of submission, as I thought he seemed rather awed at
my presence, having the fame of a great surgeon. However, after a few surveys
on each other, and now and then a word, I arose with composure, and asked him a
civil question, which was no less than to take a small walk to consult about
the good fam. He obeyed my summons; and after we were from the itching eyes of
the whole world, I recapitulated the whole of my performances, and looked on
her to be so feeble that medicine was useless. He pronounced judgment in my
favor; for in his great opinion, he did not know, at so infeebled a situation,
of any medicine that would afford relief: still we unanimously agreed, nem.
con. to contemplate for a few minutes, if any medicine could be thought of for
the woman's relief. A silence enfued, and we walked pensive and slow, wheeled
with judgment and composure, casting up and down, forming angles and triangles
in our contemplations; and to be sure, to see my brother doctor (who I suppose
knew very little more of physic than myself) in so deep a study, was a trial
for me to endure; for I thought frequently, in spite of every effort, I should
have laughed aloud on the spot. At length I spoke to the doctor; on which he
accosted me in full politeness, when I demanded if he had thought of any thing
for the use of the patient? he shook his head. Again, he was asked if he
thought on any outward application, except what had already been tried? He
shook his head. Again, I asked what he thought of her? He shook his head, and
said mallard, which is bad. Can medicine do any good? He shook his head, and
said no again. Will not a little rosemary be of use? He said we, or yes. We
then judiciously agreed on diet, and a few rosemary drops to be given to assist
the stomach. A small quantity was given in a phial. I told my patient to keep
good courage, that we were in hopes of her life. My doctor confirmed the same.
After which I, being a man of business, was about leaving the house, and
offered my hand to the doctor, by way of farewell, and asked, while our hands
were shaking -- Doctor, will you visit the patient again? He shook his head. --
Will you visit me me? He shook his head -- Will you come if again called on by
me? He answered, yes. These questions being over, I then read that a
physician's hand had hold of a physician's hand, and great hands they were,
particularly as to physic. Our bodies were brought forward with regularity and
decorum, and* a due regard to our feet being properly placed, having my eye the
whole time upon my brother doctor, who appeared to be a Canadian and a man of
good parts; his hair white, red nose, short waisted coat, clumsy under clothes
and parts which they covered. I had the honor of his company to the door, and
he wished me good speed.

March 17. It being Sabbath day, on which I have more retirement than on other
days of the week, some occurrences are brought to my mind, which have happened
in life, particularly in the army. It was a custom to keep St. Patrick's day,
which I believe very few knew the meaning of, and I must confess to be ignorant
of the cause to this minute; yet it was a custom, like many other customs that
have a tendency to folly. How much more improving would it be, to endeavor to
season the mind with reason, and resolve to have the intellectual part
governing and directing me to love and even embrace all the dispensations of
Providence toward me; to preserve the dignity placed in the breast pure and
undisturbed, and amid a crowd of imaginations, still be calm, and follow with a
graceful reverence the dictates of sound reason; never speaking against truth,
or acting against justice; nor ever quit the road which leads to the true end
of life.

Thursday, 21. We have begun to prepare troughs for making sugar, which made my
hands sore enough.

Sunday, 24. My poor carcass is pretty much worn in the sugar preparation,
having cut wood, dug troughs, dug snow, and what not. I am racked in every
joint; my limbs are stiff, the nerves throb, and convulsed feelings pervade my
whole frame, and to add to my comfort, I am called on to go two miles to bleed
a poor man, and cannot of conscience ask any pay.

I have paid my patient his visit, and on my return, found a man who yesterday
left town, and he informs me, that the news of peace is vanished. What shall I
now say! However, in this journal a remark will not be amiss: for in spite of
my pretended efforts, I am sunk to the center; for so contrasted a message,
strikes the root of all my hopes. But surely the day is at hand: I will never
give it up. How am I tossed on this life's tempestuous sea. Yesterday the mind
(though the body was digging in snow) was like a vessel with her ^ails full
spread, in sight of the desired harbor, but lost on the rocks at her entrance:
-- So it is with poor man. Our imaginations spread far and wide; we sail on the
imaginary billows, but do not fathom the difficulties of the ocean on which we
are embarked; for life is often compared to the troubled sea, a warfare, etc.
therefore let this teach me, that all earthly disappointments should be my
schoolmaster, to aid me in ^^cking for a better, yea, a heavenly country.

Wedensday. 27. We have got our sugar-works in order, and cut seven cords of
wood, to pay the owner ^or permission to make sugar. The labor that I have gone
through for some days past, has a tendency to divert the mind, but there is
still a heavy impression, which is increased by some conversation Capt. Smith
and I have had on the immortality of the soul; as some pretend there is no
surviving after death; some will agree that the soul lies dormant, and will not
awake until the morning of the resurrection, when it will rise up and appear as
from an over night's slumber. These are weighty ideas; but I hold, with Cato,
that the soul is secured in its existence, and will flourish forever in
immortal youth; for it is ever on the wing, by day and by night, searching
after new hidden objects, building castles in the air, and, as Doctor Young
says, walking among the stars. The mind being never inactive, is a great proof
that the soul is too noble to cease; for in case of its being dormant after
death, that part of eternity which was begun in man when he became a living
soul, must be lost; therefore at the first embryo of man's creation, I am fully
of opinion, it is for nothing short of an endless duration. But such
meditations are too deep for me, who am of a weak understanding, and wanting in
education: but so far I will ^ay -- that these sentiments are my own, and not
borrowed, as Captain Smith differs with me in this part. He is a man of sense,
but in this I think he is erroneous.

Friday, 29. Yesterday and last night we had a remarkably severe snow storm.
The young women went last night to the house of worship, where a mass was held.
The women continued the whole night in the chapel, in order to keep watch, or
to commemorate the night in which our Savior was betrayed. Their forty days
lent finished yesterday, and this being the day on which they hold Christ was
crucified, they eat no breakfast, although they have not tasted of meat in
forty days, and the day is held very solemn, with a general mass. It must be
confessed by all who are spectators to all their different modes of worshipping,
that no people can take more pains to go to heaven than they do; and as to
their pinning their ceremonies on their sleeve, according to some observations,
what is that to me, or another, since they are up and doing? They certainly
show more rationality in this, than in making no pretense toward devotion; and
they will positively say, that it is their duty to worship, and by seriously
serving God, and commemorating our Savior's different passions whilst on
earth, they trust will finally be a means of making them happy.

For my part, it is not my intention to ever profess the Roman Catholic
religion, although I believe the first foundation of it to have been a good
institution^ for instance, their commemorating our Savior's different scenes
on earth, I think cannot be amiss; though I find no scripture to order it. But
there have several enormities crept into their church through the design of the
popes, bishops, priests, etc. that in fact the people are real vassals and
slaves to the priests, who ought to be their shepherds, instead of their
tyrants! therefore I think it a miraculous hand of providence that the eyes of
some were so awakened, and the firmness of others supported in attempting to
revolt from such errors; and this to me is a great evidence of the authenticity
of the b^ble, ^or nothing short of the aid of Omnipotence could have carried on
the Protestant religion at so dark a day, when the whole power of the Roman
government was in opposition, both the civil and ecclesiastical, which led to
martyrdoms and every kind of cruelty; and it is recorded in the history of
England, that in the reign of Queen Mary, so many were burnt by martyrdom, that
it made firewood scarce. These things must, according to my opinion, have been
done through an enthusiastic zeal. In my retired moments, my pen and thoughts
are my only comforts, and I am led to think that nothing can be more sweet than
those things which are agreeable to that nature which tends to wisdom,
simplicity of intentions, and a pure and God-like sincerity; these added to
outward acts of devotion; must secure the mind, and keep the thoughts from
soaring after objects which cannot be attainable.

Antoninus justly observes, that if God has ^o power at all to aid men, why do
they pray? But if they think he has power, why do they not choose to pray to
relieve themselves from difficulties. But some will say, "I have it in my power
to relieve myself," when he owes his existence to God, and notwithstanding he
does not deign to petition the Supreme Being, yet that very Maker and Preserver
relieves him in distress. Well might our Savior say, the sin of ingratitude is
worse than witchcraft.

Sabbath, 31st A pleasant day. My health is much recovered. What a variety of
disorders have run, and perhaps will still pursue through this constitution of
life; but e're long (at the most) like a taper, it will take its flight.

Monday, April 1, 1782. This morning having some business with Mr. Dunning, I
descended pretty early to his quarters, and was saluted by the family with a
bone jure, or good morning. They asked me if we were going to tap our trees to
day, in order to make sugar? I answered in the affirmative; they replied, that
this and tomorrow were holy days to them, and that if we commenced working on
either of these days, God would blast our undertakings. I expressed to them our
unwillingness to labor on their worshipping days, which I should deem as an
infringement, provided we trouble them; but as we were urged by motives of
necessity, occasioned by our being prisoners, and having no support except a
common soldier's ration, together with its being good weather, and the season
far advanced, induced us to undertake the disagreeable task: -- but all to no
purpose. They insisted that their prayers would gain us more sugar if we
delayed a few days. I answered, that I believed both their prayers and religion
to be good, but as to looking for miracles in our necessary callings, I could
not be full in the faith. They still persisted, and recapitulated the many
miracles God had wrought for them: -- I told them it was a great blessing if
Providence was so favorable in such extraordinary aids, and that neither the
Roman Catholics nor Protestants had a right to doubt of his goodness; but on
the religious part, I professed we did not look for miracles; and that if my
memory served, that they had met with instances of disappointments, for they
could not kill nor drive away the grasshoppers and other insects the two last
summers. The old lady was about leaving her bed when she sprang up in a great
rage, and we had the whole family to encounter, the wife, husband, daughters,
etc* but I like a great soldier, kept the field, and heard their harrangues,
which was a loud ^clat upon this and that miracle; and recapitulated more than
ever they or I shall know. The old woman appeared the most in earnest, and
after her whistling pipe was nearly expended, she ran to Dunning, and in a low
and faultering voice, said -- "Monsieur Dunning, if you will believe me, if our
old priest had not been so devilish lazy last summer in praying, he might have
destroyed all the insects, as the priest before him had done, for the Curate or
pries^ who lived here before, would kill so many that they could be scraped up
by hands-ful." We did not adhere to the people, and having a commander (a large
Dutchman whom Smith and I appointed, and an old experienced warrior in the
sugar boiling) the following orders appeared, and were strictly attended to.

GENERAL ORDERS, By H. Banter, commander in chief of the sugar works on the
Isle of Orleans, in the province of Canada.
HEADQUARTERS, April 1st, 1782.
WHEREAS, for the procurement of a well conducted plan to operate in the
important undertaking which is now in adjudication, and for the prevention of
many perturbations, erroneous and unph^^o^ophic plans and maneuvers which have
hitherto proved greatly prejudicial, to the common cause and our enterprising
pursuits. It is therefore ordered, that to obtain a well regulated plan for the
purpose above mentioned, that no person may presume to act, speak or think on
any other branch of this maneuvering, than what has heretofore been wisely
adopted and pursued with invariable success, at father's sap works. The
commander in chief has no doubt but his orders will be obeyed with explicity
and cheerfulness; and having a full reliance on the party that he has the honor
to command, in his opinion portends events not to be paralelled (...) history.
Two inducements appear ^lattering; first, the faithfulness of his subjects, and
secondly, the firmness with which he has ever conducted himself in such a
crisis, by which he never failed of obtaining a full source of sap; and he
declares upon the word of an old and experienced sap boiler, that he obtained a
penny halfpenny more in a pound for his sugar than any of his neighbors. He
now proceeds to point out the rules which has, and ever will conduct him with
stability and firmness, as long as his internal and external constitution will
ad^^t. The troughs being now finished, he orders that they be immediately
carried to the trees that are to be tapped, and placed at the bottom of said
trees; it will not do so well to lay them down, because, do you see, they ought
to be set up; the reason in this, for because, do you see, if they are set up
with one end against a tree, they will not lay down, do you see; and another
thing is this, why the reason is plain, because do you see, if they are set up,
the snow and ice will not get in; I say one end ought to be up against a tree,
for it may rain and then freeze, and ^^ll them chuck full of ice, and then it
would plague us (...): and let me see further -- Oh! why if the troughs are set
up with one end against the trees, they must be turned bottom upwards.
Secondly, a p^^ce should be dug in the snow; that is, I mean, do you see, that
a square hole should be made about as large -- let me think -- why, I suppose,
six feet square; and for that matter, it is no matter how large, if it was
twenty feet square; but do you see, eight feet will answer, for the snow is
nation deep -- I guess above four feet, and we want this place for a little
cabin, to put up some crotches, lay poles on them, and brush over and the
like, which will keep the rain out, but not much neither, do you see, but will
prevent the snow considerably, and will cover us some times, do you see, and we
do exactly so at father's works.



For my amusement, I will form a sham battle in tapping the maple trees (which
are in French called Rabs,) and I am of opinion there will be near as much
truth in my displayed battle among the trees, as in the accounts which have
frequently appeared in Hugh Gain's and James Rivington's Gazettes, of the royal
battles, carnage, and great victories, etc. that have been obtained by the
omnipotent British, over the poor rebels, when at some times not a man or beast
^^d been touched. Our commander in chief is styled Mentus Blodget; our waiter
is a Major General, and called Bajezet: Gigantic is the other young man, and he
is also a General.

HEADQUARTERS, April 2nd, 1782.
GENERAL ORDERS,
THAT the army be in readiness tomorrow morning, and to march at the first
beat. General Bajezet will command the right wing, and Gigantic the lef^;
Adjutant-General Columbus will take post in the center of the army.



April 3d. At seven in the morning, Mentus alone, with looks filled with
thoughts and deeds, and after a solemn pause, at length he speaks -- "This day
is big with the fate of Mentus and of sap. The sky is lowery, but now and then
serene. What a dreadful hour is now at hand! My mind would feign wander from
its woe; but a hardy soldier will never shrink, although the fate of kingdoms
were at one important stroke, at stake. My men are hardy, and Generals firm,
and have no doubt of their valor. I will rouse myself from this supiness, and
put on the veteran at once. Beat up to arms."

Eight o'clock. The drums do beat, a courier is dispatched to inform the
General that the army is ready to advance, and waiting now for orders.

Half after eight. The army marches regularly and slow. We approach our enemy
with the undauntedness that becomes men of firmness.

Half after nine. The columns are formed, an^ all in order for battle, on which
our chief does thus address:

My Worthy Army, It is to you I now address myself -- and what a happiness must
your General feel, when on a retrospective view, your courage, your valor,
appears undaunted; nay, from such hardy firmness as is now displayed in every
countenance, victory on our side assuredly bespeaks and forbodes events full of
triumphant praise, and will redound to your immortal honor. But why do I take
up your time; I see your anxiety for the onset. All is pensive; a courier is
coming. Mentus's orders! Give place! give place!


Columbus. What news my noble General?

Most worthy (...), the enemy have formed columns upon columns, and with a
haughtiness disdain your force.


Mentus. "Lead on my brave and noble Generals; your troops will meet them in
array; my presence shall be through (...) line of battle. Follow your leaders
with a becoming firmness, like Romans and not Britons. Let nothing daunt your
adamantine hearts. Their southern ambuscades shall first feel the resentment of
our revenge." Mentus is in the hottest part of the battle, besmearing his
hands, and wielding a falchion instrument of a ghastly size in one hand, and in
the other holding an olive leaf, in token of a noble expansion of heart. Their
columns are solid, and almo^^ irresistible; but Mentus expands his foot steps
from pole to pole, and Bajezet seems to scale (...) herial blue. The elements
resound and echo back the fame of the hardy veterans. Gigantic presses on with
a resolution not to be paralelled. Our general's spears are wielding with the
prospect of success. They seem to vie with each other in bravery; how does the
hills and dales redound to the conflict; but through much fatigue, an interval
appears at hand.

Mentus (by himself.) The day hangs heavy.

My Generals and men are brave; but the enemy are hardy. And what a sight is
this; on the capacious plains now ruddy to the sight, are many forever lost.
What a pity the ambition of potentates should so deface the greatest work of
nature! The day is doubtful; what a dread event! An awful interval seems at
hand between the birth of plots, and the lives of thousands, and may finally
overthrow and be the dissolution of kingdoms, to satisfy ambition. Our generals
take some respite, to redouble the onset. We again view Bajezet and Gigantic,
collecting all their force. Their brows are knit; they rally again and advance
with horror in every wrinkle of their visage. They will accumulate revenge, and
meet their enemy with terror thick as hapless Egypt ever felt. Bajezet and
Gigantic gains the ground, inch by inch, purchased dear. Smoke issues as from
mount Etna, thick as sabled midnight darkness. All is clangor and devastation.
The carnage is invincible. But methinks I hear another sound. Our chief resumes
his former shrine; the enemies give way; their columns are broken; victory is
proclaimed. Bajezet and Gigantic has made the conquest complete. Their colors
are flying, red with success. The enemies are scattered into worlds unknown,
and they like hardy avengers, overtake and captivate the rear. Sol with his
beams will arise from the eastern horizon, and with his radient glory salute
their arrival.


Captain Smith and myself, by many hard struggles in the cogitation of our
brains, have descended with our mathematical heads, and pursued almost all the
branches of theory, by contemplating late and early, in forming angles and
triangles, and passing on with resolution into every rule of arithmetic, in
adding and diminishing, casting in full speed up and down, turning and winding,
crossing and meeting, joining and separating, dividing and subtracting, and
observing every corner and crevice, looking and searching, measuring and
g^aging, to find the strenth and quantity of sap, to make a certain bulk of
sugar, and find to a demonstration, that a bushel of sap will make one pound,
one quarter, 2 ounces and 13 grains.

Saturday, 20th. We have given up our sugar works; and, for my part, I have
obtained twenty-two pounds, which makes me rich; and, what is not common for
people in riches and splendour, I am contented with my lot; and sure I am, it
has been dirty, hard, ragged business, and by turns occasioned my carcass to
briskly jump by day, and at night ^oll fast on my couch; my nice paws resemble
a Canadian's, and dull sprightly limbs, have often throbbed, the nerves beat
like a drummer to arms, my slender corpulent body more than common emaciated,
and the senses, if I mistake not, more obscure; but I am again at leisure to
speak, act or think, therefore adieu to r^b and noble Mentus! But I must
confess that so long a state of inactivity as I have had since being a
prisoner, produces a sensible feeling, that should I be so fortunate as again
to return to my native coutry, it may be a means of deranging my constitution
so much, as will render it hard for me to follow business that requires
activity, for the support of myself and family ^he few remaining days or years
that may be allowed me: -- But, as Antonin^s says, why should I be disturbed at
any thing which happens in life, or be over anxious for the things which are to
come, since all circumstances whether prosperous or adverse, are known by him
who gives or withholds the donation. Pope, in his universal prayer, says,

" This day be bread and peace my lot,
All else beneath the sun,
Thou know if best bestowed or not,
And let thy will be done."
Sabbath, April 21. The face of nature once more begins to resume an agreeable
aspect. The earth, our ancient and first mother, again makes her appearance,
after having been smothered for nearly seven months in snow. I cannot but
observe how rejoiced every thing in this country appear at the departure of so
large a bulk of snow. The lowing of cattle, return of birds, etc. all seem to
join in one universal choir, to welcome the beauties of the earth, which I was
never so sensible of as since living in this country. This globe, interwoven as
it is with hills, dales, rivulets, and the interspersion of landscapes, with
the variety of colors, all presenting to view, is something grand and
pleasing, and bespeaks a great forming hand. The old philosophers seemed to vie
with each other who should most extal the grandeur and pleasantness of this
immense globe, and were willing to return to her again. Xenophon, in describing
the life of his prince as a pattern of good nature and charity in all his
different scenes of life, describes him, even on his death bed, as being
pleased with the reflection, that while the soul returned to him who made it,
his body would incorporate with the great mother of all things, and by that
means become beneficial to mankind, for which reasons he gave his sons positive
orders not to enshrine his body in gold or silver, but to lay it in the earth
as soon as the life was gone out of it. What a noble instance of humility, and
sentiment of philanthropy, was here! How different from the description of
Harvey, where he speaks of the timorously nice ^reature who dared hardly to
venture her foot upon the gravel, but now a naked, ghastly skull. And I am of
opinion that every real christian who expects e're long to be completely happy
in the celestial realms of everlasting bliss, free from troubled seasons and
angry skies, feels as little concern on reflecting that their mortal part must
mingle with the dust, as Xenophon's prince did.

April 24. The inhabitants begin to sow their wheat, although large snow banks
are on the sides of the fields, by the senses.

25th. Sowed some garden seeds. The wind has blown hard at the northeast for
ten days.

28th. A brig passed down the river, supposed with prisoners on board for St.
Pa^^'s Bay. On the 25th, I lost a venerable old patient, of seventy six years
of age; he had been a long time unwel, and in spite of medicine, he is dead.
My doctoring still is dull, but I have courage that my skill will lift me up
yet.

May 1. The snow is chiefly gone, except in banks; but nature looks as dead,
with respect to vegetation, as in January.

Tuesday, 14. This day I visited the old priest, which is the first time since
last fall: yet I have been often invited* but his having a great deal of
company, and sometimes business myself, prevented; however, at this time we had
a long chat. He is a droll man, is from Old France, and warmly attached to the
British crown; and his reasons for the favorable wishes he appears to have for
that empire, seems grounded on a desire, that a balance of power may ever be
kept up; and says he would be sorry to see one nation rise superior to another:
but as all at present are balanced, he wishes that concordance may continue,
and seems apprehensive that if America should be independent, the crown will
lose that weight of balance which it ought to have; although he appears to have
a desire that the Americans may not be enslaved, but may be set on the same
footing as before the war, which sentiment agrees with abstracts from two
letters intercepted, and which appeared in the Quebec Gazette, said to be
written by Mr. Deane, in France; one was directed to his brother in Virginia,
and the other to Major Tall-man, at General Washington's head quarters, setting
forth himself to be much dejected on account of the contest with Great Britain,
pointing out so many difficulties, and the vast expense it will occasion should
we become free and independent states. He urges that, in his opinion, we could
make a peace with that crown honorable to ourselves, and advantageous to both
England and America, and a firm establishment to the protestant faith; but if
England should be too far reduced, it would be dangerous not only to the
liberties of America, but to her religion also. The date of these letters is
"Paris, May 20, 1781." I do not believe the copy is genuine; but I fear some
remarks relative to the protestant religion may, in case England should be
reduced, prove too true; as the Canadians make no scruple of telling us, that
if France reduces England, they will make them and the Americans become Roman
Catholics. Mr. Duran says, that he does not think it right to persecute people
for their religious sentiments, and he thinks the Protestants can go to heaven
as well as the Catholics; but says the Protestant clergy have a much easier
way: they marry and have families, and pray now and then: -- but the Roman
Catholic priests cannot marry; they must rise every morning and attend to
prayers until nine o'clock, and then confess the people till twelve, and from
two until five; and then to mass at seven constantly. Indeed I must say, that I
never saw any man so faithful in prayer as the one I am now writing of. He
rises exactly at six in the morning, in winter and summer (as I have often
passed by the church in the summer, and always heard the bell ring at six, and
never failed of finding him at prayer.) Sometimes he walks back and forth bye
the meeting house, when there are not people to attend prayers; and I fully
believe, if the king of France was to pass him in his devotion, he would not
appear to take any notice of him. Indeed he says, that if the king goes bye
when they are at prayer, he takes his hat off, or if he even passes a church,
small chapel, or cross; and I never saw any, from the gray head to the youth,
pass a meeting house, cross, or the like, but they walk with their hats off,
and put up a short prayer. I was once in a boat in the river St. Lawrence, with
several Canadians, who, on passing a church, all went to prayer. How far this
is right let every one judge.

How natural it is for the mind to be anxious about the cares of this world!
And indeed we are sent into it to act our part upon the great theatrical stage,
and if we do not perform our temporary, as well as spiritual, warfare aright,
we fall short of acting with propriety that part for which we were designed. I
have often reflections about my two poor little children whom I left in
infancy: but they are under the guidance of a guardian God. Still it is
necessary and right that they should be educated, which I trust they will; but
if it should please the Great Parent of the dear pledges to arrange them among
those who cease to be, let me learn contentment; always remembering how
uncertain are all sublunary objects. Some are hastening into being, and some
are hastening to be no more, on earth. These changes renew the world, and ever
present new parts of the infinite eternity that lies before us; therefore, what
is there in this rolling tide, which is constantly flowing and ebbing, worthy
of our attachment, any more than if we should grow fond of a sparrow flying? We
should consider life as now finished, and what little surplus remains, should
he spent agreeable to God.

May 15. I read the king's speech of the 27th of November last, in which he
gives information to his parliament of the loss of his army in Virginia, which
he says calls loudly for a more spirited exertion in order to restore peace to
his deluded subjects. Poor man! he has not been the instrument of causing blood
enough to be shed as yet, particularly on our frontiers; and yet is very
unwilling to burden his subjects with new taxes. I cannot believe the British
empire will ever prosper for their cruel and savage treatment to the Americans;
and I should not wonder if, at some future day, the judgments we now undergo
from their oppression should fall on their own heads; and whatsoever measures
they meet, should be measured to them again, although they may have no Indians
to fear: but I pray that something resembling them may scourge those who have
been the instruments of scourging us. I view the United States as a free and
independent empire, although further pretended British exertions are
threatened, in order to reduce us to obedience; and the language of the hardy
Britons, cry aloud that it must be so. I can hear nothing but that the
obedience of the Americans will be the only means of restoring peace: but the
story is so old, that it appears ^uite threadbare to me, and I guess pretty
much (...) to them. This, however, is my own opinion, for I am cooped up in
this corner of the globe, like a moving statue, deprived of every kind of use
to my country and fellow creatures: for as to my doctoring, had I ever so much
custom, it would be as useless as Davis's ballad, the title of which was "a
^out about nothing." General Haldimand, the commander is not omnipotent, but no
being in a civilized power is more arbitrary -- for all kinds of loud news that
has the least favor toward the Americans, is kept out of the province; even
the king's speech did not appear in the newspapers here: I read it in an
English paper sent me by a friend. Ask a man for news, and he will whisper that
(...) has heard so and so -- "but keep it to yourself, and for God's sake don't
spread it as from me, that it may come to the ears of the General." However,
they cannot deprive me of thinking, and I will think that there is a war
between Great Britain on one part, and America, France, and the Netherlands on
the other part; that for and in consideration of the sum of fifty millions
sterling, on the part of Britannia, to be paid by the oppression of her
subjects, at five percent, annually, until the principal and interest shall be
paid, and the loss of about thirty thousand troops by sword, death and
desertion; and finally, poor Britain! poor Britain! I would have you remember,
although you have fought, you will be obliged to submit: for it will never do
for the Americans to be bound to help pay off the lease.

16th. A man came from Quebec this morning for Newcomb Blodget, our waiter, who
is exchanged, and we received letters from Mr. Murray informing us that we
might write to our friends; but the captain hurried off so fast, that we had no
opportunity. It bespeaks a great man, and a great man he is, having at this
very time, six men under his immediate command. However, he is bound for Quebec
with a fair wind, and appears a man of business. The French for this week past
have fasted, having eat no meat, except on Thursday, which was kept as holy
time; but the women have every day attended on mass and the men as often as
they could, to pray for a blessing on the ensuing crops. It is a custom,
whenever a man begins to plow, or at the time he goes into the field to make a
beginning, to take his family with him, and they all ask a blessing on their
labor, etc. by kneeling down to prayer.

21st. We wrote a petition to Congress, informing them of our distress, and
setting forth that officers from the continental army, being captive in a
strange land, were not a little chagrined to find themselves so reduced and
neglected by their country, as to be obliged to cut wood for the Canadians at
twenty-four coppers a cord (which is one shilling Halifax) and exposed to
insult from every British upstart, and asked if we are not ashamed to serve
such a body of men. However, we despise such questions and the authors of them,
more than we do cutting wood; but we are in a hobble. Were we servants or
hirelings, we would try and make the best of it; but here we are, and here we
may be found, gentlemen beggars, outcasts, and in one sense anathematised. What
a beautiful figure we cut in this place! We strut about with an empty purse and
a ragged coat. And what makes the business more intolerable, is, that we are
sensible it is not for want of abilities in Congress, but a defect, in being
thus neglected; and I will not curse them, but I pray (...) as individual
persons, have a (...) of (...) to teach them how to pity others. I do not want
them made prisoners, but I want satisfaction. Poor Smith hangs his under lip,
and seems more in the dumps than any of us; still it would be a reviving
thought to have the message arrive for our departure once more to our native
country; and no wonder, since we have been almost three years prisoners, add to
which a strong anxiety to know how our country fares, relative to the war, and
the finances for the support of the army, and with me, my dear children. How is
my heart clung to their infancy, and concerned for their education; but I
trust, that he who formed them will be a guardian parent to the now fatherless
babes.

Sunday. We all went to mass except Smith, who appears sullen. It is one of
their grand faits, or holy days, and is to continue three days, wherein no
labor is to be done. There was a full, and what the French call Belle Assembly.
The preacher is enough to make any person by turns laugh, and his actions
before the altar is very odd; his underclothes are made of brown linen, near as
course as top-sail duck, and his shirt nearly related to its neighbor breeches,
but he has a great deal of money, as is said, and is very miserly, which the
people say is his failing. He has a large red nose which bespeaks wine.

Saturday, 25th. This day my land-lady's mother died, after a strange and
lingering disorder, which very much prevails in this country, and generally
proves fatal, particularly to the aged. They are taken with a puking up every
thing which the stomach receives, with an excessive heat and boiling in the
bowels, and are so costive that medicine or clysters are of no use; neither the
English or their own doctors can remove the cause, as every application of
medicine is useless. She died in the parish of St. John's. I frequently, from
the friendship I had for Mrs. Jaunseling, went to see the old lady, and on one
of my visits, the minister from St. John's was there; he appeared a genteel,
well bred gentleman, and as far as I could understand the language, spoke to
her with great solemnity and sense on her last end; and told her to continue
steadfast in prayer to God, and that through the merits of Christ and the
intercession of the blessed Apostles and the Virgin Mary, he was in hopes she
would meet with a free pardon of all her sins; she received the sacrament with
devoutness of heart, to appearance, and when she died, appeared sensible and
composed. There was about twenty people in the room, who continued on their
knees in prayer I believe better than an hour, and as her last breath went out
of her they arose and sprinkled holy water on the corpse, which was immediately
sewed up in a sheet, and the face never more seen. Whatever has been said of
the Roman Catholic's, I cannot condemn them for one thing, as they always
appear joyful if any of us protestants attended mass or their funerals, and
have never asked us to become Roman Catholic's.

May 26. A man arrived this morning from Quebec with a letter from Mr. Murray,
to inform Mr. Dunning that he is exchanged -- And about 12 o'clock he set out.
By him I wrote letters to my brother John Scudder, Jeremiah Van Renssalaer, and
Doctor Woodruff, at Albany. An instance of this kind flags my drooping spirits
more than any thing I have ever experienced since being a prisoner. His being
the whole time in captivity with me, and having lived together for some time in
one house in friendship, together with his good character, (for he is a worthy
deserving young gentleman) makes the the trial more severe: -- still, I am
happy in his release which has been obtained by friends; but I must view myself
as set apart in the world, without a friend to apply for my liberation, and as
a forsaken forlorn outcast in creation, poor in health, poor for the want of
the necessary comforts of life, and poor in devotion toward my God --

My spirits flag like withering grass,
Burnt with excessive heat;
In secret groans my minutes pass,
And I forget to eat.
As on some lonely building's top,
The sparrow tells her moan;
Far from the tents of joy and hope
I sit and grieve alone.
Dark, disinal thoughts, and boding fears,
Dwell in my troubled breast,
While sharp reproaches wound mine ears,
Nor give my spirit rest.
( From the sublime Dr. WATTS.) What a blessed situation a real Christian must
be in! -- and how happy should I be amid those surrounding difficulties which
appear to be continually presenting themselves anew, could I feel a proper
submission to the dispensations of my righteous God, with a full belief that
all these things come form his sovereign disposal, and, like the prodigal son,
return to my father and find mercy! Oh! for a heavenly aid to bow this
faithless, unbelieving heart.

Wednesday, 29th, I am unwel with a slow sever, and have ^^gered so for several
days. I grow feeble, which I attribute partly to my ^ore afflictions which very
sensibly assect me.

Thursday, 30th. This day is a grand fait (...) holy day, and a great
procession would have taken place, but the rain with a hard northeast wind
which is common in this country, prevented.

I have for the winter past, and this summer, put down in this journal whatever
occurrences took the most upon my mind; sometimes on serious subjects, and,
when I felt more cheerful, wrote at random; always considering that it was a
journal: and believe if I had plenty of paper, I should be much more lengthy on
many points, for my pen is my greatest delight -- and this puts me in mind of a
passage in the Spectator, of his friend Sir Roger, who was deeply in love; and
being a great sportsman, whenever his mistress was cruel, the foxes were sure
to pay for it: and when my country appears most cruel, my pen is sure of
employment, which has a tendency to soften cares, and make the time pass more
easily away. But, what do I say, -- that it makes time pass more easily away,
when I have so short a space allowed me, at the longest, to prepare for a dread
eternity, which surely belongs to me.

June 1. This spring is allowed to be fruitful, or to have a forward
appearance, from the information of the inhabitants; yet I have not seen a
flower on an apple tree before this morning. Bought shad at four coppers each;
they are larger than those which are catched in the North or Hudson's river.

Sabbath, 2d. My health is much impaired with a slow, lingering fever, and of
consequence my strength fails, and I have nothing to nourish nature but hard,
salt provisions and cold water, with a mind that is tossed too and fro in
melancholy glooms. -- The cloud appears to be gathering thicker and darker, and
no glimmering rays of comfort; being burdened with oppressions from a feeble
constitution, that appears s^oping to its last exit, and a wounded conscience,
on the great event of a final retribution. The gale that blows from God, we
must endure: toiling, but not repining.

" The soul is forced while pent in darksome clay,
" To grope in s^ades, and guess the doubtful way:
" Great is the toil, but glorious is the prize --
" Who would not always labor to be wife?
" Thus heaven desires, and we must search to find,
" Or wink forever -- be forever blind."
June 3d. Captain Smith and myself have this day had some conversation on the
frailties of man toward his maker, and how feeble his efforts in devotion; and
notwithstanding the Great Author of our existence, is beyond all comprehension;
he who fills eternity, and at one glance surveys millions of the planetary
worlds, and the most minute things through these vast and expansive systems, so
that not a hair of the head is passed unnoticed; yet in our addresses to such a
being the mind wanders and loses its true end, and roves after the fleeting
colors of unsubstantial air. We also made some remarks on the awful day of
days, when a final retribution will take place; and, as Harvey describes, we
must be attendants on the dissolution of nature! Then what manner of persons
ought we to be, in order to fulfill the important design for which we were sent
into this world? Surely the Almighty never planted these heavens, and fixed
this extensive globe, floated with huge mountains, and the great deep, with
cities and empires, for man, whom he placed as Lord over all, without a great
and important end, and to fulfill his Maker's command. But these reflections are
too deep for me, a feeble particle of dust, to in the highest!" There is
something so beautiful in the whole travels of our Savior, that it is
astonishing to me that any person will dispute the authenticity of the
evangelical displays of our Lord's passions on earth, confirmed by such
remarkable instances, and the proof of the apostles.

Capt. Smith and the Messrs. Banters, are cutting wood; and being low in
health, I am still lonesome; though I begin to recover my strength, but
sensibly feel the loss of those blessings I used to enjoy -- such as liberty,
religion, company (...) support nature (...) the value of (...) that (...)
health and comfort, let us endeavor at such a ter^per as may be our best
support in the decay of it. Uranius has arrived at that composure of soul, and
is so thoroughly persuaded another life, and endeavors so sincerely to secure
an interest in it, that he looks upon pain as quickening his pace to an home
where he shall be better provided for than in his present apartment; and
instead of the melancholy views which others are apt to give themselves, he
will tell you he has almost forgot he is a mortal; nor will he think of himself
as such: for he thinks that at the (...) of his birth he entered into an
eternal being, (...) of death he will not allow an (...) moment is not of (...)
wards, has escaped my lancet, and many in St. John's have met with the same
fate. My Bohea for the stomach has been given profusely, with glaube^ salts;
the cortex peruvianus, rhubarb. jalap for cathartix, ^^neti^s spirits of
hartsh^^^ ^or the toothache some drops for the headache, good advice for the
back-ache, and this and that hodge podge, with my French jargon, and the
complaints which appear before me, make a scurum blarcum singularam, which I
believe was of little use on their part; but I was employed: nay, they
sometimes almost surrounded my castle, and sometimes I visited, etc. But
notwithstanding all this bustle has been made, I get but little lushong, as
they are poor (or a great many of them) and have no cash.

June 14. Col. James Gordon of Ballstown, and Lieut. Epenetus White, arrived
here today from Quebec, on parole, to live in this parish. The Colonel informs
us there is a good prospect of peace. Such news and new company raises the
spirits, and s^ems to indicate that at some short period we shall once again
visit our native place.

Wednesday, 19. The grasshoppers and worms appear as if their intention was to
devour the crops, which has so alarmed the inhabitants, that a number of them
have set out for Quebec to try to obtain liberty of the bishop to conjure them
to depart, which they say, if so obtained, they can by ceremonies prevail with
God to send them into the river, or any way they have a mind, to kill them.
Smith and myself seem anxious about the event of the grasshoppers, as the
inhabitants threaten them very hard, and are determined to take revenge on them
for their insults, in offering to touch their tooth agriculture.

21st. My landlord who went to Quebec to commence hostilities against the
in^^^s, has returne^, and the whole parish almost are assembled to know the
news, which from appearance does not wear a pleasing aspect, as from what I can
gather, it seems the bishop is too cunning to per^uit them to conjure the
grasshoppers; for he knows it would be such an open deception; and as our old
priest is acquainted with the same, together with all the rest of the curates
or priests, they excuse the affair, and say they are not ready, and the like,
in order to keep the people in ignorance; but exhort them to be steadfast in
prayer and in penitence, and have ordered some processions, etc. Malice is knit
in every Canadian's brow. For my part I am at a loss how they would proceed by
the term they give, of conjuring them; but they hold very strenuously, that if
the Bishop (which often had been the case) gave permission to conjure them
away, they never failed; and will tell of great victories obtained over their
enemies, or the insects, which, from what I can learn, have often frequented
this country; but all allow they never saw so many: yet they hold they have
driven them by shoals into the river, and sometimes they have killed them dead
on the spot, so that handsful^, could be taken up, etc. etc. etc.

Wednesday, 26. A brig came to anchor opposite where we live, and the Captain
of her and two young ladies, came on shore; Col. Gordon, Mr. White, and myself,
waited on them and invited them to my lodgings. The Captain whose name is
Cornwell, failed from Portsmouth, in England, on the second day of May, and
says the universal talk in England, was peace with America. They continued
about two hours, and invited Colonel Gordon on board to receive a present,
which the Colonel complied with, and returned with half a dozen bottles of gin.
The Captain of the brig was born on Long Island, at a place called Cow Bay, and
has brothers and sisters there.

July 4th. This being the sixth year of our Independence, we were invited to
take an Anniversary dinner with Colonel Gordon. We passed the day agreeably;
and from the flattering prospect of affairs, I trust before another fourth of
July shall return, peace with America may be made on lasting and honorable
terms.

Sabbath 7th. All of us who are prisoners went this day to mass, where the
young women as well as the old, were dressed in striped homespun^ petticoats
and mockasins, in token of humility, by order of the priest, that the
grasshoppers may depart; but it seems to enrage them; they have eat all my
young onions off; -- they will toward evening gather so thick in the fields of
wheat, that the stalks look fairly black; and they begin to eat the ears that
are just putting out. It is really a melancholy sight.

Tuesday 9th. All are gone to mass to make a procession, old and young. The
women go without stockings and mockasins, in token of mourning for the
calamities in their land.

Monday 15th. This morning I had a patient to visit at* St. John's, and on my
way met about fifty English sailors who were going to unload a large ship that
is cast away oppos^^^ where I live; her cargo is provisions for government^.
There has come in this summer, two fleets; one from England, and the other from
Ireland, both laden with provisions for government, so that at present I
understand General Hald^mand boasts of having three years provision for a
garrison of ten thousand men, and a sort impregnable* I fully believe the fort
is strong, but no one is so strong but it may be overpowered^.

Thursday 10th. I wont to a vendue this day where the owner of the goods bought
almost the whole, or bid for them in public, which was the man of the house;
and however droll it may appear, it is the fashion of this country, if a man
loses his wife and has children, he is obliged to sell his movables, and give
one half to the children, which ^s the case at the present vendue. The wind has
blown from the south-west for near two weeks constantly, during which time we
have had no rain, and it being a considerable drought, the grasshoppers take
the advantage, and eat the wheat; in some fields the ears appear to be half
destroyed. What is voided from the insects, is as large as chess, and as thick
on the ground as wheat when first sown; but no people appear more in earnest in
devotion that God would impede this judgment, than these people. A fifty gun
ship and a frigate passed down the river to day ^or sea; I am informed there
are three thirty-six gun frigates still at Quebec.

Tuesday, July 23. This day is three years since being taken a prisoner; and
how far it may prove of present or future advantage, is hard for me to form the
least idea of; but from what former reflections I have had and am still
impressed with, I trust that these things will not be entirely lost. The fire
may in some measure be extinguished, but surely it will not be wholly
forgotten, as I view prosperity and adversity as proceeding from the bountiful
giver or withholder, at his all Sovereign pleasure, and we are entirely at his
disposal, respecting crosses and disappointments, or rather adverse and
prosperous prospects.

July 25. Again I have lived to see another birthday, which makes me
thirty-five years of age; and I cannot omit reflecting on the vain use that is
generally made of the arrival of a birthday, in particular by Kings, Queens,
and renowned men; but certainly common sense must teach us that one year is
elapsed and a dread eternity is that much nearer opening ^^us the boundless
prospect of happiness or misery without end; therefore, such rejoicings as are
generally attended with luxury, etc. are broken ^eed (...) best, but often a
spear. For my part I do not justify myself; for when I was in the army, and
since I have been a prisoner in Quebec Jail, although neither great nor
renowned, I rejoiced in feasting and drinking at my own birth, which certainly
was hypocrisy; for I never saw so much comfort in the world yet, as to make
(...) rejoice that I was brought and continued in it: but so it was. However,
it is not good to be over-wise nor b^^go^ed: yet it is certain that death hangs
around us, and may seize this clay before another birthday comes: Therefore,
instead of decorating the body with clothes may I view myself as shortly to
moulder into dust, and instead of feasting and drinking, may I humble myself
under the reflection that I know not how long or how short the soul will use
this surrounding body, ^re it will take its ^^ight into the worlds unknown --
and then, helpless being, where will it go without a heavenly aid? Why down,
down into sorrows inconceivable, and pains without end.

August 1st. Pleasant agreeable weather. We catch plenty of pigeons, which are
young and very fine, and have a tendency to assist us along the journey of
life, and may be numbered with thousands of blessings which we receive and pass
by without scarcely taking notice of.

August 4th. Captain Smith received thirty dollars from his wife, which is the
first relief that has ever been sent to the prisoners from our country; and
poor Scudder is yet poor Scudder! Left in poverty, and no friend to apply to,
except my doctoring, which is some assistance; but I am too poor a doctor to
deceive the people, and they are too poor to pay if they were deceived. The
news about peace and my country is favorable -- and shall I despair? If I
should never return, I should be very little missed; some might say they were
sorry; but it would be like all other things of the kind. But I scrawl at
random, and think; because Smith has got a little money, and my doctoring of no
use, that I am not going to return again. This is an uncommon digression, and I
am at a loss what it is penned for; -- however it is down, and I cannot take it
up It may remain along with many other remarks in the journal that is like
chips in porridge.

August 17th. Received a letter from Mr. Murray, containing an answer to a
letter I wrote to Genesis Clark, on account of the stoppage of the advancement of
money to the prisoners, in which I begged him to intercede for us; but all to
no purpose. He informed Mr. Murray, that he would not interfere with the
General in our behalf, as he supposes the Commander in Chief had sufficient
reasons for his conduct. It possitively appears, that all the boasted British
humanity is fled; nor do I believe they ever were possessed of that greatness
of soul that has been represented, though we were taught so to believe -- but
surely we have learned another lesson: for instance, the treatment to the
prisoners taken at Fort Washington, who were frozen and starved to death in
Sugar Houses, cold Jails, and thousands died on board of prison ships: -- but
let them go on; I am proof against any further attack, as I have lain in jail
until my constitution is ruined, and they may now tyrannize, for I scorn them
from my inmost soul, and hope that not a tory devil will be allowed to exist in
the United States after peace.

Tuesday, 20th. From the small stock of money I have been able to collect, I
have purchased a gallon of red wine to make a trial for relief from the
disorder I have so long been afflicted with in my bowels. I almost despair of
ever recovering; but if I had ever so good a state of health, at last I must
die. Therefore, sickness, pains and imprisonments, ought to make me familiar
with so great a change. Death is like our birth, a mystery of nature.

Saturday, August 24, 1782. My being particular to the day, month and year, is,
that last evening Col. James Gordon, Lieutenant White, Lieutenant Banter, and
Ensign Banter, made their escape, or deserted. We suppose it was a matter which
had for some time been under consideration. At any rate they are gone, and we
suppose have broke their paroles, and embarked down the river.

Tuesday, 27th. Last night a man came from Quebec, with a letter to inform
Captain Smith he is exchanged, and this morning he sat off for home. In him I
have lost, I believe, a sincere friend, a good companion, and a man of sense.
His company was agreeable, of a merry turn, but very striking on serious
subjects; his reasonings are improving and agreeable. Farewell my good friend,
may you live comfortably the remaining days you may have left, die in peace,
and leave a blessing behind you, whilst my little barque glides slowly after;
and may we both enter into rest (which is a thought too great for frail mortals
to dwell on) but such we are told will happen to those who earnestly seek
aright, and the prize is so great, who would not hasten to be an adventurer? It
is a fair and noble chance, and there is nothing in this life worthy of our
anxiety or cares. It is a troubled ocean at best, and those who have landed
safe upon the frontiers of our Great Emanuel, are blessed unspeakably indeed. I
am left alone, not a person who can speak English, but all are Canadians, and I
speak such poor French, that it is hard to talk with them, but I will wait with
calmness, not forgetting that he who relieveth captive prisoners, will also
deliver me from this confined state, at his gracious will. The time is fast
approaching, when all these different changing scenes in life will lie down and
be forgotten; although I hold that the soul does not lose the thought of the
tribulated stage it has passed through, as it is reasonable that no part of
annihilation can take place after the soul leaves the body. For instance, when
the soul is lost and forever miserable, that which creates and makes the
misery, is the reflection of having misspent the opportunities which were
offered whilst here on earth and a guilty conscience makes a hell, miserable
far beyond human conception; therefore, should any part of annihilation take
place, or the soul forget its being on earth and misusing these opportunities,
it would be ignorant of what it was punished for. It is just the same with
those who die happy; for the scripture says, that those who through many
tribulations are clothed in white, so the thought of passing through a
tempestuous life, in pains, sicknesses, trials and temptations, all add to fill
the mind with expansive views, beyond the ^each of a finite mortal to form an
idea of. The joys and boundless prospects of a celestial a vast infinity of
eternity, opening more capacious than imagination can conceive; the string can
hardly be touched upon, when hallelujahs will reign, forever and forever.

Thursday, 29th. Received a letter from Mr. Murray, advising me to make myself
contented for a little time longer, for he expects I will in a short time be
exchanged. But if not, the General will permit me to return to the states of
America, on parole. Such news revives my mind, to think I shall once more see
my native country, which I sincerely desire, and that before cold weather, as
it very much affects my health, the climate being too frigid. What a noble
temper and disposition a man must be possessed of who, under all difficulties
and trials, never suffers the mind to be ^^^^led or discomposed; but puts on
the capacities of a man of fortitude, and spurns at trifles that are incident
to human nature; sincerely ^oaring higher and having loftier views than what
tends to frail dust, remembering that he is an adventurer for another world,
and that if the road is filled with thorns, let them appear like flowers,
considering our crown is at stake, and if we receive mercy, no thought can
reach the smallest chord of the bliss which will complete our happiness to all
eternity. Therefore what is there in this life that we would not cheerfully
submit to, that comes from so righteous a providence, who spared not his only
son, but suffered him to wear a crown of thorns and die an ignominious death
for man who is filled with ingratitude.

August 3d. This day we had a violent storm from the northeast, or up the
river. The wind blew a hurricane, attended with thunder. The people of the
house were fearful it would blow down. The woman brought out her hemlock boughs
which had been consecrated at church, and threw them into the fire; some holy
water was also brought, to sprinkle with, and they then all fell on their knees
to prayer, and appeared very fervent; but the storm seemed to increase. I
expected the roof of the house at least would have gone, and felt under great
apprehensions that all of us would lose our lives. In the midst of the storm,
the young woman who was the only child, about eighteen years of age, jumped
from her prayers and flew to my arms for protection, crying aloud, Oh! Monsieur
Scudder, guard me and pray for me; on which I answered that God was her guard,
and it was, according to their belief, of no use for Protestants to pray. The
old man and woman sprang up and said they did not doubt but God would hear a
Protestant as soon as a Catholic. I told them that I made no doubt but he heard
all nations or people that prayed sincerely, and I desired to join with them
for his assistance, at the same time encouraging them not to be afraid, for
that we were in his hands, and made no doubt but the wind would soon abate;
still I had, for near an hour, a hard struggle to keep the young woman from
going into fits. Happily at last the storm a^ated, and the father and mother
seemed to regard me for my encouragement to them and their daughter, andnow
suppose the Protestants may go to heaven. I have often mentioned the Roman
Catholics in this journal, and really to see them in any difficulty fly to the
Supreme Being for assistance, is a circumstance worthy of attention, as there
is so reasonable a demand from the Creator to the creature, that not to return
our Parent and Maker a thankful heart, is placing us below the common brutes.

Thursday, 15th. I have for sometime neglected putting any of my physical
proceedings down in this journal, in particular relating to the woman who lives
near Montreal, on account of my mind being taken up with more serious matters;
but man is of a changeable disposition, so now proceed to put down some
sketches of my practice, least it may be lost. In the first place, as is my
usual practice in almost every disorder, I hold her, and then prepared a bottle
of good madeira, with the filings of steel put therein, out of which two large
phials were filled and the remainder left in the quart bottle; this is to
assist the blood, and indeed all nature. The decoction of cortex was put in two
p^ials more, as a bracer; the acid of elixir to assist the appetite, and a
phial of camphor to keep off the fever, with two phials of strong bohea. Thus
were almost all my phials filled, and my patient's room looked like a small
apothecary's shop. The reason of this was, I expected she was rich, and there
was cash to be had. An issue was also ordered, and the whole conducted with
judgment: and I find my patient is no worse, nor indeed much better; however,
she is not very sick. Her father generally takes me out in a horse cart, and
when I get on my three square hat, (for modesty's sake I must not say a cocked
hat) I say when this hat is put on my head, the brim of it being large, (which
was allowed through the clemency of Britannia's generallissimo of this
province) and I placed along side of my old friend in the horse-cart, we draw
the attention of a great many spectators, particularly the dogs; for the
rattling of the cart and a trail of dogs which never escape us (as they seem to
know our sound) with their yelling and bowwowing, one dog bringing out another,
and thus we are accosted for four miles* together, which with our gibberage,
when we can be heard, all contribute to make a jargon not easily understood.
One thing is very extraordinary, and that is -- how these dogs should take so
much notice of me, being an entire stranger to them, but knowing the sagacity
of those animals, they often stir up my jealousy, sor I am like the world of
mankind who are more or less jealous, in particular if they undertake what they
are unacquainted with. So my feelings are worked up, and I am sometimes
inclined to believe that they think as I think, that I am no doctor; or why
should they make such a plaguey rout every time I go, and seem to let me return
in peace. However I disregard what they say, knowing dogs to be dogs, although
in this case they are cunning dogs. -- I have also been called on to bleed the
old Priest's housekeeper, and went a sabbath morning, expecting to bleed her
and then go to mass, but was rather later than I expected, and met the parson
going to church, who thus accosted me, bone jure Monsieur Scudder? (how do you
do Mr. Scudder) are you going to bleed the young woman? I answered I was. He
shook his head, and said no pau possible -- I asked why? He said she was too
gross, and no doctor or person bad or could ever bleed her. I said that perhaps
she never had tried a Bostonian surgeon. He replied no. I then laughed at him,
and told him the Bostonians always went through with what they undertook. It
may be was his answer. I then proceeded to the house where my great lusty
patient was sitting with her feet in warm water; she was as heavy as two of the
old priest put together. I asked her if she meant to be bled in the foot? She
answered in the affirmative, and I proceeded to tie up her leg; but no more of
a vein appeared, than on ^her moc^asin; I tied up her arm, but to no purpose.
At last I perceived a vein appeared full just back of her toes, near the fore
one, and ventured to put the lancet in, which made her bleed ^reely; I stoped
it without much difficulty, which not ^inally contributed to raise my fame. In
short, my lancet, and now and then a cathartic, with this and that which I
hobble through with, gets me a considerable income of late, and it really
begins to flatter ^^e that I am somewhat* of a surgeon or doctor; and these
flatteries will remain until I am put to the test, and then what a figure I
shall cut, like a quack as I am! But one thing is certain, and this certain
thing is, that I am not the only quack that practices in America, or Europe;
for many pretended doctors are quacks, and many trumped up priests are quacks,
some merchants, attorneys and mechanics are quacks; farmers, ship-builders,
boat builders, scow-builders, balloon-builders, steam-boat builders, nay my
memory will not ^^rve, nor paper admit, neither can I enumerate the quacks:
Therefore, my advice from experience is, to all manner of persons, friends or
foes, never to undertake, a piece of business, particularly when difficulty
attends, without having a thorough knowledge of what they are about to
undertake, except in my situation; for I must plead my own cause. I do not mean
here to cast any reflections, but only to advise; for the more regular or
experienced persons are in their lawful avocations; the more useful they can be
in their callings; and it cannot be expected that a man who served two or three
years can be equal in knowledge and experience to those who served seven. With
regard to trumped up priests, I look upon the bible to be of so mysterious a
nature, that the man who undertakes to open and explain those sublime truths
which the scriptures are filled with, and be a teacher, ought to be a man who
has education and a clear and good understanding. Some will pretend to go by
the spirit; but miracles are not wrought now a days; and it is either ignorance
or self-delusion. However, I hold that the spirit assists* all men; but no man
can be assisted, only by the labor of the hands of mind, or else I might be a
good doctor; for the spirit is willing, but it is new to me, therefore I cannot
understand it, and cannot practice, only through deception; and this must be
the case with any branch, civil or religious, where they know but little of
what they undertake.

September 8. Mrs. Lebe was this morning delivered of a fine son, and as is
common, it was this day carried to church, and baptized by the name of Michael;
and what is singular, the parents never attend at the christening of a child;
only the Godfather and God-mother. The same is adhered to in funerals; I have
never known a husband to attend the funeral b^er of his wife.

September 10, 1782. Notwithstanding the apple trees and all kinds of fruit
trees are so late in putting forth their blooms, yet I have ten days past eat
ripe apples. All kinds of vegetation in this country is very quick after the
snow is off. My doctoring appears in a thriving condition, as I am called here
and there with my lancet, which is the main standby, together with pills and
jallap, rheubarb, gunpowder bohea tea, and many more combustibles too tedious
to mention; sometimes with a three-square hat, and at others a round one, often
on foot and in horse-carts, hearing and attending on the complaints of the
people, which is done with patience and judgment.

[ Finis for this time.]

Copy of a letter received from Richard Murray, Esquire. Commissary of prisoners
dated Quebec, August 29, 1782.
SIR,
Captain Smith, arrived here last night, and informed me that you expressed a
desire to be sent up to this place, but it is my advice to you to remain
quietly where you are, as I have every reason to expect you will in a very
short time be either exchanged or allowed to return home on your parole.

I am, sir, your humble servant, RICHARD MURRAY.

Lieut. SCUDDER, Isle of Orleans.

The copy of my answer is as follows:

SIR,
I am at a loss how to express my acknowledgments to you for the kind favor of
your letter of the 29th of August, but give me leave to assure you, that I am
filled with greatful sentiments for his Excellency's and your kind favor
toward me, and flatter myself, if I should not meet with an exchange, that if
his Excellency should admit me on parole, he will ^e fully convinced I shall
not vary from the line of true honor. As I have a feeling for the long
captivated prisoners taken from the regiment to which I belong, I should esteem
it a particular favor, if I should be so fortunate as to have my parole, that
they might be indulged to go with me, as several of them have families, and I
will pledge my faith they will not act against his Britannic Majesty or his
government, until they shall be properly exchanged. Permit me to further
observe, (if there is a meditation of my being permitted on parole) that the
frigid season of the year is fast approaching, and my health much impaired,
together with a want of more clothing, I must therefore earnestly request,
that I may be sent from this place before the weather proves very tedious.

I am, sir, with sentiments of respect, your very humble servant, WILLIAM
SCUDDER
Isle of Orleans, September 12, 1782.
Richard Murray, Esquire. Commissary of Prisoners, Quebec.

September 23. This day arrived nine prisoners to live in this parish, on
parole. Their names and places as follow:

Charles Creecraft, Major of militia, from Virginia, taken August 21, 1781.

Joseph Erwin, Captain in the 5th Pennsylvania regiment, taken August 24,* 1781.

Robert Orr, Captain of militia, 5th Pennsylvania regiment, taken August 24,
1781.

Moses Van Camp, Lieutenant in the state regiment, taken April, 1782.

Samuel Craig, Lieutenant of Pennsylvania militia, taken April, 1782.

James Cole, Ensign of the militia of Pennsylvania, taken April, 1782.

Batrick Hunter, Ensign of the Pennsylvania militia, taken April, 1782.

Stephen White, Captain militia, New York, taken April, 1782.

John Zelie, Lieutenant militia, New York, taken April, 1782.

September 24. The man who took my letter to Quebec, has returned without an
answer, Mr. Murray being in the country. I am as usual disappointed, and
amongst so many disappointments in life, can it be possible that I shall be
disappointed when death comes, which will make but one event in the whole of
all those different vicissitudes, and that event will put an end to all the
temporary, mistaken, and flattering ideas of this frail and transitory stage,
which is full of actions and perplexities, and disquiets us in vain; for the
whole of all these disquietudes are as a spark, or a moment to an endless
duration. -- Mournful thought! that man, poor frail dust, should be unhappy
after leaving this lodgment of clay, whose better part has wandered from its
God, and ^oved through this tempestuous life, after hidden objects of
unsubstantial joy; but there is a righteous God and the blessed Redeemer to
plead the cause of his creatures, and who knows the frailties of human nature.

September 29. My physical finances being rather too low for the relief of all
my brother officers, we concluded all hands to cut wood for one day, at the
extravagant* wages of thirty sous per^cord; and having our weapons well
sharpened, repaired to the woods bet^nes in the morning; and each man took his
post, which occasioned such a cracking, tumbling and thrashing amongst the
trees, and even smiting them after they were down, that the Physician sometimes
thought himself in danger, in particular he had to stand at a distance from his
Major, whose carcass was six feet six inches in height, with very extensive
arms; so that when his axe was fully extended in the air, it was eight feet
five inches and an half from the solid ground, and every stroke counted one. He
had also one other advantage over his men, which is necessary for all
field-officers, he had not much occasion of making many steps to finish
trimming his tree. In short the onset was pushed with resolution by all, and in
every quarter until, high meridian, when a halt was made for dinner, at which
time it was discovered that many wounds were received in the hands; however,
being to a man commissioned officers, we stood bravely until the setting sun,
when we found ourselves possessed of seven cord of wood, completely heaped and
measured for the Canadians, and the day following received the whole of the
cash, which we immediately sent to Quebec, where every farthing was said out
for ru^^, tea, sugar, and sundry articles too tedious to mention.

October 1st. Our goods arrived this day at ten o'clock, amounting in the whole
to fourteen shillings worth (^alifax money, at five shillings for each rix
dollar,) and among said arrivals, were for each of us, two stout stemmed large
bowled pipes, built much in the form of the Canadians, or their horses, being
peculiarly clumsy, the stem six inches in length, and the bowl about one inch
in diameter, and of consequence they seldom needed charging, which was an
advantage to men of industry. Our rum was not so closely inspected into, being
thirsty for that kind of liquid, occasioned us, as in all other cases where
love is at the bottom, to overlook some of its ^ad qualities. We all assembled
together at one place, which was no other than the doctor's quarters, and took
dinner, when our liquor, pipes and tobacco smoked for it. The remaining part of
our stores were equally divided, and about the setting sun, every man to his
quarters.

October 2d. A droll circumstance happened last night to one of my brother
officers; I suppose he was something thirsty in the evening, and drank a dish
of strong tea, which made him vapory. He imagined the house was in flames, and
bawled and hallowed so loud that the man of the house had to run for the
surgeon. He told me in French that the Bostonian had lost his senses -- I
immediately sat out in haste to his lodgings, and ^ound the poor man almost
frightened to death. He told me he was dying, for that streaks of fire were
flying out of his eyes, and images continually appearing; and not being able to
speak a word of French, their appeared a general fright and jargon in the whole
family; however, I soon found out the nature of his complaint: for the old lady
informed me she had made him some tea after he was in bed, and that she put a
handful of tea in the mug, and the man soon went crazy. I mentioned the
circumstance to him -- gave him some water, and on the whole made a cure of the
patient. I received a letter from Capt. Smith, mentioning ^e had arrived at a
place called Casselton, on our Eastern ^rontiers, and that peace was in a fair
way of taking place. On the whole great encouragement is given to me of being
soon sent home.

October 4th. This day came to this place Mr. Aaron Purbeck, a second
Lieutenant, belonging to the ship Dispatch, which was taken by the frigate
Pandora. He was three weeks from Salem when captured, and has been prisoner six
weeks. His crew has gone home, and himself detained as an hostage. The dispatch
mounted twelve guns, six and four pounders. The Pandora has in the course of
the war taken a number of our American vessels; but I believe the Captain has
used the prisoners well. The ship Hind of twenty-four guns, is lost.

October 6. My doctoring goes on as usual, although I have lately lost a
patient, who died of age; therefore his life could not be further prolonged,
notwithstanding the judgmatical assistance of two eminent physicians. I am
waiting with patience for a departure from this island of fortune, and of
consequence collecting my debts, dues and demands, and have at this instant my
physical book before me, which I expect will at some period appear in this
journal; at any rate it contains a number of Rhe^s, or a great many nothings,
if their is such a thing as nothing. Upon the whole, was this very account set
up this day at sale, I would not give more than thirty-six York shillings for
it, as I verlly believe that all those who intended to pay me, have already
done it: and to attempt the risk of a lawsuit would be more whimsical than my
practice. Furthermore, should I attempt a lawsuit with my old customers, in
the first place, it would create anger; secondly, my abilities might be called
in question; and thirdly, I should make a bad defense was that the case.
Therefore as a man of skill, judgment and sound sense, I think that soft words,
persuasions, etc. etc. is by far the most eligible, the most peaceable, the
most harmonious, and to make short of this part of my business, the most
conclusive.

October 7. A SMALL SKETCH OF MY PHYSICAL ACCOUNT.
Mrs. Mercer -- To bleeding and bohea, Rhea 0 s. Mrs. Lebe -- To do. do. do. 0
s. Mr. Compinia -- To jalap 1 oz. 2 s. Janselen's family -- To cortex, jalap,
rheubarb, salts, bohea, etc. etc. etc. 16 s. Mr.Lapash -- Bleeding, bohea,
decoction, boluses, and Simon may know what. 12 s. M. Bodwin -- Bleeding, 1 oz
of peru, hartshorn, glauber, rheubarb, bohea, etc. etc. 12 s. The Lame Man --
Sundry applications of barks, and Nathan knows what not. Rhea The Seginor -- To
bleeding, attendance, and combustibles not to be mentioned. 8 s. My Landlady --
To a dose of jalap, and a stout one too. Rhea
This account is the first of my undertaking; and is not so correct as after
getting more used to the practice. However, it is a specimen, but in the long
run, there is a great many Rheas, or nothings, as I am very rich and generous,
and it is not common for the two to keep company. When I was a boy at school, I
recollect a copy that was set me as follow:

When lands are gone and money spent,
Then learning is most excellent.
A proverb which is applicable to me at this time, particularly in the physical
line.

October 10. The happy hour has arrived when we are to take our departure from
these cold and frigid climes, as a letter has arrived this day at three
o'clock, with orders for us to make ready to embark on board a schooner, called
the Mercury, for New York, William Ha^eroc, commander. We all embarked about
sunset, and lay at anchor that night. In the morning early we fell down the
river to Paul's Bay, and took on board the prisoners who were there and sailed
to the island called Beck, where a fleet lay bound to New York, at which place
we arrived the next morning. The wind blew heavy with a rough sea. The
prisoners and some of the seamen were very sea sick. The Captain had a cat that
had kittens, which he said had sailed with him in the ship Hind, which was
lost, for several years, and in the height of the swell, the vessel being small
and rolling very much, the poor cat took sick, and in about two hours died. The
Captain appeared to lament her death far beyond what I have seen in a parent
for the loss of a child. The cat acted by reaching and puking like a person
sea-sick. Whether the creature was sea-sick or not, is unknown to me; but I
believe that was that occasioned her death; and I would not admit this remark
in my journal if I could not prove it by credible witnesses. It was also the
Captain's opinion that the swell made her sick.

About sunset the wind abated, but a heavy sea continued. We were divided and
put on board of different vessels. My lot was to go in the Lady Townsend, a
large ship pierced for 64 guns, and had been a Spanish galeon of eleven hundred
tons. The weather was cold and stormy. After I had been on board for some time,
walking on the quarter deck, the second mate came and ordered me off, and said
no one walked there but gentlemen -- I informed him of my rank in the American
army, and expressed a wish to speak with the Captain, whose name is Auth^r. He
informed the Captain of it, and I was ordered into the cabin. The Captain asked
me what I wanted? I told him that I was a prisoner of war on board his ship,
and mentioned my rank in the American army -- that I had been near an hour on
board, exposed to the cold and rain, and ^o notice had been taken of me, except
that some man had ordered me from the quarter deck, and said gentlemen walked
there; I therefore wished to ^now the place assigned me in the ship, as my
situation was uncomfortable, and my clothes were wet. He had a number of clerks
writing at his table, and appeared to be very attentive to them, without making
any reply for some time; at last he called to his second mate, and told him to
take me out of the cabin, for he was not going to be troubled by persons in
rebellion against their Sovereign, and that if I danced, I must pay the
fidd^er, or words to that effect. However, I still stood warming myself, when
the mate said, "sirrah don't you mind what is said?" I replied I was warming
myself. The Captain walked with importance two or three times back and forward
on the cabin floor, and then said to me, "Sir, do you intend to obey my
orders?" I answered -- "yes; but by all the ships that the sovereign you talk
of owns, your master, Sir Guy Carlton, shall know every tittle of your
treatment to me," -- and walked out of the cabin. I was conducted by the
second mate to a little birth where not more than two or three could sit, and
received a severe reprimand from the Crony; but I told him -- "Sir, abuse me on
your peril." He asked me who I was? I told him his master should know who he
was as soon as I arrived at New York; on which he took a more minute survey of
me, and walked off. The first Lieutenant or mate, was truly a gentleman: he
brought me some refreshment, and said I must not think much of my treatment, as
the Captain had rose from a boatswain to his present rank, and that he treated
him more like a scullion than a mate. I had some canvass to sleep on; but being
wet and having no fire, lay cold that night. The next morning I resumed my
quarter deck walk, to the no small mortification of the second mate, who was a
proper likeness in temper and politeness to his Captain, In about an hour the
noble Captain appeared on the deck, and walked on one side and myself on the
other; after some time he was called to breakfast. After breakfast he came on
deck and resumed his walk for some time, and at last said to me -- "go into the
cabin and take some coffee, my boys are now at breakfast." I answered, "damn
you and your cabin, if ever I put my ^oot in it to eat or drink with a man who
has treated me in so cruel a manner -- And to ask me to eat with your boys! But
remember Captain, I shall not always be under ^our clutches, and if ever I
arrive at New York, I will acquaint Sir Guy Carlton, and the Commodore of this
fleet with the usage I have received. I am a prisoner of war, and well know
that the British officers who are prisoners among us, are treated like
gentlemen. A few words more passed.

We lay at anchor by Beck, until the 19th instant. The Captain and myself had
no conversation together; but I messed with the mates of the ship. The second
mate appeared more pliable; however, I said but little to him, having others to
talk with that appeared more agreeable. During our stay, the snow fell half leg
deep, and the weather was cold like winter in Jersey.

On the 19th, we all weighed anchor and stood down the river with a fresh
breeze, keeping the south shore in sight, but soon lost sight of land on the
north-east and east. Nothing material happened on our passage. We saw an
American sail that appeared a fine stout ship, and was supposed to be an
American frigate, but she outrun our ship, which was the fastest sailing
vessel in the fleet -- The Pandora also gave chase, but to no purpose; we had
to return to the fleet, greatly to the disappointment of my beloved Captain,
who appeared very whist until he found she out-went us, and then sought
manfully at the sight of the rebel's top-masts. I imagine we were opposite
Massachusetts Bay, on the discovery of the vessel, which was to the leeward,
and on sight of us hauled her wind, so that before she bore away we could
discover her hull and hands at work; but our ship was large, and three frigates
in company, it was prudent for her to stand off. We discovered her about ten in
the morning, and made every rag of sail that could be put on, and by sunset he
ship was out of sight, except her top-masts, which leased Scudder. We had a
great deal of head ^inds, and was obliged to delay on account of a number of
dull sailers, as the victualling ships were chief^y old colliers, built for
burden more than running. One poor man, a mate to one of the ships,
unfortunately fell overboard and was drowned, and I be^ieve no other accident
happened. On the 13th of November, we arrived at New York. But to return to my
noble Captain -- the old saying is, "give Satan his due" -- so I will him; for
as we drew on the coast of New York, he appeared more sociable, and actually,
on a Sunday, asked the first mate and myself to dine with him -- We accordingly
did; and if my memory serves, I never knew the mate to dine with him at any
other time; he also invited me into his cabin to drink some old brandy late at
night, a heavy wind blowing and all hands on deck. I concluded a harsh promise
was better broke than kept; still on my arrival at New York, had not a word to
speak of his favorable treatment, but mentioned to several Captains of vessels
whom I saw one evening at Mrs. Banks's, his first treatment to me, and they to
a man disapproved of it in the strongest terms.

We continued on board the ships until the 16th, during which time I was
permitted several times to go on shore, and the afternoon before we left town,
the prisoners were all put on board a cartel, vessel, and General Carlton, that
good and humane man, sent us two kegs of liquors, of ten gallons each, one of
the best Madeira, and the other of spirits. The next morning his aid-de-camp
came to see if we wanted any thing, and to know what kind of treatment we had
received in Canada and on our passage; and herein I confess, that by
experiencing so great a contrast to the usage I had before received, and
considering we were at the eve of peace, made but a short reply, and said that
I had suffered by the rigidness of some; still finding myself under the
protection of a man of so much philanthropy, and about to embark once more for
my native home, should suspend any particular complaint. The evening before,
the prisoners, on receiving their liquors, drank to Sir Guy Carlton, George
Washington and Congress, as loud as their voices could roar; and drank bad
luck, (or in worse words) to the tories, those poor reptiles. About ten
o'clock, we made sail up the north river, and was treated by the Captain of the
Cartel, with great politeness; and what added to our comfort, the General had
given express orders for us to have fresh provisions and every necessary for us
that was wanting. We lay that night about twenty miles from New York, and the
next day about noon arrived at Dobbs's Ferry, where I confess I hardly knew our
troops, neither officers or soldiers, as their regimentals were altered, and
they had a fresher countenance than what appeared either among the English or
German troops, and were hardier soldiers, to appearance. I confess that it was
almost impossible to look at them with an impartial observation; but the
Captain himself who commanded the Cartel, said he never saw finer looking men.
I sat out afternoon for headquarters, and arrived at New-Burgh that night, in
a sloop; and the next day dined at headquarters, from whence I went to camp,
where I found my old brother officers and soldiers hutting themselves. I
continued a few days with them, when I received a horse from headquarters, and
on the 25th of November arrived at my native home, after a captivity of three
years four months and three days.

Thus has ended a long and tedious captivity; for I scarcely ever had a well
day from the time the Onondaga nation was cut off until the present hour; and
my affairs by the ravages of the war and negligence, being much deranged, added
to the afflictions that I have before mentioned in this journal, united in
rendering my happiness less complete than otherwise it would have been; still
it is my real desire to return a heart full of thankfulness and gratitude to
the good hand of Providence, in again* ^estoring me to my native home, friends,
language and religion, and also, where peace and liberty will soon reign
triumphant, which I hope we shall obtain and guard with a watchful eye. I shall
conclude by adopting the language of the poet.

God he is good, supremely good,
Nor less when he denies;
Even crosses from his Sovereign hand,
Are blessings in disguise.
[ Harvey.] SUPPLEMENT. TO THE PRINTER.
SIR,
WHEN I sent my Journal to you for publication, I acknowledged by a letter,
that it contained many imperfections, and that I felt the greatest diffidence
in having it published to the eyes of (generally speaking) a censorious world;
but the reasons for the attempt were then stated; and since I have so far
proceeded, I wish to make a few remarks, which if judged admissible, you will
place at the end of the journal, that whoever shall read may judge of their
propriety or impropriety. At the commencement of the late memorable contest
between England and America, every true friend of liberty appeared to have a
determination to be free, and from the justice of the cause, and the exertions
of a brave and magnanimous people, with the aid of a kind Providence, we were
brought to peace, liberty and independence, and now enjoy a mild, safe and good
government, every branch of which is elective, from the highest to the lowest
stations. Added to this, we are situated in a rich and fertile country, having
extended forests, navigable rivers and spacious harbors; our seaports are
crowded with vessels, wafted from the different ports of the globe, besides an
extensive commerce of our own, with the fullest enjoyment of our sentiments,
both civil and religious, and a situation happily remote from Europe, that seat
of oppression, war and bloodshed: -- all these are blessings which conspire to
make us a happy people indeed. It only now remains for us to endeavor to
improve the blessings we have, and are daily receiving. And first, we must be
guilty of the highest degree of ingratitude, if we do not one and all reverence
and adore the Supreme Governor of the universe, for so highly signalizing, us
with peace and plenty, whilst our friendly allies, the French are jeopardizing
their lives and fortunes against despotic powers, to obtain those blessings we
so happily accomplished. It ought therefore, not only to excite the prayers of
every well wisher to the rights of man, for a blessing on that distressed
nation, but every exertion should be made for their relief, as far as is
consistent with the safety of the United States.

Being thus settled under a well organized government, a due regard to our
privileges is next in question, and merits a more serious discussion than I am
able to give; but this far I may go -- that to be at all times prepared for war
is the most effectual method to preserve peace, and prevent injury and insult,
for which end a well disciplined militia, having a due regard to the laws both
civil and military, is highly essential. But notwithstanding difference in
sentiments may prevail, particularly on political topics, yet by these
different opinions the basis of government is made more secure than if a
torpidness prevailed; for it is a general maxim that all lethargetic
governments are always in danger; still a certain medium should be observed,
and a particular caution not to proceed too far without being convinced a real
danger does exist. Enquiries into the conduct of our rulers is right and
reasonable; it makes them more attentive to their duty, and good pilots will
always keep a good watch:* and for the further safety, to consolidate a
government, we should strictly attend to the motto that appeared at the head of
Mr. Hol^^'s Paper, at the commencement of the late war, viz. "United, we stand,
divided we fall." -- Every person in the union should consider himself as
belonging to a great family compact, and that it is his indispensible interest
to support the same by being a volunteer, and not a drudge, in supporting the
cause of his country; but what is conceived to be of the most importance is the
privilege of an elective government, which is, if I may be allowed the
expression, most shamefully neglected. A certain supiness and non-attendance on
elections generally prevails, as if it were rather a shame than an honorable
duty to attend, and time will make the neglect still greater. Riches beget
pride, and some think it not an honor to mix with the multitude in elections,
not considering that their property is as much at stake as that of their
fellow-citizens. Churches and elections are treated much alike, except
self-interest, such as being appointed to public stations, etc. is the moving
cause; nay, I have known some characters to scoff at persons who appeared
spirited on such occasions as I deem of the utmost importance. Such neglect
often gives room for clamorous characters to become injurious to a government;
and on the contrary, when the mass of the people move in one body, a country is
safe. Therefore every free man of America who has a right to a vote, rich or
poor, should be strictly careful in attending to elections, as it has long been
a common remark, that when the mass of the people collect for their safety,
they were scarcely ever known to err, provided the fulfillment of the laws of
their country was their motive. By appointing worthy citizens to the head of
government, and by a constant and uniform attendance on elections, it will
become habitual, harmonious, and of consequence the laws of the country
cheerfully adhered to* For instance, when the first American Congress was
chosen, the people of America were roused from one end of the continent to the
other, and almost every person flew to the election with alertness; and where,
or when, was there ever a greater and wiser set of Statesmen collected in one
body together? Their resolves and names will be recorded to their honor, to the
latest posterity. And does not our country at this day and at all times loudly
call for wise and prudent statesmen as leaders of the Republic.

Mankind are naturally of a restless make, and a republican form of government
is an assistant to their ambition, as it is natural to aspire to posts of
honor, for which reason, an aspiring man in order to render himself
conspicuous, will say -- "neighbor, things does not go on right in government;
our country is in danger" -- and as the complaint increases, the patient, who
wishes to be cured by obtaining some honorable station, complains louder and
louder. He rails against the President of the United States, the Governor, and
all in authority. This makes him a great man; for surely says one, and surely
says another, this man must know a great deal, or he would not talk in this
manner, not considering that if they obtain their ends, others are left behind
to make the same complaints. Therefore, I say again, a strict attention to
elections will prevent much jaring and discord* as such ambitious, restless
characters would (...) despised, and men of prudence and integrity wh^ stand
for the general good, would always meet with the public confidence. Every
elector should consider himself a statesman, and set too high a value on his
vote to impart it to parties or tools, but consider well who he gives his
suffrage for, as I do pronounce every man who is inattentive to the duties he
owes his country, a very useless organ, and his strings, if stretched, is
sounded with murmurs and complaints. But what I deem the most harmonious way of
supporting a republican government is, to act sure. This may be thought an
extraordinary remark; but what I judge the bulwark of this acting (and I am not
alone) is to have a certain period of time fixed for the continuance in office
of all public servants, from the President to the members of the State
Legislatures, to be elective as they are at present, for as many years as the
law may direct, and if thought proper, after a tain period, be again replaced.
Such a rule once ecerstablished, would become an easy custom, and the person in
office would know his destiny, and if he had conducted faithfully as a good
servant, would yield up his post with pleasure; and if he had not done his
duty, it certainly would be proper to displace him.

I before observed, that mankind are restless beings, and when a dignified
office is filled by one person for a long time without any limitation to his
continuance therein, rivalings and jarrings will appear, although the officer
may be ever so faithful; and where there is no end to the said officers being
held up for his old station, he may be out-voted and displaced from office
through calumnies, which exertions would not be so strenuous, was a certain
period set. Besides a high station is ever courted, and ever envied; let the
person's conduct be ever so upright, connections and parties will naturally
arise, and it is a station or mark for the observation of every individual, and
the administration is attended with more or less complaints; therefore to
relieve the person from so tottering a post, let another take his place, and he
who has been in office can be enabled to form a better judgment of the conduct
of his successor than any other person; and for general tranquillity a wide
difference remains between a conformity to law, or the strength of interest in
elections that has no end to its periodical progression. But it is argued, why
should a man be put out of office, if he has behaved well, been long
experienced in government, and a good old pilot? Nay, some will say the Empire
or State would be in danger, was such an event to take place. I would ask this
simple question, what would become of such a government was the head thereof to
die? I would wish to pay the highest respect to every person who has faithfully
served his country, but this I am sure of, that the lives of such are as
uncertain as those of all other montals; and I have not so great an opinion of
a mere man's being the salvation of a country which has got to be an
independent nation, where the whole body moves in one common cause.

I wish to be indulged with a few further remarks on our general privileges.
Let us take a view of this happy land, which was first settled by Europe an^
about the year sixteen hundred and twenty, and was under but small cultivation
in the year seventeen hundred. The progress that has since been made in so
short a time, is unequalled; for at this day there is no country or nation in
the world that has so great a plenty of the necessaries of life as America; the
sciences of every kind gain great perfection, its laws both civil and
religious, are such as become an independent and enlightened nation, each
religious denomination attending divine service in their own way, and as Harvey
says, like so many flowers, though of different colors, are all from the same
soil, These and many other advantages of a like kind are so striking, that no
one can doubt the aid and protection of a great governing hand. I am sorry to
observe that the greatest writer of his age on the free government of nations
(I mean Thomas Pain,) has directed his works, styled, "The Age of Reason," to
the people of the United States of America.

All due deference ought to be paid to this author for his writings at an early
period of the late war. "Common Sense," "the Crisis," etc. demands the
gratitude of America; but his Age of Reason, addressed to the people of this
country, contains a flat contradiction to the truths of the Bible, and in my
opinion ought to be deemed an insult on our understandings and government -- He
has, since his residence in Europe, confessed that the United-States of America
are a happy and free people, and that no person is under compulsion as to
religious worship; but every one has a method of his own choosing: besides, he
is sensible that from the first settlement of this country, no people could
have been more liberal in sentiment or more spirited in dedicating houses of
worship to Almighty God in every part of this extensive continent. The civil
and religious laws have gone hand in hand ever since its first settlement, and
he must be convinced that this country is a happy asylum for the oppressed of
all nations, remote from the jars, contentions and persecutions of despotic
powers. With these impressions on his mind it was ill done to strike at the
foundation of our united existence; for if the bible is all fabulous, and we
have no way or mode pointed out to worship, our churches and church discipline
will be annihilated and we become far inferior in poin^ of religion to the
Hottentots; for they are under an established form or method of worshipping,
and indeed there is no nation under Heaven but acknowledge and adore a Supreme
Being.

It has always been thought reasonable for one man when he is showing another
an error, that he would point out some way for relief; but Mr. Pain, who
boasts of being an instrument in liberating us from monarchial oppression, has
created and now damns; for in no part of his Age of Reason has he pointed out
any method in which we may worship. Mr. Pain denies the bible and the Koran,
or what is called the Alkoran, as equally false; we must of consequence lay
aside both and adhere to the dictates of reason; and in this point every man
has a right to make a proposal, what kind of way, attitude or method is to be
taken; for as I before mentioned, all nations worship God, and in our lost
situation, they are far superior to us, each having their established modes and
the tradition of their, forefathers, who ^aught them to worship the Good
Spirit. That there is a good and bad spirit, or in our primative language, God
and the Devil, all historians agree, -- and the intention or act of doing an
unjust thing or committing transgressions, is supposed to be an affront to
their Good Spirit. Ever since I have read Paine's Age of Reason, I have been
thinking that should this vast continent, which contains near four millions of
people and is fast increasing, at this day, or at some future period, be all of
his opinion, what a medly and jargon it would make! For if the bible is laid
aside as a piece of imposition or false history, there is no command to serve
God any way: Therefore, in the first place, there would be no assembling
together to worship on the seventh, or any other day, and of consequence all
churches would be converted to other purposes. Some would be for adopting some
kind of worship, and others would be for no system. However, I am of opinion a
very large majority would be for having some regular mode of worship held up;
and as every man would be at his option what mode to adopt, it would be,
properly speaking, a medly amongst mortals, and make as great confusion a^ the
building of the tower of Babble; for it must be understood that we have no
tradition nor guide but the bible. These things are too serious to trifle with,
and considering we are happily united under a civil and religious government of
our own voluntary wills, I would propose continuing as we are, and judge it
more safe than to submit to chance. Nay if there is no truth in the bible, we
are safe; for God will never damn a man for his ignorance. I am fond of Mr.
Paine's title page, and it is an unspeakable blessing that we live in an age of
reason, in which some doctrines that used to be strenuously preached are much
discountenanced: I mean the doctrines held by some Predestinarians which I
never did nor never intended to believe. I recollect, when a boy, my mother
ordered me to read a book that treated on predestination. I came to a passage
in which the author said he made no doubt but there were children in hell not
more than a span, or nine inches long; he did not say inches, but the word span
I shall ever remember. I was struck with amazement, and have ever since
despised such ideas. I am often struck with the reflection when my children are
dandling and playing with all the innocence that a feeling heart can conceive,
that (according to the principles of Predestinarians) two thirds of the dear
pledges are called into existence to be made miserable through an endless
eternity; as I cannot retain any idea of my childrens having a better chance
than others, nor of their being by nature, better than those born among Pagans
or elsewhere. The doctrines of Predestination appears so derogatory to a
Supreme Being, who created worlds unknown, the whole system of which appears in
such harmonious order, and every thing so well ornamented in this creation for
the reception of every one born into it, that it damps the ideas of his justice
and philanthropy, and I believe has been the cause of many delusions,
insanities and self-murders; for instance, when a person begins to be
thoughtful about a future state, he immediately begins to think himself a
chosen vessel, which indicates that the Almighty has respect to persons. Others
suppose themselves destined for eternal wrath, and dispairing of God's mercy
frequently put an end to their lives. On the whole I must pronounce the person
who holds to the doctrine, that God created from all eternity some to happiness
and some to misery, an inhuman being. Nay I shudder while I am writing on this
subject. But I will quit so disagreeable a theme with observing that it cannot
be possible the possessors of such sentiments have ever taken a view of the
greatness and goodness of that being who is infinite in justice and mercy.

Mr. Paine's refutation of the bible appears to me ^^orthodox, particularly in
America, as we wish to give those volumes we call sacred, their due weight, not
having Popes, Inquisitions, Friars, Bishops and such pests of mortals, who
traffic with the gospel for the lucre of gain and oppress the people to make
themselves rich, merely through the terrors of false representation. But on the
contrary, in America, scientific knowledge pretty generally prevails, and we
can have no better example than the travels of our blessed Savior. They
bespeak every thing which is necessary to mortals; the whole tenor is humility
toward God, and to love one another, seed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit
the sick and imprisoned, and the great duty of doing as we would be done by.
The whole appears to be a pattern of friendship, equal to the dignity of so
great a personage. The sermon on the mount, is a pledge of purity; and the
whole of his succession is a pattern of morality which cannot be copied by a
mere man, as there appears in his travels one uniform system of piety; and it
is very extraordinary to me, that so much bigotry has ever gained ground in the
different modes of worship; every one thinks his own the most safe. Our
Savior's prediction of the destruction of Jerusalem, that there should not of
the temple be left one stone upon another is, according to Thompson's travels,
and other historians, exactly fulfilled; and the prophecy of the destruction of
Babylon, so prophetically foretold by Jeremiah, that "Babylon the great, the
mighty, is fallen, and shall become a den for owls and pelicans, although it
was once the greatest and richest city in the world." Its walls was said by
some to be seven, and by some fourteen miles in circumference, fifty feet in
height, and so wide that two chariots could drive abreast; having gardens
erected in the air for ornament, and to display its grandeur: yet no account is
given where it stood, although some suppose that Grand Cairo stands on or near
its ruins, within two miles of the river Nile, in Egypt, and is said to contain
two millions and an half of people. However, for my part, the bustle and
business that I am obliged to attend to, in order to obtain the necessaries in
life for myself and family, will not permit my particular attention; but
whoever denies the prophecies, let them read Newton on the subject, and they
will be convinced, in my opinion, of their being wrote from inspiration.

As I have before observed, I never intended to be so much of a writer as to
appear in public; but since I have so far proceeded, I desire that nothing I
have advanced may be taken amiss; for I wish to be honest, and fairly give my
sentiments. When I begun I did not expect to be so lengthy; but I despise
apologizing, and will conclude with a recommendation to all persons, but
particularly youth, not to be led away by this or that writer or observer; but
act virtuously on this short stage of life; for soon very soon we must go the
way of all the earth, to give place to millions yet to be called into
existence. Therefore, as Doctor Young says, "Lean not on earth, 'twil pierce
thee too the heart -- a broken reed at best, but often a spear. On its sharp
point peace bleeds, and hope expires." Adoration to God is reasonable, and
raises our ideas and expectations above the brutes, after passing through this
mortal state. Believe in the bible, read and endeavor to live to the rules
taught by our Savior, and when this life is done, a happy reward will ensue.

WILLIAM SCUDDER
New York, August 21st, 1794.
ERRATA -- In page 95, in the 13 th and 26 th lines, for MUA read MECCA.


