Engraved for S. CAMPBELL's Edition of MUIR's TRIAL


THOMAS MUIR ESQUIRE YOUNGER of Huntershill

AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF THOMAS MUIR, ESQUIRE YOUNGER, OF HUNTERSHILL.

BEFORE THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY AT EDINBURGH, On the 30th and 31st days of
August, 1793, FOR SEDITION.

Dedimus profecto grande patientiae documentum: et sient vetas aetas vidit,
quid ultimum in liberate esset; ita nos quid in servitute, ad empto per
inquisitiones et loquendi audiendique ^^amer^io. (...)

-- NEW YORK -- PRINTED AND SOLD BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL NO. 37, HANOVER-SQUARE.
1794.

Tolbooth, EDINBURGH, September 16, 1793. SIXTH MONTH OF MY IMPRISONMENT. TO
THE PUBLIC.
THE Publisher makes no apology for the delay of the account of this trial. His
object was not to gratify the transient curiosity of the present day, but to
present to his countrymen the faithful record of a transaction which implicates
some of their most material interests. Truth and accuracy were what he chiefly
studied. He wishes that several of his cotemporaries, who have likewise
exhibited an account of this trial, had been actuated by the same principles.

He is greatly indebted to several gentlemen, who liberally furnished him with
notes of the evidence. In particular, he begs leave to express his warmest
acknowledgements to Mr. Moffat, the friend of Mr. Muir, who attended him in the
court. From the peculiar situation of the Publisher, it would be improper in
him to speak of Mr. Muir himself. It is sufficient to say, that at his request
he took the trouble to look over the notes which were taken of the speech
delivered to the Jury, and he has the authority of that gentleman, for
declaring, that he believes that the account given of that speech, is as
accurate as could possibly be presented, of what was, to all, evidently
delivered without previous preparation, and entirely regulated by the
circumstances which occurred in the course of the trial, and which came out in
the evidence.

JAMES ROBERTSON.

THE TRIAL OF THOMAS MUIR, Esquire YOUNGER, OF HUNTERSHILL.
THE Members of the Court of Justiciary assembled precisely at ten o'clock in
the forenoon. Mr. Muir, who had obtained his liberation upon bail, soon
afterward appeared, and placed himself at the bar.

His Majesty's Advocate, for his Majesty's Interest, was then in the usual
form, called against the Panel. Mr. Muir was desired by the Lord Justice Clerk
to listen to the Indictment against him, which was to be read immediately by
the Clerk of the Court. Of that Indictment the following is a true copy.

"GEORGE, etc. WHEREAS it is humbly meant and complained to us by our right
trusty ROBERT DUNDAS, Esquire of Armiston, our Advocate for our interest, upon
THOMAS MUIR, younger, of Huntershill, THAT, by the laws of this and every other
well governed realm, the wickedly and feloniously exciting, by means of
SEDITIOUS SPEECHES and HARANGUES, a spirit of disloyalty and disaffection to
the King and the Established Government; MORE ESPECIALLY, when such speeches
and harangues are addressed to Meetings or Convocations of Persons, brought
together by no lawful authority, and uttered by one who is the chief Instrument
of calling together such Meetings: AS ALSO, the wickedly and feloniously
ADVISING and EXHORTING persons to purchase and peruse seditious and wicked
publications and writings, calculated to produce a spirit of disloyalty and
disaffection to the King and Government; AS ALSO, the wickedly and feloniously
DISTRIBUTING or CIRCULATING any seditious writing or publication of the
tendency aforesaid, or the CAUSING distribute or circulate any such seditious
writing or publication: AS ALSO, the wickedly and feloniously PRODUCING and
READING ALOUD, in a public meeting or convocation of persons, a seditious and
inflammatory writing, tending to produce in the minds of the people a spirit of
insurrection and of opposition to the Established Government: AND, the PUBLICLY
APPROVING of, and RECOMMENDING, in said meeting, such seditious and
inflammatory writing, are all and each, or one of other of them, crimes of an
heinous nature, dangerous to the public peace, and severely punishable: YET
TRUE IT IS, AND OF VERITY, that the said Thomas Muir is guilty actor, art and
part, of all and each, or one or other, of the said crimes, aggravated as
aforesaid: IN SO FAR AS on the 3d day of November 1792, or on one or other, of
the days of that month, or of October immediately preceding, or of December
immediately following, the said Thomas Muir having been present at a meeting in
the town of Kirkintilloch, parish of Kirkintilloch, and county of Dunbarton,
denominated, 'A Society for Reform,' or bearing some such name; and also having
sometime during the course of the said month of November aforesaid, been
present at another meeting at Miltoun, parish of Campsie, and county of
Stirling, which meeting was also denominated, 'A Society for Reform,' or Lore
some such name, (and both of which societies abovementioned the said Thomas
Muir was the chief mean of instituting and forming;) he did, at times and
places foresaid, with wicked and seditious intention, address and harangues,
the said meetings; in which speeches and harangues, the said Thomas Muir did
seditiously endeavor to represent the Government of this country as oppressive
and tyrannical, and the Legislative Body of the state as venal and corrupt,
particularly by instituting a comparison between the pretended existing
Government of France and the Constitution of Great Britain, with respect to the
expenses necessary for carrying on the functions of Government; he endeavored
to vilify the Monarchical part of the constitution, and to represent it as
useless, cumbersome, and expensive: AT LEAST, the said Thomas Muir did use
words and arguments of the above seditious tendency and import. FURTHER, the
said Thomas Muir did, sometime during the course of September, October, or
November 1792, in the town of Glasgow in the county of Lanark, Kirkintilloch in
the parish of Kirkintilloch, and county of Dunbarton, and Miltoun in the parish
of Campsie and county of Stirling aforesaid, and elsewhere, wickedly and
feloniously exhort and advise several persons to purchase and peruse various
seditious pamphlets and writings; PARTICULARLY, the said Thomas Muir did,
sometime in the months aforesaid, within his father's house at Glasgow
aforesaid, or some other place to the Public Prosecutor unkown, wickedly and
feloniously advise and exhort John Muir senior, late hatter in Glasgow, Thomas
Wilson barber in Glasgow, and John Barclay residing in the parish of Calder and
county of Lanark, to read Paine's Rights of Man, and to purchase the same;
which book or pamphlet entitled, Paine's Rights of Man, is a most wicked and
seditious publication, calculated to vilify the Constitution of this country,
to produce a spirit of insurrection among the people, and to stir them up to
acts of outrage and opposition to the Established Government, FURTHER, the said
Thomas Muir did, in the course of the months of September, October, or November
aforesaid, wickedly and feloniously distribute and circulate, or cause to be
distributed and circulated, in the towns of Glasgow, Kirkintilloch, and Miltoun
aforesaid, and at Lennoxtoun in the said parish of Campsie and county of
Stirling, or elsewhere, a number of seditious and inflammatory writings or
pamphlets; particularly a book or pamphlet entitled, The Works of Thomas
Pain, Esquire Also, a writing or publication, entitled. A Declaration of Rights,
and an Adress to the People, approved of by a number of the Friends of Reform
in Paisley; Also, a paper or publication entitled. A Dialogue be^twixt the
Governors and the Governed; Also, a paper or publication, entitled 'The
Patriot:' Particularly, the said Thomas Muir did, some time in the month or
October or November aforesaid, at Kirkintilloch, aforesaid, or at some other
place to the Public Prosecutor unknown. wickedly and feloniously deliver and
put into the hands of Henry Freeland, weaver, in Kirkintilloch, a seditious
book or pamphlet, entitled, 'The Works of Thomas Pain, Esq' which the said
Henry Freeland carried away with him; which book or pamphlet, along with the
other wicked, seditious, and inflammatory passages, contains the following:

Paine's Works, p. 13. Monarchy is ranked in Scripture as one of the sins of
the Jews, for which a curse in reserve is denounced against them.

P. 20. In short, Monarchy and succession have laid not this or that kingdom
only, but the world, in blood and ashes; it is a form of Government which the
Word of God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it.

P. 21. Why is the Constitution of England sickly, but because Monarchy has
poisoned the Republic? -- the Crown has engrossed the Commons.

In England a King has little more to do than to make war, and to give away
places; which in plain terms is to impoverish the nation, and set it together
by the ears. A pretty business indeed for a man to be allowed eight hundred
thousand pounds Sterling a year for, and worshipped into the bargain! Of more
worth is one honest man to society, and in the sight of God, than all the
crowned ruffians that ever lived.

P. 78 What are the present governments in Europe but a scene of iniquity and
oppression! What is that of England? Do not its own inhabitants say it is a
market where every man has his price, and where corruption is common traffic,
at the expense of a deluded people? No wonder then that the French Revolution
is traduced.

P. 85. But the second head, that of a nation establishing a particular family
with hereditary powers, does not present itself as despotism, on the first
reflection; but, if men will permit a second reflection to take place, and
carry that reflection forward but one remove out of their own persons to that
of their offspring, they will then see that hereditary succession becomes in
its consequences the same despotism to others which they reprobate it for
themselves.

P. 36. It operates to preclude the consent of the succeeding generation, and
the preclusion of consent is despotism.

Part II. p. 30. All hereditary government is in its nature tyranny. An
heritable crown, or an heritable throne or by whatever fanciful name such
things may be called, have no other significant explanation, than that mankind
are heritable property. To inherit a government is to inherit the people, as if
they were flecks and herds.

P. 51. The act called the Bill of Rights comes here into view. What is it but
a bargain which the parts of the government made with each other to divide
powers, profits, and privileges? You shall have so much, and I shall have the
rest; and with respect to the nation, it said, for your share. YOU shall have
the right of petitioning. This being the case, the Bill of Rights is more
properly a Bill of Wrongs, and of insult.

P. 54. The attention of the Government of England (for I rather choose to call
it by this name, than the English Government) appears, since its political
connection with Germany, to have been so completely engrossed and absorbed by
foreign affairs, and the means of raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no
other purposes. Domestic concerns are neglected; and with respect to regular
law, there is scarcely such a thing.

P. 126. The time is not very distant when England will laugh at itself for
sending to Holland, Hanover, Zel, or Brunswick, for men, at the expense of a
million a year, who understood neither her laws, her language, nor her
interest, and whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the office
of a parish constable. If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be
some easy and simple thing indeed, and materials fit for all purposes may be
found in every town and village in England.

AND the said Thomas Muir did, some time in October or November aforesaid,
within his own or his father's house at Huntershill, in the country of Lanark,
or at some other place to the Public Prosecutor unknown, wickedly and
feloniously put into the hands of William Muir, weaver in Kirkintilloch, eleven
number of a seditious book or pamphlet, entitled, 'The Patriot', which the
said William Muir carried away with him, and kept possession of; and which book
or pamphlet contained among others the following seditious passages:

Patriot, No. V. p. 168, and 169. They have lost the distinguishing character
between freemen and slaves; they have lost the distinguishing character of
Englishmen! They have lost what the most tyrannical Kings of England would
never force from them! They have, in a great measure, lost what their
forefathers spent their blood and treasure to defend -- the greatest jewel that
any people can possess -- their constitutional and natural liberty -- their
birthright and inheritance derived from God and nature! They have lost the
constitutional means of redress for all their grievances! What is it indeed
they have not lost by that hated septennial law, which has fettered down the
elective power of the people, like a dog in a manger, who is only suffered to
go abroad once in seven years for an airing!

No. VI. p. 184, and 185. Rouse then ye Britons! Awake from the slumbering
state of apathy in which you have so long suffered yourselves ingloriously to
remain! Open your eyes to the injuries which have been heaped on you; and
assert your right to have them redressed. Evince to all the world that you are
the true descendants and sons of your once famed glorious ancestors; prove
yourselves worthy to inherit, in its highest degree of perfection, that
constitution which they raised by their valor and cemented with their blood:
-- Raise your voice -- the voice of the people -- and sound in the ears of
Tyrants, and their abettors, that you will be free, and you are so: That voice
is the noble, the mighty fiat, which none can, or dare to, attempt to gainsay.

No. XI. p. 375. And what would he (Earl of Chatham) have thought, if he had
lived to hear people now talk of a happy and glorious constitution, evidently
built upon corruption and supported by peculation? And what would he have
conjectured, had he seen a proclamation issued to intimidate and prevent the
people from exercising their right of conferring upon, and publishing their
grievances?

No. XII. p. 414. But we should ask, here, what is the difference between a
King of England taxing his subjects without consent of Parliament, and taxing
them with the consent of Parliament, which Parliament the King, or his
Minister, can influence as he pleases to approve of war or peace, and to vote
such supplies as may be required; no matter how grievous or burdensome, nor for
what base or corrupt purposes they are granted: One would think that the latter
method is equally oppressive, and deserving of reprobation; for being done with
a seeming legality, and under a form and semblance of constitutional procedure,
the people are made parties to their own oppression, and the greatest insults
are added to the heaviest injuries.

P. 419. Here we see clearly the origin of the immense overgrown landed
property of our race of nobles and rich commoners; a right founded in murder,
desolation, rapine, and proscription of the first owners and holders of the
landed property in this kingdom, among our Saxon ancestors; and by this we may
easily trace the means by which our nobility are at this moment not only in
possession of one branch of the legislature by hereditary claim, but by which
they have also monopolized, with the addition of a few rich commoners, the
majority of voice in the House of Commons, which, shame to tell, is
bare-facedly called the Representation of the People. This we pledge ourselves
to prove to the satisfaction of our readers in the course of this work, and
indeed of a few more numbers? And the said paper or publication, entitled, A
Declaration of Rights, and Address to the People, approved of by a number of
the Friends of Reform in Paisley, distributed and circulated as aforesaid,
contained the following passages:

Paisley Declaration, p. 4. 1. Being subject to the legislation of persons whom
other men have placed over you, it is evident you are denied that which is the
right of every one, and without which none are free. For to be enslaved, is to
have no will of your own in the choice of those lawmakers, which have power
over your properties, your families, your lives, and liberties. Those who have
no votes for electing representatives are not free, as the rights of nature,
and the principle of our constitution, require, but are enslaved to the
representatives of those who have votes.

P. 5. 3. Should you not associate in your own cause, and with one voice? the
voice of united millions, demand refirm in the national representation

P. 8. 10 But such a Parliament cannot be had unless we will revert to the
first principles of our constitution, which we have so shamefully abandoned. A
government where the executive and legislative power meet in a single person
has no more pretense to freedom; it is perfect despotism; and the people who
submit to it are in a state of slavery. If the will of the Prince must be law,
in what manner it is announced, whether the mandate issue directly from the
throne itself, or through the medium of the House of Commons, is a matter of
indifference. If that assembly is no longer the representative of the people,
the constitution is changed. If those men who are said to represent us are only
the registers of the Royal edicts, the government is degenerated into an
absolute Monarchy. Since electing a Parliament is our only security against an
arbitrary power in the Crown, election itself must be not only the common
right, but the common duty, of all the people.

P. 15. But the evils of long Parliaments -- are they not written in tears and
in blood? And have they left us aught of liberty but the name? With the poor
exception then, of one year of freedom in seven, and that in favor of not
one-seventh, part of the nation, it is demonstrated that you are constantly
taxed without being represented and compelled to obey laws to which you never
gave assent. Are not these the very definitions of slavery? And, are you not
thus degraded to a level with the very cattle in the field, and the sheep in
the fold; which are a property to those who rule over them, and have no power
to say, why are we bought and fold? why are we yoked and laden with heavy
burdens? why are we fleeced and led to the slaughter? Demand then with one
voice, friends and countrymen, that share in making your own laws to which, by
the constitution and the laws of nature, you are entitled; call for the Bill
which would restore your lost constitution, and recover your stolen rights!
Pursue the only course which can ever effect any considerable reduction of
debts and taxes, or materially advance the interest of manufactures and
commerce! In short, be free, prosperous, and happy! and give your posterity the
same cause to revere your memories, as you have to bless those progenitors who
left you an inheritance in a free constitution.

And the above writing or publication, entitled, A Dialogue between the
Governors and the Governed, distributed and circulated as aforesaid, contained,
among others, the following passage:

Dialogues. ' Civil Govenors. The law enacts that ye be submissive.

'People. The law is the general will, a new order.


'Civil Governors. You will be a rebellious people


'People. Nations cannot revolt; tyrants are (...) only rebels.


'Civil Governors. The King is with us, and he commands you to submit.


People. The Kingly office originates in the people, who elect one of
themselves to execute it for the general good. Kings, therefore, are
essentially indivisible from their nations. The King of ours, then, cannot be
with you; you only possess his phantom. And the Military Governors stepping
forward, said, The people are timid, let us menance them, they only obey force.
Soldiers, chastise this insolent rabble.


'People. Soldiers, you are of our own blood! Will you strike your brothers? If
the people perish, who will maintain the army? -- And the soldiers grounding
their arms, said to their chiefs, We also are the people, we are the enemies of
--. Whereupon the Ecclesiastical Governors said, There is now but one resource
left. The people are superstitious; we must frighten them with the name of God,
and of Religion. -- Our dearly beloved brethren, our children! God has
appointed us to govern you.


'People. Produce to us your heavenly powers.


'Priests. You must have faith, reason will lead you astray.


'People. Do you govern then without reason?


'Priests. God ordains peace: Religion prescribes obedience.


'People. Peace presupposes justice; obedience has a right to know the law it
bows to.


'Priests. Man is only born into this world to suffer.


'People. Do you then set us the example.


'Priests. Will you live without Gods and without Kings?


'People. We will live without Tyrants, without Impostors.'


FURTHER, the said Thomas Muir having, upon the 11th, 12th, or 13 days of
December 1792, or on one or other of the days of that month, being present at a
meeting calling itself The Convention of Delegates of the Associated Friends of
the People, or assuming some such name; which meeting was held in a room
commonly called Laurie's Room, in James's Court, in the City of Edinburgh, he
did then and there, with a wicked and seditious design, produce, and read aloud
to the said meeting, a writing or paper, entitled, Address from the Society of
United Irishmen in Dublin, to the Delegates for promoting a Reform in Scotland.
Which writing or paper was of a most inflammatory and seditious tendency,
falsely and insidiously representing the Irish and Scotch nations as in a state
of downright oppression, and exciting the people rebelliously to rise up and
oppose the government. And which paper or writing, among other passages,
contained the following:

P. 1. We take the liberty of addressing you in the spirit of civic-union, in
the fellowship of a just and common cause. We greatly rejoice that the spirit
of freedom moves over the surface of Scotland, that light seems to break from
the chaos of her internal government, and that a country so respectable for her
seize in science, in arts, and in arms, for men of literary eminence, for
the intelligence and morality of her people, now acts from a conviction of the
union between virtue, letters, and liberty; and now rises to distinction, not
by a calm, contented, secret wish for a reform in Parliament, but by openly,
actively, and urgently willing it, with the unity and energy of an embodied
nation. We rejoice that you do not consider yourselves as merged and melted
down into another country, but that in this great national question you are
still Scotland. -- Also,

We will lay open to you our hearts: Our cause is your cause. If there is to be
a struggle between us, let it be, which nation shall be foremost in the race of
mind. Let this be the noble animosity kindled between us, who shall first
attain that free constitution from which both are equi-distant, Who shall first
be the savior of the empire. The sense of both countries, with respect to the
intolerable abuses of the constitution, has been clearly manifested, and proves
that our political situations are not dissimilar, that our rights and wrongs
are the same. -- Also,

We will not be the dupes of such ignoble artifices. We see this scheme, of
strengthening political persecution and state inquisition, by a fresh infusion
of religious fanaticism. But we will unite, and we will be free. Universal
emancipation, with representative legislature, is the polar principle which
guides our Society, and shall guide it, through all the tumult of factions, and
fluctuations of parties. It is not upon a coalition of Opposition with Ministry
that we depend, but upon a coalition of Irishmen with Irishmen; and in that
coalition alone we find an object worthy of reform, and, at the same time, the
strength and sinew both to attain and secure it. It is not upon external
circumstances, upon the pledge of man or minister, we depend, but upon the
internal energy of the Irish nation. -- We will not buy or borrow liberty from
America or from France, but manufacture it for ourselves, and work it up with
those materials which the hearts of Irishmen furnish them with at home. -- We
do not worship the British, far less the Irish constitution, as sent down from
heaven; but we consider it as human workmanship, which man has made, and man
can mend. An unalterable constitution, whatever be its nature, must be
despotism. It is not the constitution, but the people, which ought to be
inviolable; and it is time to recognize and renovate the rights of the English,
the Scotch, and the Irish nations. -- Also,

You have our ideas -- answer us, and that quickly. -- This is not a time to
proc^ast^nate -- Your illustrious Fletcher has said, that the liberties of a
people are not to be secured without passing through great difficulties; and no
toil or labor ought to be declined to preserve a nation from slavery. He spoke
well; and we add, that it is incumbent on every nation who adventures into a
conflict for freedom, to remember, it is on the event (however absurdly)
depends the estimation of public opinion; honor and immortality, if fortunate;
if otherwise, infamy and oblivion. Let this check the rashness that rushes
unadvisedly into the Committee, of national character; or, if that be already
made, let the same consideration impel us with active, not passive
perseverance, with manly confidence, and calm determination, smiling with equal
scorn at the bluster of official arrogance, and the whispers of private
malevolence, until we have planted the flag of freedom on the summit, and are
at once victorious and secure.

' M' Allister, 102, Grafton Street, Printer.'

WHICH seditious paper or writing, containing, among others, the above
passages, the said Thomas Muir did, immediately thereafter, wickedly and
feloniously, propose should be received, and lie on the table of the said
Meeting; and did also move, that the thanks of the Meeting, or some
acknowledgement, should be returned to those from whom the foresaid paper or
address came. AND MOREOVER, the said Thomas Muir did, then and there, wickedly
and feloniously express his approbation of the sentiments contained in the said
paper or address, or, at least, did declare, that it was altogether harmless,
or used words and expressions of a similar import, notwithstanding that many of
those who were present at the foresaid meeting did oppose and object to the
foresaid paper or address being read, or allowed to lie on the table, or in any
shape acknowledged by the said Meeting. AND the said Thomas Muir having been
brought before John Pringle, Esquire our Sheriff-depute of the county of Edinburgh,
upon the 2d day of January 1793, did, in his presence, emit and sign a
declaration, but immediately thereafter, the said Thomas Muir, conscious of his
guilt in the premises, did, in order to evade punishment, abscond and leave the
kingdom; and having been indicted at the instance of our Advocate, for our
interest, to stand trial before the High Court of Justiciary, upon the 11th day
of February last, the diet was afterward continued to the 25th of that month
to give him the better opportunity of appearing, if he was so disposed; but the
said Thomas Muir having notwithstanding f^^led to appear, he was, on the 25th
of February last, fugitate by a sentence of the said High Court. AND the said
Thomas Muir having lately, in a private and clandestine manner, come into this
Country, by the way of Ireland, he was discovered at Portpatrick, apprehended,
and committed prisoner to the tolbooth of Stranraer, in the county of Wigton,
on the 30th or some other day in the month of July last; and, at same time,
sundry papers found in his possession were together with his pocketbook,
sealed up in the presence of William Ross, Esquire one of our Justices of Peace for
the shire of Wigton, under the seals of the said Thomas Muir and the town seal
of Stranraer. AND the said Thomas Muir having been afterward transmitted to
Edinburgh, by warrant of our High Court of Justiciary, along with the said
pocketbook and papers, the sealed parcel containing the same was opened in
presence of him, the said Thomas Muir, and Harry Davidson Esquire
Sheriff-substitute of the county of Edinburgh, upon the 10th day of August
current, the seals having been previously inspected by the said Thomas Muir,
and declared by him to be entire, and an inventory of the contents thereof was
made, and signed by the said Thomas Muir and Harry Davidson, and others then
present. AND the above mentioned declaration, emitted by the said Thomas Muir
before the Sheriff-depute of Edinburgh upon the 2d of January 1^93, together
with a copy of 'Paine's Works,' recommended and circulated as aforesaid; as
also, a copy of he said Declaration of Rights, and an Address to the people,
approved of by a number of the Friends of Reform in Paisley, circulated as
aforesaid; as also, a copy of the Dialogue between the Governors and the
Governed. circulated as aforesaid; as also, a copy of 'The Patriot.' circulated
as aforesaid; as also, a copy of the Address from the Society of United
Irishmen in Dublin, to the Delegates for 'promoting a Reform in Scotland,'
produced, read, and approved of by the said Thomas Muir, in manner aforesaid,
and attested by the subscriptions of James Denh^lm, James Campbell, and others;
and also* a book, entitled, The Book of the Records of the Association of the
Friends of the Constitution and of the People of Kirkintilloch, volume 1st,
Entered at Kirkintilloch, November 1792; and also the foresaid inventory, made
up before the said Thomas Muir and the Sheriff-substitute of Edinburgh, upon
the said 10th day of August current, with the whole articles and papers there
in contained and referred to, will all be used in evidence against the said
Thomas Muir, and will for that purpose in due time be lodged with the Clerk of
the High Court of Justiciary, before which he is to be tried, that he may have
an opportunity of seeing the same. AT LEAST, times and places above mentioned,
the said seditious speeches and harangues were uttered, the said seditious
books or pamphlets recommended to be purchased and perused, the said seditious
books or pamphlets circulated and distributed, as aforesaid, and the said
wicked and inflammatory address produced, read, recommended, and approved of in
manner above mentioned, and the said Thomas Muir is guilty actor, or art and
part, of all and each, or one or other of the foresaid crimes. ALL WHICH, or
part thereof, being found proven, be the verdict of an assize, before our Lord
Justice General, Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioners Justiciary, in a
Court of Justiciary to be holden by them within the Criminal Courthouse of
Edinburgh, the said Thomas Muir OUGHT to be punished with the pains of law, to
deter others from committing the like crimes in all time coming.

LIST OF WITNESSES.
1. John Brown. weaver at Lennoxtoun, in the parish of Campsie, and county of
S^^ing. 2. (...) Spei^, weaver at Lennoxtoun aforesaid. 3. William Robertson,
excise-officer at Lennoxtoun aforesaid. 4 Fr^ncis Clark, callico printer at
Lennox Mill, parish and coun^y aforesaid. 5. Ale^a^der Jo^n^ton. bleacher at
Kincaid Printfield, in ^arish of Campsie aforesaid. 6. Hen^y F^eeland, weaver
in Kirkintilloch. 7. Willaim Muir, weaver in Kirkintilloch. 8 John Sco^t,
wright in Kirkintilloch. 9 Robert Weddel, weaver in Kirkintilloch. 10. James
Baird, hosier in Kirkintilloch. 11. The Rev. Mr. William Dunn, minister of
Kirkintilloch. 12. John Scott, weaver in Townhead of Kirkintilloch. 13. Willim
Knox, weaver there. 14. James Muir, student of divinity residing at Campsie.
15. Anne Fisher, servant, or late servant, to Mr. John Carlisle collector of
the cess in Glasgow. 16. Thomas Wilson, barber in Glasgow. 17 William Reid,
bookseller and stationer in Glasgow. 18. James Brash, bookseller and stationer
there. 19. David Blair, manufacturer in Glasgow. 20. John Muir, senior, late
hat-manufacturer, presently residing in Glasgow. 21. John Barclay, residing in
the parish of Calder, in the county of Lanark, and one of the elders of the
said parish. 22. The Reverend Mr. James Lapslie, minister of Campsie. 23. James
Campbell, writer to the signet. 24. James Denholm, writer in Edinburgh. 25.
Hugh Bell, brewer in Edinburgh. 26. John Buchanan, baker in Canongate of
Edinburgh. 27. Mr. John Morthland, advocate. 28. William Skirving of
Strathruddie, residing in Edinburgh. 29. Lieutenant Colonel William Da^rymple
of Fordell. 30. Mr. Robert Forsyth, advocate. 31. Richard Fowler, student of
medicine, residing, or lately residing in Edinburgh. 32. John Pringle, Esquire
Sheriff-depute of the county of Edinburgh. 33. William Scott, solicitor-at-law,
and procurator-fiscal of the said county of Edinburgh. 34. Joseph Match, writer
in Edinburgh. 35. Sir James Colquhoun of Luss, Baronet, Sheriff-depute of the
shire of Dunbarton. 36. William Honyman, Esquire Sheriff-depute of the shire of
Lanark. 37. Harry Davidson, Esquire Sheriff-substitute of the county of Edinburgh.
38. George Williamson, messenger in Edinburgh. 30. Mr. James Carmichael,
commander of the Justice hulk, in the service of the Board of Customs. 40.
William Ross, Esquire one of the Justices of Peace for the county of Wigton.
LIST OF ASSIZE.
Sir John Clerk, of Pennycuick, Baronet. Sir William Dick, of Prestonfield,
Baronet. Sir John Inglis, of Cram^nd, Baronet. Sir Archibald Hope, of
Craighall, Baronet. Sir Philip Ainsle, of Comley-Bank. Charles Wa^son, of
Saughton. James Forest, of Comiston. Thomas Craig, of Riccarton. John
Wauchope, of Edmonstone. John Balfour younger, of Pilrig. David Johnston, of
Bavelaw. John Davie, of Gaviside.
John Trotter, of Mortonhall. Gilbert Innes, of Stow. John Davidson, of
Ravelrigg. James Rocheid, of Inverleith. James Calderwood Durham, of Polton.
Thomas Wright, of Greenhill. James Gill spy, of Spyelaw. Thomas Sivewright, of
South-house. John Alves, of Dalkeith, portioner. Partrick ^ridie, hatter in
Edinburgh. Thomas Brown, bookseller there. Andrew Smith, perfumer there.
Alexander Ing^is, merchant there. William Pattison, merchant there. William
Cooper, upholsterer there. Andrew Ramsay, slater there. William Dalrymple,
merchant there. Francis Buchan, merchant there. James Mansfield, banker there.
Donald Smith, banker there. Samuel Patterson, merchant there. George Kinnear,
banker there. Andrew Forbes, merchant there. John Horner, merchant there.
WM. NAIRNE. ALEX. ABERCROMBY. JOHN SWINTON.


To this indictment, Mr. Muir pleaded, Not Guilty. He was then asked by the
Lord Justice Clerk, if he had any objections to the relevancy of the charges
which it contained. Mr. Muir replied that he had uniformly considered the Jury
as the only judges of the law and of the fact; and that, in this stage of the
trial, he would plead upon no point, which might preclude the determination of
the Jury, by a previous decision of the Court.

IN point of form, it is required in Scotland, that the person accused should
communicate upon the evening preceding the trial, in writing the substance of
his defense with a list of the witnesses intended to be adduced in exculpation.
Mr. Muir had complied with this rule, and the Clerk of Court read the following
defenses:

DEFENSES.
THE Criminal Libel is false and injurious; so far from exciting the people to
riot and insurrection, it can easily be proved, by a numerous list of
witnesses, that, upon every occasion, the panel exhorted them to pursue
measures moderate, legal, peaceable, and constitutional. The charge of
distributing seditious publications, and of advising the people to read them,
is equally false and calumnious. The panel admits, that on the great national
question, concerning an equal representation of the People in the House of
commons, he exerted every effort to procure in that House, a full, fair, and
equal representation of the people, as he considered it to be a measure, (and
still does,) the most salutary for the interest of his Country. But the panel
offers to prove, that as he considered the information of the People to be the
chief thing requisite to accomplish this great object, he uniformly advised
them to read every publication, upon either side, which the important question
of Parliamentary Reform had occasioned.

Annexed are a list of witnesses in exculpation.

Under protestation to add and e^k.

(Signed) THOMAS MUIR.

LIST of WITNESSES, adduced in Exculpation.
William Riddle, baker in Glasgow, John Hamilton, manufacturer, St Andrew's
Squares Glasgow. David Dale, jun. manufacturer there. Basil Ronald of
Broomelone, glover in Glasgow. Alexander Park, writer in Glasgow. George
Waddel, manufacturer in Glasgow. George Russel, merchant in Gallowgate,
Glasgow. John Brock, manufacturer in Glasgow. John Wilson, shoemaker in Gorbals
of Glasgow. John Lockhart, mason there. Walter Heart, heritor in Tradestown,
Glasgow. Hugh Moodie, spirit dealer in Glasgow. James Cooper, shoemaker,
Glasgow. John Gray, manufacturer, Glasgow. Daniel M'Arthur, one of the masters
of the grammar school, Glasgow. James Richardson, sen. merchant, Glasgow.
William C^ydesdale, cabinet-maker there. John Tennant, brewer there. George
Bell, jun. manufacturer there. George Stayley, manufacturer in Balmanno Street,
Glasgow. Robert M'Kinlay, print-cutter in Mr. Fulton's employment, near
Paisley. William Orr, jun. manufacturer in Paisley. James Craig, manufacturer,
Water Brae, Paisley. James Gemmel, merchant, Story Street, Paisley. William
Muir, Fisherrow, Paisley. Hamilton Ballantyne, Story Street, Paisley. James
Muir, weaver, Shuttle Street, Paisley. John Buchannan, foreman at Kincaid
Printfield, in the parish of Campsie. Robert Honorie, printer there. Patrick
Horn, printer there. Smollet M'Lintock, block-cutter there. William Henry, of
Borrowstown parish, Baldernock. James M'Gibbon, printer, at Kincaid printfield.
John Freeland, distiller in Kirkintilloch. Andrew Rochead, younger of
Duntiblaemill, parish of Kirkintilloch. Robert Boak. surgeon in Kirkintilloch.
John Edmond, print-cutter, Kincaid printfield. Robert Millar, weaver in
Cambauslang. The Rev. Mr. William Dunn, minister of Kirkintilloch. David
Wallace, late servant to James Muir of Huntershill, now to James Stark of
Adamslie. Robert Scott, weaver in Kirkintilloch. Archibald Binnie,
type-founder, Edinburgh. Charles Salter, brewer in Edinburgh. Peter Wood,
teacher in Portsburgh. John Buchannan, baker in Canongate. -- Bell,
tobacconist, Canongate. William Skirving, Edinburgh. Maurice Thompson,
starch-maker there. Andrew Wilson, brewer in Portsburgh. John Smith, weaver,
Lothian Road. Peter Hardy, brewer in Portsburgh. Col. William Dalrymple, of
Fordel. William Johnston, Esquire Edinburgh. The Right Hon. Lord Daer. -- Newton,
residing St Patrick's Square, Edinburgh,
The following Interlocutor was then pronounced by the Court upon the relevancy.
The Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, having
considered the cri^inal libel, raised and pursued at the instance of Roleur
Bundas, Esquire of Arniston, his Majesty's Advocate, for his Majesty's interest,
against the said Thomas Muir, panel, they find the libel relevant to infer the
pains of law, but a low the panel to prove all facts and circumstances that
may tend to exculpate him, or alleviate his guilt; and remit the panel with
the libel, as found re^^v^n^, to the knowledge of an Assize.

ASSIZE.
Sir James Foulis of Coll^ Captain John lnglis of (...) John Wauchope of
Edmonston. John Balfour, younger of Pilrig. John Trotter of Morton-Hall.
Gilbert Innes of Stow. James Rochead of Inverleith. John Alves of Dalkeith,
Portioner. Donald Smith, banker, Edin. James Dickson, bookseller, Edin. George
Kinnear, banker, Edin. Andrew Forbes, merchant, Edin.
Immediately afterward the Lord Justice Clerk, asked Mr. Muir, if he had any
thing further to state, in support of these defenses, as in the further course
of the trial, he would be precluded from adducing any thing extraneous.

Mr. Muir then rose up and said, according to the rule of court, I have the
evening before this day, communicated to the public prosecutor the substance of
my defense in writing. The truth of every word in that defense, I shall
strongly prove before I leave this bar. I admit that I exerted every effort, to
procure a more equal representation of the People in the House of Commons. If
that be a crime, I plead guilty to the charge. I acknowledge that I considered
the cause of Parliamentary Reform to be essential to the salvation of my
Country: But I deny that I ever advised the People to attempt to accomplish
that great object, by any means which the constitution did not sanction. I
grant that I advised the people, to read different publications upon both
sides, which this great national question had excited, and I am not ashamed to
assign my motives. I consider the ignorance of the people, on the one hand, to
be the source from which despotism flows. I consider, upon the other hand, an
ignorant people, impressed with a sense of grievances, and wishing to have
these grievances redressed, to be exposed to certain misery and to complete
ruin. KNOWLEDGE must always precede REFORMATION, and who shall DARE to say that
the PEOPLE should be debarred from INFORMATION, where it concerns them so
materially? I am accused of sedition; and yet, I can prove by thousands of
witnesses, that I warned the people of the danger of that crime, exhorted them
to adopt none but measures which were constitutional, and entreated them, to
connect liberty with knowledge, and both with morality. This is what I can
prove. If these are crimes, I am guilty.

CAPTAIN INGLIS, before being sworn, mentioned that he was a servant of
Government; that he understood Mr. Muir was accused of a crime against
Government; and that he did not consider it as proper, that Mr. Muir should be
tried by a Jury composed of servants of Government; that his mind felt
scrupulous, labored under much anxiety, and he begged leave to decline being a
Juryman. Captain Inglis was informed by the Court, that there was no
impropriety in his being a Juryman, although belonging to the service of
Government.

The Lord Justice Clerk, in the usual form, asked Mr. Muir, if he had any
objections to state to the first five gentlemen, whose names he had selected
from the list of assize.

Mr. MUIR said: Of these gentlemen I have no personal knowledge. Their
situations in life are respectable, and I believe them to be men of truth, and
of honor; yet my situation and theirs is so peculiar, that I am obliged to
object to them being upon this Jury. The question of Parliamentary Reform has
agitated deeply, in proportion to its magnitude, the minds of men in this
country; different opinions have been adopted, and different parties have been
formed. These gentlemen belong to an association which assembled in Goldsmith's
Hall, calling themselves the Friends of the Constitution, united to support it
against Republicans and Levellers, and expressing their zeal to suppress tumult
and sedition. I belong to the association of the Friends of the People. Viewing
a reform in the representation of the people as a measure the most conducive to
the stability of the constitution, and to the felicity of the people we united
our common exertions, by legal measures, to accomplish that object.

To the constitution, in its genuine principles, we have solemnly pledged
ourselves -- Never have we professed to be its enemies, yet the association in
Goldsmith's Hall, by a deliberate and public act of their's, have declared,
that we were the enemies of the constitution. Equally zealous in our
declarations to the world -- in our reprobating riot and sedition; and sincere
in our hearts, that association has denounced us to this country, as attempting
to kindle the torch of civil war, and to lay it in blood and in destruction.
The fact upon which I found this charge is notorious, and cannot be denied. A
Convention of Delegates, from all the Societies of the Friends of the People in
Scotland, assembled in this city, upon the 11th day of December last. Of this
Convention I had the honor of being a member. The convention accorded with the
association in Goldsmith's Hall, in their zeal to support the constitution, in
their abhorrence of sedition, and in their determination to concur with good
citizens in their suppression of riot and of tumult. To testify then to this
association, their principles and their object, the Convention ordered a number
of its members to repair to their Hall, and to subscribe the book which they
had opened, of adherence to the constitution. In this number I was included. We
did so. And, What were the consequences? The association erazed our names, and
published in the papers of the day their proceeding. Was not this an act of
public proscription against us all? Accused this day of sedition, of an attempt
to overthrow the constitution, shall those men be my Jurymen? who have not
merely accused me, but likewise judged and condemned me without knowing me,
without leaving me the possibility of the power of vindication. This trial is
no trivial matter. It affects me, but it affects the country more. The noise of
it will pa^s down to other times, and posterity may fancy their most valuable
rights connected with its consequences.

A respectable gentleman of the five to whom I now object, has felt the
delicacy of his situation, and has honorably avowed his scruples. Such
sentiments, so respectful in themselves, I trust are common to all his
colleagues.

This is not the only objection I state to the Gentlemen of Goldsmith's Hall
being of my Jury. I am accused of circulating the works of Mr. Pain. That
association has publicly advertised their horrors at the doctrines contained in
these books. Nay, more, they have offered a reward of five guineas, to any who
will discover a person who may have circulated them! If this is not
prejudicating my cause, I demand to know what prejudication is?

Upon these two objections, I shall make no further observations. To suppose
them not well founded, would be to insult the common sense and the common
feelings of mankind.

I demand justice. Let me be tried fairly, not by a Jury of the association of
Goldsmith's Hall, not by a Jury of the Association of the Friends of the
People, but by men unconnected with either, whose minds cannot possibly be
supposed warped with prejudices. I THEREFORE SOLEMNLY PROTEST, that no person
who is a member of the Association in Goldsmith's Hall, should, or can, be of
the Jury in my trial.

Solicitor-General BLAIR replied, That he considered this objection to be of
the most extraordinary nature. The panel is accused of forming associations,
contrary to the Constitution, and he presumes to object to those Gentlemen, who
formed associations in its defense. With equal propriety might the panel
object to their Lordships on the Bench, to be his judges in this trial: their
Lordships had sworn to defend their Constitution.

Mr. MUIR. This day, I will not descend into the quibbles of a Lawyer. I object
to these gentlemen, not because they associated in defense of the constitution.
I too, as well as they, have associated in defense of the constitution. But my
objection is, that they, by an act of theirs, have publicly accused me of being
an enemy to the constitution, have already pronounced the sentence of
condemnation, and have imposed upon my name the seal of proscription.

LORD JUSTICE CLERK. -- If the objections of the panel were relevant, it would
extend far indeed; it would go to every person who had taken the oaths to
government. I can see nothing in the objection, and I am clear for repelling it.

LORD HENDERLAND. -- I can see nothing in the objection; these gentlemen
entered into a society for a particular purpose, and had the right of judging
of the qualification of their members; they did not think Mr. Muir or his
friends proper members. In no trial whatever could this be a good objection.

The objection was repelled. Mr. Muir, however, continued to repeat it, as
every five were sworn.

When the list of the five last was presented, he said it was not sufficient to
say that these gentlemen were free to form a society, this is a fact which no
man in his sound senses will dispute. But, this society when formed, had
opened, in a public place, a book for public subscription. By repeated
advertisements they had called upon every friend to the constitution, every
enemy to sedition and tumult, every person inimical to a public division of
property by a levelling system, to come and subscribe their names in that book,
as expressive of their attachment to the constitution, to property, and to
peace. Every porter, every chairman from the streets, was allowed to insert his
subscription. Why were the names of the panel and his friends expunged? Was it
not a public denunciation of their being the supporters of that system of
plunder and of disorder, which that association was to oppose?

When the Jury were sworn in, Mr. Muir again stated, that he believed them to
be men of truth and integrity, but never would cease recalling to their
attention the peculiarity of their situation. They had already determined his
fate. They had already judged his cause; and, as they valued their reputation,
their own internal peace, he entreated -- Here Mr. Muir was interrupted by the
Court, who concurred in opinion, that his conduct was exceedingly improper, in
taking up their time, as the objection had been repelled!

The counsel for the Crown now proceeded to call the witnesses.

ALEXANDER JOHNSTON.
Mr. MUIR objected to this witness. He said he did not know him. He did not
remember if ever he had seen him, but he could clearly prove, by respectable
witnesses, that this person had said, upon hearing of his arrival in Scotland,
that he would do every thing in his power to have him hanged.

Mr. MUIR was asked if he could condescend upon any particular circumstances of
malice, which this witness entertained against him. He replied that he did not
know him, therefore could specify no circumstances from which the proposed
witness might have entertained malice against him; but the fact that he had so
expressed himself was certain and true, and if permitted, he would immediately
substantiate what he had asserted, by the most convincing proof.

The objection was repelled. The Court observed, that witnesses might be averse
to bear testimony. That for this purpose they might make similar assertions in
order to disqualify themselves. That if, upon objections of this kind, they
were to be cast, the ends of public Justice. might be defeated; besides, it was
observed, that the witness would be purged of malice upon oath.

The objection was overruled, and the witness was adduced.

ALEXANDER JOHNSTON,
Depones, That he was present at a meeting in Kirkintilloch, sometime in the
month of November last, but does not remember the day. That the meeting had
then no name, but has been since known by the name of a Reform Meeting. Mr.
Muir was present who harangued the meeting. As far as he recollect, Mr. Muir
addressed the President; stated the disadvantages in the Representation, some
Boroughs being rotten, others having no vote. He stated the population of
England, and Scotland, and mentioned, that from the smallness of the number who
voted, the people were not fully represented. Mr. Muir said, that if a man paid
L. 20,000 for a seat in Parliament, he behoved to derive some interest from his
seat, and he referred to the people, whether it was reasonable that a man
should pay so much for a seat in Parliament, without deriving some emolument in
return. That the Duke of Richmond, had complained of this, and had L. 30,000.
-- He was silent. -- That Mr. Muir compared our Constitution with the French,
and said, that beyond a doubt they would be successful. That they were more
equally represented, and their taxes much less. That two thirds of the French
national debt was already paid. That a manufacturer in this country could not
bring his goods to market with the same advantage as the French Manufacturers;
of course, we should lose our trade. Mr. Muir said, the Society ought to be
acquainted with the principles of those members they admitted. That the sole
intention of these Societies, was to procure a more equal and a shorter
duration of Parliament. That the means these Societies were to use, for these
ends, was to petition Parliament, and to communicate their resolutions, and
extend their knowledge, by publishing and circulating useful publications. That
in order to obtain that knowledge, they ought to get all political pamphlets
from a neighboring Bookseller? but he did not mention any pamphlet in
particular.

Upon the interrogatory of the Solicitor-General. Deponed, That nothing was
said about a King, but that the Constitution ought to consist of King, Lords,
and Commons. There was mention made of Paine's Rights of Man, but not by Mr.
Muir. One man in the Society, not in a public manner, but to his neighbor
privately, said, he had read that work. The most of the members were young
weavers, from eighteen to twenty years of age. He knew of no previous meeting
at Kirkintilloch, this one being the constituting one. Mr. Muir did not come
into the meeting till after it was constituted, but had promised in the morning
to be there. He seemed to be the principal man in that Society, and said, he
belonged to other Societies, of the same sort: He recommended a timeous
accomplishment of the business, in order, that when the different meetings had
communicated with each other, they might lay it before Parliament. At the time
he recommended the above measure, some of the members wished to form meetings.
Being interrogated by Mr. Muir, he deponed, That Mr. Muir did recommend peace
and regularity to the meeting, and observed that any tumult or disorder would
ruin their common cause. He told the meeting, that there was no other mode of
procuring redress, but by applying to Parliament, and he recommended to the
meeting to be ware of admitting immoral characters as members.

ROBERT WEDDEL,
Depones, That he remembers a meeting in Kirkintilloch, about the beginning of
November last, which was called the meeting of the Friends of the People, or,
for a Parliamentary Reform. That Mr. Muir was at this meeting, which was the
constituting meeting -- came in after the meeting began, and made a speech in
which he advised regularity in their proceedings; and mentioned that they ought
to proceed, in a constitutional manner, as the law now is, by King, Lords, and
Commons. He said nothing about the expense of a King, nor the burden of taxes,
nor the comparative expense of the French Government, nor did he mention the
success of their arms. He spoke about ten minutes. After the meeting broke up,
the witness met Mr. Muir with some others, in Mr. Wallace's, Baker in
Kirkintilloch, where the conversation was about the politics of the country --
there were about eight present in Mr. Wallace's, or one fourth of the number
that was at the meeting. The witness was Vice President of the meeting, Mr.
Freeland was President, and James Baird was Secretary, there were no other
officers, and all these were with Mr. Muir in Wallace's. He does not remember
the particulars of the conversation, but Flower on the French Constitution was
mentioned, which he never before had heard of. He thinks it was Mr. Muir that
mentioned this book, in speaking of new publications, and he remembers books
being spoken of. Depones, That at the meeting, one Boyd asked Mr. Muir's
opinion about Paine's Works, when Mr. Muir said, that it was foreign to their
purpose. He remembers this, because he was angry at the question being asked.

Upon the Lord Advocate's interrogatory, Whether Flower's book had been
recommended, Mr. Muir objected to the question. The witness was removed.

Mr. MUIR. -- There is no accusation brought against this book in the libel.
Let it be admitted that this book is of a seditious or a treasonable nature,
yet, as I am not accused of either recommending or circulating it, how can any
thing under this indictment, concerning it, be adduced in evidence against me?
I plead upon a great principle of natural justice: I look forward to other
times, and I tremble for the precedent. If this were nor the case. I would not
say that I merely approved of that book of Mr. Flower's, but, in this great
audience, I would recommend its principles, in general, to every man who valued
the interests of his country, and whose feelings interest him in the happiness
of human kind.

LORD ADVOCATE. -- The charge against the Panel is sedition, and it is
branched out under various heads. One of these was, advising people to purchase
seditious books; and he was entitled to examine as to such facts, though every
particular book or fact was not condescended on in the libel.

Mr. MUIR. -- Neither in justice not in law has the Public Prosecutor a right
to bring against me a general charge. Every criminal charge, upon the facts,
must be special, in order that the panel may know the crime that is alleged
against him, and accordingly prepare the special matter of his defense.

LORD JUSTICE CLERK. -- By the Statute of James VI. wherever art and part is
libelled, there can be no objection to the generality. This is a proper
question; and it has a tendency to establish the major proposition, and it
ought to be sustained.

The Lord Advocate gave up the question.

The witness was again calledin* and deponeed, That he knows of no books having
been recommended to be purchased in consequence of this meeting, except Henry's
History of England. The books purchased by the witness for the Society or
others, were three or four copies of the Political progress, -- three or four
copies of the Paisley Declaration, one copy for his own use and one for the
Society: That he was not ordered by the meeting to buy them, but bought them
for his own use, and to show his neighbors. He never purchased any of Paine's
Pamphlets, but he got a copy of that pamphlet, he does not know from whom, and
which happened sometime before the meeting. He never saw the Dialogue between
the Governors and the Governed. He saw the Patriot, and was shown it by Mr.
William Muir. Upon being interrogated by the Panel, depones, That he
recommended Henry's History but no other book, -- That he recommended order and
regularity; and upon the Solicitor General's interrogatory, depones, That Mr.
Muir particularly said, that they would be the more successful the more they
were constitutional: That their end was to obtain a more equal Representation
in Parliament: That the witness meant by that a more equal Representation; but
he does not know the precise terms: That he cannot say more, but there were
different opinions in the Society, one part of them wanting it confined to the
landed interest, another to have it that every man should have a vote, but Mr.
Muir gave no opinion. Upon Mr. Muir's interrogatory, depones, that Mr. Muir
recommended to avoid riot, and said, that tumult would ruin the cause; he also
advised them to take care of the moral character of the members whom they
admitted. He does not remember whether Mr. Muir said he would desert them, if
they became unconstitutional, and he does not remember that he recommended them
to purchase any other book than Henry's History of England.

REV. MR. JAMES LAPSLIE.
The Public Prosecutor next adduced as a witness Mr. Lapslie --

Mr. MUIR -- Let this witness be removed. I have many objections to state
against him.

Mr. Lapslie was accordingly removed.

Mr. MUIR. -- I have said that I have many objections to state, both to the
admissibility and credibility of this witness. My delicacy with regard to that
man, will, at present, permit me to adduce the least weighty only; for I mean
to prove the most important, in a different shape, in a criminal prosecution
against him, when he and I shall exchange places at this bar. I know not what
title this Reverend Gentlemen has to act as an agent for the Crown; but this I
offer to prove, that he assisted the Messengers of the Law, in exploring and
citing witnesses against me; that he attended the sheriffs in their different
visits to the parishes of Campsie and Kirkintilloch, that previously to the
precognition, he converted with the witnesses of the Crown, that he attended
their precognition, put questions to them and took down notes; nay, more, that,
without being cited by the Prosecutor, he offered himself ultroneously against
me, and insisted that his declaration should be taken in the unusual form, with
his oath attending it, to attest its truth. Upon other matters I shall not
dwell; it is sufficient for me say, that this witness attended the precognition
of other witnesses. The uniform and the late decisions of your Lordships have
sustained this objection -- the witness therefore cannot be examined.

The LORD ADVOCATE said, that he knew the Court had sustained the objection in
many late cases. He would not dispute the point of Law at present, afterward
indeed he might upon some future occasion, but consented that Mr. Muir should
be allowed to prove the first part of his objection, of Mr. Lapslie's activity
as an agent in collecting evidence against them.

In proof of the objection Mr. Muir called

HENRY FREELAND,
Depones, That he knows Mr. Honeyman, (Sheriff of Lanarkshire) and saw him at
Kirkintilloch, in company with Mr. Lapslie and another gentleman, a writer in
Glasgow. Mr. Honeyman examined the witness about Mr. Muir; and, during the
precognition, Mr. Lapslie also put questions to the witness. He asked him, if
he had got a College education, which being answered in the negative, Mr.
Lapslie said he was a clever fellow, and when he saw him write, he said it was
a pity such a clever fellow should be a weaver, and that it was in Mr.
Honeyman's power to procure him a birth, which was said in presence of Mr.
Honeyman. That when Mr. Honeyman examined him about how often Mr. Muir had been
at Kirkintilloch meetings, Mr. Lapslie also asked him if Mr. Muir had been more
than once there. That on the above occasion when Mr. Lapslie praised the
witness's abilities, the witness answered, that it was flattery, when Mr.
Lapslie clapped him on the shoulder, and said it was no such thing, but that it
was probable Mr. Honeyman would see him again.

Mr. Muir then called

ROBERT HENRY,
Who deponed, That he was examined by Mr. Honeyman about Mr. Muir: That Mr.
Lapslie was present all the time he was so examined.

ROBERT M'KINLEY
Was then called, who deponed, That he was examined at Campsie by Mr. Honeyman,
in presence of Mr. Lapslie and Mr. Shiels. Mr. Lapslie spoke to the witness
before the examination, and told him to speak the whole truth, and frequently
exhorted him, during the examination, to tell every thing as it concerned Mr.
Muir, and not him the witness.

Mr Muir proceeded to call James M Gibbon, when the Lord Advocate gave up Mr.
Lapslie's evidence; consequently there no longer remained any necessity to
examine more witnesses, with regard to the conduct of that gentleman. The
Prosecutor said, that he gave up Mr. Lapslie as a witness, not on the ground of
his being present at the precognitions, but because he appeared, if not an
agent, at least to have taken an active part in the business.

The evidence for the Crown then proceeded.

HENRY FREELAND.
When this witness appeared, Mr. Muir observed, that the Jury would remember,
that from what this witness had already deponed, it would appear that he had
got the promise of a good deed.

Then the witness being examined, depones, That he was present at a meeting in
Kirkintilloch, which was called a Society for Reform, on the 3d November last.
He was president that night and sat in the Chair. Mr. Muir was there, and made
a speech of about a quarter of an hour. The general purport of the speech was
about shortening the duration of Parliament, and a more equal representation.
He thought the taxes might be lessened by these means* That the Reform was not
to take effect as to the King and House of Lords, but only of the Commons. He
mentioned the success of the French arms, and that liberty would be established
in France. He spoke of books in general, but he does not recollect the name of
any being mentioned but Henry's History of England: in general it was political
books. The books this witness remembers to have seen, are the Proceedings of
the Westminster Association, the Patriot, and Paisley Declaration. It had been
suggested by one Boyd to purchase Pain, but Mr. Muir shook his head, and said
it was foreign to the purpose: That the witness some time before this spoke to
Mr. Muir about Paine's book, and asked it as a favor to get the loan of it,
and Mr. Muir bid him search his great coat pocket, and he would get it, and
that he got it accordingly: That this was on the Tuesday; eight days before the
meeting, at which time Mr. Muir had sent for him to Mr. Wallace's, and told him
that he had heard of the intended society, and that the witness was to be a
member; and that Mr. Muir and the witness afterward talked of societies in
general: That the witness took Pain home with him, and read it, and gave it to
his sister: That he gave it to one Scott, and also to one Stewart, who had
sought it several times, and was angry he had not got it sooner: That Mr. Muir
said, when the witness first asked the book from him, that he thought it had a
tendency to mislead the people, and that nothing further passed in respect to
it; and that he has concealed nothing: That he was surprised Mr. Muir did not
recommend it, because every body else spoke well of it, and was surprised that
Mr. Muir said it had a bad tendency: That Mr. Muir did not approve of the book,
but on the contrary, said it had a bad tendency: That he knows no particular
reason for his being sent for: That he knows books were bought for the society;
and that he wrote to Mr. Muir, saying that the books then in circulation gave
satisfaction: That he received a letter from Mr. Muir, telling that Mr.
Provan's cause had been decided in the Court of Session: That he got two
letters from Mr. Muir, in which he desired the witness to impress the society
with the importance ^^^nding a delegate to the Convention, and hoped to see him
there, but said nothing about the books: That the Paisley Declaration purchased
for the Society was not recommended by any particular person: That the book
before mentioned was afterward given up by the witness to the Sheriff; and the
book being shown to him, he thinks it the same: That he cut up the leaves: That
the witness first mentioned the book to Mr. Muir: That there were two pamphlets
in Mr. Muir's pocket Upon Mr. Muir's Interrogatory -- depones, there was an
intention of having this society long before the witness saw him: That Mr.
Wallace, at whose house there was an adjournment from the meeting as aforesaid,
was an old servant of Mr. Muir's father, and Kirkintilloch is within four miles
of Huntershill, his father's house: That he did not recommend any other book
than Henry's History of England: That he told them all riot would be ruin to
the cause, and recommended them to be constitutional and regular: That the
people were to petition Parliament, and that there was no other way of getting
a Reform. That on Pain being recommended in the society, Mr. Muir said it was
foreign to the subject: that the witness having heard that a Proclamation of
the King was against that book, he was upon that account curious to see it, and
he first spoke of it to Mr. Muir.

WILLIAM MUIR.
When the oath was proposed to be administered to this witness, he refused to
swear, as being contrary to his religious principles. Being asked what these
principles were, he declared he was one of those who are called the Mountain:
That he had no objections to be examined: That he would tell the whole truth,
but could not wrong his own conscience by taking an oath, which he thought
unlawful.

The Court observed to him, that if he would not swear, no other alternative
remained to them, but to commit him to prison; that there was no way by which
he could ever obtain his liberation, and that his imprisonment would be
perpetual. He replied, that he could not help it, and that he knew the Lord was
present in prison, as well as present any where else.

The Judges asked him, if he believed in the Bible; to which he answered, he
did. He was then interrogated, if he could point out any particular passage
which taught him the unlawfulness of taking an oath. In order to remove his
scruples they quoted several passages from the Bible, but he still adhered to
his first declaration, saying, that he could not take the oath without
deserting his principles, which he was determined never to do.

The LORD ADVOCATE moved, that this person should be committed to prison for
his contumacy, informed him there was no way by which he could ever be set
free; and, in express words, declared that his imprisonment would be eternal.

Mr. MUIR -- I believe this person to be a good and conscientious man. Whether
he be right or wrong in refusing to take this oath, is not an object of my
inquiry. He is adduced as a witness by the prosecutor against me. I have
therefore the most material interest that he should be sworn, but rather than
he should suffer for acting according to the dictates of his conscience, I wave
my right, and I will admit every word which he utters, although not upon oath,
to be as true as if it were.

The Court observed, that neither they, nor the jury could listen to any
evidence but what was given upon oath. The law expressly required it, and it
could not be dispensed with, and that the Prosecutor and public justice was
concerned in this matter also.

William Muir persisted in his refusal. The Court committed him to prison,
declaring they knew no mode by which by the law of Scotland, he could be
liberated. By the officers of Court he was conducted to prison.

JOHN BROWN
Depones, That he was present at a meeting at Campsie, about the month of
October or November last: That Mr. Muir and Mr. Buchanan both spoke at the
meeting: That he also was at a meeting in Kirkintilloch: That he does not
understand these meetings were called by Mr. Muir: That he has bought Paine's
book, but does not recollect whether he did so before or after the meeting:
That he bought it merely from curiosity, seeing the title in a window: That he
does not remember, whether or not that book was mentioned at the meeting: That
he does not recollect Mr. Muir mentioning France: That the tenor of Mr. Muir's
speech was to inculcate upon them the necessity of sobriety, to pursue
constitutional measures, and to read constitutional books: That there were
(...) books in the meeting, and that at a conversation he heard Mr. Muir say,
That Paine's book was not a constitutional book, and would not do.

ANNE FISHER,
Depones, that she was sometime servant to Mr. Muir's father; she knows about
the time libelled, Mr. Muir was much busied about reading and writing, but does
not know the subject* That she was sent to Mr. Mennons' with a message from Mr.
Muir, and with a paper, which she thinks was entitled a Declaration of Rights,
which had not been printed as he wanted, and to get it corrected. She saw at
that time, a good many country people coming about Mr. Muir's father's shop:
That Mr. Muir has frequently said to these country people, that Mr. Paine's
book was a good book: That she has frequently bought this book for people in
the shop, and that this was sometimes at the desire of Mr. Muir, and sometimes
at that of these people. She bought both the first and second part of Paine's,
at different times, and when she returned with them, she sometimes laid them on
the table, and sometimes gave them to the people, that she bought two different
parts at different times, for Alexander Muir, Mr. Muir's uncle. She was sent
for a copy by Mr. John Muir hatter, but is no^ sure whether or not she got it.
That John Muir was much pressed upon by the Panel to purchase the book: That,
to the best of her remembrance, she bought one for one Barclay: That she knows
Mr. Muir's hair dresser Thomas Wilson, and she has heard Mr. Muir advising him
to buy Paine's Rights of man, and to keep them in his shop to enlighten the
people, as it, confuted Mr. Burke entirely: She read this book herself, and got
it in her master's house: That she has seen one copy on fine paper, and one or
two coarse ones: That, to the best of her remembrance, she has seen the Paisley
Declaration on Mr. Muir's table, and sometimes in the dining room: That she
thinks she has seen the Dialogue in Mr. Muir's room, and as he heard him read
it, in presence of his mother, sister, and others, in his father's back shop:
That Mr. Muir said it was very clever, and wrote by one Vilnew, one of the
first wi^s in France: That she does not remember to have seen the Patriot: That
she thinks she has heard part of the Paisley Declaration read by Mr. Muir in
the said back shop, in presence of somebody, that being the common place where
he read these books: That she has been sent from the back shop upstairs for
some books: That she does not recollect whether he thus read these books on a
market day; and that she has known him read some French law books: That she has
heard him speak about Reform and members of Parliament: That if every body had
a vote, he would be made member for Calder: that members of Parliament were to
have thirty or forty shillings a day; and that, in that case, there would be
none but honest men to keep the Constitution clear: That she has heard it said*
by Mr. Muir, that France was the most flourishing nation in the world; as they
had abolished tyranny and got a free government; that she heard him say the
Constitution of this country was very good, but that many abuses had crept in
which required a thorough Reform: That the Courts of law required Reform also,
for they got their money, for doing nothing but pronouncing sentence of death
upon poor creatures: and that it was an useless parade of their coming in to
Glasgow: That she recollects, about that time, of Mr. Muir being Council for
two soldiers; at their trial she heard him say, that he told the Judges and the
Jury, as much as what they had to expect.

Mr. Muir arose, and made a motion for the witness to withdraw.

Mr. MUIR. then said, that the conduct of the Lord Advocate was, in every
respect, highly reprehensible. He has put a variety of questions to witnesses,
with regard to crimes of which I am not accused. The indictment charges me with
making seditious speeches at Kirkintilloch and at Campsie, vilifying the
Constitution and the King, and inflaming the minds of people to rebellion. It
charges me with distributing seditious books; and it specifie^ that I gave away
Mr. Paine's Works, some numbers of the Patriot, the Dialogue by Volney, betwixt
the Governors and the Governed, the Paisley Declaration of Rights, and of
having read, in the Convention, the address from the Society of United Irishmen
in Dublin. The indictment charges nothing more, there is not a single letter
within its four corners which points out to me the charge of speaking
disrespectfully of Courts of Justice, tending, in any manner, to excite the
people against the administration of the law. Compared to a crime of this
nature, the giving away to single individuals, single copies of books and
pamphlets, which may be esteemed seditious, is a trifle, light as air. If the
public Prosecutor had evidence that I was guilty of this crime, he was
deficient in his duty to the public, in not making it an article of accusation.
He should have manfully, in the light, brought it forward against me, joined a
fair issue betwixt us, and then I would have defended myself the bed way I
could. But to attempt to steal in as evidence in this way, to prove a crime
which he durst not openly libel, because he knew it could not be supported,
merits the severest reprobation. But what is the tendency of this little art?
this domestic and well tutored spy, is brought to prove words which may
irritate your minds against me, -- Yes, this is the artifice, this is its
object, but your justice will render it ineffectual. You will feel the same
contempt which I do. Let us pass from that -- I contend upon the great
principal of natural justice, upon the constitutional law of this country, that
no person can be tried for a crime of which he has not been previously accused.
What is the purpose of an indictment, but to specify the crimes which are to be
proved, in order that the Panel may have an opportunity to prepare his
defense? Why is the indictment served upon him fifteen days before the trial,
but to enable him to accomplish this purpose? It is vain to say, that under the
general charge of sedition, every thing tending to prove it can be adduced,
although not specially mentioned. If this is now to be adopted as law, what
portion remains to us of our national liberties is for ever torn away. Every
thing's ^nsecure, an indictment will no longer be regarded, but a^ a piece of
unmeaning paper. The unfortunate man who ^ece^ves it may say, I am charged with
robbery. I have many witnesses to prove I did not perpetrate this crime, but
what avails preparing a defense? Not a single witness may perhaps be adduced
against me for that offense. I may never hear a word of it in Court, but I may
be instantly called upon to defend myself against a charge of murder, of
sedition, or of high treason. In short, if, under the specious p^etence of
being allowed to introduce what is not specified in the libel to support its
generality, you establish a precedent of this kind, you strike the fatal blow
against individual security, and of general safety. What has been called the
criminal law of this country, its forms, its precedents, and its principles,
are for ever gone. It is vain to say that the statute of James VI. allows this
proceeding. That statute is now obsolete. By the law of Scotland it has gone
into disuetude. It was enacted under a despotic reign, when the freedom of
Scotland was trampled under the foot of power. It opposes every principle of
justice; and will you, after the lapse of so many years, descend into the
grave, drag the pestilential carcass, in order that it may poison the political
atmosphere? -- One word more upon this subject: The charge against me is
sedition. That crime, from its very nature, supposes, and, in fact, it has
often happened, that it may be attended by rapine, and by murder. If,
therefore, under the generality, you allow a charge of vilifying the Courts of
Justice, which I never heard of before, you must, by the same parity of
reasoning, allow a charge of plunder, equally unheard of, to be adduced as an
agravation of the general crime of sedition.

This question is of little importance to the individual, who is now struggling
for the liberties of his country. But the eyes of your children will be fixed
upon this trial, and they will tremble and shudder at the precedent. I feel for
the country, -- I feel for posterity, -- I will not sanction the procedure
which is to produce to both, a system of injustice, of ruin, and of murder.

LORD ADVOCATE said -- Mr. Muir is indicted for the crime of sedition, and that
crime may consist of many facts and circumstances, and of these the strongest
must be, feloniously and seditiously stirring up the inhabitants against a
lawful King and a good Constitution: That, to prove this, he was entitled to
bring in evidence every word of any conversation which might have passed
betwixt Mr. Muir and ignorant people; every paper, every fact, and every
witness which could be got: That no person could deny the relevancy of the
fact, viz. the abusing and vilifying the Courts of Justice to be an aggravation
of the crime of sedition; it is that crime of which the Panel is accused, and
he certainly would be permitted to bring forward every thing which could
support the charge. If it had been necessary to specify, in the indictment, all
the facts against the Panel, that indictment would have covered, by its
magnitude, the walls of that Court.

Mr. MUIR. -- This is not the time to entertain your Lordships with frothy
declamation, with sounding, but unmeaning periods. I pleaded upon just
principles; every person here must see their strength, and must admit their
truth. -- If these are given up, if these are violated, PROPERTY, and LIBERTY,
and LIFE are insecure. Once more; can the Lord Advocate himself say, that if he
was to bring the general charge of murder against me, and should specify that I
had murdered James, would he be allowed to prove, under the generality, that I
had murdered John? Can there be any thing more plain more just, and which
requires less argument than the simple proposition which I support? That if you
accuse a man of a crime, you must tell him what that crime is, in order that he
may be able to defend himself against the accusation. Particular acts must be
specified, in order that the Panel may be able to prove, that either these
acts in themselves were innocent, or that he was not accessory to them. If you
destroy this proposition, if you sanction the reverse, what remains to this
country, but the melancholy prospect of ruin and of despair?

LORD SWINTON was of opinion, that reflecting on Courts of Justice was included
under the general charge of sedition, and that the objection was groundless.

LORD DUNSINNAN, concurred with Lord Swinton, and declared, that the various
circumstances which may come out in evidence need not be specified.

LORD ABERCROMBY could not entertain the smallest doubt of their being a
necessity for specifying in the libel, every seditious expression that might
have been used.

LORD JUSTICE CLERK was clearly of opinion, that when one crime is charged,
another, and a different one cannot be proved under that libel. This none could
dispute. But was that the case here? The Panel is accused of sedition; and
will any person say, that it is not a circumstance of sedition for the Panel
to have inflamed the minds of the people against Courts of Justice, so
important, and so material a branch of the Constitution. Under the Statute of
King James wherever art and part is libelled, the Prosecutor can prove every
fact and circumstance, and no objection of generality is admitted.

The objection was overruled. The witness was called back, who deponed: That
she had heard Mr. Muir say, that a monarchical government would be the best in
this country, under proper restrictions; but that republican governments were
the best: That she has been sent by Mr. Muir to an organist in the streets of
Glasgow, and desired him to play ca ir^.

Mr. Muir was asked, if he had any questions to put to this witness. He
replied; I disdain to put a question to a witness of this description. The
witness turned round to Mr. Muir, and said she wished to ask him one question.
This the Lord Justice Clerk would nor permit, as he would suffer no altercation
of that kind. The Court expressed their strongest disapprobation of the terms
which Mr. Muir had used; and Lord Henderland said, that if Mr. Muir had been
acting as a counsel at the bar, instead of being in that situation, he would
immediately have sent him to prison for it! The conduct and the accuracy of
this witness, was much applauded by the Court.

As the witness was withdrawing, a Juryman called her back, and asked her, if
she had had any quarrel in Mr. Muir's father's family, to which she replied,
that so far from that, her mistress had given her 5 s. more than her wages,
which were at her option, and that Miss Muir, had given her a petticoat, with
some other presents.

THOMAS WILSON,
Depones, That the witness was in use to dress Mr. Muir, and dressed him in
Autumn last: That Mr. Muir having asked the witness if he had bought Paine's
Works; on being told that he had not, he advised him to get a copy, as a
barber's shop was a good place to read, out he did not buy it. That he bought a
copy of the Address to the Addressors, and kept it a day or two, but this was
not by Mr. Muir's advice. That he remembers an old man from the country coming
to Mr. Muir, when he was dressing him, and Mr. Muir told the witness, that the
old man was a great reformer. Upon which the old man replied, that Mr. Muir was
only taunting upon him.

Upon being interrogated by Mr. Muir, depones, that he has heard Mr. Muir say,
that he would maintain the Constitution: That he wished for peace and good
order, and good morals among the people; and that he never heard him say any
thing against the King: That he has seen; Mr. Muir's Library in the country,
which is a large room open to all the family.

The LORD ADVOCATE stated to the Court, that he was informed that William Muir,
the person committed to prison, was a parishioner of the Rev. Mr. Dunn's,
minister of Kirkintilloch, one of the witnesses enclosed against the Panel.
That if Mr. Dunn was allowed to converse with him, he might remove his error,
and preserve him from suffering the dreadful punishment due to his obstinacy.
He therefore moved their Lordships to allow Mr. Dunn to converse with William
Muir for the purpose.

Mr. MUIR opposed the motion. -- He said, he had already consented, and would
still consent to admit the declaration of William Muir against him to be true,
although not accompanied by an oath. To prevent the witness from suffering any
punishment, he would surrender the right which the law gave him; but, that he
certainly would object to conversation betwixt that witness and Mr. Dunn: Not
that he suspected any thing improper to take place in that conversation, but
that this was a great and important cause; a trial that might create precedents
dangerous to those who might come after. By the law of Scotland all witnesses
must be examined apart from each other. The law is jealous of their
conversation: The law dreads their collusion, in framing together a consistent
story. If, in this case, you allow Mr. Dunn and the witness, of both of whom I
have no suspicion, to converse together, you cannot refuse it to others. It
will be sufficient for two witnesses, who may have an interest in a trial, to
play the same concerted game, in order to tell the same concerted story with
more accuracy, and with greater safety.

The LORD ADVOCATE declared, that he would depart from Mr. Dunn as a witness,
and that the conversation should proceed in the presence of an officer of the
court, or of some person on the part of Mr. Muir.

Mr. Dunn was called in. He was ordered to converse with the witness in
presence of one of the macers; enjoined not to speak on the subject of the
trial, but solely about the witness's scruples to take the oath.

JOHN MUIR,
Deponed, That he knew Mr. James Muir's father; and that he saw Mr. Muir at his
house in September. That Mr. Muir and he had a conversation about Mr. Paine's
book; when he asked Mr. Muir, as a favor, to get him it; when Mr. Muir said,
he had it not, but would send for it; and that a servant girl was accordingly
sent for it, and said she had purchased it at Brash and Reid's, Booksellers, in
Glasgow; that he read it and took it home with him, but that he would not have
bought it, if he could have got the loan of it.

JOHN BARCLAY,
Deponed, That he is acquainted with Mr. Muir; that he had a conversation with
Mr. Muir about Paine's book: That he asked Mr. Muir what book it was, when he
answered, that he might buy it, if he chose, as it was printed; but afterward
said it was not a book for us.

Upon Mr. Muir's interrogation, deponed. That he is an elder of the parish of
C^lder, and that he voted on the same side with Mr. Muir, in the election of a
minister; that, in consequence of this, he was frequently with Mr. Muir; and,
in his library, from which he borrowed some books; that he had many
conversations with Mr. Muir, and heard him say, that this constitution was an
excellent one, and the best in the world; that he has heard him praise the
King, and always heard him speak of order, regularity, and obedience to the
ruling powers; that he called upon Mr. Muir since he came to Scotland, who sent
down a message that he could not see him, as he would have no correspondence
with any who might be cited against him as witnesses on this trial, until it
was finished.

JAMES CAMPBELL,
Deponed, That he was present at a meeting of the Convention; that he called
there on his way home from the Parliament Hoase; that Mr. Muir was not there,
but came in soon after and read a paper, which, being shown to him, he admitted
to be the same with the Address from the Society of United Irishmen of Dublin;
that Colonel Dalrymple opposed the paper being read, and talked of taking a
protest; that, after Mr. Muir read it, he said nothing more; but, before he
read it, he spoke of answering it; but, in this, there was no vote taken; that
he does not know how the paper came, and that a copy was afterward sent him in
a blank cover. Being interrogated whether the purport of Mr. Muir's speeches
approved or not of this paper, says, he knows nothing more than that he
proposed its being read and answered. Depones, That it was assigned as a reason
for not receiving the Address, that they had no connection with it; that Mr.
Muir thought there was no impropriety in receiving and answering it, and would
take the burden on his own shoulders.

JAMES DENHOLM,
Deponed, That he was present at a meeting of the Convention in December; that
Mr. Muir was there, and he heard him read that paper, called the Irish Address:
That objections were made to its being read, and Mr. Muir answered, that he saw
no harm in it. Colonel Dalrymple protested, and he believes, Mr. Bell did so
also; but he does not remember Mr. Mo^thland being there; that he thought it
possible it might be illegal; that he saw it on the table, but does not know
whether Mr. Muir brought it or not; that he understood that Mr. Muir moved,
that an answer should be sent; that this was dissented to, but he does not
recollect for what reason, and he thinks that it carried, Not to be sent. The
Address being shown to him, he admitted it to be the same which he had formerly
signed.

Being interrogated by Mr. Muir; deponed, That he never heard him say any thing
unconstitutional; that the purpose of the Association was to get a Reform in
arliament; that he knows of no other object, but that he understood their
object was an alteration, and that he was not a member of the Convention.

ROBERT FORSYTH,
Deponed, That he was present at a meeting of the Convention; that Mr. Muir was
there, and read a printed paper; that there were some objections made to the
reading of it; that the witness himself made one, which was, 'That it was not
expedient to have any connection with others;' that it was a paper which we
ought not to have any thing to do with; that it was a paper containing some
expressions too strong, such as, 'an inviolable constitution was a tyranny,'
that Mr. Muir defended the paper, and said, it should lie upon the table.

Upon Mr. Muir's interrogatories, the witness thinks the Convention came to a
resolution to adhere to the genuine principles of the Constitution; that the
object was to reform the elections, and shorten the duration of Parliament;
that Mr. Muir never advised any deviation from the constitution; that he never
heard him speak ill of the constitution, but that he heard him advise order.

WILLIAM MUIR.
The scruples of this witness having been removed; he was brought to the bar
and consented to take the oath. Deponed, That he was twice present in Wallace's
house in Kirkintilloch, once before the society was formed, and once along with
Mr. Muir; that Freeland was there, and Wallace; that, at this meeting, a copy
of Paine's Works was taken out of the great-coat pocket of Mr. Muir: that he
does not remember what was said about the book; that he is not sure that Mr.
Muir spoke of the will of the people being the sovereign will, but that it was
said Pain said so; that he got eleven copies of the Patriot, and a copy of the
Political Progress; that he got them from Mr. Muir in his father's house, at
Huntershill, who bade him keep them, and to show them to a society he was in,
which was a society for the purpose of purchasing and reading books.

Being interrogated by Mr. Muir; depones, That he does not remember to have
heard him speak against government; that Mr. Muir did not advise
unconstitutional measures; that he heard him speak about the government; that
he heard him tell how Sarum was represented.

The Lord Advocate caused the sentence of fugitation against Mr. Muir to be
read, [which is annexed in the Appendix] and afterward proposed to prove the
Declarations before the Sheriff, and the papers that were found upon Mr. Muir
when before the magistrate at Stranraer. In order to save time and trouble, Mr.
Muir agreed to admit them without proof, but under this express condition, that
none of these papers should be used in evidence against him of any criminality.

If these papers, said Mr. Muir, had afforded any weighty discoveries of my
guilt, the Indictment should have so stated. It was impossible that these
papers could afford the smallest presumption against me, and therefore there is
not a single article of the Indictment alleged that they were of a culpable
tendency. It is indeed stated in the libel, that these papers were found upon
me; but that they are of a felonious or a seditious tendency, is no where set
forth. In the concluding proposition of the Indictment, in which the whole
criminal charge is recapitulated, these papers are passed over in silence. In
proof of this permit me to read the conclusion:

AT LEAST, times and places above mentioned, the said seditious speeches and
harangues were uttered, the said seditious books or pamphlets recommended to be
purchased and perused, the said seditious books or pamphlets circulated and
distributed, as aforesaid, and the said wicked and inflammatory address
produced, read, recommended, and approved of, in manner above mentioned; and
the said Thomas Muir is guilty actor, or art and part, of all and each, or one
or other of the foresaid crimes. ALL WHICH, or part thereof, being found
proven, by the verdict of an assize, before our Lord Justice General, Lord
Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, in a Court of Justiciary
to be holden by them within the Criminal Courthouse of Edinburgh, the said
Thomas Muir OUGHT to be punished with the pains of law, to deter others from
committing the like crimes in all time coming.

The Lord Advocate in reply stated, that he was entitled to bring forward
every circumstance which could criminate the Panel, although these
circumstances were only collateral, nor in issue or necessary in the conclusion.

[The Clerk of Court accordingly read, the declarations, the passports, and the
other papers, which are annexed in the appendix.]

When the Clerk of Court proceeded to read the letter signed J. Muir, at Panel
arose, and said, That he saw it was vain for him to make any objection, however
strong it might be in law, it was sure to be overruled; but every mind
tinctured with humanity, would shrink at the wanton disclosure of the anxiety,
and the grief of a private family; especially when the Prosecutor had himself
admitted, that the papers which he had read, and proposed to read, were not
necessary to the conclusion of the libel.

The LORD ADVOCATE stated, that his conduct proceeded from no idle curiosity,
that the letters found upon Mr. Muir would completely do away the assertion of
his anxiety to return home, and prove the guilt attending his flight.

I am convinced said Mr. Muir, of the reverse. I gladly join issue with the
Prosecutor, and consent to these letters being read.

After the papers (...) in the Appendix, had been read, the Lord Advocate
declared the proof finished on the part of the Crown, and Mr. Muir commenced
his proof in exculpation.

PROOF IN EXCULPATION.
WILLIAM SKIRVING,
Depones, That it was thought proper that Mr. Muir should attend a meeting at
the Friends of the People in London; that on this account he left Edinburgh and
went to London in January last; that he received a letter from Mr. Muir, dated
from London, mentioning that he had appeared in the Society at London, of which
Mr. Gray is a member, and giving an account of what had been done there; that
owing to some late circumstances which occurred in his family he cannot at
present find Mr. Muir's letter, but that, according to the best of his
recollection, he thinks, Mr. Muir wrote him, he was advised by some friends to
go to France, as he might have some influence with the leading people, in
miti^^ting the s^^e of the King: that while Mr. Muir was at (...) he received a
letter from him, giving an (...) of the execution, and that Mnd Muir mentioned
(...) that he would return as soon as his friends (...) was necessary in
Scotland; (...) frequently with Mr. Muir in private, and has often heard him
speak in public, in the Societies; that he never heard him speak against the
constitution, advised the people to disorder or sedition, but that he always
inculcated upon them, that there was no other mode of obtaining the proposed
reform than by applying to Parliament by respectful petitions; and that Mr.
Muir never submitted to his consideration any plan of government; that the
general tenor of Mr. Muir's Address to the People in the Societies, was to
impress upon their minds the necessity of good order, and that before they
attempted public Reformation they should begin by reforming themselves; that he
does not believe Mr. Muir is connected with any Society, abroad or at home, for
the purpose of exciting sedition; that he never heard Mr. Muir speak against
the monarchical part of our constitution, and that he has been in his company
in his most unguarded moments; that he remembers a private conversation with
Mr. Muir, in which he disapproved of many of the principles in Paine's book,
and both agreed that many of them were impracticable; that he was happy to find
the Panel of this opinion, and he then told the Panel, that he had written on
the subject, and proposed to give lectures on government; that Mr. Muir
approved so much of the proposal, that he informed him that, for himself, he
would dispose of eighty or a hundred tickets.

Upon the interrogation of the Lord Advocate, if he was not the person who had
designed himself, on a late occasion Secretary General to the association of
the Friends of the People; -- answered, That it was a mere mistake in writing
out the Petition, for he was Secretary to the General Association of the
Friends of the People.

Being interrogated by Mr. Muir, if he remembered the tenor of the answer which
he proposed in the Convention to the Address of the Society of United Irishmen
in Dublin, depones, That he cannot recollect.

JAMES CAMPBELL,
Depones, That in the beginning of last winter, he acted as agent for Mr. Muir;
that while the Panel was in France, he received from him two letters from
Paris, which he produced, and likewise had received another from Calais, upon
which at present he could net lay his hands. These two letters were read by the
Clerk of Court, and are subjoined in the appendix. They expressed Mr. Muir's
willingness to return home whenever it should be necessary, but at the same
time his regret for so soon leaving an amiable set of acquaintances, with whom
his friendship was just commencing.

Upon the Pannel's interrogatory, he depones, That he never heard him attempt
to excite the people of the Societies to sedition or outrage; that he exhorted
them to avoid riotous conduct, to behave orderly peaceably, and, above all, to
attend to the moral characters of those whom they admitted members; that he
also remembers Mr. Muir's opinion of Paine's book was, that it might be
dangerous for people of weak minds.

JOHN BUCHANAN,
Depones, That he has often heard Mr. Muir speak in the Societies; that he
never advised sedition, riot, insurrection, nor unconstitutional measures, but,
that they should act peaceably and orderly; that he said, the constitution
ought to direct all their applications to Parliament; and, that he used to say
in conversation, that the constitution ought to be to us the polar star, and
that we should begin our Reformation by first erecting among ourselves the
temple of morality; that he had more sense than to think of procuring a redress
of grievances by any other than constitutional measures; and that he does not
remember of hearing him give any opinion upon Paine's books.

WILLIAM JOHNSTONE,
Depones, That the principles of Mr. Muir were firmly for supporting the
constitution as it stood at present; and that all the other principles, held by
him, grew out of this one; that Mr. Muir never advised tumult, but recommended
sobriety, and said, that nothing would do but an application to Parliament by
way of a Petition; that it is inconsistent with his knowledge that Mr. Muir
circulated any books or pamphlets; that while Mr. Muir was in France, he
received from him one or two letters upon general subjects, but that he
remembers Mr. Muir expressed in their, his intention of returning home; that he
had sought for these letters, but could not lay his hand upon them.

MAURICE THOMPSON,
Depones, That he once heard Mr. Muir in a society of the Friends of the People
deliver speech, but does not remember much of it; that he heard him speak about
reform, measures which were constitutional and the necessity of being moderate,
and never heard him advise the people to excite disturbances.

CHARLES SALTER,
Depones, That in societies he has heard Mr. Muir speak three or four times;
that he exhorted them to constitutional measures, peace, and order.

PETER WOOD,
Depones, That he has heard the Panel speak in societies, and impress upon
them the necessity of petitioning the House of Commons; that he never heard him
speak against the King or House of Lords; that he never saw him distribute any
books or pamphlets; and that he heard him say, no members should be admitted
into the societies who were inclined to faction.

DAVID DALE, JUN.
Depones, That he has seen Mr. Muir at the Star Inn at Glasgow, in meetings of
the Friends of the People; that he remembers a motion was made, that books
should be recommended to the society; that this motion was opposed by Mr. Muir,
who argued, that most books were written too much in the spirit of party; that
no truth could be got from them, and that the only way to procure knowledge was
by general reading; that he advised the people to inform themselves on both
sides of the question; -- to seek reform by measures calm and constitutional;
and that they had no other mode of obtaining it than by petitioning Parliament;
that he never heard him say any thing which had a tendency to excite sedition;
and that he always advised the people to be quiet and orderly; that he never
knew of his distributing books, or recommending Paine's Works; and that he
advised the Friends of the People to expel any member who might behave
seditiously or disorderly.

Being interrogated by the Lord Advocate, depones, That it was at a meeting of
the Friends of the People, at the Star Inn, that he heard Mr. Muir oppose the
recommending of particular books that he does not recollect the particular
month when this occurred.

Being interrogated if he recollects when Mr. Muir was first apprehended,
depones, he could not precisely. Being asked if he thought it was in the month
of January, or in any of the succeeding months; depones, he could not be
positive, but thinks he might have heard it about five months ago. Upon which
the Prosecutor observed, he had a very short memory; to which the witness
assented.

WILLIAM RIDDELL,
Depones, That Mr. Muir always advised peaceable and constitutional measures;
that he does not remember of hearing him recommend any books in particular;
that he never saw any disorder in the meetings of the Friends of the People,
and that he does not recollect Mr. Muir's advising to petition Parliament.

WILLIAM REID,
Depones, That he is a bookseller in Glasgow, and acts in the company under the
firm of Brash and Reid; that he remembers to have asked Mr. Muir's opinion
about the propriety of selling Paine's book; that Mr. Muir said it was an
improper book, and that in selling it the^e might be danger.

Upon the interrogatory of the Prosecutor, depones, that Mr. Muir gave him this
advice a few days before Mr. Honeyman, the sheriff of the county, came to take
precognitions concerning that book.

GEORGE WADDEL,
Depones, That he has been at meetings of the Societies of the Friends of the
People in Glasgow; that at one of these meetings, he remembers Col. M'Leod and
Mr. Muir being present; that when a motion was made for recommending particular
books, both Col. M'Leod and Mr. Muir opposed it, as in most books there was too
great a mixture of truth and falsehood; that the only books which he remembers
them to have recommended, were, Blackstone's (...) upon the Laws of England,
and Erskine's (...) of the Law of Scotland; that Mr. Muir advised moderate
measures; that this was the continual subject of his discourse; that he said he
would glory to have the table of the House of Commons covered with petitions;
that he spoke to Mr. Muir about an address of congratulation to the French, in
imitation of Dundee, but that Mr. Muir disapproved of it.

JOHN RUSSEL.
After this witness had been sworn, the common question was put to him, if any
person had instructed him what to say, He answered; None, except to tell the
truth. Being asked who instructed him so, he replied, He could point out no
person in particular, but that it was the general advice of all to whom he
spoke. He was obliged to produce his summons to be a witness, and it appeared
that the citation had been given him four days only before his examination. He
was informed by the Court, that any who spoke to him, must have done so in the
interval of these four days, and that therefore it was impossible that he could
forget all their names. The wirness replied, that the general instruction to
speak the truth was so common, that he could not remember at present, any
particular person who had given it.

The LORD ADVOCATE moved, That the witness should be committed to prison for
prevarication!

Mr. Muir arose, and attempted to speak in defense of the witness, but as he
was beginning, was interrupted by the Court, who commanded him to sit down, as
he had no right or title to interfere in the business.

LORD HENDERLAND gave his opinion: Every appearance was against the witness;
that he wished to conceal the truth; that he merited punishment, and should be
committed to prison for a certain period.

The rest of the Judges concurred with Lord Henderland; and Mr. Russel was
committed to prison for the term of three weeks, as guilty of concealing the
truth upon oath.

JOHN BROCK,
Depones, That he was at one meeting of the Friends of the People, in the Star
Inn at Glasgow, where he head Mr. Muir recommend adh^^^nce to the Constitution,
and to good order, and that he declared, he would leave the Friends of the
People, if ever they should proceed to riotous measures; that he has heard him
speak of books of the Law, but cannot be positive to any in particular, only,
he thinks he remembers to have heard him mention a work of Mr. Locke's.

WILLIAM CLIDDESDALE,
Depones, That he never joined himself to any Society of the Friends of the
People, but that he is a member of the Society in Glasgow, for the Reform of
the Boroughs; that about the 13th December last Mr. Muir, when the witness was
present, visited the Society, said that the Borough Reformers had made great
exertions; recommended to them perseverance, firmness, and measures which were
peaceable; that he did not exhort them to riot or insurrection; that he
remembers of hearing Mr. Muir observe, that some things in Paine's book were
extremely good, and some things impracticable; that he heard him run down
Liberty and Equality, as it implied violation of property, and assigned, that a
division of property was a chimera which never could exist.

GEORGE BELL,
Depones, That in the Society of the Friends of the People at Glasgow, he has
heard Mr. Muir speak, and that he has heard him declare that he would admit no
members into the society, but such as acknowledged the King, House of Lords,
and House of Commons; that he never heard him speak against the Constitution,
and that he did not recommend any books in particular, but only such books in
general as would inform their minds, and render them better members of Society.

REV. DANIEL M'CARTHUR,
Depones, That he remembers to have had a conversation with Mr. Muir in the
Coffee Room at Glasgow, in the months of September or October last; that he saw
Mr. Muir and another gentleman walking together; the gentleman having gone
away, Mr. Muir came up to the witness, and said, that the person with whom he
had been, was Chairman of the Society of the Friends of the People in
Edinburgh; that the witness said to Mr. Muir, Do you not think this a wrong
time for to insist for a Reform in Parliament? To which Mr. Muir answered, That
he thought it a proper time, as the country enjoyed the blessings of peace,
that there was no comparison betwixt this country and France* that in France,
they had sought a revolution, and had brought it about, but that in Britain we
wanted no Revolution, but only a moderate Reform.

JAMES M'GIBBON,
Depones, That he was a member of the Society of Reform in Campsie; that Mr.
Muir came there, and that he did not recommend any books in particular, nor did
he speak against the King, House of Lords, or House of Commons.

ROBERT HENRY,
Depones, That he is a member of the same society with the preceding witness;
that Mr. Muir came there; that he spoke of no books in particular, and heard
him say nothing against the King, Lords, and Commons, but that he recommended
peaceable measures.

WILLIAM ORR,
Deponed, That Mr. Muir and Colonel Dalrymple came to Paisley; that in the
company of the witness they visited, and addressed the different societies of
the Friends of the People there; that Mr. Muir, in his speeches, inculcated a
firm attachment to the King and Constitution; that he recommended peace and
regularity, and reprobated riot and sedition; that he exhorted the people to be
steady, and to pursue their object by all legal means; that after having gone
through the different societies, Mr. Muir, Colonel Dalrymple, and the witness,
went to Sinclair's Inn, in Paisley; that in the course of private conversation,
he heard Mr. Muir say nothing against the King and Constitution, bur that he
heard him say, that the King was the best of princes.

JAMES CRAIG,
Depones, That in the societies of the Friends of the People in Paisley, he
heard Mr. Muir declare, that the Constitution was a good Constitution, and that
the King was the friend and father of his people.

JAMES RICHARDSON,
Deponed, That he is a member of the same society of the Friends of the People
in London of which Mr. Gray is a member; that he is not a member of any society
of the Friends of the People in Scotland, but that he was present at a meeting
of the Friends of the People in Glasgow, when he heard Mr. Muir exhort the
people to keep up the Constitution, and that if any of them were against (...)
they should be exp^^^d* that in a masterly (...) he exposed Liberty and
E^^ality if it implied division of property, and that he said such a system was
totally impracticable, and he used every argument to excite the people to keep
to the Old Constitution.

Mr. MUIR now declared, That he had finished the proof in exculpation; that it
was in his power to adduce many more witnesses, but that he deemed it totally
unnecessary.

The LORD ADVOCATE then rose and addressed the jury,
Gentlemen of the Jury,
It is my duty, now, to require your most attentive and deliberate
consideration of what you have heard. The moment is come, when the truth or
falsehood of what is laid to the charge of the Panel at the bar, is to be
ascertained. He is a man, who, under the pretext of a reform, as I shall
afterward show you, has been sowing mischief and sedition: he appears here
before you, after being a fugitive from his country; and it is now that by your
verdict, a verdict which is uncontrollable, and from which there is no appeal,
his guilt must be established, or the imputation thrown out against him,
completely wiped away. It is a moment which I have long wished to see; for
during the circumstances which occurred last winter, among the numerous list of
^ffenders who appeared, this is the man who of them all appeared to me the most
criminal, and whom I most wished to lay hold of, he in every thing betrays a
most decided spirit against the Constitution, and all under the veil of
Parliamentary Reform.

This country has seen many instances of pernicious effects of seditious
writings and conduct, but I am persuaded a wider range of diabolical mischief
will appear in this man, than ever was seen in England, or any where else. --
Who could believe that a man of a liberal education, an Advocate at ^his bar*
could be found among villagers, and manufactures, poor and ignorant, for the
purpose of sowing sedition and discontent?

The charges against the Panel are divided into three heads, all centering
however, in the general charge of exciting sedition and discontent, by various
steps of conduct. He has circulated Paine's works, a book which one of his
witness says he declared to be dangerous to weak minds, with an obstinacy and
pertinacity, which plainly indicated that his wish was to alter or overturn the
Constitution. He went to Kirkintilloch and Campsie, carrying Mr. Pain with
him, and advised the constituting of meetings, which, without him, would never
have been established; he came like the demon of sedition recommending that
club government, which has produced all the anarchy we see in France, and which
cannot be supported in any well established government.

He has been in a convention of people, calling themselves Reformers; but the
spirit of the people showed itself, and it no longer exists: he in that meeting
endeavored to support and defend a paper coming from our sister kingdom: It
came from the Society of United Irishmen, highly seditious, if not treasonable;
and yet he was the ringleader to produce, to read, and approve.

These three charges, then, Gentlemen, which unite themselves in one, that of
exciting discontent against Government, have been brought with deliberation;
and, it is now my duty to show you, have been establshed by the evidence.

I wish to have the opinion of a respectable Jury on the subject. Whether
sedition is a crime of the detestable nature I represent it? I bring forward
the arm of Justice to suppress it; and it is in your power to invigorate it, or
palsy it in a moment.

Gentlemen, as the charges are threefold, the evidence must be of three kinds.
I shall speak of each in their order, and I must say, that if ever a strong
body of evidence appeared in a difficult case, it is to be seen here.

The first charge is, making seditious speeches and harangues, and encouraging
improper meetings. To support this, we find that he went to Kirkintilloch and
Campsie, and recommended improper publications to enlighten their minds; but in
this he does not appear to have been very successful, if we take the Vice
President as an example of their in^^uence. The evidence here re^^s chiefly on
Johnston and Freeland, particularly Johnston, and we should remain the mode in
which he gave his evidence; he was calm, accurate, and clear. He and Freeland
agree that the Panel spoke of the success of the French a^ms: With what motive
could he discourse on such a subject to weak, uninformed, illiterate people,
but to fulfill his seditious intentions? He talked of the weight of taxes
Gentlemen, we may see these burdens lightened; but if this gentleman's mode of
doing it were to go on, what sort ^f relief we should have by the diminution of
our taxes and the payment of our debt, are topics of which you will judge as
you ought to do. He said that their taxes would be less, if they were more
equally represented, and that from the flourishing state of France, they could
not bring their goods to market so cheap as Frenchmen. What could possibly be
more calculated to produce discontent and sedition? Had such societies
previously existed, the case would have been different; but he appears as the
ringleader, he was there on the Tuesday preceding, conversing about it; he came
to the meeting and harangued them; he adjourned with them afterward to
Wallace's: Can any evidence be more connected or more clear that he was the
main instrument?

The second charge is the circulating seditious books, containing the passages
libelled in the indictment, which you may read. Freeland is again an evidence
here; and I must observe, that it appears to be doubtful, whether he told all
he knew; from his face he plainly prevaricated; and, when closely questioned,
the sweat broke upon it. He told you the story of getting Paine's book out of
Muir's pocket. I may here observe, that such a mode of circulating a book is
that which a man in his situation will naturally adopt; he will not go on
openly, but privately, and under various pretexts; by his fruits must you know
him; you must compare his actions with his professions, and then judge.

We have evidence of his recommending and buying the Paisley Declaration and
other books, which go to prove he is tainted from head to foot, and is as
unworthy to live under the protection of the law as the meanest felon.

You would observe his conduct, Gentlemen, on Anne Fisher leaving the foot of
the table. What can be laid to her charge? her evidence was clear and correct,
and was founded on the best basis, here is being confirmed by the testimony of
others. But what was his conduct? the only thing, indeed, which he could do, --
an endeavor to shake her testimony by an illiberal and unfounded in^^^uation,
that we procured our information only from domestics.

To what then amounts her testimony, which stands beyond a doubt: That she was
sent repeatedly from her master's house, the Pannel's father, who I understand
is a respectable man; far be it from me to attach any criminality to him; the
Panel ha^ the miserable reflection that the distresses which have embittered
the lives of his parents have been brought on by himself; -- that she was sent
repeatedly to buy Pain and other works for country people that came to the
shop, who by this man's persuasion mu^^ out with their miserable sixpence to
purchase Paine's Rights of Man; that he used constantly to be reading seditious
publications in the back shop. -- It was there, in that cathedral of sedition,
he sat like a spider, weaving his filthy web to catch the unwary.

The witness specifies the people to whom he procured Paine's book -- his own
uncle, John Muir the hatter, Barclay the elder, and, Wilson the barber. I have
produced all of them in support of the girl, except the uncle, whom I declined
making an evidence against his nephew. He advised Wilson, who completely
supported the girl in this, to keep a copy in his shop to enlighten his
customers minds; for that it confuted Burke entirely, -- Mr. Burke, a man whose
wonderful talents and genius have lately been so much exerted in the service of
his country.

From these circumstances I have only to desire you to look at Paine's book, at
the passages in the indictment; and if you are loyal to your king, if you are
loyal to your country, and would preserve it, you will find this man guilty,
who has given so decided an opinion in favor of that wretched outcast. His
works I never read till my official duty compelled me to it; I need not give my
opinion of it; the determinations of courts of law, and the unanimous opinion
of the country, have marked the detestation in which they are held.

[His Lordship here read some of the passages in the indictment.]

What avails then, Gentlemen, all this evidence of attachment to the king and
constitution, when he unequivocally approves sentiments such as these? We are
told, indeed, by one of his witnesses, that he advised him not to ^ell Pain;
but unfortunately the answer given to the question put to him upon his cross
examination, proves that they were not his real sentiments, but for fear of
danger, as the book began to be taken notice of.

We find from the evidence of the girl Fisher, that the very organist could not
pass the house of this oracle of mischief, without being desired to play ca ira.

He used to say, too, that if every man had a vote, he would be member for
Calder, and members would have thirty or forty shillings a day. All these
circumstances go to prove incontestibly, that France and French principles were
continually in his view, and that he aimed at the destruction of the present
government; with respect to which, however, I hope his prophecies will be as
false, as they have already been, in regard to the success of the French.

I may here remark, that the evidence of Fisher appears in a trifling instance
to be contradicted by the elder Barclay; but you should remember the salvo with
which that old gentleman chose to premise his evidence.

I come now to the third charge, which relates to Mr. Muir's conduct in the
Convention. It is here incontestibly proved, that he read, approved, and
defended, the Irish Address. Will you approve this paper? Will you disregard
this convincing proof of his guilt? Be his studies ever so great, be his views
ever so expensive, will you permit him arrogantly to set up his seditious
opinions in opposition to the government and constitution? His conduct in some
instances would almost appear to be marked with insanity, were we not finding
him the determined ringleader in an uniform scheme of sedition.

This, Gentlemen, finishes my remarks upon the evidence; upon the evidence
which I think is invincible; but there are two topics on which I must beg to
make some observations.

Mr. Muir told us, that he was carried out of this country by business of
importance, and that he was detained in France; and that he always wished to
have a trial, I could have no objections to his proving this: It would have
argued some degree of honor. But his professions are false and confuted. He
left this country under an impression of guilt; and lately returned, the pest
of Scotland, with the same intention as before.

The reason of his going to France, it seems, was the influence he might
possibly have in saving the life of the King of France; and he was sent there
by the Friends of the People. Never was I more astonished than at the impudence
of this evidence. Did Skirving know or recollect, that he was almost accusing
him of high treason? But why was he interested in this event? It was an event,
as his witnesses tell you, that would hurt the common cause. -- What cause?
their intention of effecting a change in the government of this country: There
then he stands a missionary from a society in this country to France, -- a
circumstance which greatly confirms his guilt.

When the trial was coming on, I postponed it longer than I ought to have done,
to give him every chance; and I inserted it in the papers, which might perhaps
reach him roaming in some part of the world.

The shipmaster's receipt bears date the 16th May. What became of him from this
date to the 31st July when he was apprehended. He informed nobody of his coming
home. How wonderful that no letter was driven by the winds or impelled by the
waves, to give notice of what he says was his earnest wish. The reverse in fact
appears to have been the case. By the letter of J. Muir, his father, we find
him in Ireland, doing we know not what; except what we learn from the diploma
of the worthy society of United Irishmen. He is at last apprehended returning
into this country, with all the insignia of sedition about him.

I have but one remark more. You may in some degree judge of a man, by the
company he keeps: amongst Muir's papers we find a letter here in my hand
addressed to the Rev. Fische Palmer, a man who is indicted to stand trial at
Perth, in the course of a few days, and whom most of you must know. The
impression of the seal too is worth remarking, a cap of li^^rty on a spear, and
under is the motto ca ira. I beg your ^ention, Gentlemen, to the quotation I
shall now read from a celebrated French author, in treating of the British
Constitution. [The passage his Lordship read, was from De Lolme, on the
Constitution of England, from the middle of p. 534, to the end.]

I hope, Gentlemen, this case will be viewed by you in a light such as this,
that you will protect your King from the attacks of his enemies, that you will
protect this temple of freedom from the attempts of the factious, but
particularly against that man at the bar, who has been sowing sedition with so
liberal a hand. You now, however, may seize him in his career, and by your
verdict do justice to your country, and honor to yourselves.

The Lord Advocate here finished his address to the Jury, -- He spoke two hours
and ten minutes. We are sorry, that our present situation has precluded us from
stating his Lordship's speech at full length, but the foregoing embraces the
most material parts, and corresponds exactly with what we have already seen
published, and announced to be a comprehensive, and in many parts a literal
abstract of the most material parts of his Lordship's speech.

Mr. Muir then addressed himself to the Jury as follows:
Gentlemen of the Jury,
I rise, in my own defense. -- All that malice could devise; all that slander
could circulate; has been directed against me. I speak with joy, and with
triumph. After an investigation into my public transactions, and into my
private conduct, the most minute and the most unexampled, which ever occurred
in this country; my moral character stands secure and unimpeached. With the
anonymous, the worthless, and the paid assassins of public reputation, I
disdained to enter the lists. To this day I looked forward with expectation;
when before you, in the presence of Scotland, I should not merely remove the
suspicion of guilt, but should demonstrate my innocence. I will not imitate the
example of the Public Prosecutor, who has finished his pleading. Sounding, and
unsubstantial declamation is unsuitable for you, and it is unworthy of me. This
is not an hour to temporize. The eyes of this country are fixed upon us both.
The records of this trial will pass down to posterity. When our ashes shall be
scattered by the winds of heaven, the impartial voice of future times will
rejudge your verdict. Let faction rage; -- let the spirit of party, in the
present hour, proudly domineer. -- The illusion will soon vanish away. In
solitude the power of recollection will assume its influence; and then, it will
be material to you, whether or not you have acted uprightly, or sinned against
your own eternal conscience, in my acquittal, or in my condemnation!

Before I enter into a particular vindication of myself, let me take notice of
two circumstances, strongly insisted upon by the Public Prosecutor, which have
little relation to the general nature of the evidence which has been adduced.
-- Long, indeed, has he harangued upon them; and has concluded his speech by
exhibiting them in every shape which his imagination could invent. He
maintains, that a consciousness of guilt obliged me to leave this country after
an information had been filed against me, and after I had been examined by a
magistrate. I will admit the fact of my departure. -- In these days -- in these
circumstances -- is that to be ascribed to conscious guilt alone? If the whole
strength of arbitrary power is extended against an Individual, is there merit
in exposing himself as a sacrafice which cannot be useful to the country, and
which may only present posterity with a new addition to the immense catalogue
of the victims of despotism. -- If two motives had only existed to which you
could assign my departure, you are bound to ascribe it to the most charitable.
But what were the circumstances attending my departure? Did they bear any
resemblance of a flight? Did I not publicly anounce it the preceding evening in
a numerous meeting of citizens? Did I not cause it to be published in a public
paper? Did I affect the garb and disguise of concealment? In London did I
remain in obscurity? Did I not appear in a distinguished Society, the Society
of the Friends of the People? And did not that Society publish afterward a
resolution, announcing in its preamble my presence among them?

But I went immediately afterward to France. Mr. Skirving, who was examined
with regard to a letter he received from me, before my departure from London,
has said, in his evidence (and his words I have accurately in my notes,) that I
proposed to go to Paris, as it was the advice OF SOME FRIENDS, and might be of
some service in mitigating the fate of the late King.

The words of Mr. Shirving, "SOME FRIENDS," have been curiously represented. --
It is stated (...) these some friends, must have been the members of that truly
respectable Society; and it is boldly argued, that I went to France as a
Missionary from that body. Nothing can be more ridiculous. -- Nothing can be
more injurious. -- Mr. Skirving never said so! -- No person can, or dare, say
that I ever went as a missionary, delegated from individuals, or by Societies,
to any foreign power. Building then upon this unsubstantial basis of words,
never uttered in evidence by Mr. Skirving, nor which ever could possibly be
uttered. I am accused of a species of high treason, in corresponding with a
foreign power without any legal authority from home. The charge of
corresponding with foreign power is equally ridiculous with the
misrepresentation upon which it is founded; but let it be considered as
serious, I dare the proof.

I challenge the Prosecutor to adduce the smallest vestige^ of evidence.

Yes; I will admit, I wrote to Mr. Skirving my intention of going to France;
nor will I deny the motive. I saw, in the execution of the late King, a
specious pretext to plunge the country in war, and to extend the effusion of
human blood to every corner of the world! I may have erred. I may have acted
from enthusiasm; but it was enthusiasm in the cause of man. If, at the period
when it was free to every person to publish their sentiments upon that awful
question. I wished likewise to publish mine, can that be imputed to me as a
crime? Can the intention of pleading the cause of mercy, of individual and of
general humanity, be construed into guilt? If it can, I am then guilty. Has not
the Prosecutor lamented that disastrous event? And will he accuse a man who
wished to prevent it? Who, with many friends to humanity, of every nation, and
of every party, in private, in public, in conversation, and from the Press,
exerted their abilities to ward off an event which they foresaw was to
introduce years of blood and of sorrow! But allow, that at first glance, my
departure from Scotland; my journey to Paris, afforded a presumption of guilt;
that presumption is obviated by my RETURN.

The Prosecutor has boasted of his humanity, in granting me the delay of a few
weeks, by postponing my trial, in order that I might return from Paris. -- But
was he ignorant that hostilities at that time were commencing -- that the
communication was closed; that it was tedious and difficult to procure
passports. Of that difficulty no person here can possibly have any doubt.

Do not all my private letters, which have this day been read, prove my
uneasiness upon account of the delay, and my anxiety to return? But, at the
period when I procured my passport, the flames of war were blazing over most of
Europe -- I knew only two ways by which I could possibly return home. The
first, by the way of Hamburgh; the second by the longer, but the more certain
circuit of America. -- I adopt the latter, as more safe, and less liable to
interruption. -- I left Paris. -- I went down to the port of Havre-de-Grace. I
found a vessel which was to sail for New York -- The receipt found in my pocket
book, when I was stopped upon my landing in Scotland, from the master of that
vessel for the payment of my passage, proves that I had actually taken my
passage in that ship. That vessel, in taking in her freight, and by an embargo,
was detained for near three months. -- In this interval, another American ship,
the Hope, of Baltimore, arrived. The Captain was to touch in at Belfast, in
Ireland, for part of his cargo, on his return to America. -- This I considered
to be a fortunate accident. -- I immediately embraced this opportunity of
returning by the way of Ireland to my country, not to implore favor, not to
ask protection, but to DEMAND justice. To pass from France, to any of the
dominions of Britain, I had no passport, -- my passport was to America. I
braved every danger. After a short passage I was landed in Ireland. There I
remained no longer than nine days. I concealed not my name, I appeared
publicly, and in the places of most public resort. To all I announced my
situation and intention. The Prosecutor has either designedly, or ignorantly,
laid hold of the circumstance of the indorsation of the municipal officers of
Havre-de-Grace, upon my passport. The Deparment of Paris granted me a passport
in the end of the month of April, and I arrived at Havre on the 3d or 4th of
May. The first step which a stranger is obliged to take, upon arriving at the
place of his destination in France, is to proceed to the Municipality, to show
to them the passport from whence he came, to have it revised and attested by
them, in order to enjoy security within their jurisdiction. The indorsation, as
I have stated, of my Parisian passport, by the municipal officers at Havre, is
of the 3d or 4th of May last. From this circumstance the Lord Advocate infers,
that I must immediately have found a vessel to carry me home. He makes no
allowance for the state of the two nations; he makes no allowance for the
difficulties which neutral vessels have, in passing betwixt both; and he knows
nothing of the embargoes which these vessels must constantly experience, in the
different belligerent ports. Well, then, sometime in the month of May I must
have landed in Ireland! Public report has said, that insurrections have been in
that country. The Prosecutor has cried out, That I was the demon of sedition!
And he insinuates, that there is a probability that I was the cause of these
insurrections. I smile at the accusation; which he himself in his own mind must
deride. It could have been easy for me, by the testimonies of my friends in
Ireland, whom I love, and whom I honor, to prove how I passed my time. But for
me to dwell upon this is unnecessary. You, of the Jury, must have experienced
the same emotions, and at present indulge the same feelings as I do.

From Ireland, the Prosecutor says, I attempted to land in Scotland in a
clandestine manner; and so says (his composition) the Indictment.

In the list of witnesses adduced against me, I saw the names of Carmichael,
the person who first recognized me at my landing at Portpatrick, and of Mr.
Ross the magistrate at Stranraer, before whom I first appeared. The Lord
Advocate charges me with coming to Scotland in a clandestine manner. He serves
upon me, in the list of witnesses, the only witnesses who could prove the fact;
Carmichael, the custom-house officer, and Mr. Ross the magistrate, to whom I
surrendered. I expected Carmichael and that gentleman would have been enclosed
with the other witnesses of the Crown. I would have adduced them as witnesses
to prove that so far from concealing myself, I announced myself publicly, and
without disguise; so far from attempting evasion, my only anxiety was to put
myself in the hands of the Law; and under the protection of its magistrates.
The conduct of the Public Prosecutor, is in every respect uniform. He is guilty
of another piece of disingenuity, by serving upon me in the list of the
witnesses of the Crown, the names of Carmichael and Ross. I could not entertain
the least possible doubt, but that they were to be adduced. This was an art to
prevent me citing them at my own instance. It has succeeded. I am deprived of
their testimony. But why did not the Prosecutor, at least, produce the
declaration which I made before the Magistrate at Stranraer: That declaration,
freely and voluntarily emitted, would have proved that I came into the country
in no unbecoming manner.

Much of the invective of the Prosecutor was founded upon my coming into this
country in concealment. This circumstance, the Indictment charges as an
aggravation of the crime Judge then, Gentlemen, of the rectitude of the
Prosecutor's conduct; when he declaims upon a fact which he shrinks from
proving, and which by his art in serving the list of witnesses upon me, he has
prevented me from confuting.

I trust, now you will be convinced, that no consciousness of guilt led me from
Scotland, no improper motive carried me from England to France; and that no
deep, and secret intention, induced me to return in disguise to my country. The
object of that return was to demand justice, to wipe away the imputation of
that crime of which I now stand charged. And what is that crime? Sedition. --
Is there a term so vague and so undefined, so familiar to power, so familiar to
corruption. All who ever dared to oppose ARBITRARY POWER, and who in the hour
of danger came forward to save their country, have been branded by the epithet
of seditious. The term is therefore no longer a term of opprobrium. In one age,
it has been applied to men rejected by society, whose names were honored by
after times, and upon whose virtues, and upon whose sufferings, the succeeding
age reared the majestic pillar of the constitution. I am then accused of
sedition, and I ask you of the Jury, to point out the corner of this land where
sedition has existed. And tell me truly where the smallest vestige of this
crime has appeared. Upon you the eyes of the people are now placed. Upon your
consciences the oath of God is binding. Point out then to us, where the shadow
of sedition has been descried. Have the sacred rights of property been any
where invaded? Has the blood of the citizens flowed by the hands of the Friends
of the People? O! No. -- But the Prosecutor has talked of the danger the People
of this country were in last winter, of deep-laid plots, and of tremendous
conspiracies! and I am the man, whom he charges as the author of the whole,
whom he represents similar in malignity to the demon of mischief! and whom he
honors with the title of the pest of Scotland! Well then, let it be supposed
that an attempt was formed to overthrow the Constitution, to kindle the torch
of civil war, to lead rapine and murder along the land; Where has the proof of
this design been found? Has it been discovered in the meetings of the Friends
of the People* who, conscious of the purity of their intentions, affected no
concealment, assembled with doors open to all; and who hatched their hellish
designs, (if such they were) in no midnight cavern. Could in the crowds, that
were admitted to attend the deliberations of these societies, be found no
russian, who could at least give a bold and manly testimony against them, and
against me? But to support the accusation, the walls of a private house must be
invaded; domestic secrets must be explored, and the testimony of a miserable
scullion girl, and a hair-dresser, must be brought forward, with regard to
words, spoken where suspicion the most vigilant must have been asleep, under
the guardianship of a paternal roof. And are these the witnesses, who are to
prove against me this mighty crime, which, supposing them to have been honored
by my confidence, would have required the cooperation of thousands of bearded
men in arms.

Gentlemen of the Jury, Let us this night throw away vain pretext: Let us act
fairly and heartily. I smile at the charge of sedition. You yourselves are
conscious that no sedition has existed in this country, and in your own minds
you deride the accu^ation. I know for what I am brought to this bar; it is for
having strenuously and actively engaged in the cause of Parliamentary Reform;
for having exerted every effort, by constitutional measures, to procure an
equal representation of the people, in the House of the People. Let not the
Prosecutor s^ulk in darkness: Let him come manfully forward, and av^w the cause
which has impelled him to bring me here. I will give you little trouble: I will
prevent the lassitude of the judges: I will save you, the Jury, from the
wretched mockery of a trial, the sad necessity of condemning a man, when the
cause of his condemnation must be concealed, and cannot be explained. Yes, I
plead guilty. I openly, actively, and sincere^y embarked in the cause of a
Parliamentary Reform, in the vindication and in the restoration of the rights
of the people. Nor will I blush to unfold to you my motives; they are supported
by their own intrinsic strength, but they are likewise held up by the great and
the venerable names of the living and of the dead. I contended for an equal
representation of the people, in what I shall ever call the House of the
People, because I considered it a measure essentially necessary to the
salvation of the State, and to the stability of your boasted constitution.
Wherein then consists the excellency of that time-tried fabric, cemented by the
blood of your fathers, flowing from the field and from the scaffold. I will
tell you: It consists in the due balance of its three impelling powers, KING,
LORDS, and COMMONS; If one of these powers loses its vigor, the constitution
in proportion loses its vigor; If one of these powers becomes only a shadow of
what it ought to be, if it becomes merged and absorbed into any of the other
two, your constitution then also becomes a shadow, and it is annihilated. And
do you not know, and does all the world not know, and if any were the proud
structure of the constitution has suffered the ravages of time or of
corruption, it is in its popular branch. Is it not a fact indisputable, that
the representation of the people is not such as it once was, and is not such,
as I trust in God, one day it shall be. The man then who sounds the alarm, when
he discovers the aproach of danger, who summons all who may be concerned in its
reparation, is surely no enemy to the country, no foe to the constitution,
because he labors in its preservation and protection And, as it is essential
to the very being of Parliament, that elections should be absolutely free,
therefore all undue influences upon the electors are illegal, and strongly
prohibited. For Mr. LOCK (on Gov. p. 2. 222.) ranks it among those breaches of
trust in the executive magistrate, which, according to his nations, amount to a
dissolution of the government. -- If he employs the force, treasure, and
offices of the society, to corrupt the representatives, or openly to pre-engage
the electors, and prescribe what manner of persons shall be chosen: For thus to
regulate candidates and electors, and new-model the ways of election, what is
it, says he, but to cut up the government by the 100ts, and poison the very
^ountain of public security? Blackstone, B. l. chapter 2. p. 179. -- Edition, Land.
1787.
.

Such were the motives of my conduct. If I am guilty, I have in my guilt many
associates, men who now enjoy the repose of eternity, whom your fathers admired
while living, and to whom you, their children, have erected statues. I have no
time to run over all the venerable catalogue. But, is there a man ignorant of
the illustrious Lock, and was not this sage in philosophy, this advanced
champion the cause of liberty, and of man; this friend to the British
constitution, who wrote his Treatise on Government in its defense; in defense
of the last glorious revolution, by the desire of the Prince; who was the
leader of the men who planned it; -- was not he an advocate for a reform in
Parliament, for a more equal representation of the Commons in the House of
Commons? Will you venture to tear the records of his same, to stigmatize his
memory, and to brand him with the epithet of seditious?

Let us rapidly proceed down to more modern times. Let us pass over in silence
many illustrious names, whose memory with that of the Constitution will perish
together. Let us come to your own days. Are ye ignorant of Blackstone; -- the
man who first collected the laws of his country, from the deformed chaos into
which they had been thrown, who arranged them with elegancy, and who adorned
them with every flower which the classic field could produce? Are not the
volumes of this reverend judge in the hands of all? Should they not be
familiar, at least to those who are called to decide concerning the
constitution? And has not Blackstone, not with the levity of ill-pondered
words, not in the private hour of relaxation, not in the heat of popular
debate, but in the calmness and solitude of study, maintained the same
propositions which I maintain, been guilty of the same sedition of which I am
guilty, when he pronounced that the Constitution was imperfect, in its popular
branch, and if any where ALTERATION was necessary, it was there to be desired.
I entreat you to listen. I will read you, what this best expounder of the
constitution has said. Let the words be engraved on the tablet of your hearts.

And this constitution of suffrages is framed upon a wiser principle, with us,
than either of the methods of voting, by centuries or by tribes, among the
Romans. In the method by centuries, instiuted by Servious Tullius, it was
principally PROPERTY, and not numbers, that turned the scale: in the method by
tribes, gradually introduced by the tribunes of the people, NUMBERS only were
regarded, and property was entirely overlooked. Hence the laws passed by the
former method had usually too great a tendency to aggrandize the patricians or
rich nobles; and those by the latter had too much of a levelling principle. Our
constitution steers between the two extremes. Only such are entirely excluded,
as can have no will of their own: there is hardly a free agent to be found, who
is not entitled to a vote in some place or other in the kingdom. Nor is
comparative wealth or property entirely disregarded in elections, for though
the richest man has only one vote at one place, yet, if his property be at all
diffused, he has probably a right to vote at more places than one, and
therefore has many representatives. This is the SPIRIT OF OUR CONSTITUTION: not
that I assert it is in fact quite so perfect as I have here endeavored to
describe it; for, if any ALTERATION might be wished or suggested in the present
frame of parliament, it should be in favor of a MORE COMPLETE REPRESENTATION
OF THE PEOPLE.

If Blackstone then wished for a more equal representation of the people, if he
dared to publish and to enforce his wish; and if I have merely done the same,
where is the difference in ou^ guilt? But there is a difference, and that
difference is great. A learned professor of the laws of England, in the
University of Cambridge, a grave writer, in the solitude of his retirement, a
solemn judge, upon the tribunal of England, proclaiming that a reform in the
representation of the people was just, and essential to the true spirit of the
constitution; how superlatively criminal must his conduct be when compared with
mine?

But vengeance ceases at the verge of the grave. There factions and parties
rage in vain. If I have been guilty of an atrocious crime, I shall not demand
the protection of the dead, I shall not wonder among the tombs, and cry for the
support and the assistance of those who cannot hear me, but I shall loudly
demand the protection of the living, of men high in rank, exalted in power, and
who enjoy the confidence of their king. Can it ever be forgotten, that in the
year 1782, Mr. Pit was stained with the same guilt? Did not he preach up the
necessity of a reform in the representation of the people? Did not he advise
the people to form societies; and did not he countenance these societies, by
his presence? I appeal to the resolutions which he subscribed, in the Thatched
House Tavern. I attest the motions which he made for Reform, in the House of
Commons. Beware how you condemn me. Beware how you brand me with the opprobrium
of being seditious. At the same time you condemn the confidential Minister of
the King. Nay more Sir, in bringing this charge against me you accuse your
Sovereign; for can it be supposed that he would permit a man to enjoy his
confidence, who in the year 1782 by being a reformer, as I am in the year 1793,
wished to precipitate this country into anarchy, desolation, and, into all the
horrors which you have described.

But if the attempt to procure a Reform in Parliament be criminal, your
accusation must extend far and wide. It must implicate the Ministers of the
Crown and the lowest subjects. Have you forgotten that in the year 1782, the
Duke of Richmond, the present Commander of the forces, was a flaming advocate
for the universal right of suffrage? Do you not know, that he presided in
societies, and like Mr. Pit, advised an universal formation of such societies
all over the kingdom? Have you never read his famous letter to Colonel
S^ar^win, in which his principles, his testimony, to a full and complete
representation of the people, are indelibly recorded? Is guilt the passing
unsubstantial fashion of the day? Does it vary according to times and to
seasons, and to circumstances? Shall what was patriotism in 1782, be criminal
in 1793? You have honored me this night, by the title of the pest of Scotland.
And if the same offenses merit the same appellations, you must likewise
liberally bestow this epithet upon the first Lord of the treasury, and upon the
Commander of the forces. But what term of super-eminent distinction will not
you, the Public Prosecutor; you the Lord Advocate for Scotland, appropriate to
yourself? Were not you, not many months ago, likewise a reformer? Did you not
contend and act for a more equal representation of the people in the House of
Commons? Were not you one of those men, who, for that purpose, assembled lately
in this city, in what they called a Convention, and assumed to themselves the
title of Delegates from the Counties? Were not you, yourself, employed in
framing a bill for the extention of the elective franchise? Every charge in
your indictment against me recoils upon yourself; in accusing me, you charge
yourself with sedition. If it was lawful for you and your friends to meet in
societies, and in conventions, for the purpose of a Reform in Parliament,
unless the standard of guilt shrinks and extends as caprice or power may order,
it surely must have been permitted to me and my friends also to meet, and to
act on the same principle.

But I advance in this tract no farther, although my assertions and my
arguments are just, yet the subject of them is so connected with ridicule, as
to render them not so seeming in this solemn trial.

Gentlemen of the Jury, If the real cause of my standing as a Panel at your
bar, is for having actively engaged in the cause of a Parliamentary Reform, I
plead guilty. My conscience, however, will whisper consolation to me under my
condemnation. I engaged in that cause, for I thought the measure was to save
the country; that a more equal representation would dry up the sources of
corruption, would diminish our taxes, and stop the effusion of our blood. That
such were my motives, appears from every part of the evidence against me. The
Public Prosecutor shrunk from the examination, even of the testimony of his own
witnesses. He averted his eyes from the proof, in order to indulge himself in
vain declamation and unbecoming invective. I will not, however, imitate his
conduct. I will examine minutely every branch of the proof which he has adduced
against me; and you will be convinced that after every word and action of mine
has been scrutinized; after even the levity of the most unguarded hour has been
explored, and while instructed spies have watched every book, had marked every
word, not the vestige of sedition can be discovered.

The first charge against me is, That at meetings of the people which I myself
had convocated, I made seditious harangues; vilified the King and constitution;
represented the monarchical part of our government as cumbersome and expensive;
instituted a comparison betwixt our system and that of France, and did every
thing to inflame the minds of the people to insurrection and rebellion. It is
particularly alleged that I was guilty of these crimes at two meetings, the
one at Campsie, and the other at Kirkintilloch.

To prove this charge, Alexander Johnstone is adduced. You will remember, that
I offered to prove that this witness had expressed himself in the most
rancorous terms against me; that he would do all in his power to get me hanged.
By respectable witnesses, I could easily have supported this averment; but I
was not allowed by the Court, as I could not specify the particular cause which
had excited the malice of a man I did not know, and whom I do not remember to
have ever seen. But what does even Johnstone say? I will read you from my notes
the whole of his evidence. Correct me if I have erred in taking down any thing
differently from what has been stated. I believe that my notes are accurate,
but mistakes are not impossible.

[Here Mr. Muir read over the whole of the evidence.]

What does this witness then say? He says, that I stated, in the meeting at
Campsie, the disadvantages in the representation, from boroughs being rotten,
and from others having no vote, the population of England and Scotland, the
small number of electors in both; and that the people were not fully
represented. And is this sedition? Is not the fact notoriously true? Has it not
been resounded innumerable times within the walls of the House of Commons
itself? Has not the table of that House been covered with petitions, expressing
it in language infinitely stronger than mine? If to state truth be sedition,
why did our legislature slumber? Why slumbered the law; and why was not public
vengeance armed with the sword of justice, when this crime dared to pollute the
sanctuary of the legislature, by its appearance within it?

Johnstone depones, that I said, If a man gave 20,000 l. for a seat in
parliament, he behoved to derive some interest from it. Is not the fact true?
Do not we daily know of sums of money being given for seats in that house, and
can there be a conclusion in Euclid, more certain than the inference which I
draw from the fact? It may be said, that the House may be pure and uncorrupted,
even although such sums of money are given for admission into it; that men may
do so in order to serve their country, or to display their abilities. -- Grant
all this; but have we not seen much greater sums thrown away at contested
elections, by men who never opened their mouths within the walls of St
Stephen's Chapel; whose patriotism never shone forth; and whose abilities were
never discovered? The witness depones, that I said the Duke of Richmond had
been bribed into silence by 20 or 30,000 l. And supposing I had said so, that
this was the salutary opiate, which calmed and cooled the fever of his brain,
and probably saved him the mortification of standing his trial, also, for the
crime of sedition; what has this to do with the present matter? It is not the
Duke of Richmond, but it is the king himself that I am accused of vilifying.
This assertion of Johnstone's is indeed too ludicrous for serious argument.

Gentlemen, before I proceed farther, let me make one remark. I am to be tried
by the law of Scotland; and, by that law, two witnesses are necessary to prove
a crime. -- This is a rule full of humanity; but, at the same time, by cutting
off proof, it may, and has upon some occasions defeated the ends of public
justice. If, however, the concurrence of two witnesses were to be rigorously
insisted upon, it must be in a case similar to mine, where their testimony is
to go to words, volantia verba, neither engraved in marble, nor recorded in
brass. You know the infinite variety of circumstances depending upon the
speaker, the occasion, the manner, the person to whom they were uttered, and
his situation; by which, the meaning of the same words, can be diversified and
modified, tortured into guilt, and explained into innocence. By the law of
England, which is likewise the same with ours in the case of treason, the bare
uttering of words, without any overt act, cannot be admitted us evidence to
prove the crime.

Johnstone depones, that I compared our constitution with the French, and said
that their arms would be successful* that their representation was more equal;
two thirds of their debt paid, and that their manufacturers, in the competion
with ours, would have the advantage. Whoever heard before, that it was unlawful
to compare the British constitution with that of another country? If the
British constitution is the boast of ages, the pride and glory of the world,
Can it suffer by any comparison? On the contrary; will not its splendor
brighten by the foil? But does Johnstone say, that I gave the superiority to
the French constitution over the British? No. -- Does he assert, that I
exhorted the meeting to reject the British constitution, to adopt the French,
and to adopt the French as the better model? No; not a word. What then says he?
That I merely compared the two together. Is this sedition? -- Alas! we are all
seditious. Is there a man here, or in this country, who has not, in his own
mind, and who has not in words, made a similar comparison?

Johnstone next observes, That I mentioned, that two thirds of the French
national debt was already paid; that their taxes were less, and that I ascribed
this to the people being more equally represented in their legislator. I may
have said so, or I may have not said so. My remembrance does not carry me.
Whether the fact was true at that time that I spoke in the meeting, of two
thirds of their national debt being paid, and of their taxes being less, I know
not. Certain it is, before and since, I have often heard it to be so, in word
and in writing; but I will say this to you, and I will say it to all Scotland,
that an equal representation of the people is the most direct and salutary
method to diminish and pay off the national debt; to alleviate the weight of
taxes, and to remove the clogs of industry. Nothing can be truer than the
inference which Johnstone says I drew, that a people equally industrious, must
have the advantage over another, who pay greater taxes, and who groan under the
burden of a greater debt. If I were connected with this last nation, I
certainly would advise them to take every constitutional step to procure a
diminution of their debt and of their taxes. And what does Mr. Johnstone say?
That I advised the society to petition Parliament, and that the sole intention
of these societies was to procure a more equal representation and a shorter
duration of Parliaments. Do you say then that the object of these societies is
unconstitutional? Or do you say, that these societies, in the means which I
advised them to make use of in order to accomplish that object, were to act
unconstitutionally? You can do neither. Under the free government of Britain,
every man has a right to look after those whom he is supposed to delegate to
the House of Commons, to be the arbiters of his liberty, his fortune, his life.
He has a right to come and state to them his wrongs and his apprehensions; and
the mode which the constitution has pointed out is by petition.

Johnstone depones, that I advised the people to consult together to
communicate and diffuse their knowledge: The advice was a good advice; and such
an advice as I would give were I still in the same situation. What! Is the time
now come when the mind must be locked up; when fetters must be imposed upon the
understanding, and when the people, the great mass of human being, must be
prohibited to receive information, and to communicate among themselves the
information which they may have received. Miserable people. -- Country to be
deplored! -- Ignorance is the source from which despotism flows. The
remembrance of former liberties will make you only more wretched. Extinguish
then (if possible) the light of heaven, and let us grope, and let us search for
consolation, if it can be found, under the darkness which shall soon cover us.
But the prospect before us is not so dismal. -- We live, and we act under the
British constitution. A constitution which, in its genuine principles, has for
ages consecrated freedom. We live, and we remember the glorious revolution of
1688, which banished despotism, and placed the family of Hanover upon the
throne. We remember the Bill of Rights; nor shall we forget one of its most
sacred clauses, which declared, established, and sanctioned the unalienable
claim of the citizen to petition Parliament. Now, as members of the British
constitution, acting under the Bill of Rights, how should our Conduct be
shaped? Do we complain of general grievances, such as, an unequal
representation of the people? It would be arrogance in a part to speak the
language of the whole. Let those, then, who feel most sensibly the pressure of
this general grievance, not presume to complain for the nation, but consult the
nation. And how are they then to consult the nation, but by bringing the people
together in societies, to deliberate and to resolve? Would you wish the people
to act unadvisedly. Would you propose they should carry petitions to the doors
of the House of Commons, without knowing the real signification of the import
of these petitions? Let us apply to our political conduct a rule sure and
unerring in private life. -- Think; deliberate before you act. An unequal
representation is a general grievance. -- Before we seek to obtain its redress,
let us enquire, in the first place, if it is generally felt; and in the second,
if redress is generally wished for. In applying for a general remedy, let us
first be convinced of the general disease. Without this, a few factious may
presume to speak for the nation; may impose upon the weak, and may plunge the
many into inextricable confusion and misery. The great proposition, then, which
I maintained is, that the people should consult together; that they should form
themselves into societies; for it is only by so doing that they can conduct
themselves with wisdom, and hope for success.

The Bill of Rights declared the unalienable, imprescriptible right of the
people to petition Parliament, and if you condemn me for advising the people to
petition with reflection, with united and general deliberation, for redress of
general grievances, ye tear the record of our liberties, and scatter the
fragments where they never can be collected.

In advising then, even according to Johnstone's evidence, the people to inform
themselves, reciprocally to communicate their information, and then wisely and
deliberately to petition Parliament, you do not condemn me, but you trample
upon their liberties, and you proscribe the constitution. If I declared, at the
meeting of Campsie, that the people should adopt every mean to instruct
themselves with regard to their political rights, I declare and I inculcate the
same now before you, and before this great audience.

Hear farther what Mr. Johnstone says. I have his words accurately in my notes.
I advised the society to get ALL the political pamphlets from a neighboring
bookseller. -- The advice was a right advice. I did not list myself under the
banners of faction. I combated neither for ministry nor for opposition, for the
ins nor for the outs; I fought in the cause of truth, and how is that cause to
be successful, but by general, complete, and impartial information (...) the
different arguments, advanced upon either side of the great question of
Parliamentary Reform? Gentlemen, remember who the witness is, who brings
forward this important truth in my favor. It is Alexander Johnstone, the first
witness adduced by the Prosecutor, against whom I objected on account of the
expressions which he had used indicating his intention to ruin me, which by
respectable witnesses I offered, instantly, to prove, but which proof was not
allowed by the Court. When this man speaks what is strongly in my favor, you
cannot suspect him; nay more, what he has said, affords a clue to my conduct.
Fond of reading myself, purchasing, for information, almost every new
publication, was it not natural and just for me to recommend a similar lin^ of
conduct to men, who, from their union, were enabled to defray the expense? If I
had been the tool of party and of factions; if truth had not been my object, I
would have said to this society, 'purchase not the books which are written
against Parliamentary Reform; they are merely the productions of pensioned
hirelings; but read every treatise written in its defense. -- These are the
productions of enlightened, and of philanthropic men, and they are stamped by
the signature of genius.' You will remember what the witness has said upon the
interrogatory of the Solicitor General, relative to what I mentioned concerning
the King, Lords, and Commons; What was the reply of the witness? It was this,
that I said, the constitution ought to consist of King, Lords, and Commons. Is
this vilifying the Monarchy? Is this representing that part of the government
as expensive and cumbersome, as the indictment sets forth? Is this inflaming
the minds of the people, and exciting them to insurrection and rebellion?

This witness has likewise deponed to a remarkable fact. I will state you his
words accurately. If I am in error, you will correct me from your notes. In
that meeting there was mention made of Paine's Rights of Man, but not by Mr.
Muir. One man in the society, not in a public manner, but to his neighbor
privately, said; that he had read Paine's Works. What was that to me? And
supposing I had overheard this man use these words; could I (...) blamed for
merely possessing the faculty of hearing? Does Johnstone say, that I
participated in this private conversation? He says no such thing. Does he swear
that I recommended Paine's Works, or introduced the mention of them in the
meeting? No. How then is the other charge in the indictment supported by the
testimony of this witness? -- of my advising the people to read seditious
books, and circulating such among them.

Johnstone has told you, that most of those who composed this meeting were
weavers, mostly young men from eighteen to twenty years of age. What is the
inference which the Lord Advocate has deduced from this? I blush to mention it,
-- That people, in that situation, and at that time of life, have no right to
interfere in public affairs! People, in that situation! What situation? Who
compose the great mass of society? Who support the State? Who contribute to its
wealth? Who must fight in its defense? People at that period of life! -- What
period? When the heart is uncorrupted; when the soil is best prepared to
receive good seed, and when the feelings of the mind can be most easily led
over to the side of virtue and humanity. Because the majority of the members of
that society might be weavers, they must be held up in derision! Because the
majority of them might be young men, they must be censured for presuming to
interest themselves in the happiness of that country in which they were to
spend their future days, and whose constitution was to operate upon their
future lives! But you have seen several of the members of that society, and
those too adduced by the Prosecutor, (Mr. Johnstone in the number) and did you
think them so young, so frivolous, and so ill-taught as he represented? This is
a matter which regards you, as you were the witnesses, and you must judge for
yourselves. Finally, hear the conclusion of the deposition of this witness,
which states, That I recommended peace and regularity to the meeting, and
observed that any tumult or disorder would ruin their common cause; and that I
told them, there was no other mode of procuring redress, but by applying to
parliament; and that I recommended to them to beware of admitting any immoral
characters as members.

The next witness adduced for the Prosecutor, is Robert Waddell, vice president
of the society at Kirkintilloch, who swears to the particulars which occurred
at the same meeting, in which the preceding witness was present.

[Mr. Muir then read over his notes of this witness's deposition.]

In what respect does this witness criminate me? Does he not agree precisely
with Johnstone, concerning my general conduct. I am accused of vi^ifying the
king and constitution; and what does this witness say? That I made a speech, in
which I advised regularity in their proceedings; and that they ought to proceed
in a constitutional manner, as the law now is, by King, Lords, and Commons. The
indictment alleges, that I spoke and reprobated the monarchical branch of the
constitution. But the witness swears, that I said nothing about the expense of
the King, nor the comparitive expense of the French constitution, nor the
success of their arms. Gentlemen, I speak with candor; it is not in my
remembrance, that I spoke concerning the comparative excellency of the French
or British constitutions. You hear one witness declaring, that I merely
compared them together; you hear this witness declare, that I made no mention
of either constitution; both of them may have spoken truth according to the
impression which was on their minds, but they show you the danger of trusting
to the memory of witnesses, when it relates to words spoken in the warmth of a
public discussion, and attempted to be recollected after the lapse of many
months. But give whatsoever degree of strength you choose to Johnstone's
evidence, draw from the comparison, which I instituted between the French and
British constitutions, an inference as highly criminal as you possibly can; the
testimony of that man is completely overthrown by this witness. Mr. Waddell has
stated to you what passed after the meeting was over, in private company, in
the unguarded hour, when the mind dreads no danger, and when vigilance is
asleep^ Can any thing prove more strongly than the deposition of this man, the
innocence of my conduct? The conversation related to politics, and to new
publications; and surely materials of that kind are infinitely more noble in
their nature, than those which deform convivial society, and disgrace the man.
He remembers me speaking of Mr. Flower's boook upon the French constitution; a
book which the Lord Advocate, although not specified in the libel, w^^ed to
insinuate as being seditious, and consequently an aggravation of my crime. Of
the truly respectable author of this book, I know nothing; but if, from
writing, a true idea may be formed of the heart which guides the pen, there is
no man that I would more fondly call my friend. It is true, I recommended Mr.
Flower there, because I recommended his principles every where. I will do so
still; I will do so in your presence, in the presence of the Court, and to this
great audience. You, who wish for a Reform in Parliament, read and weigh well
the lessons, which this good man has given and inculcated. Let personal
reformation precede public; let the torch, of knowledge lighten the path of
liberty; but above all, let sound morality, and genuine Christianity be the
goals from which you commence your political career. A people ignorant -- never
can enjoy freedom; a people immoral -- are unworthy of the blessing.

The witness next mentions, that the only book which I recommended to be
purchased, was Dr. Henry's History of England. I am an enemy to the
constitution, -- and yet I recommended to the people the book best calculated
to instruct them in its principles, and in its progress; a book, applauded in
private and in public by the Earl of Mansfield, and upon whose application, the
author received an honorable pension from the King; honorable to the granter,
to the receiver, and to him who first noticed the modest merit of the writer.

The witness next proceeds to mention, that at the meeting, a person of the
name of Boyd proposed, that Paine's Works should be purchased and recommended.
What was my conduct upon the occasion? I said, it was foreign to their purpose;
and foreign, surely, indeed it was. Without approving of Mr. Paine's
principles, without condemning them, I shall afterward more fully show you,
that the advice was such as became them and me, in our situation at the time.

The witness mentions, that he purchased for the Society three or four copies
of the Political Progress. Does he say, that it was at my desire, or on my
recommendation? No. -- That he purchased for his own use, and that of his
neighbors, three or four copies of the Paisley Declaration of Rights; that he
got a copy of Paine's pamphlet, but knows not from whom; that he never saw the
Dialogue betwixt the Governors and the Governed, one of the charges against me
in the libel; and that a Mr. William Muir showed him a number of the Patriot.
In the name of common sense, what connection have I with this extraneous
matter* How does it tend toward my crimination? The witness swears positively,
that the only book which I recommended to be purchased by the Society, was
Henry's History of Britain.

The witness declared, that a more equal representatiion of the people was the
object of the Society. Being asked by the Solicitor General, what he meant by a
more equal representation. He stopped for a moment to consider. O! what matter of
triumph was this! Then burst the contemptuous sneer; and then with affected
ridicule was pointed out, the absurdity of men so ignorant, embarking in the
cause of reformation, when even their Vice President, the witness who from his
station, if any had known, he should have been the man. But by all, excepting
by Mr. Pit and the Duke of Richmond, who contended for reformation, no
specific plan has yet been proposed. In all that was said in the late debate in
the House of Commons, no specific plan was brought forward. Is it then a matter
of surprise that the witness stopped for a moment to consider his answer to the
question? His answer was such as did honor to the coolness of his mind, and to
the foundness of his understanding, Two opinions, replied he, divided the
Society. One was, for confining the right of election to landed property; the
other, for extending it to the body of the people; that he; for his own part,
had not yet made up his mind upon either. Being asked my opinion, he swears, I
gave none.

The witness depones to my express language, that I said to the meeting, that
they would be the more successful, the more they were constitutional. Is this
preaching up sedition? Is this inflaming the minds of the multitude to
rebellion? With every witness adduced against me this day, this witness
likewise corroborates my earnest advices to the people to be regular, to be
moderate, and to be moral.

The next witness proposed to be adduced against me was, the Reverend James
Lapslie. My objections to his admissibility were sustained, before I advanced
upon the threshold of my proof, by the Lord Advocate's giving him up. Sorry am
I indeed for the Prosecutor's timely precaution; proof was thickening fast
against this gentleman; proof of practices, proof of crimes, which -- but I go
no farther; the day will come, when this gentlemen and myself shall exchange
situations at this bar. I trust that by your verdict I shall be acquitted, and
the moment after, I solemnly pledge myself to this nation, to exhibit against
him a criminal accusation of the most serious kind. To say more would not be
right, as tending to excite a prejudice against him in the day of his own
trial. It is sufficient for me, that, even in this stage of the business, after
the proof I was leading, my most rancorous enemy, would have blushed to have
brought forward this man's testimony.

The next witness was, Henry Freeland, president of the society, at
Kirkintilloch. The indictment charges me with having convocated the societies
at Campsie and at Kirkintilloch. The witness depones, that there was an
intention of having a society at Kirkintilloch, long before ever he saw me.
Does this witness, the first president of that society who, if any man could,
must have been well informed of the circumstances leading to its formation,
support the charge of the libel? Quite the reverse. I shall postpone the most
material part of his deposition to the last. In my speech, he mentions, that I
spoke about shortening the duration of Parliaments and a more equal
representation; that I said, that I thought taxes might be lessened by these
means, and that the reform was not to take place as to the King and House of
Lords, but only of the Commons. Call you this sedition! Does not every thing
brought forward by these witnesses of the Crown, confute the false, the
injurious, and the scandalous charge in the libel, of vilifying the
Constitution, and of exciting the people to rebellion against the King?

Mr. Freeland said, that I mentioned the success of the French arms, and that
liberty would be established in France. Call you this likewise a crime? At the
time when I spoke was it not true? Were not the armies of France in every part
victorious? and could I, not possessed of the power of penetration into the
future, be sure that they were not to accomplish their object? Are not
opinions, after all that has happened during the last months, as much divided
as they were then? Can you go into private or into public company, where this
topic forms not the most material part of their conversation? If merely to
speak upon this subject be sedition, you are all contaminated.

Mr. Freeland concurs with the other witnesses in remembering, that I
recommended no other book to the meeting, than Henry's History. That I told
them all riot would be ruin to the cause; exhorted them to be constitutional
and regular, and told them, that they were to petition Parliament, and that
there was no other way of getting a reform.

I now come to the most material part of Mr. Freeland's evidence, which relates
to my lending him a copy of Paine's Works. Now let us take his evidence in the
connection of time. He tells you, that, having heard that a proclamation was
against that book, he was upon that account curious to see it, and that he
first spoke of it to me; that upon Tuesday, eight days before the society met,
when I happened to be at Kirkintilloch, in the house of Wallace, to which I had
sent for him, that I bid him search in my great coat pocket, and he would find
the book; but that he had before this time, for the reason which he had
mentioned, asked the loan of it from me. He further tells you, that when he
first spoke of that book to me, I said, I thought it had a tendency to mislead
the people; that he was surprised I did not recommend it, because every body
else spoke well of it, and that I did not approve of it.

This is Mr. Freeland's deposition as to what passed between him and me, when
he received Mr. Paine's Works. But his testimony goes farther, and corroborates
that in which all the witnesses are unanimous, concerning what passed in the
society when that book was mentioned; of its being suggested by one Boyd, to
purchase it; but that I shook my head, and said it was foreign to the purpose.

Gentlemen, This is the most material evidence which the Prosecutor has been
able to produce. A wide field is now before us, and that I may deviate as
little as possible from precision, I shall arrange what I have to say, under
distinct heads.

In the first place, the indictment charges me of feloniously and wickedly
circulating and distributing this book, in order to inflame the minds of men
against the Constitution. You are the judges of the law and of the fact. Your
decision will not separate them from each other, but combine them both
together. It is necessary for me to inform you, that, without a criminal
intention, there can be no crime; and has not the indictment itself set forth,
that I did not circulate these books merely, but that the circulation proceeded
from such intention. Now, I ask you to lay your hands upon your breasts, and to
say, where, in the circumstances of this case, is the shadow of felonious
design. The Works of Mr. Pain had been published and sold every where. The
papers of the day teemed with successive advertisements, announcing where they
were to be procured. What excited this curiosity in the public mind, without
uttering a single syllable upon the intrinsic merit or demerit of these works,
is easy to tell. The situation of France roused the attention of Europe. To
that country every eye was turned, and every man who could wield a pen, was
employed in discussing the principles which the Revolution had brought forward.
Mr. Burke entered the field of controversy. The name of that gentleman would
give sale and diffusion to any production. Mr. Burke fought upon one side of
the question. He was encountered upon the opposite by Thomas Pain. Both of
them champions of approved vigor, and of undoubted prowess. -- Could public
curiosity not be awakened to the contention of such men? It was so most
completely: and, the Works of Mr. Burke and of Thomas Pain, flew with a
rapidity to every corner of the land, hitherto unexampled in the history of
political science. Is there a single man among you, who has not read the Works
either of Pain or of Burke? Is there a person upon the bench, upon the Jury,
or in this audience, who has either not purchased or lent the Treatise upon the
Rights of Man! Now, if one of you lent to a friend or relation, who might
participate in the common curiosity, a single pamphlet of Mr. Paine's, you are
as guilty as I am; but why should I use the term guilty? NONE of us are guilty
in lending that book, because we harbored no evil design.

If there had been a public law of the Kingdom condemning that book, the
presumption of ignorance, could not be admitted by its rigid rule. And the mere
act of giving away a single copy, would have been considered as a violation of
its letter. But, at the period when I lent Mr. Freeland Paine's Works, was the
sentence of reprobation thandered against them? No -- I then was guilty of
offending no existing Law. I was not certified of my danger. I was not put upon
my guard. Was there a judgment of any court in England or in Scotland against
this book at that time? No -- Then I had no cause for alarm; but some months
before, a proclamation against seditious writings had been issued. A
proclamation, gentlemen, is not law. It can declare and it can enforce what the
law has already enacted, but it has no legislative authority. But was there any
mention of Mr. Paine's Works in that proclamation? None. -- What were the
consequences of this proclamation? You know them well. -- If there had been a
demand before for political books, that demand increased in a tenfold
proportion. Concerning the particular books to which the proclamation might be
supposed to allude, curiosity was more highly excited, and conversation became
more keenly interested. Now, mark the circumstances, in which Mr. Freeland
applied to me for the loan of that book. Here, take notice of his express
words, "that having heard a proclamation of the King was used against it, he
was, upon that account, curious to see it, and first spoke of it to Mr. Muir."
Now I ask you if any thing like felonious intention in Freeland can be
discovered, in applying for it to me; a proclamation had been issued against
seditious books, and a natural curiosity was excited in him to see what these
books were, which he had heard reported to be seditious; a curiosity which, at
the time, was common to all. I ask, if you could suppose there was a felonious
intention in my lending it? Did I introduce the conversation by speaking of it.
Did I advise him to read it, to adopt its principles, and to contribute his
exertions to carry them into practice? No. -- He expressly tells you, that I
did not approve of the book; that I said it had a tendency to mislead the
people, at which he was surprised, as it was otherwise approved by all. To what
then reduces itself this mighty crime of sedition for which I stand here? To
gratify the natural curiosity for a person who tells you, he lives in my
neighborhood, and is a distant re^^^ion; I lent a book, which was in universal
circulation, unnoticed by Courts of Justice, uncondemned by law.

If you have come here this day with an intention to bring me in guilty,
whether right or wrong, say so boldly, openly, and let me add, honestly. Resort
not to wretched pretexts and expedients to justify a stretch of power. These
pretexts are soon seen through by the penetrating eye of mankind, and to the
guilt attending the determination, will be added the contempt which the pretext
will justify.

Gentlemen, in the second place, I would direct your attention to what Mr.
Paine's writings are, and to the particular manner in which they are presented
in accusation, in my trial. I will allow that any writing which calls upon the
people to rise in arms, to resist the law, and to subvert the constitution is
something worse than seditious, that it is treasonable, but do the writings of
Mr. Pain stand in that predicament? Can you point me cut a single sentence
where he provokes insurrection? Mr. Paine's writings are indisputably of a
speculative nature. He investigates the first principles of society; he
compares different forms of government together; and where he gives the
preference, he assigns his reasons for so doing.

I have neither time, nor inclination to entertain you by dissertations upon
the Liberty of the Press. If that liberty is sickly, the Constitution is
likewise diseased If that liberty is extinguished, the constitution expires.
You will ask, What is the precise notion which I ^ffix to the term: Liberty of
the Press? I will tell you honestly, and without disguise. -- By the Liberty of
the Press, I mean not the power of assassinating the reputation, of torturing
the feelings of individuals. No crime in my estimation can be more heinous. --
By the Liberty of the Press, I mean not the power of degrading, and of
contaminating the public mind by corruption of public morals. -- By the Liberty
of the Press, I understand not the power of inflaming the minds of men against
the constitution, of stimulating the people to insurrection, and of tearing
down the barriers of public property, and of public security. Where government
is established, that government must be respected. And the truest republic,
which ever yet existed, never could tolerate the internal foe, who, within its
own precincts, founded the charge to civil war. -- BY THE FREEDOM OF THE PRESS,
I understand the INALIENABLE RIGHT OF PUBLISHING TRUTH; of presenting to the
world, whatever may tend to public good, and may not hurt the feelings of
individuals, morals, nor established laws.

Constitutions of government are the workmanship of men; that constitution is
the most perfect, which can be most easily amended. There are constitutions,
which, step by step, without convulsion, and with ^ut blood, have advanced to
superior degrees of perfection; which, by their own internal energy, have
effected their own reformation, and avoided the calamities of a revolution.
These progressive constitutions, if I may use the expression, must always
cherish and support the liberty of the press, as the chief instrument of their
preservation. Look back, I beseech you, to the ancient system in France. To you
the observation may be singular, but I am confident in my own mind it is just.
If, while the vestiges of their ancient constitution still ^emained, while the
remembrance of the States General was not yet forgotten, the freedom of the
press had not been annihilated, their constitution would have become
progressive; its reformation would gradually have been operated, and by the
exertions of good men and of patriotic writers, all the calamities which we now
deplore in the revolution would have been averted. How grateful should we be to
eternal providence, that our Constitution possesses in itself the power of
amendment, that, without a revolution, it can rectify its abuses; and that,
silently and without disorder, it can advance toward that chastened liberty,
which constitutes human felicity. You have read the history of the British
Constitution; and what is it but the history of a continual progress? You will
next ask what has been the impelling cause of this progress? I answer, the
right of the universal diffusion of information, by means of the Liberty of the
Press. If you destroy that liberty, you accomplish one of two things. -- The
people will be buried in ignorance; the iron throne of despotism will be
erected, and the silent -- I cannot, will not contemplate the picture. If you
destroy the Liberty of the Press, you may perchance do something else, which is
horrible to think upon. This high spirited and generous people will not soon
forget their lost rights. You have removed what led to progressive perfection.
Evil will proceed to evil. What originated solely from corrupted men, will be
imputed to the constitution itself. By undermining its best prop, its most
solid and massy pillar, I repeat it, and never shall cease to repeat it, the
liberty of the Press, you expose this holy fabric to a blow, which will shake
it from its foundations. Let us then apply this argument to the case of Mr.
Pain. This work is merely of a speculative nature, upon the principles of
government. If Mr. Paine's Work is, inconsistent with the British Constitution,
what is the consequence? If the book is written with ingenuity, it will acquire
readers. No man in his sound senses, the keenest advocate for a Parliamentary
Reform, but will avert his eyes, bathed in tears, and in horror of soul, from a
revolution. He will compare the principles of Mr. Pain with the Constitution.
If Mr. Pain has pointed out any thing defective in the Constitution, he will
contribute his humble efforts to have that defect repaired. If, upon the other
hand, he shall imagine, that Mr. Pain has taken an erroneous view of this
ed^^^e, has misrepresented its properties, he will become more and more
sensible, from his inquiry, of the security which he enjoys under its
protecting roof. The sense of danger will be removed, and his mind, undisturbed
by gloomy apprehensions, will enjoy tranquillity. O! how little do ye deem the
British Constitution, who think that it is built upon the sand, which when the
rain descends, and the floods comes, and the winds blow, and beat upon it,
that it shall fail. No -- when the rains descend, when the floods come, when
the winds blow, it shall not fall, for it is founded upon a rock. I then
maintain, although not in accents sweet to the ear of corruption, grateful to
courtly pride, nor acceptable to ill-got power, that those speculative writers,
who investigate the principles of our Constitution, who compare that
Constitution with those of other countries, perform a meritorious service to
this nation: these writers either impel us to rectify that which is wrong, or
more strongly confirm us in our love and in our attachment to that which is
right. Let Mr. Pain then be considered as the bitterest enemy to our
Constitution, yet as long as he confines himself to speculation, we should be
grateful. Our best interests are involved in the Constitution, and like those
still of a higher class, superior to time, and which extend to eternity, are
too apt to be forgotten, and to make little impression. If Mr. Pain then has
called our attention to the Constitution, he has performed to us an essential
service, he has led us to contemplate all its perfection, and roused us from
our lethargy to rectify wherever, by time and by corruption, it may have
suffered decay.

Shall the lending of a single copy of the works of this writer be held
criminal? When was there ever such a violation of the rights of Britons? Mr.
Pain has composed no model of a perfect commonwealth, as Mr. Hume has done;
yet, the political works of Mr. Hume, you have all read, and you have all
applauded. If you condemn a man for lending Mr. Paine's Works, you do what even
was not attempted to be done in the reign of Henry the VIII, when the
Constitution lay expiring on the rack of despotism, making exertions, which
only could discover remaining life, but at the same time the privation of
strength. Along with equality of political rights, has Mr. Pain preached
equality of property? a chimera which may enter into the brains of those, who
may dream of a golden age, but who know not human nature. Yet, under that
arbitrary reign, did not Sir Thomas M^re, enjoying the confidence of the King,
and placed at the head of the law, publish his Utopia, the plan of his
republic, of which an equal division of property, an Agrarian law, an universal
community, formed the basis. In this enlightened age, when, after so many fiery
trials, our constitution, in its pure and genuine principles, stands unveiled
to our view, will you condemn a man for lending a work, equally speculative,
and if such a thing existed, as a well founded panic against levellers,
infinitely more dangerous.

I should be the last man to propose to your imitation, the conduct of despots;
but I call upon you to ponder well the words of a man, who rendered the terms
republic and pure and undefined despotism the same; Cromwell. Under his
protectorship, when Harrington published his Oceana; informers denounced the
work. "My cause is too strong." said Cromwell, "to be hurt by paper shot;" and
if you say that, by any publication, the British constitution can be injured,
you yourselves are guilty of the crime of libelling its strength.

To conclude upon this head, I maintain, that to suppress works purely
speculative, provoking not the people to disobedience to the laws, nor to
rebellion, however much these works may differ from the constitution, is to
destroy the Liberty of the Press, to trample upon the best and the surest
bulwark, which defends the approaches to that respected building. If, to lend
the Works of Thomas Pain today be sedition, to lend a translation of the
republic of Plato tomorrow will be treason. Gentlemen, the Works of Mr. Pain
are lying before me. I could read to you many passages to prove, that they are
merely of a speculative nature. You are exhausted; equally so am I. And yet, we
have some length of field before we conlude to travel over. For these passages
I ^efer you to the celebrated speech of Mr. E^^kine; one of the best friends
the constitution ever knew, although of that reprobated cast, the Friends of
the People. Gentlemen* I trust that you will now be persuaded, that neither the
publishing nor the lending of a speculative political book is sedition. But I
now call your attention to another circumstance, the manner in which
criminality is attached to that book and to myself. Various detached passages
are quoted from it in the indictment. They are called wicked, inflammatory and
seditious. In the sacred name of justice, will you condemn any book for
detached passages, separated from the whole connection, cut off from reciprocal
explanation, and from which neither its general tenor nor scope can be
discovered. If you do this, where is the book in which you cannot discover
sedition, by dissecting its separate sentences and paragraphs. For my part, if
you proceed on in this manner, I do not know a more dangerous collection than
the books of holy inspiration. Separate verse from verse, and then combine
them, according to your pleasure, and you may make the Bible one of the most
seditious and treasonable books which ever was written. But you are neither to
condemn that book, nor me, for those detached passages exhibited in the
indictment. You must carry along with you the whole works of Mr. Pain, you
must scrutinize line by line, and you must pronounce upon the general context.
If you find it provoking the people to resistance, calling them forth to arms,
to subvert the constitution; then, no doubt, it is seditious. But, if you find
the author indulging himself in nothing but philosophical and political
speculation, however much your principles and his may differ, you cannot
condemn him for composing it, or me, after it was composed and published, for
lending it to a relation.

If you condemn books for being seditious, upon account of passages culled from
this page and from that page, and artfully combined together, you have it in
your power to award a proscription against books and universal literature. As I
have already mentioned, there is not a single book, in which, by dissecting it
in this manner, sentence by sentence, and passage by passage, you may not
discover immorality, blasphemy, and treason. Indeed, if the sad objects of
reflection which present themselves to my mind, when I contemplate the state of
my country, could permit me to indulge in a vein of ridicule, I would advise
you at once to lay the axe to the root of the tree, and to bring an indictment
against the alphabet itself, as it is the source of the (...) you dread, as its
parts form the component elements (...) sentences and of paragraphs which may
contain the most (...) ^rous sedition, and the most horrible treason. But this
(...) an hour to indulge the sport of humor. (...) I admit, that the passages
from Mr. Pain and the (...) ^xhibited in the indictment may be highly
criminal, (...) ^ill any person venture to say, that I lent these books, (...)
^ntaining such passages, that I particularly pointed (...) out, and gave them
my warmest approbation? If the Prosecutor has a right to presume, that it was
upon account of these passages I lent these writings, I too have a right to
draw a contrary presumption in my favor. If there are sentiments in the Works
of Mr. Pain, (and many such there are) fraught with universal benevolence,
inculcating universal amity and brotherhood, and of a tendency to dispel those
passions and those prejudices, which animate and impel nation against nation
into the field of blood and of carnage, I am entitled to plead upon these
passages: I have a right to say, that it was the antidote and not the poison I
recommended; And you must know, that the law of this country obliges you, where
opposing presumptions are of equal strength, to let the balance preponderate on
the side of mercy.

Gentlemen, I shall conclude upon the subject of Mr. Paine's Works by
observing, That all the witnesses have uniformly sworn, that I refused to
recommend them; that when the matter was proposed, I said, the principles
contained in them might mislead the people, as they were foreign to the object
of the society, and might misguide weak minds. There is not a witness adduced
by the Prosecutor, who says the contrary of this; and will you agree in
opinion, that the charge in my indictment of circulating and recommending these
books, has the ^lightest shadow of support? I will tell you the reason why I
did not recommend Mr. Paine's books to the societies Scotland, and why I
declared them foreign to their purpose -- Mr. Pain is a republican, and the
spirit of republicanis;m breathes through all his writings. This is his darling
system. The object of these societies was, by constitutional means, to procure
a reformation in the constitution, and not a revolution, which implied its
destruction; to have their long lost rights restored, but not the assumption of
new rights derived from a different system. The people of Scotland were rapidly
advancing to a true sense of their constitutional liberties: They demanded an
application to them of the constitution, in its genuine principles, in which
they beheld their security confirmed, and their happiness established. That
they might advance with more ardour in this cause, it was necessary that they
should know the constitution; what it had been in its vigor, and what it now
is in its decay, in consequence of the corruption of men and of ages. What did
I do to effectuate this legal and peaceable object? I did not present to them
the splendid fabrics of ancient or of modern republics; I wished them to keep
their eyes confined at home, to repair their own mansion rather than pull it
down, and expose themselves to the inconveniences and to the dangers of
building upon new plans, the advantages or disadvantages of which could be only
known by the uncertain experience of future ages. All the witnesses who speak
of my conduct in the societies tell you, that I recommended none but
cunstitutional measures; and that the only book which I recommended to them was
Henry's History of England, as the best calculated, by its accuracy and
plainness, to give them insight into the nature and progress of their
constitution.

If, in my library, in conversation upon the subject of government, the plans
adopted by different political writers had been discussed, doubtless, I might
have given opinions different from those which I considered it my duty to
advance when acting under an established constitution, and employed in those
measures, which it pointed out, to effectuate a redress of grievances. When Mr.
Hume published his Essay upon a Perfect Commonwealth, did not he, as strongly
as he possibly could, declare that he thought this model preferable to the
British constitution, even in its purest and best principles? But supposing Mr.
Hume to have been a member of the Society of the Friends of the People, what
would have been his conduct in it? Would he have said to men who were assembled
to renovate constitutional rights only, You must give up the constitution
entirely; it is defective and imperfect when compared to the offspring of my
fancy; it is this last which you must adopt, and reject the former. But Mr.
Hume would have held forth no such language; he would have said to them, 'The
grievances of which you complain can be redressed by the energy of our own
constitution; the redress of these grievances is the only object of your
association. If then reformation is your object, and not revolution, however
much you may approve of my speculative system, it must not operate upon you for
a moment in practice.'

It was upon this principle that I refused to recommend the Works of Mr. Pain;
that I said, that they were foreign to the purpose, and might mislead weak
minds. But was it ever before held criminal in an author, to publish what
speculative systems of government he pleased, provided he confined himself in
the retirement of speculation, and did not advance forth to the field of
action? Was it a crime of Plato, under the Athenian republic, to compose his
beautiful system, of one more perfect? Was it high treason in Cicero, under the
Roman Commonwealth, to write those applauded works, which have been lost in the
darkness of the Gothic night, and of which, a few fragments could be found
only, when the morning of letters began to dawn upon Europe? Was Sir Thomas
More led forth to the scaffold for composing his Utopia, Harrington proscribed
for his Oceana, or Hume exiled for his Commonwealth? These authors indulged
themselves in a liberty, which, if we now are to be deprived of, we must be
left hopeless, and in despair, as the attempt at amendment and reformation will
be for ever precluded.

Upon the principle which I have explained, I should have thought it equally,
if not more dangerous uad inexpedient, to have recommended in a Society of the
Friends of the People, Plato's Republic, or Hume's Commonwealth. Inexpedient!
because these writings might have had a tendency to lead these societies from
their constitutional object; dangerous because, if presented to weak
understandings, and to fervid imaginations, they might have influenced them to
depart from those ends, which, by calmness, perseverance, and legal measures,
they were sure at last to accomplish, in pursuit of chimeras, brilliant but
delusive, always seemingly approaching, but always in reality flying farther
away.

Gentlemen, I conclude my observations upon the subject of Mr. Paine's Works.
You will remember it was only a single copy which I lent; the circumstances
attending it, which, admitting the book to be as seditious and as treasonable
as can be imagined, precluded the idea of a felonious circulation. You are the
first Jury in Scotland, before whom Mr. Pain was either directly or indirectly
brought; I trust, that you will act in such a manner as to do honor to
yourselves, in doing justice to him and to me; that you will not attempt to
annihilate political science, by condemning a work in its nature purely
speculative; that, in this country where our chief glory has arisen from
literature, you will not limit her researches, but indulge her in her unbounded
flight, into every region where the materials of human happiness and human
improvement can be collected. Above all I entreat you, that you would not set
the dangerous precedent of condemning a book, for sentences detached from the
whole, when you do not consider the general tenor and scope. I tell you that if
you do not carry away this book from your table to your chamber, read every
line, and compare the whole in connection, you do me most flagrant injustice.
Finally, I must tell you, that you are not bound by what any Jury has done in
England -- you are bound by the Law of Scotland; and this is the first trial of
the kind which ever occurred here: -- Even the decisions in England have lost
the respect due to them, although they were to be held out as precedents. We
have seen Juries one day condemning the author and the publishers, and upon the
succeeding day we have heard other Juries pronounce a verdict of acquittal.

The next witness is Anne Fisher, a late servant in my father's house. Her
evidence comes forward to you with peculiar distinction; caressed by the
Prosecutor, and complimented by the Court; -- her wonderful accuracy extolled,
and her abilities admired. I will soon show you, Gentlemen, that she has but
few pretensions to that accuracy, of which the Lord Advocate spoke in such
terms; -- that her memory possesses a singular quality, retentive to whatever
may militate against me, but hesitating and confused to whatever may seem in my
favor What this domestic and well instructed spy has given in evidence against
me, fills my mind with little concern; on the contrary it affords me much
satisfaction to find that when I was surrounded in the place where I expected
most security, -- where all suspicion was ^^lled asleep, my conduct was so
guarded. -- What do I say? -- Guarded! Innocence has no need to be on the watch.

My conduct has been such, as even malice itself cannot condemn. But before I
proceed to read her evidence from my notes, let me solemnly caution you against
the dangerous precedent of giving credibility to witnesses of this kind, under
accusations of this nature. The crime of sedition, if you attend to its
essence, never can be committed within the walls of a private house. It
supposes the highest publicity, the convocation of many. But if power shall
say, that words spoken in an unguarded moment within the sacred walls of a
family, amount to this crime, What will follow? Not those with whom you may
have acted in your political life, and who, with the impression of the oath of
God upon them, can best tell the truth; not those whom you may have admitted to
your friendship, and to your confidence, and who best know the secrets of your
soul; but the meanest of your domestics, who could hardly approach your
presence even in their menial duties, who, (if the expression may be used) to
the members of a family are almost unknown; -- These! These! The meanest and
the lowest -- will be brought forward to swear away your property, your
reputation, and your life: And such is this witness, who is adduced against me
with such parade. O! Beware how ye sanctify the shameful proceeding. It is not
me you wound alone, but you destroy the confidence which subsists between man
and man; you lead, by your own hands, to the fire-sides of your children and
your dearest relations, the fiends of suspicion and of danger; and ye forever
put an end to that reciprocity of communication, which enlivens and endears
domestic society.

Now let us hear what this witness has to say? I will read you from my notes,
her evidence. If I have erred in taking it down, you will please correct me.

[Here Mr. Muir read from his notes, the evidence of Anne Fisher.]

The testimony of this witness seems to relate to two of the principal charges
in the indictment; the first, to my having made speeches in public societies,
vilifying the King and constitution. The second, to my having distributed and
recommended seditious books, viz. Mr. Pain, the Patriot, the Paisley
Declaration, and the Dialogue between the Governors and the Governed. Under
these two different articles, let us examine the testimony of this witness.
First, To my making seditious speeches; Secondly, To my circulating seditious
books.

Every thing which the Prosecutor could adduce against me, he has told you that
he would adduce under the generality of the term Sedition, even although it
should not be specified in the libel. The Court likewise has permitted him so
to do; and in the case of this witness, you can see an exemplary illustration
of this right, if it can be so called. Accused of making seditious harangues in
public, this wretched girl is adduced to swear to what she says, she may have
heard in private, when instructed to take her watch, she stood and marked to
destruction those who fed her.

And what is the dreadful language she has heard me use in my unguarded
moments. I will repeat an that she says, I will recall to your remembrance her
express words, and upon them I will make no comment. That if every body had a
vote, I would be made member for Calder; -- that members of Parliament would
have thirty or forty shillings a day, and that, in that case, there would be
none but honest men to keep the constitution clear. You remember how the Public
Prosecutor enlarged and expatiated upon these words of this witness. Now, after
laboring so long in vain, he fancied, he had got something against me. I
smiled at the indecency of his exultation; but next moment I blushed when I
reflected he was a lawyer, and chief Council in Scotland for the Crown. Here
said the Prosecutor, "you see the cloven foot. -- You see French principles
manifested. Here you discover the whole tincture of his soul. Members of
Parliament to have thirty or forty shillings a day for their attendance -- to
be honest men and, to keep the constitution clear! Is not this evidence, that
he means to introduce in place of our House of Commons a National Convention,
on French principles, and according to French forms"

Sorry am I ^o record the ignorance of this Lord Advocate of Scotland. Is there
a man who has hardly opened the volume of the history of our constitution, who
does not know, that until a very late period indeed, when corruption glided in,
and tainted and poisoned the whole, members of Parliament received their wages
from the hands of the people alone: O! how I speak it with joy when I view the
past; with sorrow, when I contemplate the present; they would have scorned to
have received the price of their attendance from any other hands, than from the
hands of the people. Then the constitution possessed all its energies. Then
toward the constitution in the strength of age, but with the bloom of youth.
The people delegated none, but men whose virtues they knew, and none but men
who possessed public virtues could be found to undertake the important mission.
Look back I entreat you to all the great and good men whom English History
records. Turn your eyes to the Hampdens, to the Sidneys, to the Marville's of
former times; to those men whom -- but I stop; they received their wages
directly from the people. Let the Lord Advocate pronounce their eulogium by his
invective. If what I have said be sedition, when overheard by that spy Fisher,
I shall next moment render myself infinitely more criminal; for I declare to
you, that we never can expect a virtuous House of Commons a Constitutional
House of Commons, a House of Commons, such as it once was, connected with no
other interest than the interest of the people; until such time as its members
shall receive a compensation for their attendance from the people and from no
other quarter, be entitled to no other reward than the approbation of their own
minds, and the applauses of their fellow-citizens, of whose rights, and of
whose liberties, they have been the undaunted, uncorrupted defenders.

Fisher proceeds to state, that she has heard me say, That France was the most
flourishing nation in the world, as they had abolished tyranny, and got a free
government; And that, further, se has heard me say, that the Constitution or
this country was very good; but that many abuses had crept in, which required a
thorough Reform.

Gentlemen, even in my most unguarded hours, this domestic spy cannot, by her
evidence, support a tittle of the indictment, where it charges me with
vilifying the King and Constitution.

Of her idle story of what I said concerning Courts of Justice, that they need
a reform, and that this Court in particular got their money for nothing, but
pronouncing sentence of death upon poor creatures; and that their parade in
coming into Glasgow was useless, I disdain to take notice Only, you will
discover her exquisite art. This day, I am tried before this very Court, and
she supposes, that, by inventing and throwing in a circumstance of this kind,
in order to irritate the judges against me, she will more completely execute
the wretched job she has undertaken to perform. Were there not more servants in
the house, who had infinitely better opportunities to hear my conversation; and
must she, the lowest of them all, with whom she cannot pretend I had ever two
minutes conversation, be singled out, and pitched upon for this drudgery?

This witness depones, that she heard me say, a republican form of government
was the best, but a monarchical form of government, under proper restrictions,
would be the best in this country. With all her art, and with all her memory,
she cannot depone to a single circumstance which can strike against me. Even
from her own account of my private conversation, it appears, that when I spoke
of republican forms of government, it was purely in the abstract, without any
allusion to this country, without expressing any wish to see any particular
mode of them introduced; and that when I spoke of this country, I never
deviated from the constitution, but said that a limited monarchy, under
restrictions, was the best adapted to its interest.

The next article of sedition to which she depones, is of the most
extraordinary kind, that I had sent her to employ an organist on the streets of
Glasgow, to play the French tune of Ca Ira. What! was a tune, unintelligible to
the multitude, to light up the flames of civil discord, and to be the
forerunner of the revolution? Have you read the words of that popular song?
Could you discover a single allusion in them to the state of England? But
supposing you did, there is a presumption from your station in life, that you
are acquainted with the French language; but is it so with the multitude of our
weavers in that quarter of the country? Britain has always cherished freedom,
and shall it be deemed criminal in me to listen to the effusions of joy, poured
out by a neighboring people, on obtaining that first of human blessings, which
always constituted our peculiar distinction? But I know it well. The word
Freedom is soon to be proscribed from our language; it carries alarm and
sedition in the sound. If I had caused to be recited one of those noble
choruses of the Grecian drama, in which, with the enthusiasm of liberty, the
glories of the Republics of Athens or of Sparta were displayed, in language
more than mortal, my offense would have been deemed the same with that of
amusing myself, by hearing the national song of France. If it had been possible
for me to have caused to be sung, upon the Streets of Glasgow, one of the
Psalms of the Hebrews, in the original language, in which the triumphs of the
people and the destruction of tyrants are recorded in a strain of the highest
poetical inspiration, the criminality would have been the same with that of
listening to ca ira.

Let me abandon the subject. My political career has neither been obscure nor
inglorious. It has undergone the severest scrutiny which ever fell to the lot
of man; and after every engine has ^^en employed, after heaven and earth have
been-moved, the tremendous charge of sedition is to be supported by the
testimonies of domestic spies, swearing, not to my serious occupation, but to
the amusement of an idle hour, in listening to a foreign tune.

Let us next attend to the evidence of Fisher, as far as it relates to
seditious publications. She swears that I used to recommend to a great many
country people who came to my father's shop to purchase and to read the works
of Mr. Pain, as they composed a very good book. How can you believe the
general averment? In the number of country people, she can only specify one;
John Barclay, and when you come to his evidence, you will see that he gives her
the flattest contradiction. She depones, that she has bought, at two different
times, for my uncle Alexander Muir, at my desire, a copy of the first part, and
a copy of the second part of the Rights of Man. Can you suppose, that if my
intentions had been felonious, I would have introduced such writings into my
own family? Can you imagine that I could have wished to involve, in the
conflagration of my country, my nearest relations to whose property I may
eventually succeed? Why is not Alexander Muir brought forward as a witness?
Certain it is, that he was closely interrogated, before the inquisition held by
Mr. Sheriff Honeyman. But the Lord Advocate says, that his feelings would not
permit him to examine the uncle against the nephew. Wonderful humanity!
Goodness ever to be remembered and extolled! But did not you, Sir, advise and
direct the whole proceedings against me; and will you have the effrontery to
maintain that Alexander Muir was not dragged like a felon from his own home, by
the myrmidons of power, carried before your friend Honeyman, and that every art
was employed to wring from him every domestic secret?

Speak then to us of your humanity -- continue to speak to us of your feelings!

Fisher next depones, that I much pressed John Muir to purchase Paine's works,
that he was prevailed upon, and that she was sent accordingly to purchase them.
Now you will hear the evidence of this man, immediately in express
contradiction to this witness. She next tells you, that I advised another
domestic, Wilson my hair dresser, to purchase Paine's works and keep them in
his shop, in order to enlighten the people, and you will hear Wilson
immediately express himself far otherwise. She speaks of carrying some paper,
which she thinks was a Declaration of Rights, to a Printing Office to be
corrected. Every thing in her evidence is made to tally with the indictment; I
am accused of circulating a paper, entitled a Declaration of Rights by the
Friends of Reform in Paisley. And this respectable personage! so highly
complimen^^^ by the Court, must likewise swear something concerning this. Yet
her tenacious memory utterly fails her. She thinks she can only remember what
the title was, but nothing more. She ^^ows nothing of the substance of the
writing, but her (...) is to give a color to the allegation of my having
circulated that paper from Paisley; and to fur^ish ground for insinuating, that
-- I myself was the author of it.

Gentlemen, the witness next swears to a fact which must rouse, as having
domestics yourselves, your keenest indignation. Vigilant has this family spy
been in the course of her duty. She tells you what books she has seen lying
upon my table. Not contented with describing the title of the books, she must
go more deeply; and she informs you that she saw, in my house, a copy of
Paine's writings upon fine paper, and one or two copies upon coarse! Gentlemen,
from this moment, lock up your libraries. If they are extensive, as you have
heard mine is, there is no crime in the whole catalogue, of which, by the
testimony of your own servants, you may not be found guilty. The possession of
Plato, of Harrington, or of Hume, will mark you down for republicans. The
misfortune of having the A^c^^^n of Mahomet, will cause the shipwreck of your
faith, and stigmatize you as the disciples of the conqueror of Mecca. Well do I
congratulate the Lord Advocate of Scotland. -- He has discovered a new region
in the sphere of criminality. -- He will not merely confine himself to a voyage
of discovery; But, along with his associates, he will make many voyages to this
fertile land, and return home, loaded with many valuable cargoes. But
seriousness becomes this place. Can it be believed, that in the close of the
eighteenth century, that this night the servants of a man should be examined
concerning what particular books he may have had in his house; and that the
proof of the possession of particular books may ruin his reputation; sweep away
his property; and deprive him of his life!

Let us proceed with this witness. If you possess the common feelings of men,
every sentiment of indignation must be excited, not against her -- she is to be
pitied -- her task has been a dreadful one; -- but against the manner in which
the crime of sedition has been attempted to be proved.

The libel charges me with feloniously circulating a Dialogue betwixt the
Governors and the Governed, extracted from the ruins of Volney. This dialogue
is narrated in the indictment, and it is charged to be felonious and seditious.
There is not a word in this dialogue which is not true. Alas! in colors but
too faithful, it delineates the mournful history of six thousand years; -- the
crimes of despots, and the artifices of impostors, to subjugate, and to blind
the people. It is purely abstracted. It is entirely speculative. To no
particular nation, much less to England, does it allude; if to any, it must be
to France, under the ancient system. Yet, this dialogue is libelled as
seditious and inflammatory. The truth is, the crime of sedition must be brought
home against me; and the possession of any book, as well as that of Volney,
must be employed to substantiate it. Let us hear what the witness says
concerning the felonious circulation. She heard me read it in the presence of
my mother, sister, and some other people; that I said it was very clever, and
done by Velnew, one of the first wits in France. Who were those other people
who were in company with my mother and sister when I read it? Her accuracy, so
much extolled by the Court, totally fails her. But the propagation of sedition
must not be confined to a mother and a sister; it must have a wider range; --
other people present! and founding upon his beloved generality, the prosecutor
has reason to argue, there might have been a full company, a numerous meeting
-- nay, -- an immense congregation.

You have heard the testimony of Fisher, and these are the arts; and of this
class are the witnesses by which I am to fall. By receiving such testimony, you
forever destroy domestic society; you blast the blossoms of family confidence;
you tender ALL suspicious of ALL; each relation, to behold in each, a deadly
foe. -- And is it not sufficient to weep over public calamities, that
wide-spreading desolation which, at present, passes over the nations; but when
we retire to our own homes, we must be obliged to confine ourselves in a dismal
solitude, guarded by suspicion and by danger, where no kindred affections can
enter, and where no reciprocal consolation can be admitted.

I hasten over the evidence of the remaining witnesses against me. I am
overcome by the exertions of this day; and you must be greatly exhausted.

The next is the evidence of Thomas Wilson, my hairdresser, and he is brought
to bring up the rear of Fisher's testimony. He depones, That I asked him if he
had bought Paine's Works, and that I advised him to get a copy of them, as a
barber's shop was a good place to read in. Does this confirm the testimony of
Fisher, who says, I desired him to buy that Work, and to keep it in his shop,
in order to enlighten the people. Mark the art of Fisher. How strongly she
paints what might seem to strike against me. -- To enlighten the people! But
does Wilson concur in this? No. -- Wilson! -- the person who should have best
remembered -- the person to whom the words were addressed.

Wilson tells you, that he bought a copy of the Address to the Addressers; but
that was not by my advice. He even recollects the levity of conversation. An
old man, from the country, came in while he was dressing me; he remembers me
saying, that this old man was a great reformer. If I ever said so, I wish it
may not have been in jest, but in earnest; and that the fact, with regard to
the man, was true. For I know of none who should be greater reformers, of
themselves and of others, than those who are standing on the brink of the
grave, and panting upon eternity. But I am afraid that this witness remembers
only a piece of unmeaning gaiety. For he adds, the old man said I was only
taunting him.

The conclusion of the evidence of Wilson, affords me high consolation. It is a
proof of the innocence of my private life, in moments when I could not possibly
think of the affectation of integrity. He swears, that he has always heard me
say, that I would maintain the Constitution; and that I wished for peace, and
good order, and good morals among the people; and that he never heard me speak
against the King.

The next testimony is that of John Muir. He tells you that he had a
conversation with me in September last, about Paine's book, in my father's
house; that he asked the loan of it from me; that I told him I had it not. Does
this resemble the conduct of a man accused of distributing these books to all
and sundry, and scattering them over every portion of the land? He says, I
mentioned that I would send a servant who would get it for him; that a servant
girl accordingly went and got it. Does not this completely confute the
testimony of Fisher, who affirms, that I much pressed this man to buy the book?
and, he tells you, that he himself asked the loan of it.

Is not this a complete contradiction of her testimony?

The next witness is John Barclay. That old and venerable person, whom you saw
adduced as a witness by the Prosecutor; and what does he say in his testimony?
That we were elders in the same parish; the parish of Calder, in which the
lands of my father are situated. He informs you that at the last election of a
minister for that parish, a dispute had arisen, concerning the right of
election, and that he voted upon the same side of the question with myself.
This introduced acquaintance, and acquaintance produced friendship. The Lord
Advocate, in speaking of this virtuous and venerable old man, exclaimed with
insolent contempt, Such men as these are the companions, and such men as these
are the friends of Mr. Muir! Yes, I tell the Lord Advocate, I tell the
aristocracy of Scotland, I glory more in the friendship of such an old, poor,
and virtuous man, than in the friendship of the highest titled peer, who
derives the sources of his guilty grandeur from the calamities of the people;
who wrings out a splendid, but a miserable revenue from their sorrow and
distress, from their tears, and from their blood, which he squanders in
dissipation, to the ruin of private virtue, and to the contamination of public
morals.

Let us see then what Mr. Barclay says against me. That he asked my opinion
concerning Paine's books; and that I told him he might purchase them if he
chose, as they were printed: but that I afterward said, it was not a book for
us. Does Mr. Barclay's evidence support the criminal charge in the libel, of my
advising people to read seditious books, and of my circulating them over the
country? Does not Mr. Barclay's evidence corrobo^^te the testimony of every
other witness? That for the reasons which I fully explained, I never
recommended, Mr. Paine's works; but that even when that work excited the
greatest attention of the country; when mention of it was introduced into every
company, and into every conversation, I uniformly expressed myself, that it was
not a book for our purpose. -- For our purpose, who were engaged in the cause
of a Parliamentary and constitutional Reform! Is there a single witness brought
forward by the Prosecutor, who has, in the smallest degree, stated any
conversation of mine which was unconstitutional? Hear what Mr. Barclay says,
that he was frequently with Mr. Muir, and in his library, from which he
borrowed some books; that he had many conversations with him, and heard him
say, that the constitution of this country was an excellent one; that he
praised the King; and that he always spoke of order, regularity, and obedience
to the ruling powers. In short, Gentlemen, all and each of the witnesses for
the Prosecutor, use the same uniform language, attest that neither in public
nor in private, ever a single expression dropped from me, which the most
violent associator could construe into guilt.

The last witness of whom I shall take notice, is William Muir; the person
whose religious principles at first induced him rather to suffer, according to
the elegant expression of the Lord Advocate, eternal imprisonment than to take
the oath, until his scruples were removed by the Rev. Mr. D^^n. He swears, that
in my father's house, at Huntershill, I gave him eleven numbers of the Patriot,
and a copy of the Political Progress. From these numbers of the Patriot several
passages are quoted in the indictment. Of the Political Progress there is no
mention made; and, I maintain, that every passage in the Patriot, quoted in the
libel, is highly constitutional. The sentiments advanced in them may not found
musically sweet to the ears of corruption. They call upon you to arise and
vindicate the purity of your constitution. To vindicate your long lost rights;
and, if my feeble voice could extend to the remotest corners of Scotland, I
should resound the same sentiment, in the same language. These numbers of the
Patriot speak to you concerning septennial Parliaments. And, I say to you, that
the act which converted triennial Parliaments into septennial, violated our
holy constitution; tore the chartar of our national liberties, and paved the
way for the inroads of a frightful despotism.

But this witnese concurs with all the preceding witnesses, with regard to my
conduct, and to my principles. He swears, That he does not remember to have
heard me speak against government; that I did not advise unconstitutional
measures; and that he heard me tell, how Old Sarum was represented. Old Sarum
represented! And, do not the friends of the Constitution weep! and do not the
enemies of the Constitution smile, when they hear of such representation.

Before I speak to the third article of accusation, the reading, in the
Convention, the Address of the Society of United Irishmen of Dublin, permit me
to make one observation on the manner in which the Prosecutor spoke of the
papers found in my custody. Do they correspond with the view which he
represented of them? Are they the documents of correspondence with foreign or
internal foes? And, supposing I had involved myself in a correspondence of that
nature, do you believe I could be so infatuated as to retain, in my possession,
that which must have been attended with, to me, certain destruction. Among my
papers, there is not one which can be construed into guilt. They consist of
pamphlets unconnected with the politics of the day; and of the various
publications of a society, pure and untainted in its principles, of which I
have the honor to be a member. But every thing must be ransacked to heap
crmination upon my head. One of the letters which I hd undertaken to deliver in
Scotland, is addressed to the Reverend Fische Palmer. Ma^k! cries the Lord
Advocate, the company which this man keeps. -- Who is Mr Palmer? -- A person
whom I have indicted for sedition, and who is to be tried in a few days at
Perth! -- Unheard of cruelty! -- Unexampled insolence! -- What! Before this
court, this jury, this audience, do you attempt to prejudicate and condemn Mr.
Palmer, in his absence, undefended, and without any possibility of defending
himself? But, exclaims the Lord Advocate, -- The seal upon the letter is a
proof of the most atrocious guilt. What is it? -- Horrible to ^ell! It is the
Cap of Liberty, supported upon a spear, with the words Ca lra above. All is
consistent. When you attempt to banish the substance of freedom -- the shadow
must follow! When a new coinage takes place, you have given a most excellent
hint. The officers of the mint, will profit by the lesson, and they will no
more scatter sedition through the land, by impressing upon our halfpennies the
figure of Brtiannia with a spear in her hand, mounted with the Cap of Liberty.
But I am ashamed to enter into such trifles. If that letter had contained
proofs of sedition, or of treason against me, Mr. Palmer, or the writer of it
-- the seal -- and the spear -- and the Cap of Liberty, would have been its
feeblest protection.

Gentlemen, I now come to the last charge. That of having read, in the
Convention of Delegates, the Address from the Society of United Irishmen in
Dublin.

I admit the fact, and I glory in the admission. The Prosecutor has represented
that society, as a gang of mean and nefarious conspirators; and their diploma
of my admission into their number, as an aggravation of my crime. Let me tell
the Lord Advocate of Scotland, that society stands too high to be affected by
his invective, or to require the aid of my defense. I am a member of that
society; and, in the last moments of my life, to have been so, shall be my
honor and my pride. The Lord Advocate has represented to you, in general
terms, that this address amounts almost to treason; but he durst not attempt to
point out, in his speech, a single passage which could support the aspersion. I
maintain that every line of that address is strictly constitutional. You must
carry the whole of it along with you into your chamber, and not judge of
passages scandalously mutilated in the indictment. The mutilation of the very
first paragraph of the address, is a proof of the fairness, and of the
ingenuity of the Prosecutor. I beg leave to read how it stands in the
indictment, and then to read what follows in the address itself:

We take the liberty of addressing you in the spirit of civic-union, in the
fellowship of a just and common cause. We greatly rejoice that the spirit of
freedom moves over the surface of Scotland; that light seems to break from the
chaos of her internal government; and that a country so respectable for her
seize in science, in arts, and in arms; for men of literary eminence; for
the intelligence and morality of her people, now acts from a conviction of the
union between virtue, letters, and liberty; and, now rises to distinction, not
by a calm, contented, secret wish for a Reform in Parliament, but by openly,
actively, and urgently willing it, with the unity and energy of an embodied
nation. We rejoice that you do not consider yourselves as merged and melted
down into another coun^^^ but that in this great national question, you are
still -- Scotland. [See Appendix.]

This is the first paragraph libelled on. But, even as it is in the indictment.
It is not permitted to the United Irishmen in Dublin, to congratulate this
unfortunate people upon account of former eminence in literature, in arts, and
in virtue; -- and to express the wish, that they would still retain that
enviable distinction? And, is that last and forlorn period now arrived, when
those who express such a wish, must be called nefarious conspirators, and he
who has been the organ of its communication, must be branded with the epithets
of, a "wretch," of an "oracle of discord," of "a fiend of sedition!" The
children of your children, in after ages, will not forget this
ever-to-be-remembered night. But here let us stop. I have said that this
indictment mutilated this passage, as it does every other passage in this
Address; It breaks off the paragraph at the words, "You are still Scotland." It
breaks off in the middle of a sentence; and for what purpose? -- to countenance
an insinuation, that the United Irishmen in Dublin wished a dissolution of the
Union betwixt Scotland and England. The Prosecutor cuts off the remainder of
the sentence which demonstrated the sense, in which the United Irishmen
understood the words "still Scotland," expressing solely their idea of her
still being distinguished by her former luster. The words which are separated
from the sentence are in the address as follows: That you are still Scotland --
the land where Buchanan wrote, and Fletcher spoke, and Wallace fought. Yes, I
give my solemn assent to this wish, and to this hope of the United Irishmen. My
voice shall resound, Scotland shall still be the land, where Buchanan has
written, where Fletcher spoke, and where Wallace fought.

Let us attend to the mutilation of another passage, in this extraordinary
indictment. I shall read it as it stands: --

We will lay open to you our hearts: Our cause is your cause -- If there is to
be a struggle between us, let it be which Nation shall be foremost in the race
of mind: let this be the noble animosity kindled between us, who shall first
attain that free constitution from which both are equidistant, who shall first
be the savior of the empire.

The sense of both countries with respect to intolerable abuses of the
constitution has been clearly manifested; and proves that our political
situations are not dissimilar; that our rights and wrongs are the same.

The passage libelled upon stops at the words "rights and wrongs are the same."
But it forbears to take in the remainder, in which the similarity of our rights
and wrongs is specified. The self-elected magistrates of Burghs -- the unequal
representation of the People in Parliament -- and the total privation, in
Scotland, of the shadow of popular Election.

Gentlemen, I will read over many passages of this Address, not merely because
they are the production of an immortal pen, but because every word is regulated
by the spirit of the constitution.

[Here Mr. Muir read most of the Address; but we forbear to insert the
particular passages, as the whole is in the Appendix.]

Can you call this address seditious or inflammatory, which contains the
following sentiment? If Government has a sincere regard for the safety of the
constitution, let them coincide with the people in the speedy reform of its
abuses, and not by an obstinate adherence to them, drive that people into
Republicanism.

Gentlemen, the Lord Advocate has represented the authors of this address, as
the meanest of mankind, and has expressly called them infamous wretches, who
had fled from the punishment due to their crimes. What slander! -- what false,
unfounded slander! -- Has Doctor Drennan? Has Mr. Hamilton Rowan; whose names
are at the head of this address, fled from crimes and from punishment? "And
they are infamous wretches!" If ever after ages shall hear of my name, I wish
it may be recorded, that to these men I had the happiness of being known. To be
honored by the notice of Doctor Drennan is an ambition to which, in the most
exalted station of life, I would fondly aspire. To have it said, that I was the
friend of Mr Hamilton Rowan. I would consider as the passport to the only
acquaintances whom I value; those who found their claim to distinction upon the
only true basis, their own virtues. Mr. Rowan is indeed indicted to stand trial
in Ireland, upon a charge similar to my own. Mr. Rowan has not fled. He will
boldly meet his accusation; and, let me say, along with those who know him,
that, although it is impossible to add any new luster to his character, yet, as
he has often come forward in the cause of individual humanity, he will display
himself upon that occasion, the firm, the intrepid, and, I hope the successful
champion of the liberties of his native country.

I hasten to a conclusion. Much yet remains to say. But after, upon my part,
the unremitted exertions of sixteen hours, I feel myself nearly exhausted.

Look once more, I entreat you, to the indictment, and compare it with evidence.

The first charge against me is, that in public speeches, I vilified the King
and Constitution. All the witnesses adduced attest, that, both in public and in
private, even in my most unguarded moments, my language was always respectful
to the King, and that I always recommended the Constitution.

The second charge against me, is, that of advising the people to read
seditious books, and of distributing inflammatory publications among them: And
you hear it proved by the unanimous voice of all the witnesses for the Crown,
that I refused to recommend any books, and that the only one which I
recommended, was Dr Henry's History of England. You will not forget the
circumstance in which I lent Freeland a copy of Mr. Paine's Works; nor will you
forget the manner in which the writings of that man were introduced in
conversation with Wilson, Muir, and with Barclay. With regard to other books
and pamphlets mentioned in the libel, there is not any proof. William Muir has
de^oned, that I gave him one or two numbers of the Patriot, and some other
pamphlets, whose titles I cannot remember. William Muir is but a single witness
to this fact; and you know that, by the laws of Scotland, the testimony of a
single witness cannot claim any weight; but I frankly admit and acknowledge
that I gave him those numbers of the Patriot and, if I were not now entirely
overcome by fatigue, I could demonstrate to you, that, in those numbers, there
is not a single sentiment unconstitutional or seditious.

I am accused of reading the Irish Address in the Convention, and of moving a
solemn answer in return. That address is neither seditious, wicked, nor
inflammatory. There is not a sentence in it, which I have not defended in your
presence.

You neither can do justice to me, nor to the country, if you condemn these
different publications, upon account of the scandalously mutilated extracts
from them in the libel. You must carry the whole of them along with you from
this place. It is not upon detached passages you are to judge; but you must
decide upon the whole.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

This is now perhaps the last time, that I shall address my country. I have
explored the tenor of my past life. Nothing shall tear from me the record of my
departed days. The enemies of Reform have scrutinized, in a manner hitherto
unexampled in Scotland, every action I may have performed, every word I may
have uttered. -- Of crimes, most foul and horrible, have I been accused. -- Of
attempting to rear the standard of civil war, and to plunge this land in blood,
and to cover this land with desolation. At every step, as the evidence of the
Crown advanced, my innocence has brightened. So far from inflaming the minds of
men to sedition and to outrage -- all the witnesses have concurred, that my
only anxiety was, to impress upon them the necessity of peace, of good order,
and of good morals. What then has been my crime? Not the lending to a relation
a copy of Mr. Paine's Works; not the giving away to another a few numbers of an
innocent and constitutional publication; but for having dared to be, according
to the measure of my feeble abilities, a strenuous and active advocate for an
equal representation of the People -- in the House of the People; -- For having
dared to attempt to accomplish a measure, by legal means, which was to diminish
the weight of their taxes, and to put an end to the profusion of their blood.
From my infancy to this moment, I have devoted myself to the cause of the
People. It is a good cause. -- It shall ultimately prevail. -- It shall finally
triumph. Say then openly, in your verdict, if you do condemn me, which I
presume you will not, -- That it is for my attachment to this cause alone, and
not for those vain and wretched pretexts stated in the indictment, intended
only to color and disguise the real motives of my accusation. The time will
come, when men must stand or fall by their actions; when all human peageantry
shall cease; when the hearts of all shall be laid open. If you regard your most
important interests, -- if you wish that your conscience should whisper to you
words of consolation; or speak to you in the terrible language of remorse, --
Weigh well the verdict you are to pronounce. As for me, I am careless and
indifferent to my fate. I can look danger -- and I can look death in the face,
for I am shielded by the consciousness of my own rectitude. I may be condenmned
to languish in the recesses of a dungeon -- I may be doomed to ascend the
scaffold -- Nothing can deprive me of the recollection of the past -- Nothing
can destroy my inward peace of mind, arising from the remembrance of having
discharged my duty.

When Mr. Muir sat down* an unanimous burst of applause was expressed by the
audience.

When the exclamations had ceased, he arose and said,

I have omitted to take notice of the evidence adduced upon my part, I am not
going to detain you a moment longer. -- To you I leave the import of the whole
of that evidence.

The LORD JUSTICE CLERK, in summing up the evidence, said, that the indictment
was the longest he had ever seen; but it was not necessary to prove the whole,
in order to find the Panel guilty, for the Jury had only to look at the
concluding sentence of the indictment, from which it was plain, that if any one
part of the libel was proven, it established the guilt of the Panel the same
as if the whole was substantiated.

Now, this is the question for consideration. -- Is the Panel guilty of
Sedition, or, is he not? Now, before this question can be answered, two things
must be attended to that require no proof: First, that the British Constitution
is the best that ever was since the creation of the world, and it is not
possible to make it better; for, is not every man secure? Does not every man
reap the fruits of his own industry, and sit safely under his own fig tree? The
next circumstance is, that there was a spirit of sedition in this country last
winter, which made every good man very uneasy. And his Lordship coincided in
opinion with the master of the grammar school of Glasgow, who told Mr. Muir,
that he thought proposing a reform was very ill timed. Yet Mr. Muir had, at
that time, gone about among ignorant country people, making them forget their
work, and told them that a reform was absolutely necessary for preserving their
liberty, which, if it had not been for him, they would never have thought was
in danger. His Lordship did not doubt that this would appear to them as it did
to him, to be sedition.

The next thing to be attended to, was the outlawry. -- Running away from
justice, that was a mark of guilt. And what could he do in France at that
period? pretending to be an ambassador to a foreign country without lawful
authority, that was rebellion; and he pretends to have had influence with those
wretches, the leading men there And what kind of folks were they? His Lordship
never liked the French all his days, but now he hated them.

The Pannel's harranguing such multitudes of ignorant weavers about their
grievances, might have been attended with the worst consequences to the peace
of the nation, and the safety of our glorious constitution.

Mr. Muir might have known, that no attention could be paid to such a rabble.
What right had they to representation? He could have told them that the
Parliament would never listen to their petition: How could they think of it? A
government in every country should be just like a corporation; and, in this
country, it is made up of the landed interest, which alone has a right to be
represented; as for the rabble, who have nothing but personal property what
hold has the nation of them? What security for the payment of their taxes; they
may pack up all their property on their backs, and leave the country in the
twinkling of an eye, but landed property cannot be removed.

The tendency of the Pannel's conduct was plainly to promote a spirit of
revolt, and, if what was demanded, was not given, to take it by force. His
Lordship had not the smallest doubt that the Jury were, like himself, convinced
of the Pannel's guilt, and desired them to return such a verdict as would do
them honor.

The Court retired at two o'clock on Saturday morning, and met again at twelve
o'clock of the same day, when the Jury returned the following

VERDICT.
EDINBURGH, August 31. 1793.
The above assize having enclosed, made choice of the said Gilbert Innes to be
the Chancellor, and the said John Balfour to be their Clerk; and having
considered the criminal libel, raised and pursued, at the instance of his
Majesty's Advocate, for his Majesty's interest, against Thomas Muir Panel, the
interlocutor of relevancy, pronounced thereon by the Court, the evidence
adduced, in proof of the libel, and the evidence in exculpation; they are all,
in one voice, finding the Panel Thomas Muir Guilty of the crimes libelled; In
witness thereof their said Chancellor and Clerk, have subscribed these
presents, consisting of this and the preceding page, in their names and by
their appointment, place, and date aforesaid.

(Signed)
GILBERT INNES, Chan. JOHN BALFOUR, Clerk.


The verdict being recorded, the LORD JUSTICE CLERK addressed the Jury, and
said, That this trial had been of the greatest impotance. He was happy that
they had bestowed so much attention upon it, and informed them, that the Court
highly approved of the verdict they had given. He then desired their Lordships
to give their opinion upon this verdict, and what punishment should be
inflicted.

Which they did to the following purport: --

LORD HENDERLAND observed, that the alarming situation in which this country
was during the course of last winter, gave uneasiness to all thinking men: His
Lordship said, that he now arrived at the most disagreeable part of the duty
incumbent upon him, which was to fix the punishment due to the crime, of which
the Panel was found guilty. The indictment contained a charge of sedition,
exciting a spirit of discontent among the inferior classes of people, and an
attack against the Glorious Constitution of this country the Jury, by the
verdict which they had returned, and to which the Court had alone recourse, had
found the Panel guilty; and it was their Lordships duty only, now to fix the
punishment due to the offense. His Lordship said, that he would not dwell upon
the evil consequences of the crimes committed by the prisoner. The melancholy
example of a neighboring country, which would forever stain the page of
history, rendered it unnecessary for him to recapitulate the circumstances of
the case. In that country, the consequences of such measures have produced
every kind of violence, rapine, and murder. There appeared, he said, to have
been in this country a regular plan of seditious measures. The indecent
applause which was given to Mr. Muir last night, at the conclusion of his
defense, within these walls, unknown to that High Court, and inconsistent with
the solemnity which ought to pervade the administration of justice, and which
was insulting to the laws and dignity of that court, proved to him that the
spirit of sediton had not as yet subsided. He would not, he said, seek to
aggravate the offense committed by the Panel, by the misconduct of others, in
order to increase the punishment. The punishment to be inflicted is arbitrary,
of which there is a variety. Banishment, he observed would be improper, as it
would only be sending to another (...), a man, where he might have the
opportunity of exciting the same spirit of discontent, and sowing with a
plentiful hand sedition; whipping, was too severe, and disgraceful, the more
especially to a man who had bore his character and rank in life. And
imprisonment, he considered, would be but a temporary punishment, when the
criminal would be again let loose; and so again disturb the happiness of the
People. There remains but one punishment in our law, and it wrung his very
heart to mention it, viz. Transportation. It was a duty he considered he owed
to his countrymen, to pronounce it, in the situation in which he sat, as the
punishment due to his crimes. His Lordship observed, it was extraordinary that
a gentleman of his description, of his profession, and of the talents he
possessed, should be guilty of a crime deserving such a punishment, but he saw
no alterative. For what security could we have against his future operations,
but a removal from his country, to a place where he could do no further harm.
His Lordship was therefore of opinion, that the Panel should be recommitted to
prison, there to remain, till a proper opportunity should offer for
transporting him, to such place as his Majesty, with the advice of his Privy
Council, might appoint for the space of Fourteen years from the date of the
sentence; and that he should not return within that period under the pain of
death.

LORD SWINTON -- The crime with which the Panel is, by the Jury of his
country, found guilty, is sedition. It is a generic crime, and which is defined
by our lawyers, to be a commotion of the people without authority, and of
exciting others to such commotion against the public welfare. This crime, he
observed, consisted of many gradations, and might have run from a petty mob,
about wages, even to high treason. He thought the punishment should be adapted
to the crime. The question, he said, was then, What was the degree of the crime
the Panel has been guilty of. That was to be discovered from the libel, of
which he has been found guilty by the unanimous verdict of a respectable Jury
of his country. It appeared to him, to be a crime of the most henious kind, and
there was scarcely a distinction between it and high treason. As by the
dissolution of the social compact it made way for, and so it might be said, to
include every sort of crime, murder, robbery, rapine, fire-raisings, in short
every species of wrong, public and private. This, he observed, was no
theoretical reasoning, for we had it exemplified before our eyes, in the
present state of France, where, under the pretense of asserting liberty, the
worst sort of tyranny was established, and all the loyal and moral ties which
bind mankind were broken. Nay, shameful to tell, even religion itself was laid
aside, and publicly disavowed by the National Convention.

Certain wretched persons, assuming to themselves, most falsely and
insidiously, the respectable name of Friends of the People, and of Reform,
although they deserved the very opposite denomination, by which means they have
misled, and drawn after them, a great number of well-meaning, though simple and
unwary people.

If punishment, adequate to the crime, were to be sought for, there could be
found no punishment in our law sufficient for the crime in the present case,
now that torture is happily abolished.

By the Roman law, which is held to be our common law where there is no
statute, the punishment was various, and transportation was among the mildest
mentioned. Paulus, L. 38. Dig, de Poenis, writes, Actores seditionis et
tumultus, populo concitato, pro qualitate dignitatis* aut in furcam tollunter,
aut bestiis objiciuntur, aut in insulam deportanter. -- We have chosen the
mildest of these punishments. By the Codex, lib. 9 t. 30. de Seditiosis et his
qui plebem contra rempublicam audent collegere, l. 1. and 2. such persons are
subjected, ad mulctam gravissimam. -- Baldus writes, Provocans tumultum et
clamor em in populo, debet mori poena seditionis. -- And by a constitution of
the emperor Leo: Subdandos autem poenis cis quas de seditionis et tumultus
auctoribus vetustissima decreta sanxerient.

The sole object of punishment among us, is only to deter others from
committing the like crimes in time coming. -- Therefore the punishment should
be made equal to the crime. All that is necessary is, that it serve as an
example and terror to others, in time coming, against a repetition of the like
offense. In the present case, he thought that Transportation was the lighest
punishment that could be assigned, and that for the space of fourteen years,
under the certification of death, in case of returning before the expiration of
that term.

LORD DUNSINNAN. -- His Lordship spoke in so low a tone of voice, that we had
not an opportunity of following him, throughout the whole of his opinion. He
however agreed, with the rest of their Lordships, in the punishment which they
said Mr. Muir deserved, viz. Transportation for fourteen years, with the usual
certification, etc.

LORD ABERCROMBY. -- His Lordship did not think it necessary to say much as to
the enormity of the crime, after what had been already said. By our law, it
might have amounted to treason, and even as the law now stands, it came very
near it.

He observed, that Mr. Muir last night, when conducting his defense, had
stated, and which was marked, and it had great weight with him, That the people
should be cautious, and by all manner of means avoid tumults and disorders, for
through time the mass of the people would bring about a Revolution (Here Mr.
Muir rose, and said, "I deny it, my Lord, it is totally false.") If any thing
could add to the improper nature of the Pannel's defense, it was his pretended
mission to France, and the happiness, he expressed, in the circle of
acquaintance he had there. It was evident, said his Lordship, that his feelings
did too much accord with the feelings of those monsters. -- His Lordship
coincided with the rest of their Lordships, in regard to the punishment, which,
they had given as their opinion, Mr. Muir deserved.

LORD JUSTICE CLERK -- His Lordship said, he was considerably affected to see
the panel stand trial for sedition, a man who had got a liberal education, was
member of a respectable society, possessed considerable talents, and had
sustained a respectable character. His Lordship considered the very lowest
species of this crime as heinous, and that it was aggravated according to the
object in view. Here the object was important; for it was creating in the lower
classes of people, disloyalty, and dissatisfaction to government, and this
amounting to the highest sort of sedition, is bordering on treason, and a
little more would have made the Panel stand trial for his life.

His Lordship agreed in the propriety of the proposed punishment, and he
observed that the indecent applause which was given the Panel last night,
convinced him, that a spirit of discontent still lurked in the minds of the
people, and that it would be dangerous to allow him to remain in this country.
His Lordship said, this circumstance had no little weight with him, when
considering of the punishment Mr. Muir deserved. He never had a doubt but
transportation was the proper punishment for such a crime, but he only
hesitated whether it should be for life, or for the term of fourteen years! --
The latter he preferred, and he hoped the Panel would reflect on his past
conduct, and see the impropriety which he had committed, and that if he should
be again restored to his country, he might still have an opportunity of showing
himself to be a good member of that constitution which he seemed to despise so
much.

After his Lordship had delivered his opinion, and during the time the sentence
was recording, Mr. Muir rose and said.

My Lord Justice Clerk, I have only a few words to say, I shall not animadvert
upon the severity or the leniency of my sentence. Were I to be led this moment
from the bar to the scaffold, I should feel the same calmness and serenity
which I now do. My mind tells me, that I have acted agreeable to my conscience,
and that I have engaged in a good, a just, and a glorious cause, -- a cause
which sooner or later must, and will, prevail; and, by a timely reform save
this country from destruction.

THE SENTENCE.
The Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioned of the Justiciary, having
considered the foregoing verdict, whereby the assize, all in one voice, Find
the Panel GUILTY of the crimes libelled: The said Lords, in respect of the
said verdict, in terms of an act passed in the 25th year of his present
Majesty, entitled, An Act for the more effectual transportation of felons and
other offenders in that part of Great Britain called Scotland. Ordain and
adjudge that the said Thomas Muir be Transported beyond Seas, to such place as
his Majesty, with the advice of his Privy Council, shall declare and appoint,
and that for the space of Fourteen Years from this date, with certification to
him, if after being so transported, he shall return to, and be found at large,
within any part of Great Britain, during the said Fourteen Years, without some
lawful cause, and be thereby lawfully convicted, he shall suffer Death as in
cases of felony, without benefit of Clergy by the Law of England, And ordains
the said Thomas Muir to be carried back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, therein
to be detained till he is delivered over for being so transported, for which
this shall be to all concerned, a sufficient warrant.

(Signed) ROBERT M'QUEEN.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER I. COPY SENTENCE OF FUGITATION.
February 25, 1793.
THE which day the diet of the criminal letters, raised and carried on at the
instance of Robert Dundas, Esquire of Arniston, his Majesty's Advocate, for his
Majesty's interest, against Mr. Thomas Muir, younger of Huntershill. Advocate,
being called, and the said Mr. Thomas Muir, having been of^times called in
Court, and three times at the door of the Courthouse, he failed to appear.

Whereupon his Majesty's Advocate moved, that sentence of outlawry and
fugitation might be awarded against him; and as he understood that bail had
been given for his appearance, when apprehended by the Sheriff of the county of
Edinburgh, he craved that the penalty in the bond might be forfeited and
recovered.

"The Lord Justice Clerk and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary decern and
adjudge the said Thomas Muir, to be an outlaw and fugitive from his Majesty's
laws, and ordain him to be put to his Highness's horn, and all his moveable
goods and gear to be escheat and inbrought to his Majesty's use, for his
contempt and disobedience in not appearing this day and place, in the hour of
cause, to have underlyen the law for the crimes of sedition, and others
specified in the said criminal letters raised against him thereanent, as he who
was lawfully cited to that effect, and oftentimes called in court, and three
times at the door of the courthouse, and failing to appear as said is. And
ordain the bond of caution, granted for the appearance of the said Thomas Muir
in the Sheriff-court books of Edinburgh, to be forfeited, and the penalty
therein contained to be recovered by the Clerk of this Court, to be disposed of
as the Court shall direct.

(Signed) ROBERT M'QUEEN, J. P. D."

NUMBER II.
At Edinburgh, the 2d of January 1793.
THE which day compeared, in presence of John Pringle, Esquire advocate, his
Majesty's Sheriff Depute of the shire of Edinburgh, Thomas Muir, Esquire advocate;
who, being examined by the Sheriff, and being interrogated, Whether or not the
declarant, in the month of November last, was in the towns of Kirkintilloch,
Lennoxtown of Campsie, or Milltown of Campsie? declares. That he declines
answering any questions in this place, as he considers a declaration of this
kind, obtained in these circumstances, to be utterly inconsistent with the
constitutional rights of a British subject: That he has solemnly maintained
this principle in pleading for others in a criminal court, and that, when it
comes to be applied to his own particular case, as at present, he will not
deviate from it: Declares, That he neither composed, published, nor circulated
books or pamphlets, inflammatory or seditious: That, in public and private, he
always advised, and earnestly entreated those who might be engaged in the
prosecution of a constitutional reform, in the representation of the people in
the House of Commons, to adopt measures mild but firm, moderate but
constitutional; and that he has always inculcated upon all whom he may have
addressed upon any occasion, that there was no other mode of accomplishing a
constitutional reform, in the representation of the people in the House of
Commons, but by the mode of respectful and constitutional petitions to that
House, for that purpose: And that he did not doubt but the wisdom of that House
would listen to the voice of the people, when thus constitutionally presented:
And being shown three numbers of a paper, entitled, The Patriot, the first
dated, "Tuesday, April 17th. 1792:" the second dated, "Tuesday, June 12th;" and
the third, "Tuesday, July 10th," without mention of the year, and being
interrogated, if he gave these pamphlets to William Muir, weaver in
Kirkintilloch, and eight other numbers of the same publication? declares, That
he adheres to the principles which he has mentioned in the preceding part of
this declaration, and declines answering the question. And being shown a book,
entitled, "The Works of Thomas Pain, Esquire" and interrogated, If he did not give
said book to Henry Freeland, weaver in Kirkintilloch, and first Preses of the
Reform Society there? declares, That he adheres to his principle, and declines
answering the question. And being shown a pamphlet, entitled, "A Declaration of
Rights," and an "Address to the People;" and interrogated, Whether or not he
gave the aforesaid pamphlet to the said Henry Freeland? declares, That he
declines answering upon the aforesaid principle. And being interrogated,
Whether or not he gave to the aforesaid Henry Freeland, a book, entitled,
"Flower on the French Constitution?" declares, That he declines answering the
question, upon the aforesaid principle; and all the beforementioned books are
marked as relative hereto, of this date. And being interrogated, Whether or not
the declarant was a member of Convention which met in Edinburgh, in the month
of December last, stiling themselves the Convention of the Associated Friends
of the People, and produced to that meeting, a paper, entitled "Address from
the Society of United Irishmen in Dublin, to the Delegates for Reform in
Scotland, 23d November 1792," and moved, that the thanks of the meeting should
be returned to that Society, for said Address? Declares and declines answering
the question, upon the aforesaid principle. All this he declares to be truth.

(Signed)
THOMAS MUIR. JOHN PRINGLE.


NUMBER III. COPY DECLARATION OF GEORGE WILLIAMSON
At Edinburgh, AUGUST 10. 1793.
GEORGE WILLIAMSON, messenger in Edinburgh, declares, That on Friday the 2d of
August instant, he received a warrant of the Court of Justiciary, for bringing
the person of Mr. Thomas Muir, younger of Huntershill from the prison of
Stranraer, to the prison of Edinburgh. In consequence of which, he went to
Stranraer, and arrived there in the morning of Sunday the 4th instant, when he
received the person of the said Thomas Muir; and he also received from Mr.
Kerr, one of the magistrates of Sranraer, a parcel, sealed and entitled Papers
belonging and found on Mr. Thomas Muir. W. R. J. P. And which packet was sealed
with a seal of the burgh of Stranraer, and also with two seals, which he now
hears Mr. Muir declare to be his, and which parcel he now exhibits, with the
seals entire.

And the aforesaid parcel having been opened, in presence of the said sheriff
substitute, Hugh Warrender Esquire Mr. William Scott, Procurator Fiscal of the
share of Edinburgh. George Williamson, messenger in Edinburgh, and Joseph Mack,
writer, Sheriff's Clerk's Office; and also, in presence of Mr. Thomas Muir, who
admitted, that this was the parcel containing the articles belonging to him,
which were sealed up by the magistrates of Stranraer, and to which he then
affixed his seals, and which he observed to be entire, previous to its being
opened in his presence: The same was found to contain:

1. Ten copies of a pamphlet, entitled, "Proceedings of the Society of United
Irishmen of Dublin. Dublin printed by order of the Society, 1793." 2. A printed
copy of the trial, at large, of Samuel Bushby, and Judith his wife. 3.
Twenty-nine copies of a printed paper, entitled "United Irishmen of Dublin, 7th
June 1793," being an Address from the Catholic Committee, to their Catholic
Countrymen. 4. Five copies of another printed paper, being "Resolutions of the
Society of United Irishmen, held on the fifteenth of July." 5. Twenty-two
copies of a paper, purporting to be an abstract of the trial of Francis Graham,
Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for the county of Dublin, on the 9th
July 1793, before the Hon. Baron Power. 6. A printed copy of an act to prevent
tumultuous risings, etc. of the 27th Geo. III. printed Dublin, 1787. 7.
Eighty-four copies of a printed paper, dated, "Rath Coffey, 1st July, 1793;"
containing a quotation from Milton, on the liberty of unlicensed printing. 8.
Letter* signed J. Muir, dated Glasgow, 21st July 1793, beginning with, Dear
Sir. but having no address. 9. Letter, signed Thomas Muir, and addressed to
Captain George Towers, of the American ship, the Hope, from Baltimore, care of
Messrs. Cunningham, and Co. merchants, Belfast, and dated Dublin 27th July,
1793. 10. A Red Turkey pocketbook, containing: 1, A passport from the
Department of Paris, in favor of citizen Thomas Muir, dated 23d April 1793,
having upon the back an indorsement, dated 5th May 1793. 2. Receipt by A.
M'Dougal to Mr. Muir, for 900 livres, for his passage in the cabin of the ship
from Havre-de-Grace, to the Port of New York, dated Havre-de-Grace, 16th May,
1793. 3. Certificate that Thomas Muir has been duly elected one of the members
of the Society of United Irishmen of Dublin, dated 11th January 1793, signed
Archibald Hamilton Rowan, Secretary." 4. Sealed letter, directed, "The Rev.
Thomas Fische Palmer, Edinburgh." 5. Ditto, directed "Norman M'Leod, Esquire M. P.
Scotland." 6. Ditto, directed "to Mrs. M'Cormick, at Dr. M'Cormick's, St.
Andrew's Scotland. 7. Another passport, of the department of Calais, in favor
of citizen Thomas Muir, dated 15th January, 1793. 8. Passport of the Commissary
of the Section of the Thuilleries, in favor of citizen Thomas Muir, dated 4th
May, 1793. 9. Declaration of Residence, dated 3d April 1793, in favor of
Thomas Muir. 10. Letter, signed D. Stewart dated, No. 52. Frith-street, Soho,
London, February 1st. 1st. (Addressed) John Hu^ford Stone, Esquire or Thomas Muir,
Esquire Advocate, No. 99. Palais Royal, Paris. 11. Letter, signed James Campbell,
dated No. 10. St. Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, 26th January 1793: Addressed to
Thomas Muir, Esquire younger of Huntershill. 12. Letter, signed D. Stewart, dated,
52. Frith Street, January 30; Addressed, Thomas Muir Esquire Advocate to the care
of John Hurford Stone, Esquire Paris. 13. A Letter, signed W. Skirving* without
date, Addressed to Thomas Muir, Esquire younger of Huntershill.

COPY CERTIFICATE.
Society of United Irishmen of Dublin: I hereby certificate, that Thomas Muir
has been duly elected, and having taken the TEST, provided in the Constitution,
has been admitted a member of this Society.

(Signed) Arch. Hamilton Rowan, Sec.
No. 205 Jan. 11. 1793.
On the margin of the original, is the figure of a harp, with this motto, "It
is new strung, and shall be heard."

Which whole pieces of writings, printed papers and letters, were signed by the
initials of the Sheriff Substitute, Mr. Scott, George Williamson, and Joseph
Mack, of this date, and those taken out of the pocketbook, were again replaced
in the pocket book and the whole of the said writings, etc. were also signed
with the initials of Mr Muir, excepting the three sealed letters, which he
declined to put his initials to, in regard he did not consider them as his
property. He further required that the Sheriff Substitute should immediately
transmit these three letters to the respective persons to whom they are
addressed, as any other proceeding would be a violation of the private rights
and property of the persons to whom they belong. Scott, on the part of the
Public Prosecutor, represented, that this last request cannot, in his opinion
be complied with, seeing these letters, with the other papers in the sealed
parcel, were transmitted to this office under warrant of the Court of
Justiciary, for the purpose of being inspected.

NUMBER IV. RECEIPT OF CAPTAIN M'DOUGALL, For Mr. Muir's passage from
Havre-de-Grace to New York.
Received from Mr. Muir, the sum of nine hundred livres, for his passage in the
cabin of the ship, from Havre-de-Grace to the port of New York, in finding him
with all stores.

A. M'DOUGAL.
Havre-de-Grace, May 10, 1793.
NUMBER V. PASSPORT AT PARIS.
REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE, DEPARTMENT DE PARIS.
Passeport delivre en execution de la loi du 7 Decembre 1792, l'an premier de
la Republique Francaise.
Vu l'avis du Conseil general de la Commune de Paris, laissez p^sser le citoyen
Thomas Muir, allant a Philadelphie, domicilie a Paris, municipalite de Paris,
departement de Paris, natif d'Ecosse, homme de loi, age de vingt huit ans,
taille de 5 pieds 3 pouces, cheveux et sourcils chatain, yeux bleux, nez
aquilin, bouche moyenne, mentou rond, front haut, visage long et plein, --
pretez-lui ^ide et assistance, au besoin.

Faite en directoire, le 23 Avril mil sept cent quatre vingt treize; l' an
deuxieme de la Republique Francaise; et a ledit citoyen Muir sign avec nous
administrateurs composant le Directoire du Departement de Paris. Approbatif
Thomos Muir. Dubois. E. J. B. Maillard. Leblauif, Nicoleau, presid.


Vu par nous Ministres des Affairs Estrangeres. A Paris, le 29 Avril, l' an
^'me de la Republique. Le Brun. Maill, Garat, Gr.

NUMBER VI. PASSPORT AT CALAIS.
REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE. AU NOM DE LA LOI. Department du Pas de Calais, District,
Municipalite de Calais.
Laissez passer le Citoyen Thomas Muir, Ecossaie, domicile a Edinburgh,
municipali^e de -- district de -- department de -- age de 28 ans, taille de 5
pieds 3 pouces, cheveux, sourcils, chatain, yeux bleus, nez aquilin, bouche
moyenne, menton rond, front rond, visage et long et plein; et pretez-lui aid
et assistance en cas de besoin, allant en France, et due a l' etranger.

Delivre en la Maison Commune de la Calais, le 15 Janvier, 1793, l' an premier
de la Republique Francaise. Thomas Muir. Maussy, Officier Municipal.
Cellierboullie, Secretaire et Greffier que a sign avec nous le present.


NUMBER VII. LETTER FROM J. MUIR, TO CAPT. GEORGE TOWERS.
Glasgow, 21st July, 1793. DEAR SIR,
I am at a very great loss how to answer your letter, as it is not understood by
me; but if it is the friend that I have, if it is he, I would be overjoyed to see
his handwriting, and to know what has become of him these three months. I
thought he had been at Philadelphia ere now, where letters are forwarded for
him; and if you are to stay any time at Belfast be so kind as write in course;
and I will come over and see you and him. You can write the time you mean to
stay. Mr. John Richardson, a son of Deacon James Richardson, I saw him this
week at Greeneck, where he is to sail in the Almy of New York directly, who has
two packets of letters for him; and there is many letters wrote for him to the
first people in America. And once he were there he will get letters to General
Washington; and I hope, dear Sir, you will show him every civility in your power,
which I hope some day gratefully to thank you for it. There is a trunk also in
the Almy for him, which Mr. Richardson will deliver into his own hand. Only I
sincerely wish you a safe, pleasant, and successful voyage, and a happy meeting
with your friends. And I remain,

DEAR SIR, Your most humble servant, J. MUIR.
If it is the person I mean, a cousin of his, William Muir, formerly of Leith,
is lying at Philadelphia. His ship is an American bottom. The loss of this
young man has been a dreadful affliction to us. Please give your friend this
letter. I honored his draft in favors of Mr. Masey. He Will get his letters at
the post office Philadelphia.

I hope in a year or two he can return, if he does not love America; and be so
good as cause him write me one line in your letter. You can direct it; and if
he does not choose to sign it, you can put to your initials.



NUMBER VIII. LETTER FROM THOMAS MUIR, TO CAPT. GEORGE TOWERS.
Dublin, 27th July 1793. DEAR SIR,
This day I received yours; and will be down upon Tuesday evening. I have taken
my place in the coach for tomorrow. I am happy to hear my friends is are well.
I will write them from Belfast. Of this you can give them information. I am,

DEAR SIR, Your respectful Friend, THOMAS MUIR.

Capt. George Towers, of the American ship, the Hope, from Baltimore. -- Care
of Mes^rs. Cunningham and Co. merchants, Belfast.
NUMBER IX. LETTER FROM MR. MUIR, TO MR CAMPBETL, WRITER TO THE SIGNET,
EDINBURGH.
Paris, Jan. 23. 1793. DEAR SIR,
I wrote you from Calais and from Paris, and impatiently expect your answer.
Write me fully about my private affairs, but about nothing else. Whenever you
and my friends judge it expedient or proper, I will immediately return, but I
cannot leave Paris without regret. I am honored by the notice and friendship
of an amiable and distinguished circle, and to a friend of humanity it affords
much consolation, to find according feelings in a foreign land. Present my best
wishes to all our friends, to Messrs. Johnston, Skirving, Moffat, Buchanan,
etc. Entreat you to find means to send over the numbers of the two Edinburgh
newspapers. The London papers come here but irregularly. One wishes to know
what is going on at home; but tell my friends, it is only through the channel
of newspapers I can receive that intelligence. Write me under the following
cover, Au Citoyen de Coudile, hotel de Toulon, No. 1. rue des F^sses du Temple.
Communicate this address to all my friends. Inform them no letter can reach me,
if not part of the postage is paid in Edinburgh.

I am, DEAR SIR, Yours, etc. THOMAS MUIR.
James Campbell, Esquire Writer to the Signet, Edinburgh, Scotland.

P. S. My compliments to Mr. Dick; entreat him to take the charge of my things.



NUMBER X. SECOND LETTER FROM MR. MUIR TO MR. CAMPBELL.
DEAR SIR,
I have written you frequently, whenever you think it proper I shall return. At
the same time, honored as I am by the civilities and attention of many amiable
characters, it would be with reluctance I could quit Paris for a month or two.
About my private business write me, but not a word on any other subject.
Remember me to Johnston, Skirving, Moffat, etc. Tell them, no distance of space
shall obliterate my recollection of them. Write me punctually, I entreat you.
Cause them likewise write me. Omit no post. My address is under cover, Au
Citoyen Coudile, hotel de Toulon, No. 1. rue des Fosses da Temple.

I am, Yours, etc. THOMAS MUIR.
Paris, 27th Jan. 1793.
James Campbell, Esquire Writer to the Signet, Edinburgh, Scotland.
NUMBER XI. LETTER FROM MR. M'INTOSH TO MR. CAMPBELL.
SIR,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter respecting the business of
Mr. Muir. I did not lose a moment in finding a safe and speedy conveyance to
him at Paris for your letters, and those of his other friends in Scotland, sent
to my care. I delayed from day to day in the perpetual expectation of seeing
Mr. Muir here on his return. It Is now, however, become necessary for me to
inform you, that he is not yet come; and considering the extreme anxiety which
he must have felt to return as soon as possible, I think it very probable that
this delay ought to be ascribed to the embargo laid on the vessels in the ports
of France, which may perhaps have rendered it impossible for him, though even
at Calais, to make his passage to England. I think this probability at least
sufficiently great to be pleaded for a delay of his trial; and it is to enable
you and his friends to make any use of it that you may think fit, that I have
now thought it necessary to communicate this state of facts to you.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc. JAMES M'INTOSH.
St. Charlotte-Street, Portland-Place, Feb. 7. 1793.
NUMBER XII. ADDRESS FROM THE SOCIETY OF UNITED IRISHMEN IN DUBLIN, TO THE
DELEGATES FOR PROMOTING A REFORM IN SCOTLAND.
WILLIAM DRENNAN, Chairman. ARCHISALD HAMILTON ROWAN, Sec.


We take the liberty of addressing you, in the spirit of civic union, in the
fellowship of a just and a common cause. We greatly rejoice that the spirit of
freedom moves over the surface of Scotland; that light seems to break from the
chaos of her internal government; and that a country so respectable for her
seize in science, in arts, and in arms; for men of litera^y eminence; for
the intelligence and morality of her people, now acts from a conviction of the
union between virtue, letters, and liberty; and now rises to distinction, not
by a calm, contented, secret wish for a Reform in Parliament, but by openly,
actively, and urgently willing it, with the unity and energy of an embodied
nation. We rejoice that you do not consider yourselves as merged and melted
down into another country, but that in this great national question you are
still -- Scotland, -- the land where Buchanan wrote, and Fletcher spoke, and
Wallace fought.

Away from us and from our children those puerile antipathies so unworthy of
the manhood of nations, which insulate individuals as well as countries, and
drive the citizen back to the savage. We esteem and we respect you. We pay
merited honor to a nation in general well educated, and well informed, because
we know that the ignorance of the people, is the cause and effect of all civil
and religious despotism. We honor a nation regular in their lives, and strict
in their manners, because we conceive private morality to be the only secure
foundation of public policy. We honor a nation eminent for men of genius, and
we trust that they will now exert themselves not so much in perusing and
penning the histories of other countries, as in making their own a subject for
the historian. May we venture to observe to them, that mankind have been too
retrospective; canonized antiquity, and undervalued themselves. Man has reposed
on ruins, and rested his head on some fragments of the temple of liberty, or at
most amused himself in paving the measurement of the edifice, and nicely
limiting its proportions; not reflecting that this temple is truly Catholic,
the ample earth its area, and the arch of heaven its dome.

We will lay open to you our hearts. Our cause is your cause -- If there is to
be a struggle between us, let i^ be which nation shall be foremost in the race
of mind: let this be the noble animosity kindled between u^, who shall first
attain that free constitution from which both are equidistant, who shall first
be the savior of the empire.

The sense of both countries with respect to the intolerable abuses of the
constitution has been clearly manifested, and proves that our political
situations are not dissimilar; that our rights and wrongs are the same. Out of
32 counties in Ireland, 29 petitioned for a Reform in Parliament; and out of 56
of the Royal Burghs in Scotland, 50 petitioned for a Reform in their internal
structure and Government. If we be rightly informed, there is no such thing as
popular election in Scotland. The people who ought to possess that weight in
the popular scale, which might bind them to the soil, and make them cling to
the constitution, are now as dust in the balance, blown abroad by the least
impulse, and scattered through other countries, merely because they hang so
loosely to their own. They have no share in the national Firm, and are
aggrieved not only by irregular and illegal exaction of taxes; by misrule and
mismanagement of corporations; by misconduct of self-elected and irresponsible
magistrates; by waste of public property; and by want of competent judicatures;
but, in our opinion, most of all, by an inadequate Parliamentary representation
-- for we assert, that 45 Commoners, and 16 Peers, are a pitiful representation
for two millions and a half of people; particularly as your Commons consider
themselves, not as the representatives of that people, but of the Councils of
the Burghs by whom they are elected.

Exclusive charters in favor of Burghs, monopolize the general rights of the
people, and that act must be absurd, which precludes all other towns from the
power of being restored to their ancient freedom.

We remember that heritable jurisdictions and feudal privileges, though
expressly reserved by the act of union, (20th art.) were set aside by act of
Parliament in 1746, and we think that there is much stronger ground at present
for restoring to the mass of the people their alienated rights, and to the
Constitution its spirit and its integrity.

Look now we pray you upon Ireland. Long was this unfortunate island the prey
of prejudiced factions and ferocious parties. The rights or rather duties of
conquest were dreadfully abused, and the catholic religion was made the
perpetual pretext for subjecting the state by annihilating the citizen, and
destroying not the religious persuasion but the man; not popery, but the
people. It was not till very lately, that the part of the nation, which is
truly colonial, reflected that though their ancestors had been victorious, they
themselves were now included in the general subjection; subduing only to be
subdued, and trampled upon, by Britain as a servile dependency. When therefore
the Protestants began to suffer what the Catholics had suffered and were
suffering; when from serving as the instruments they were made themselves the
objects of foreign domination, then they became conscious they had a country;
and then they felt -- an Ireland. -- They resisted British dominion, renounced
colonial subservience, and following the example of a Catholic Parliament just
a century before, they asserted the exclusive jurisdiction and legislative
competence of this island. A sudden light from America shone through our
prison. Our Volun-teers arose. The chains fell from our hands. We followed
Grattan, the angel of our deliverance, and in 1782 Ireland ceased to be a
province, and became a nation. But, with reason, should we despise and renounce
this Revolution, as merely a transient burst through a bad habit; the sudden
grasp of necessity in despair, from tyranny in distress, did we not believe
that the Revolution was still in train; that it is less the single and shining
act of 82, than a series of national improvements which that act ushers in and
announces; that it is only the herald of liberty and glory, of Catholic
emancipation, as well as protestant independence; that, in short this
Revolution indicates new principles, foreruns new practices, and lays a
foundation for advancing the whole people higher in the scale of being, and
diffusing equal and permanent happiness.

British supremacy changed its aspect, but its essence remained the same. First
it was force, and on the event of the late Revolution, it became influence;
direct hostility shifted into systematic corruption, silently drawing off the
virtue and vigor of the island, without shock or explosion. Corruption that
glides into every place, tempts every person, taints every principle, infects
the political mind through all its relations and dependencies; so regardless of
public character as to set the highest honor to sale, and to purchase boroughs
with the price of such prostitution; so regardless of public morality, as to
legalize the licentiousness of the lowest and most pernicious gambling, and to
extract a calamitous revenue from the infatuation and intoxication of the
people.

The Protestants of Ireland were now sensible that nothing could counteract
this plan of debilitating policy, but a radical reform in the house of the
people, and that without such reform, the Revolution itself was nominal and
delusive -- The wheel merely turned round, but it did not move forward, and
they were as distant as ever from the goal. They resolved. -- They convened. --
They met with arms. -- They met without them. -- They petitioned. But all in
vain -- for, they were but a portion of the people. They then looked around and
beheld their catholic countrymen. Three million -- we repeat it -- three
million taxed without being represented, bound by laws to which they had not
given consent, and politically dead in their native land. The apathy of the
catholic mind changed into sympathy, and that begot an energy of sentiment and
action. They had eyes, and they read. They had ears, and they listened. They
had hearts, and they felt. They said -- "Give us our rights as you value your
own. Give us a share of civil and political liberty, the elective franchise,
and the trial by jury. Treat us as men, and we shall treat you as brothers. Is
taxation without representation a grievance to three millions across the
Atlantic, and no grievance to three millions at your doors? -- Throw down that
pale of persecution, which still keeps up civil war in Ireland, and make us one
people. We shall then stand, supporting and supported, in the assertion of that
liberty which is due to all, and which all should unite to attain."

It was just -- and immediately a principle of adhesion took place for the
first time, among the inhabitants of Ireland. -- All religious persuasions
found in a political union their common duty and their common salvation. In
this society and its affiliated societies, the Catholic and the Presbyterian
are at this instant holding out their hands and opening their hearts to each
other, agreeing in principles, concurring in practice. We unite for immediate,
ample, and substantial justice to the Catholics, and when that is attained, a
combined exertion for a Reform in Parliament is the condition of our compact,
and the seal of our communion.

British supremacy takes alarm. The haughty monopolists of national power and
common right, who crouch abroad to domineer at home, now look with more
surprise and less contempt on this "besorted" people. A new artifice is
adopted, and that restless domination which, at first, ^u^ed as open war, by
the length of the sword; then, as covert corruption, by the strength of the
poison; now assumes the style and title of Protestant Ascendancy; calls down
the name of religion from heaven to sow discord on earth; to rule by anarchy,
to keep up distrust and antipathy among parties among persuasions, among
families, nay to make the passions of the individuals struggle, like Cain and
Abel, in the very home of the heart, and to convert every little paltry
necessity that accident, indolence, or extravagance bring upon a man, into a
pander for the purchase of his honesty and the murder of his reputation.

We will not be the dupes of such ignoble artifices. We see this scheme of
strengthening political persecution and state inquisition, by a fresh infusion
of religious fanaticism; but we will unite, and we will be free. Universal
Emancipation with Representative Legislature is the polar principle which
guides our Society, and shall guide it through all the tumult of factions and
fluctuations of parties. It is not upon a coalition of opposition with ministry
that we depend, but upon a coalition of Irishmen with Irishmen, and in that
coalition alone we find an object worthy of reform, and at the same time the
strength and sinew to attain and secure it. It is not external circumstances,
upon the pledge of man or minister, we depend, but upon the internal energy of
the Irish nation. We will not buy or borrow liberty from America or from
France, but manufacture it ourselves, and work it up with those materials that
the hearts of Irishmen furnish them with at home. We do not worship the
British, far less the Irish Constitution, as sent down from heaven, but we
consider it as human workmanship, which man has made and man can mend. An
unalterable Constitution, whatever be its nature, must be despotism. It is not
the Constitution but the People which ought to be inviolable, and it is time to
recognize and renovate the rights of the English, the Scotch, and the Irish
nations. -- Rights which can neither be bought nor sold, granted by charter, or
forestalled by monopoly, but which nature dictates as the birthright of all,
and which it is the business of a constitution to define, to enforce, and to
establish. If Government has a sincere regard for the safety of the
constitution, let them coincide with the people in the speedy reform of its
abuses, and not by an obstinate adherence to them, drive that people into
Republicanism.

We have told you what our situation was, what it is, what it ought to be: our
end, a National Legislature; our means, an union of the whole people. Let this
union extend throughout the Empire. Let us unite for all, or each man suffer
for all. In each country let the people assemble in peaceful and constitutional
Convention. Let delegates from each country digest a plan of reform, best
adapted to the situation and circumstances of their respective nations, and let
the Legislatures be petitioned at once by the urgent and unanimous voice of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

You have our ideas. Answer us, and that quickly. -- This is not a time to
procrastinate. Your illustrious Fletcher has said, that the liberties of a
people are not to be secured, without passing through great difficulties, and
no toil or labor ought to be declined to preserve a nation from slavery. He
spoke well: and we add, that it is incumbent on every nation who adventures
into a conflict for freedom, to remember it is on the event (however absurdly)
depends the estimation of public opinion; honor and immortality, if fortunate;
if orherwise, infamy and oblivion. Let this check the rashness that rushes
unadvisedly into the committal of national character, or if that be already
made, let the same consideration impel us all to advance with active not
passive perseverance, with manly confidence and calm determination, smiling
with equal scorn at the bluster of official a^^ogance, and the whisper of
private malevolence, until we have planted the ^lag of Freedom on the summit,
and are at once victorious and secure.

NUMBER XIII. LETTER TO THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE. [ The following Letter was
published in the Edinburgh Gazetteer of March 1. 1793.]
PARIS, February 13. 1793.
Upon the evening of the 8th of this month, I received letters from my father,
and from my agent, Mr. Campbell, informing me that an indictment was preferred
against me, that my trial was fixed for Monday the 11th instant; the distance,
and the shortness of the time, could not permit me to reach Edinburgh by that
day. War is declared between England and France, and the formalities requisite
to be gone through before I could procure my passport, would at least have
consumed three days. I will return to Scotland without delay. -- To shrink from
danger would be unbecoming my own character, and your confidence; I dare
challenge the most minute investigation of my public and private conduct. Armed
with innocence, I appeal to justice; and I disdain to supplicate favors. I
have hastened to give you an account of my intention; and I am happy that a
private gentleman, who leaves Paris tomorrow, affords me an opportunity for
the communication.

NUMBER XIV. LETTER FROM W. SKIRVING TO D. STEWART, ESQUIRE NO. 52. FRITH-STREET,
SOHO, LONDON, SECRETARY TO THE SOCIETY OF THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE.
Edinburgh, Sept. 2. 1793. SIR,
I ought to have wrote you on Saturday, to give your Society the means of
contradicting the aspersion, which you will see by the accounts of Mr. Muir's
trial, has been thrown upon them. I have not been able to command a settled
thought since the alarming issue of that astonishing trial. I never had a
higher opinion of any person's integrity, uprightness, and philanthropy; nor is
it diminished, but increased. The feelings which I must therefore have had
since that event, will plead my excuse with men of feeling.

In the evidence which I was called on to give, I stated the reason for his
going to London, and that I had received a letter from Mr. Muir, when at
London, explaining the cause of his proceeding to Paris; which letter I was
very sorry that I could not produce, though I had preserved it carefully. Being
desired to state, if I could recollect the reason which Mr. Muir assigned in
that letter for his journey to Paris, I said, that it was the opinion of
friends, that if Mr. Muir would go to Paris, he might have great influence with
many to mitigate the sentence of the French King. These friends were taken for
your Society; and much freedom was used, to reprobate both the Society of the
Friends of the People in London, for presuming to send a missionary into
another country; and Mr. Muir, for accepting such commission But I declare upon
my honor, that the thought of his being sent by the Society of the Friends of
the People in London, never came into my mind: And if I expressed myself so,
which it is impossible I could do, I expressed a falsehood; and which I am
bound, in justice to the Society, in this manner to contradict.

Mr. Muir is behaving with astonishing manliness.

I am, Sir, your obedient humble servant, W. SKIRVING.

FINIS.

