AN ACCOUNT OF THE Bilious remitting Yellow Fever, AS IT APPEARED IN THE CITY
OF PHILADELPHIA, IN THE YEAR 1793.

By Benjamin Rush, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES, AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET MDCCXCIV.

THE PREFACE.
THE delay of the following publication has been occasioned by the want of
health to prepare it for the press, during the winter months. It now goes
forward, under the great disadvantages, of having been hastily copied from my
notes, amidst frequent professional interruptions. Its imperfections I hope
will be overlooked, when it is considered, that my only design in publishing
thus prematurely, was to obviate as much as possible, the danger of the
disease, should it unhappily appear in our city in the course of the present
season.

In the history of the fever, I have introduced an account of the symptoms and
prognosis, in such places as they occurred most naturally, without a strict
regard to the artificial order of the schools.

In the detail of the symptoms, I have divided the body into different systems.
This division I have found to accord more easily with the principles of
medicine which I have adopted, than the common method of describing them, as
they appear in the animal, natural, and vital functions.

In republishing an account of the controversies between the physicians of
Philadelphia, my motives were, to prevent the revival of certain opinions and
modes of practice, by bringing them forward under the patronage of respectable
names, and to justify in a great measure, from their influence, the want of
universal success, by the only safe, and proper mode of treating the yellow
fever. I hope I shall be excused for this part of the following work, when it
is perceived, that I have been more minute in relating my own mistakes, than
those of other Physicians; and that I have connected no names with the opinions
and modes of practice which I have opposed, but such as were given to the
public by their authors, during the prevalence of the fever.

BENJAMIN RUSH.
PHILADELPHIA, June 14th, 1794.
CONTENTS.
AN account of the diseases which preceded the yellow fever* 1 Of the first
cases of it, 8 Correspondence between Dr Hutchinson, and the Author, upon the
subject of the fever, 16, 17 Proceedings and publication of the College of
Physicians. 21 Predisposing and exciting causes of the fever, 29 Premonitory
signs of an attack of the fever, 36 History of its symptoms, 39 As they
appeared in the blood vessels, 40 -- in the liver and brain, 47 -- in the
stomach and bowels, 51 -- in the secretions and excretions, 54 -- in the
nervous system, 61 -- in the senses and appetites, 66 -- in the lymphatic and
glandular system, 68 -- on the skin, 69 -- in the blood, 73 Anomalous
circumstances belonging to the history of the fever, 78 Its banishment of, or
mixture with, other fevers, 84 Account of persons, most subject to the disease,
93 -- of those who escaped it, 101 Signs of the universal prevalence of the
exhalation, and contagion in the city, 104 State of the atmosphere during the
prevalence of the fever, 108 Proofs of reinfection, 112 State of the body after
death, 113 Appearances of the dead body exhibited by dissection, 115 State of
the City during the prevalence of the fever, 122 Amount of deaths, and the
number on each day from the 1 st of August to the 9 th of November, 128, 129
The causes which checked the disorder, 131 The diseases which succeeded the
yellow fever, 138 The means used to purify houses and clothes, 141 Sporadic
cases of yellow fever in 1763, 144 Of the origin of the fever, 145 Symptoms,
and circumstances, of agreement and disagreement, between the yellow fever and
the plague, 169 -- of the yellow and jail fever, 175 Different grades or states
of bilious fever, 178 Premonitory signs of great and mortal epidemics, or of a
sickly autumn, 179 Register of the weather from the 1st of January to the 9th
of November, 1793. 185 Of the Method of Cure, 193 Of the remedies for the
fever, 203 Origin of the dissentions among the physicians, 207 Four modes of
treating the fever, 243 I. Of purging, 245 Objections to it answered, 248 Of
blood-letting, 258 The appearances of the blood, 261 Objections to
blood-letting answered, 274 Advantages of obtaining evacuations in a gradual
manner in certain cases, 277 Of cool and fresh air, 284 Of the drinks and diet
used in the first stage of the fever, 285, 286 Of the application of cold water
to the body, 287 Of the advantages of a salivation in the cure of the fever,
290 Of blisters, 291 Of the drinks and diet in the second stage of the fever,
291, 292 Of the remedies which were used to relieve painful or distressing
symptoms, 292 Symptoms which attended the convalescence, 294 Of the benefits of
bleeding, purging, and low diet in preventing or mitigating the disease, 295
II. Observations on the use of bark, in the fever, 289 -- of wine, 299 -- of
laudanum, 299 -- of the cold bath, 300 III. Observations on the combined use of
evacuations, and tonic medicines, 302 IV. Observations on the use of the French
remedies, 302 Inquiry into the comparative success of each of the four modes of
practice, which have been mentioned, 303 Of the tonic method, 303 Of the
antiphlogistic method, 308 Of the combination of the tonic and antiphlogistic
methods and of the French practice, 319, 320 Observations on the success of the
antiphlogistic remedies, in the hands of persons not educated to the profession
of physic, 320 Inferences from their success, and from other considerations, in
favor of teaching the people at large to cure themselves of the yellow fever,
and of all other pestilential fevers, 325 Narrative of the state of the
Author's body and mind during the prevalence of the fever, 339
The reader will please to correct the following errors:

for Dr. Physic, read Dr. Physic. In p. 41, line 2. -- p. 49, line 6. -- p.
55, line 9, -- p. 119, l. 8,

-- p. 144, line 6, insert sporadic before case. -- p. 144, line 19, insert
prevailed, instead of occurred.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Bilious remitting Yellow Fever, AS IT APPEARED IN
PHILADELPHIA, IN THE YEAR 1793.

AN ACCOUNT, etc.
BEFORE I proceed to describe the fever which is to be the subject of this
Essay, it will be proper to give a short account of the diseases which preceded
it.

The state of the weather during the first seven months of the year, and during
the time in which the fever prevailed in the city, as recorded by Mr
Rittenhouse, will be inserted immediately after the history of the disease.

The MUMPS which made their appearance in December 1792, continued to prevail
during the month of January 1793. Besides this disorder, there were many cases
of catarrh in the city, brought on chiefly by the inhabitants exposing
themselves for several hours on the damp ground in viewing the aerial voyage of
Mr Blanchard on the 9th day of the month.

The weather which had been moderate in December and January became cold in
February. The mumps continued to prevail during this month with symptoms so
inflammatory, as to require in some cases two bleedings. Many people complained
this month of pains and swellings in the jaws. A few had the scarlatina
anginosa.

The mumps, pains in the jaws, and scarlatina continued throughout the month of
March. I was called to two cases of pleurisy in this month, which terminated in
a temporary mania. One of them was in a woman of ninety years of age, who
recovered. The blood drawn in the other case, (a gentleman from Maryland) was
dissolved. The continuance of a tense pulse, induced me notwithstanding to
repeat the bleeding. The blood was now sizy. A third bleeding was prescribed,
and my patient recovered. Several cases of obstinate erysipelas succeeded
inoculation in children during this, and the next month, one of which proved
fatal.

Blossoms were universal on the fruit trees, in the gardens of Philadelphia, on
the first day of April. The scarlatina anginosa continued to be the reigning
epidemic in this month.

There were several warm days in May, but the city was in general healthy. The
birds appeared two weeks sooner this spring than usual.

The register of the weather shows, that there were many warm days in June. The
scarlatina continued to maintain its empire during this month.

The weather was uniformly warm in July. The scarlatina continued during the
beginning of this month, with symptoms of great violence. A son of James
Sharswood, aged seven years, had with the common symptoms of this disorder,
great pains and swellings in his limbs, accompanied with a tense pulse. I
attempted in vain to relieve him by vomits and purges. On the 10th day of the
month, I ordered six ounces of blood to be drawn from his arm, which I observed
afterward to be very sizy. The next day he was nearly well. Between the 22d
and the 24th days of the month, there died three persons whose respective ages
were 80, 92, and 96. The weather at this time was extremely warm. I have
elsewhere taken notice of the fatal influence of extreme heat, as well as cold,
upon human life in old people. A few bilious remitting fevers appeared toward
the close of this month. One of them under my care, ended in a tedious typhus
mitior, from which the patient was recovered with great difficulty. It was the
son of Dr Hutchins of the island of Barbados.

The weather for the first two or three weeks in August was temperate, and
pleasant. The colera morbus, and remitting fevers were now common. The latter
were attended with some inflammatory action in the pulse, and a determination
to the breast. Several dysenteries appeared at this time, both in the city and
in its neighborhood. During the latter part of July, and the beginning of this
month, a number of the distressed inhabitants of St Domingo, who had escaped
the desolation of fire and sword, arrived in the city. Soon after their
arrival, the influenza made its appearance, and spread rapidly among our
citizens. The scarlatina still kept up a feeble existence among children. The
above diseases were universal, but they were not attended with much mortality.
They prevailed in different parts of the city, and each seemed to appear
occasionally to be the ruling epidemic. The weather continued to be warm and
dry. There was a heavy rain on the 25th of the month, which was remembered by
the citizens of Philadelphia as the last that fell, for many weeks afterward.

There was something in the heat and drought of the summer months, which was
uncommon, in their influence upon the human body. Laborers every where gave
out (to use the country phrase) in harvest, and frequently too when the mercury
in Fahrenheit's thermometer was under 84. It was ascribed by the country people
to the calmness of the weather, which left the sweat produced by heat and
labor, to dry slowly upon the body.

The crops of grain and grass were impaired by the drought. The summer fruits
were as plentiful as usual, particularly the melons, which were of an excellent
quality. The influence of the weather upon the autumnal fruits, and upon
vegetation in general, shall be mentioned hereafter.

I beg pardon for the length of this introduction. Some parts of it, I hope,
will not appear useless in the sequel of this work.

I now enter upon a detail of some solitary cases of the epidemic, which soon
afterward spread distress through our city, and terror throughout the United
States.

On the 5th of August, I was requested by Dr Hodge to visit his child. I found
it ill with a fever of the billious kind, which terminated (with a yellow skin)
in death on the 7th of the same month.

On the 6th of August, I was called to Mrs Bradford, the wife of Mr Thomas
Bradford. She had all the symptoms of a bilious remittent, but they were so
acute, as to require two bleedings, and several successive doses of physic. The
last purge she took was a dose of calomel, which operated plentifully. For
several days after her re-recovery, her eyes and face were of a yellow color.

On the same day, I was called to the son of Mrs M'Nair, who had been seized
violently with all the usual symptoms of a bilious fever. I purged him
plentifully with salts and creamor tartar, and took ten or twelve ounces of
blood from his arm. His symptoms appeared to yield to these remedies; but on
the 10th of the month an haemorrhage from the nose came on, and on the morning
of the 12th he died.

On the 7th of this month I was called to visit Richard Palmer, a son of Mrs
Palmer in Chesnut-street. He had been indisposed for several days with a sick
stomach and vomiting after eating. He now complained of a fever and headache. I
gave him the usual remedies for the bilious fever, and he recovered in a few
days. On the 15th day of the same month, I was sent for to visit his brother
William, who was seized with all the symptoms of the same disorder. On the 5th
day his headache became extremely acute, and his pulse fell to sixty strokes in
a minute. I suspected congestion to have taken place in his brain, and ordered
him to lose eight ounces of blood. His pulse became more frequent, and less
tense after bleeding, and he recovered in a day or two afterward.

On the 14th day of this month I was sent for to visit Mrs Leaming, the wife of
Mr Thomas Leaming. I suspected at first that she had the influenza, but in a
day or two, her fever put on bilious symptoms. She was affected with an
uncommon disposition to faint. Her pulse was languid, but tense. I took a few
ounces of blood from her, and purged her with salts, and calomel. I afterward
gave her a small dose of laudanum which disagreed with her. In my note book, I
find I have recorded, that "she was the worse for it." I was led to make this
remark by its being so very uncommon, for a person who had been properly bled
and purged, to take laudanum in a common bilious fever, without being benefited
by it. She recovered however slowly, and was yellow for many days afterward.

On the morning of the 18th of this month, I was requested to visit Peter
Aston, in Vine-street* in consultation with Dr Say. I found him on the 3d day
of a most acute bilious fever. His eyes were inflamed, and his face flushed
with a deep red color. His pulse seemed to forbid evacuations. We prescribed
the strongest cordials; but to no purpose. We found him at 6 o'clock in the
evening, sitting upon the side of his bed, perfectly sensible, but without a
pulse, with cold clammy hands, and his face of a yellowish color. He died a
few hours after we left him.

None of the cases which I have mentioned, excited the least apprehension of
the existence of a yellow fever in our city; for I had frequently seen sporadic
cases in which the common bilious fever of Philadelphia, had put on symptoms of
great malignity, and terminated fatally in a few days, and now and then with a
yellow color on the skin, before, or immediately after death.

On the 19th of this month I was requested to visit the wife of Mr Peter Le
Maigre, in Water-street, between Arch and Race-streets, in consultation with Dr
Foulke and Dr Hodge. I found her in the last stage of a highly bilious fever.
She vomited constantly, and complained of great heat and burning in her
stomach. The most powerful cordials, and tonics were prescribed, but to no
purpose. She died on the evening of the next day.

Upon coming out of Mrs Le Maigre's room, I remarked to Dr Foulke and Dr Hodge,
that I had seen an unusual number of bilious fevers, accompanied with symptoms
of uncommon malignity, and that I suspected all was not right in our city. Dr
Hodge immediately replied, that a fever of a most malignant kind had carried
off four or five persons within sight of Mr Le Maigre's door, and that one of
them had died in twelve hours after the attack of the disorder. This
information satisfied me that my apprehensions were well founded. The origin of
this fever was discovered to me at the same time, from the account which Dr
Foulke gave me of a quantity of damaged coffee which had been thrown upon Mr
Ball's wharf, and in the adjoining dock, on the 24th of July, nearly in a line
with Mr Le Maigre's house, and which had putrefied there to the great annoyance
of the whole neighborhood.

After this consultation I was soon able to trace all the cases of fever which
I have mentioned to this source. Dr Hodge lived a few doors above Mr Le
Maigre's, where his child had been exposed to the exhalation from the coffee
for several days. Mrs Bradford had spent an afternoon in a house directly
opposite to the wharf and dock on which the putrid coffee had emitted its
noxious effluvia, a few days before her sickness, and had been much incommoded
by it. Her sister Mrs Leaming had visited her during her illness, and probably
caught the fever from her, for she perfectly recollected perceiving a peculiar
smell unlike to any thing she had been accustomed to in a sick room, as soon as
she entered the chamber where her sister lay. Young Mr M'Nair and Mrs Palmer's
two sons had spent whole days in a compting house, near where the coffee was
exposed, and each of them had complained of having been made sick by its
offensive smell, and Mr Aston had frequently been in Water-street near the
source of the exhalation.

This discovery of the malignity -- extent -- and origin of a fever which I
knew to be highly contagious, as well as mortal, gave me great pain. I did not
hesitate to name it, the Bilious remitting Yellow Fever. I had once seen it
epidemic in Philadelphia, in the year 1762. Its symptoms were among the first
impressions which diseases made upon my mind. I had recorded some of these
symptoms. I had likewise recorded its mortality. I shall here introduce a short
account of it from a note book which I kept during my apprenticeship.

In the year 1762, in the months of August, September, October, November and
December, the bilious yellow fever prevailed in Philadelphia, after a very hot
summer, and spread like a plague, carrying off daily for some time, upwards of
twenty persons.

The patients were generally seized with rigors, which were succeeded with a
violent fever, and pains in the head and back. The pulse was full, and
sometimes irregular. The eyes were inflamed, and had a yellowish cast, and a
vomiting almost always attended.

The 3d, 5th and 7th days were mostly critical, and the disease generally
terminated on one of them, in life or death.

An eruption on the 3d or 7th day over the body, proved salutary.

An excessive heat, and burning about the region of the liver, with cold
extremities, portended death to be at hand.

I have taken notice in my note book, of the principal remedy which was
prescribed in this fever by my preceptor in medicine, but this shall be
mentioned hereafter.

Upon my leaving Mrs Le Maigre's, I expressed my distress at what I had
discovered, to several of my fellow citizens. The report of a malignant and
contagious fever being in town, spread in every direction, but it did not gain
universal credit. Some of those physicians who had not seen patients in it,
denied that any such fever existed, and asserted (though its mortality was not
denied) that it was nothing but the common annual remittent

(...) of it, and into the nature of the disease. In consequence of this order,
I received the following letter from Dr Hutchinson.

DEAR SIR,
A CONSIDERABLE alarm has taken place, in consequence of the appearance of an
infectious disorder in this city; from which the governor has been induced to
direct me to make enquiries relative to the existence and nature of such
disorder. In executing this duty, I must rely on the assistance of such of my
medical brethren as may have been called to attend any of the persons supposed
to have been infected: as I understand you have had several of them under your
care, I Would be much obliged to you to communicate to me (as speedily as can
be done with convenience to yourself) such facts as you have been able to
ascertain relative to the existence of such disorder; in what part of the city
it prevails; when it was introduced; and what was the probable cause of it.

I am, Sir, With the greatest respect, Your obedient servant, J. HUTCHINSON.
AUGUST 24th, 1793.
Dr Benjamin Rush.

To this letter I wrote the following answer a few hours after it came to hand.

DEAR SIR,
A MALIGNANT fever has lately appeared in our city, originating I believe from
some damaged coffee, which putrified on a wharf near Arch-street. This fever
was confined for a while to Water-street, between Race and Arch-streets; but I
have lately met with it in Second-street, and in Kensington; but whether
propagated by contagion, or by the original exhalation, I cannot tell. The
disease puts on all the intermediate forms of a mild remittent, and a typhus
gravior. I have not seen a fever of so much malignity, so general, since the
year 1762.

From, dear sir, Yours sincerely, BENJ. RUSH.
August 24 th, 1793.

A FEW days afterward, the following publicacation, by Dr Hutchinson, appeared
in the American Daily Advertiser of August 28th.

THE governor having directed an inquiry to ascertain the facts, respecting the
existence of a contagious fever in the city, and the probable means of removing
it, Dr Hutchinson, the physician of the port, has made the following statement
upon the subject, in a letter to Nathaniel Falconer, Esquire. health-officer of the
port of Philadelphia.

DEAR SIR,
IMMEDIATELY on the receipt of your letter, with the enclosure from the
governor, stating that a considerable alarm had taken place, in consequence of
the appearance of an infectious disorder in this city, I endeavored to take
measures to ascertain the facts, relative to the existence of such disease: for
this purpose, I wrote to such of my medical brethren, who had been called on to
attend persons supposed to have been infected; and from their answers, as well
as from my own observations, I am convinced that a malignant fever has lately
made its appearance in Water-street and in Kensington; principally in
Water-street between Arch and Race-streets. This part of the city I examined
personally on Thursday and Friday last, and found that east of Front-street,
and between Arch and Race-streets, sixty-seven persons were diseased, many with
the malignant fever. Thirteen of them are since dead, and numbers remain ill.
For a while this fever was confined to the abovementioned part of the city, but
the disorder is spreading, and now appears in other places, so that several are
affected in other parts of Water-street, some in Second-street, some in
Vine-street, some in Carter's-alley, some in other streets; but in most cases
the contagion can be traced to Water-street. Dr Say, who has attended more in
this disease than any other physician, informs me, that he first observed it in
Kensington, on the fifth or sixth of this month; that he did not perceive it in
Water-street, until about the twelfth or fifteenth, but that on its appearance
in the latter place, the whole neighborhood was soon affected -- He further
informs me, that he has at this time upwards of 40 patients, which he supposes
to be infected; and that he has lost about 20 patients in this disease, since
its first appearance. As far as I have been able to ascertain, the number of
persons who have died altogether of this fever, amounts to 40 or thereabouts
The register of the deaths shows that it amounted at that time to upwards of
150.
.

The general opinion both of the medical gentlemen, and of the inhabitants of
Water-street is, that the contagion originated from some damaged coffee, or
other putrified vegetable and animal matters; and, on enquiry, it appears, that
on a few wharfs above Arch-street, there was not only a quantity of damaged
coffee, which was extremely offensive, exposed for some time, but also some
putrid hides, and other putrid animal and vegetable substances. Should,
however, Dr Says opinion be well founded, that he observed the disease in
Kensington previously to its appearance in Water-street, this cannot be the
original cause of the contagion.

It does not appear to be an imported disease; for I have heard of no
foreigners or sailors that have hitherto been infected; nor has it been found
in any lodging houses; but it is, on the contrary, principally confined to the
inhabitants of Water-street, and such as have done business, or had
considerable intercourse, with that part of the city. The Dispensary physicians
tell me, that out of the large number of sick, now under the care of that
charitable institution, they have had but one person afflicted with this fever.
In the Pennsylvania Hospital, the disorder does not exist.

The disease appears differently in different persons; it puts on all the
intermediate forms between a mild remittent and the worst species of Typhus
Gravior.

I enclose you a copy of the proceedings of the college of physicians, which
contains their recommendation of the means for preventing the future progress
of the disease.

I am, with the greatest respect, Your most obedient servant, J. HUTCHINSON.
PHILADELPHIA, August 27 th, 1793,

The disease continued to spread, and with a degree of mortality that had long
been unknown by common fevers.

On the 25th of the month, the college of physicians was summoned by their
president to meet, in order to consult about the best methods of treating this
fever, and of checking its progress in the city. After some consideration upon
the nature of the disease, a committee was appointed to draw up some directions
for those purposes; and the next day the following were presented to the
college, and adopted unanimously by them. They were afterward published in
most of the news papers.

PHILADELPHIA, August 26 th, 1793,
THE college of physicians having taken into consideration the malignant and
contagious fever that now prevails in this city, have agreed to recommend to
their fellow citizens the following means of preventing its progress.

1st. That all unnecessary intercourse should be avoided with such persons as
are infected by it.

2d. To place a mark upon the door or window of such houses as have any
infected persons in it.

3d. To place the persons infected in the center of large and airy rooms, in
beds without curtains, and to pay the strictest regard to cleanliness, by
frequently changing their body and bed linen, also by removing as speedily as
possible, all offensive matters from their rooms.

4th. To provide a large and airy hospital, in the neighborhood of the city,
for the reception of such poor persons as cannot be accommodated with the above
advantages in private houses.

5th. To put a stop to the tolling of the bells.

6th. To bury such persons as die of this fever in carriages, and in as private
a manner as possible.

7th. To keep the streets and wharfs of the city as clean as possible. -- As
the contagion of the disease may be taken into the body and pass out of it,
without producing the fever, unless it be rendered active by some occasional
cause, the following means should be attended to, to prevent the contagion
being excited into action in the body.

8th. To avoid all fatigue of body and mind.

9th. To avoid standing or sitting in the sun; also in a current of air, or in
the evening air.

10th. To accommodate the dress to the weather; and to exceed rather in warm
than in cool clothing.

11th. To avoid intemperance, but to use fermented liquors, such as wine, beer,
and cider, in moderation.

The college conceive fires to be very ineffectual, if not dangerous means of
checking the progress of this fever. They have reason to place more dependence
upon the burning of gunpowder. The benefits of vinegar and camphor, are
confined chiefly to infected rooms, and they cannot be used too frequently upon
handkerchiefs, or in smelling-bottles, by persons whose duty calls them to
visit or attend the sick.

Signed by order of the college, WILLIAM SHIPPEN, JUN. Vice President. SAMUEL
P. GRIFFITTS, Secretary.



From a conviction that the disease originated in the putrid exhalations from
the damaged coffee, I published in the American Daily Advertiser of August
29th, the following short address to the citizens of Philadelphia, with a view
of directing the public attention to the spot where the coffee lay, and thereby
of checking the progress of the fever as far as it was continued by the
original cause.

Mr DUNLAP,
A DOUBT has been expressed by Dr Hutchinson, in his letter to the
health-officer, whether the malignant fever, which now prevails in our city,
originated in an exhalation from some putrid coffee on a wharf, between Arch
and Race-streets, because it made its first appearance at Kensington. Upon
enquiry, it appears that the first persons who died with this fever, about the
5th of the month, in that village, had been previously exposed to the
atmosphere of the wharf, and that three of the crew of the Danish ship, who are
now ill with it at Kensington, received the seeds of the disease on board their
ship, while she lay at or near Race-street wharf. If these facts could not be
ascertained, it does not follow, that the disease was not generated by the
putrid coffee; for, morbid exhalations, it is well known, produce fevers at the
distance of two and three miles, where they are not opposed by houses, woods,
or a hilly country. This is obvious to all the farmers who live in the
neighborhood of mill-ponds.

It is no new thing for the effluvia of putrid vegetables to produce malignant
fevers. Cabbage, onions, black pepper, and even the mild potatoe, when in a
state of putrefaction, have all been the remote causes of malignant fevers. The
noxious quality of the effluvia from mill-ponds, is derived wholly from a
mixture of the putrified leaves and bark of trees, with water.

It is much less common for the effluvia of putrid animal matters to produce
fevers. How seldom do we hear of them in the neghbourhood of slaughter-houses,
or of the work-shops of skinners or curriers?

These observations are intended to serve two purposes: 1st, To support the
opinion of Dr Hutchinson, that the malignant fever, which has excited so
general, and so just an alarm in our city, is not an imported disease; and,
2dly, To direct the attention of our citizens to the spot from whence this
severe malady has been derived. It will be impossible to check it during the
continuance of warm and dry weather, while any of the impure matter which
produced it, remains upon the pestilential wharf.

R.


This publication had no other effect, than to produce fresh clamours against
the author; for the citizens as well as most of the physicians of Philadelphia
had adopted a traditional opinion, that the yellow fever could exist among us,
only by importation from the West Indies.

In consequence, however, of a letter from Dr Foulke to the Mayor of the city,
in which he had decided, in a positive manner in favor of the generation of
the fever from the putrid coffee; the mayor gave orders for the removal of the
coffee, and the cleaning of the wharf and dock. It was said that measures were
taken for this purpose; but Dr Foulke, who visited the place where the coffee
lay, has repeatedly assured me, that they were so far from being effectual,
that an offensive smell was exhaled from it many days afterward.

I shall pass over for the present, the facts and arguments on which I ground
my assertion of the generation of this fever in our city. They will come in
more properly in the close of the history of the disease.

The seeds of the fever, whether received into the body, from the putrid
effluvia of the coffee, or by contagion, generally excited the disease in a few
days. I met with several cases in which it acted, so as to produce a fever on
the same day, in which it was received into the system, and I heard of two
cases in which it excited sickness, fainting, and fever, within one hour after
the persons were exposed to it. I met with no instance in which there was a
longer interval than sixteen days, between the contagion being received into
the body, and the production of the disease.

This poison acted differently in different constitutions, according to
previous habits, to the degrees of predisposing debililty, or to the quantity
and concentration of the contagion which was applied to the body.

In some constitutions the contagion was at once a remote, a predisposing, and
an exciting cause of the disease; hence some persons were affected by it, who
had not departed in any instance from their ordinary habits of living, as to
diet, dress, and exercise. But it was more frequently brought on by some
predisposing, or exciting cause. I shall briefly enumerate each of them.

Whatever be the specific quality of the matter which produced the fever, it is
certain, that it acted as a stimulus upon the whole system. In a moderate
degree, it produced only a quickness and fullness of the pulse, but when it was
more active, it induced that species of debility which has been happily called
indirect. It is the reverse of direct debility, which is produced by the
abstraction of natural, and usual stimuli from the body. When the contagion
acted with so much force, as to induce indirect debility, a fever sometimes
followed without the aid of an exciting cause, but this was seldom the case. In
ninety-nine cases out of an hundred, which came under my notice, I could
distinctly trace the formation of the disease to some of the following causes,
acting separately, or in greater or less combination, and inducing indirect or
direct debility upon the system. The causes which induced indirect debility
were,

1. FATIGUE of body or mind, induced by labor, by walking, riding, watching,
or the like. It was labor which excited the disease so universally among the
lower class of people. A long walk often induced it. Few escaped it after a
day, or even a few hours spent in gunning. A hard trotting horse brought it on
two of my patients. Perhaps, riding on horseback, and in the sun, was the
exciting cause of the disease in most of the citizens and strangers who were
affected by it in their flight from the city. A fall excited it in a girl, and
a stroke upon the head excited it in a young man who came under my care. Many
people were seized with the disorder in consequence of their exertions on the
night of the 7th of September, in extinguishing the fire which consumed Mr
Dobson's printing-office, and even the less violent exercise of working the
fire engines for the purpose of laying the dust in the streets, added
frequently to the number of the sick.

2. HEAT, from every cause, but more especially the heat of the sun, was a very
common exciting cause of the disorder. It aided the stimulus of the contagion
in bringing on indirect debility. The register of the weather during the latter
end of August -- the whole of September, and the first two weeks in October,
will show how much the heat of the sun must have contributed to excite the
disease, more especially among laboring people. The heat of common fires,
likewise became a frequent cause of the activity of the contagion, where it had
been received into the body; hence the greater mortality of the disease among
bakers, blacksmiths, and hatters, than among any other class of people.

3. INTEMPERANCE in eating or drinking. A plentiful meal, and a few
extra-glasses of wine, seldom failed of exciting the fever. But where the body
was strongly impregnated with the contagion, even the smallest deviation from
the customary stimulus of diet, in respect to quality or quantity, roused the
contagion into action. A supper of twelve oysters in one, and only three, in
another of my patients, produced the disease. A half an ounce of meat rendered
the contagion active in a lady, who had lived by my advice for two weeks upon
milk and vegetables. A supper of sallad dressed after the French fashion,
excited it in one of Dr Mease's patients. It is because men are more
predisposed by their constitution, and employments, to indirect debility than
women, and that young and middle aged persons are more predisposed to this
species of debility than old people; that more men than women, and more young
than old people, were affected by the disorder.

There were several exciting causes of the disease, which acted by inducing
direct debility upon the system. It may appear difficult at first sight to
explain, how causes so opposite in their nature, as indirect and direct
debility should produce exactly the same effect. The difficulty vanishes when
we reflect, that the abstraction of one stimulus, by accumulating the
excitability of the system, increases the force of those which remain. The
contagion when received into the body, was frequently innocent, until it was
aided by the addition of a new, or by the abstraction of a customary stimulus.
The causes which acted in the latter way were,

1. FEAR. This passion debilitates, only because it abstracts its antagonist
passion of courage. In many people the disease was excited by a sudden paroxism
of fear; but I saw some remarkable instances where timid people escaped the
disease, although they were constantly exposed to it. Perhaps a moderate degree
of fear served to balance the tendency of the system to indirect debility from
the excessive stimulus of the contagion, and thereby to preserve it in a state
of healthy equilibrium. I am certain that fear did no harm, after the disease
was formed, in those cases where a morbid excess of action, or prostration of
the moving powers from excess of stimulus, had taken place. It was an early
discovery of this fact which led me not to conceal from my patients the true
name of this fever, when I was called to them on the day of their being
attacked by it. The fear, co-operated with some of my remedies (to be mentioned
hereafter) in reducing the morbid excitement of the arterial system.

2. GRIEF. It was remarkable that the greatest concentration of the contagion
did not produce the disease in many cases in the attendants upon the sick,
while there was a hope of their recovery. The grief which followed the
extinction of hope, by death, frequently produced the disease within a day or
two afterward, and that, not in one person only, but often in most of the near
relations of the diseased. But the disease was also produced by a change in the
state of the mind directly opposite to that which has been mentioned. Many
persons that attended patients who recovered, were seized with the disorder a
day or two after they were relieved from the toils and anxiety of nursing. The
collapse of the mind from the abstraction of the stimulus of hope and desire,
by their ample gratification, probably produced that debility, and loss of the
equilibrium in the system which favored the activity of the contagion.

The effects of both the states of mind which have been described, have been
happily illustrated by two facts which are recorded by Dr Jackson. Treatise on
the Fevers of Jamaica, page 298.
He tells us that the garrisons of Savannah and York Town, were both healthy
during the siege of those towns, but that the former became sickly as soon as
the French and American armies retreated from before it, and the latter,
immediately after its capitulation.

3. COLD. It will not be necessary to pause here, to prove that cold is a
negative quality, and produced only by the absence of heat. Its action in
exciting the disease, depended upon the diminution of the necessary and natural
heat of the body, and thereby so far destroying the equilibrium of the system,
as to enable the contagion to produce excessive or convulsive motions in the
blood vessels. The night air, even in the warm month of September, was often so
cool as to excite the disease where the dress and bed clothes were not
accommodated to it. It was excited in one case by a person's only wetting his
feet in the month of October, and neglecting afterward to change his shoes and
stockings. Every change in the weather, that was short of producing frost,
evidently increased the number of sick people. This was obvious after the 18th
and 19th of September, when the mercury fell to 44, and 45. The hopes of the
city received a severe disappointment upon this occasion, for I well recollect
there was a general expectation that this change in the weather would have
checked the disorder. The same increase of the number of sick, was observed to
follow the cool weather which succeeded the 6th and 7th of October, on which
days the mercury fell to 43 and 46.

It was observed that those persons who were habitually exposed to the cool
air, were less liable to the disease than others. I ascribe it to the habitual
impression of the cool night air upon the bodies of the city watchmen, that
only four or five of them out of 25 were affected by the disorder.

After the body had been heated by violent exercise, a breeze of cool air
sometimes excited the disease in those cases where there had been no change in
the temperature of the weather.

4. SLEEP. A great proportion of all who were affected by this fever, were
attacked in the night. Sleep induced direct debility, and thereby disposed the
contagion which floated in the blood, to act with such force upon the system as
to destroy its equilibrium, and thus to excite a fever. The influence of sleep
as a predisposing, and exciting cause was often assisted by the want of bed
clothes, suited to the midnight or morning coolness of the air.

5. IMMODERATE EVACUATIONS. The efficacy of moderate purging and bleeding in
preventing the disease, led some people to use those remedies in an excess,
which both predisposed to the disease, and excited it. The morbid effects of
these evacuations, were much aided by fear, for it was this passion which
perverted the judgment in such a manner, as to lead to the excessive use of
remedies, which to be effectual, should only be used in moderate quantities.

The disease appeared with different symptoms, and in different degrees, in
different people. They both varied likewise with the weather. In describing the
disease I shall take notice of the changes in the symptoms, which were produced
by changes in the temperature of the air.

The precursors, or premonitory signs of this fever were, costiveness, a dull
pain in the right side, defect of appetite, flatulency, perverted taste, heat
in the stomach, giddiness, or pain in the head, a dull -- watery -- brilliant,
yellow or red eye, dim and imperfect vision, a hoarseness, or slight sore
throat, low spirits, or unusual vivacity, a moisture on the hands, a
disposition to sweat at nights, or after moderate exercise, or a sudden
suppression of night sweats. The dull eye, and the lowness of spirits appeared
to be the effects of such an excess in the stimulus of the contagion as to
induce indirect debility, while the brilliant eye, and the unusual vivacity,
seemed to have been produced by a less quantity of the contagion acting as a
cordial upon the system. More or less of these symptoms, frequently continued
for two or three days before the patients were confined to their beds, and in
some people they continued during the whole time of its prevalence in the city,
without producing the disease. I wish these symptoms to be remembered by the
reader. They will form the corner stone of a system which I hope will either
eradicate the disorder altogether, or render it as safe as an intermitting
fever, or as the small pox when it is received by inoculation.

Frequent as these precursors of the fever were, they were not universal. Many
went to bed in good health, and awoke in the night with a chilly fit. Many rose
in the morning after regular and natural sleep, and were seized at their work,
or after a walk with a sudden and unexpected attack of the fever. In most of
these cases the disease came on with a chilly fit, which afforded by its
violence or duration a tolerable presage of the issue of the disorder.

Upon entering a sick room where a patient was confined by this fever, the
first thing that struck the eye of a physician, was the countenance. It was as
much unlike that which is exhibited in the common bilions fever, as the face of
a wild, is unlike the face of a mild domestic animal. The eyes were sad,
watery, and so inflamed in some cases as to resemble two balls of fire.
Sometimes they had a most brilliant or ferocious appearance* The face was
suffused with blood, or of a dusky color, and the whole countenance was
downcast and clouded. After the 10th of September, when a determination of
blood to the brain became universal, there was a preternatural dilatation of
the pupil. Sighing attended in almost every case. The skin was dry, and
frequently of its natural temperature. These were the principal symptoms which
discovered themselves to the eye, and hand of a physician. The answers to the
first questions proposed upon visiting a patient, were calculated to produce a
belief in the mind of a physician, that the disease under which the patient
labored, was not the prevailing malignant epidemic. I did not for many weeks
meet with a dozen patients, who acknowledged that they had any other
indisposition than a common cold, or a slight remitting, or intermitting fever.
I was particularly struck with this self deception in many persons, who had
nursed relations that had died with the yellow fever, or who had been exposed
to its contagion in families, or neighbourhoods, where it had prevailed for
days and even weeks with great mortality. I shall hereafter trace a part of
this disposition in the sick to deceive themselves, to the influence of certain
publications which appeared soon after the disease became epidemic in the city.

In the further history of this fever, I shall describe its symptoms as they
appeared.

I. In the sanguiferous system. II. In the liver, lungs, and brain. III. In the
alimentary canal; in which I include the stomach as well as the bowels. IV. In
the secretions and excretions. V. In the nervous system. VI. In the senses and
appetites. VII. In the lymphatic and glandular system. VIII. Upon the skin. IX.
In the blood.
After having finished this detail, I shall mention some general characters of
the disease, and afterward subdivide it into classes, according to its degrees
and duration.

I. The BLOOD VESSELS (and not the stomach and bowels according to Dr Warren)
are the "seat and throne" of this as well as of all other fevers. I have
publicly taught for several years, that a fever is occasioned by a convulsion
in the arterial system. When the epidemic, which we are now considering, came
on with a full, tense, and quick pulse, this convulsion was very perceptible;
but it frequently came on with a weak pulse; often without any preternatural
frequency or quickness, and sometimes so low as not to be perceived without
pressing the artery at the wrists. In many cases the pulse intermitted after
the 4th, in some after the 5th, and in others after the 14th stroke. These
intermissions occurred in several persons who were infected, but who were not
confined by the fever. They likewise continued in several of my patients for
many days after their recovery. This was the case in particular in Mrs Clymer,
Mrs Palmer's son William, and in a son of Mr William Compton. In some there was
a preternatural slowness of the pulse. It beat 44 strokes in a minute in Mr B.
W. Morris -- 48 in Mr Thomas Wharton, Jun. and 64 in Mr William Sansom, at a
time when they were in the most imminent danger. Dr Physic informed me, that in
one of his patients the pulse was reduced in frequency to 30 strokes in a
minute. All these different states of the pulse have been taken notice of by
authors who have described pestilential fevers. Vergasca, Sorbait, and Boat in
Haller's Biliotheca Medicinae, Vol. III. also by Dr Stubbs in the Philosophical
Transactions, and Riverius in his treatise de febre pestilenti.
They have been improperly ascribed to the absence of fever: I would rather
suppose that they are occasioned by the stimulus of the contagion, acting upon
the arteries with too much force to admit of their being excited into quick and
convulsive motions. The remedy which removed it (to be mentioned hereafter)
will render this explanation of its cause still more probable. Milton describes
a darkness, from an excess of light. In like manner, we observe in this small
intermitting and slow pulse, a deficiency of strength from an excess of force
applied to it. In every case of it which came under my notice, it was likewise
tense or chorded. This species of pulse occurred chiefly in the month of
August, and in the first ten days in September. I had met with it formerly in a
sporadic case of yellow fever. It was new to all my pupils. One of them, Mr
Washington, gave it the name of the "undiscribable pulse." It aided in
determining the specific nature of this fever before the common bilious
remittent disappeared in the city. For a while, I ascribed this peculiarity in
the pulse, more especially its slowness, to an affection of the brain only, and
suspected that it was produced, by what I have taken the liberty elsewhere to
call the phrenicula, or inflammatory state of the internal dropsy of the brain,
and which I have remarked to be an occasional symptom and consequence of
remitting fever. Medical Inquiries and Observations, Vol. II.
I was the more disposed to adopt this opinion, from perceiving this slow and
intermitting pulse more frequently in children than in adults. Impressed with
this idea, I requested Mr Coxe, one of my pupils, to assist me in examining the
state of the eye. For two days we discovered no change in it, but on the third
day after we began to inspect the eyes, we both perceived a preternatural
dilatation of the pupils in different patients; and we seldom afterward saw an
eye in which it was absent. In Dr Say it was attended by a squinting, a symptom
which marks a high degree of a morbid affection of the brain. Had this slowness
or intermission in the pulse occurred only after signs of inflammation or
congestion had appeared in the brain, I should have supposed that it had been
derived wholly from that cause; but I well recollect having felt it several
days before I could discover the least change in the pupil of the eye. I am
forced therefore to call in the operation of another cause, to assist in
accounting for this state of the pulse, and this I take to be a spasmodic
affection, accompanied with preternatural dilatation or contraction of the
heart. Lieutaud mentions this species of pulse in several places, as occurring
with an undue enlargement of this muscle Historia Anatomica Medica, Vol. II.
Obs. 405. 418. 423. 510.
. Dr Ferriar describes a case, in which a low, irregular, intermitting and
hardly perceptible pulse, attended a morbid dilatation of the heart. Medical
Histories and Reflections, p. 150.
In a letter I lately received from Mr Hugh Ferguson, a student of medicine in
the college of Edinburgh, written from Dublin, during the time of a visit to
his father, and dated September 30th, 1793, I find a fact which throws
additional light upon this subject. "A case (says my young correspondent) where
a remarkable intermission of pulse was observed, occurred in this city last
year. A gentleman of the medical profession, middle aged, of a delicate habit
of body, and who had formerly suffered phthisical attacks, was attacked with
the acute rheumatism. Some days after he was taken ill, he complained of
uncommon fullness, and a very peculiar kind of sensation about the praecordia,
which it was judged proper to relieve by copious blood-letting. This being
done, the uneasiness went off. It returned however three or four times, and was
as often relieved by bleeding. During each of his fits (if I may call them so),
the patient experienced an almost total remission of his pains in his limbs;
but they returned with equal or greater violence after blood-letting. During
the fit there was an intermission of the pulse (the first time) of no less than
thirteen strokes. It was when beating full, strong, and slow. The third
intermission was of nine strokes. The gentleman soon recovered, and has enjoyed
good health for ten months past. The opinion of some of his physicians was,
that the heart was affected as a muscle, by the rheumatism, and alternated with
the limbs."

I am the more inclined to believe the peculiarity in the pulse which has been
mentioned in the yellow fever, arose in part from a spasmodic affection of the
heart, from the frequency of an uncommon palpitation of this muscle, which I
discovered in this disorder, more especially in old people. The disposition
likewise to syncope and sighing, which so often occurred, can be explained upon
no other principle than inflammation, spasm, dilatation, or congestion in the
heart. After the 10th of September this undescribable or sulky pulse (for by
the latter epithet I sometimes called it) became less observable: and in
proportion as the weather became cool, it totally disappeared. It was gradually
succeeded by a pulse, full, tense, quick, and as frequent as in pleurisy or
rheumatism. It differed however from a pleuritic or rheumatic pulse, in
imparting a very different sensation to the fingers. No two strokes seemed to
be exactly alike. Its action was of a hobbling nature. It was at this time so
familiar to me, that I think I could have distinguished the disease by it,
without seeing the patient. It was remarkable, that this pulse attended the
yellow fever even when it appeared in the mild form of an intermittent, and in
those cases where the patients were able to walk about, or go abroad. It was
nearly as tense in the remissions and intermissions of the fever, as it was in
the exacerbations. It was an alarming symptom, and when the only remedy which
was effectual to remove it, was neglected, such a change in the system was
induced, as frequently brought on death in a few days.

This change in the pulse, from extreme lowness, to fullness and activity,
appeared to be owing to the diminution of the heat of the weather, which by its
stimulus, added to that of the contagion, had induced those symptoms of
indirect debility in the pulse, which have been mentioned.

The pulse most frequently lessened in its fullness, and became gradually weak,
frequent, and imperceptible before death, but I met with several cases in which
it was full, active, and even tense in the last hours of life.

HEMORRHAGIES belong to the symptoms of this fever as they appeared in the
sanguiferous system. They occurred in the beginning of the disorder chiefly
from the nose and uterus. Sometimes but a few drops of blood distilled from the
nose. The menses were unusual in their quantity, when they appeared at their
stated periods, but they often came on a week or two before the usual time of
their appearance. I saw one case of an hemorrhage from the lungs on the first
day of the fever, which was mistaken for a common hemoptysis. As the disease
advanced, the discharges of blood became more universal. They occurred from the
gums, ears, stomach, bowels, and urinary passages. Drops of blood issued from
the inner Canthus of the left eye of Mr Josiah Coats. Dr Woodhouse attended a
lady who bled from the holes in her ears, which had been made by ear rings.
Many bled from the orifices which had been made by bleeding, several days after
they appeared to have been healed, and some from wounds which had been made in
veins in unsuccessful attempts to draw blood. These last hemorrhages were very
troublesome, and in some cases precipitated death.

II. I come now to mention the symptoms of this fever as they appeared in the
LIVER, the LUNGS, and the BRAIN. From the histories which I had read of this
disorder, I was early led to examine the state of the LIVER, but I was
surprised to find so few marks of hepatic affection. I met with but two cases
in which the patient could lie only on the right side. Many complained of a
dull pain in the region of the liver, but very few complained of that soreness
to the touch, about the pit of the stomach which is taken notice of by authors,
and which was universal in the yellow fever in 1762. In proportion as the cool
weather advanced, a preternatural determination of the blood took place chiefly
to the lungs and brain. Many were affected with pneumonic symptoms, and some
appeared to die of sudden effusions of blood or serum in the lungs. It was an
unexpected effusion of this kind which put an end to the life of Mrs Keppele
after she had exhibited hopeful signs of a recovery.

I saw one person who recovered from an affection of the lungs, by means of a
copious expectoration of yellow phlegm and mucus. But the BRAIN was principally
affected with morbid congestion in this disorder. It was indicated by the
suffusion of blood in the face, by the redness of the eyes, by a dilatation of
the pupils, by the pain in the head, by the hemorrhagies from the nose and
ears, by the sickness, or vomiting, and by an almost universal costive state of
the bowels. I wish to impress the reader with these facts, for they formed one
of the strongest indications for the use of the remedies which I adopted for
the cure of this disorder. It is difficult to determine the exact state of
these viscera in every case of bilious and yellow fever. Inflammation certainly
takes place in some cases, and internal hemorrhagies in others; but I believe
the most frequent affection of these viscera consists in a certain morbid
accumulation of blood in them, which has been happily called by Dr Clark an
engorgement or choking of the blood vessels. I believe further with Dr Clark
Vol. i. p. 168.
and Dr Balfour Treatise on the Intestinal remitting Fever, p. 125.
, that death in most cases in bilious fevers is the effect of these morbid
congestions, and wholly unconnected with direct debility or a supposed
putrefaction in the fluids. It is true the dissections of Dr Physic and Dr
Cathrall discovered no morbid appearances in either of the viscera which have
been mentioned, but it should be remembered, that these dissections were made
early in the disorder. Dr Annan attended the dissection of a brain of a patient
who died at Bush-hill some days afterward, and observed the blood vessels to
be unusually turgid. In those cases where congestion only takes place, it is as
easy to conceive that all morbid appearances in the brain may cease after
death, as that the suffusion of blood in the face should disappear after the
retreat of the blood from the extremities of the vessels in the last moments of
life. It is no new thing for morbid affections of the brain to leave either
slender or no marks of disease after death. Dr Quin has given a dissection of
the brain of a child that died with all the symptoms of hydrocephalus internus,
and yet nothing was discovered in the brain but a slight turgescence of its
blood vessels. Dr Girdlestone says, no injury appeared in the brains of those
persons who died of the symptomatic apoplexy, which occurred in a spasmodic
disease which he describes in the East Indies; and Mr Clark informs us, that
the brain was in a natural state in every case of death from puerperile fever,
notwithstanding it seemed to be affected in many cases soon after the attack of
that disorder Essay on the Epidemic Disease of Lying-in Women, of the years
1787 and 1783. p. 34.
.

I wish it to be remembered here, that the yellow fever like all other diseases
is influenced by climate and season. The determination of the fluids is seldom
the same in different years, and I am sure it varied with the weather in the
disease which I am now describing. Dr Jackson speaks of the head being most
affected in the West India fevers in dry situations. Dr Hillary says, that
there was an unusual determination of the blood toward the brain after a hot
and dry season in the fevers of Barbados in the year 1753, and Dr Ferriar in
his account of an epidemic jail fever in Manchester in 1789, 1790, informs us,
that as soon as frost set in, a delirium became a more frequent symptom of that
disorder, than it had been in more temperate weather.

III. The STOMACH and BOWELS Were affected in many ways in this fever. The
disease seldom appeared without nausea or vomiting. In some cases, they both
occurred for several days, or a week before they were accompanied by any fever.
This was more frequently the case, where the disease was taken by exhalation
from the putrid coffee, than by contagion. Sometimes a pain, known by the name
of gastrodynia, ushered in the disease. The stomach was so extremely irritable
as to reject drinks of every kind. Sometimes green or yellow bile was rejected
on the first day of the disorder, by vomiting; but I much oftener saw it
continue for two days without discharging any thing from the stomach, but the
drinks which were taken by the patient. If the fever in any case came on
without vomiting, or if it had been checked by remedies that were ineffectual,
to remove it altogether, it generally appeared, or returned, on the 4th or 5th
day of the disorder. I dreaded this symptom on those days, for although it was
not always the forerunner of death, yet it generally rendered the recovery more
difficult and tedious. In some cases the vomiting was more or less constant
from the beginning to the end of the disorder, whether it terminated in life or
death.

The vomiting which came on about the 4th or 5th day, was accompanied with a
burning pain in the region of the stomach. It produced great anxiety and
tossing of the body from one part of the bed to another. In some cases this
painful burning occurred before any vomiting had taken place. Drinks were now
rejected from the stomach so suddenly as often to be discharged over the hand
that lifted them to the head of the patient. The contents of the stomach (to be
mentioned hereafter) were sometimes thrown up with a convulsive motion, that
propelled them in a stream to a great distance, and in some cases all over the
clothes of the bystanders.

Flatulency was an almost universal symptom in every stage of this disorder. It
was very distressing in many cases. It occurred chiefly in the stomach.

The BOWELS were generally costive, and in some patients, as obstinately so, as
in the dry gripes. In some cases there was all the pain and distress of a
bilious colic, and in others, the tenesmus, and mucous and bloody discharges of
a true dysentery. A diarrhoea introduced the disease in in a few persons, but
it was chiefly in those who had been previously indisposed with weak bowels. A
painful tension of the abdomen took place in many, accompanied in some
instances by a dull, and in others, by an acute pain in the lower part of the
belly.

The vomiting and costiveness in the first stage of this fever, I believe were
occasioned chiefly by the morbid state of the brain. But the vomiting and
burning in the stomach, and the pain in the bowels which occurred on the 4th
and 5th days, appeared to be the effects of inflammation induced in part by the
effusion of acrid bile into the alimentary canal, and in part by a change in
the action of the coats of the stomach and bowels, induced by effusions of
serum or red blood, similar to those which take place on the skin in malignant
fevers, and which are known by the name of petechiae. I am the more disposed to
ascribe a large portion of the inflammation, erosions, and mortifications,
which have been observed after death in the stomach and bowels in this fever,
to the latter cause, from the discovery which has been made of petechiae and
carbuncles in the bowels in the plague, exactly similar to those which are
found on the external parts of the body in that disorder Haller's Biliotheca
Medicinae, vol. iv. p. 375.
.

IV. I come now to describe the state of the SECRETIONS and EXCRETIONS, as they
appeared in different stages of this fever.

There appeared to be a preternatural secretion and excretion of bile. It was
discharged from the stomach and bowels in large quantities, and of very
different qualities and colors.

1. On the first and second days of the disorder, many patients puked from half
a pint to nearly a quart of green or yellow bile. Four cases came under my
notice in which black bile was discharged on the first day. Three of these
patients recovered. I ascribed their recovery, to the bile not having as yet
acquired acrimony enough to inflame, or-corrode the stomach.

2. There was frequently on the 4th or 5th day, a discharge of matter from the
stomach, resembling coffee impregnated with its grounds. This was always an
alarming symptom. I believed it at first to be a modification of vitiated bile,
but I was led afterward by its resemblance to the urine (to be described
hereafter) to suspect that it was produced by a morbid secretion in the liver,
and effused from it into the stomach. Many recovered who discharged this
coffee-coloured matter.

3. Toward the close of the disease, there was a discharge of matter of a deep
or pale black color, from the stomach. Flakey substances frequently floated in
the basin or chamber pot upon the surface of this matter. It appeared to be
bile in a highly acrid state. That the bile may become extremely acrid in this
stage of the disorder is evident from several observations and experiments. Dr
Physic's hand was inflamed in consequence of its being wetted by bile in this
state, in dissecting a dead body. Dr Arthaud examined the body of a soldier who
died of the yellow fever at the French Cape on the 16th of May 1789, whose bile
imparted a green color Rosier's Journal for Jan. 1790. vol. xxxvi. p. 380.
, to the tincture of radishes. I am not certain that the black matter, which
was discharged in the last stage of this disorder, was always vitiated or acrid
bile. It was probably in some cases, the matter which was formed in consequence
of the mortification of the stomach. The matter which was discharged from
carbuncles on the skin, as I shall say hereafter, was always of a dark color.
Several dissections of persons who have died of the yellow fever, have shown
abscesses in the stomach, not unlike external carbuncles. May not the black
matter in some cases be derived from these internal carbuncle-like abscesses?

4. There was frequently discharged from the stomach in the close of the
disease, a large quantity of grumous blood, which exhibited a dark color on
its outside, resembling that of some of the matters which have been described,
and which I believe was frequently mistaken for what is commonly known by the
name of the black vomiting. Several of my patients did me the honor to say, I
had cured them, after that symptom of approaching dissolution had made its
appearance; but I am inclined to believe, dark-colored blood only, or the
coffee colored matter, was mistaken for the matters which constitute the fatal
black vomiting. I except here the black discharge before mentioned, which took
place in three cases on the first day of the disorder. This I have no doubt was
bile, but it had not acquired its greatest acrimony, and it was discharged
before mortification, or even inflammation could have taken place in the
stomach. Several persons died without a black vomiting of any kind.

Along with all the discharges from the stomach which have been described,
there was occasionally a large worm, and frequently large quantities of mucus
and tough phlegm.

The color, quality, and quantity of the faeces depended very much upon the
treatment of the disease. Where active purges had been given, the stools were
copious, foetid, and of a black or dark color. Where they were spontaneous, or
excited by weak purges, they had a more natural appearance. In both cases, they
were sometimes of a green, and sometimes of an olive color. Their smell was
more or less foetid, according to the time in which they had been detained in
the bowels. I visited a lady who had passed several days without a stool, and
who had been treated with tonic remedies. I gave her a purge, which in a few
hours procured a discharge of faeces so extremely foetid, that they produced
fainting in an old woman who attended her. The acrimony of the faeces was such
as to excoriate the rectum, and sometimes to produce an extensive inflammation
all around its external termination. The quantity of the stools produced by a
single purge was in many cases very great. They could be accounted for only by
calling in the constant, and rapid formation of them, by preternatural
effusions of bile into the bowels.

I attended one person, and heard of two others, in whom the stools were as
white as in the jaundice. I suspected in these cases, the bile was so impacted
in the gall bladder, or in its ducts, as not to be discharged in a sufficient
quantity to color the foeces. Large round worms were frequently discharged
with the stools.

The urine was in some cases plentiful, and of a high color. It was at times
clear, and at other times turbid. About the 4th or 5th day it sometimes assumed
a dark color, and resembled strong coffee. This color continued in one
instance for several days after the patient recovered. In some, the discharge
was accompanied by a burning pain resembling that which takes place in a
gonorrhoea. I met with one case in which this burning came on only in the
evening, with the exacerbation of the fever, and went off with its remission in
the morning.

A total deficiency of the urine took place in many people for a day or two,
without pain. Dr Sydenham takes notice of the same symptom in the highly
inflammatory small pox. Wallis's Edition, Vol. i. p. 197.
It generally accompanied, or portended great danger. I suspected that it was
connected in this disease, as in the hydrocephalus internus, with a morbid
state of the brain. I heard of one case in which there was a suppression of
urine, which could not be relieved without the use of the catheter.

A young man was attended by Mr Fisher, one of my pupils, who discharged
several quarts of limpid urine just before he died.

Dr Arthaud informs us in the history of the dissection before quoted, that the
urine after death imparted a green color to the tincture of radishes.

Many people were relieved by copious sweats on the first day of the disorder.
They were in some instances spontaneous, and in others, they were excited by
diluting drinks, or by strong purges. These sweats were often of a yellow
color, and sometimes had an offensive smell. They were in some cases cold, and
attended at the same time with a full pulse. In general, the skin was dry in
the beginning as well as in the subsequent stages of the disorder. I saw but
few instances of the disease terminating like common fevers, by sweat after the
third day. I wish this fact to be remembered by the reader, for it laid part of
the foundation of my method of curing this fever.

There was in some cases a preternatural secretion and excretion of mucus from
the glands of the throat. It was discharged by an almost constant hawking and
spitting. All who had this symptom recovered.

The TONGUE was in every case moist, and of a white color on the first and
second days of the fever. As the disease advanced, it assumed a red color, and
a smooth shining appearance. It was not quite dry in this state Toward the
close of the fever, a dry black streak appeared in its middle, which gradually
extended to every part of it. Few recovered after this appearance on the tongue
took place.

V. In the NERVOUS SYSTEM the symptoms of the fever were different according as
it affected the brain -- the muscles -- the nerves -- or the mind. The sudden
and violent action of the contagion, induced apoplexy in several people. In
some, it brought on syncope, and in others, convulsions in every part of the
body. The apoplectic cases generally proved fatal, for they fell chiefly upon
hard drinkers. Persons affected by syncope, or convulsions, sometimes fell down
in the streets. Two cases of this kind happened near my house. One of them came
under my notice. He was supposed by the bye-standers to be drunken, but his
countenance, and convulsive motions, soon convinced me that this was not the
case.

A coma was observed in some people, or an obstinate wakefulness in every stage
of the disorder. The latter symptom most frequently attended the convalescence.
Many were affected with immobility, or numbness in their limbs.

These symptoms were constant, or temporary, according to the nature of the
remedies which were made use of, to remove them. They extended to all the
limbs, in some cases, and only to a part of them in others. In some, a violent
cramp both in the arms, and legs attended the first attack of the fever. I met
with one case in which there was a difficulty of swallowing from a spasmodic
affection of the throat, such as occurs in the locked-jaw.

A hiccup attended the last stage of this disorder, but I think less frequently
than the last stage of the common bilious fever. I saw only five cases of
recovery where this symptom took place.

There was in some instances a deficiency of sensibility, but in others a
degree of it, extending to every part of the body, which rendered the
application of common rum to the skin, and even the least motion of the limbs
painful.

I was surprised to observe the last stage of this fever to exhibit so few of
the symptoms of the common typhus or nervous fever. Tremors of the limbs and
twitchings of the tendons were uncommon. They occurred only in those cases in
which there was a predisposition to nervous diseases, and chiefly in the
convalescent state of the disorder.

While the muscles and nerves in many cases exhibited so many marks of
preternatural weakness, in some, they appeared to be affected with
preternatural excitement. Hence patients in the close of the disorder often
rose from their beds, walked across their rooms, or came down stairs, with as
much ease as if they had been in perfect health. I lost a patient in whom this
state of morbid strength occurred to such a degree, that he stood up before his
glass, and shaved himself on the day in which he died.

The mind suffered with the morbid states of the brain and nerves. A delirium
was a common symptom. It alternated in some cases with the exacerbations and
remissions of the fever. In some, it continued without a remission, until a few
hours before death. Many, however, passed through the whole course of the
disease without the least derangement in their ideas, even where there were
evident signs of a morbid congestion in the brain. Some were seized with
maniacal symptoms. In these, there was an apparent absence of fever. Such was
the degree of this mania in one man, that he stripped of his shirt, left his
bed, and ran through the streets with no other covering than a napkin on his
head, at 8 o'clock at night, to the great terror of all who met him. The
symptoms of mania occurred most frequently toward the close of the disease,
and sometimes continued for many days, and weeks, after all the febrile
symptoms had disappeared.

The temper was much affected in this fever. There were few, in whom it did not
produce great depression of spirits. This was the case in many, in whom pious
habits had subdued the fear of death. In some the temper became very irritable.
Two cases of this kind came under my notice, in persons who in good health,
were distinguished for uncommon sweetness of disposition and manners.

I observed in several persons the operations of the understanding to be
unimpaired, throughout the whole course of the fever, who retained no
remembrance of any thing that passed in their sickness. My pupil Mr Fisher
furnished a remarkable example of this correctness of understanding with a
suspension of memory. He neither said, nor did any thing during his illness,
that indicated the least derangement of mind, and yet he recollected nothing
that passed in his room, except my visits to him. His memory awakened upon my
taking him by the hand on the morning of the 6th day of his disorder, and
congratulating him upon his escape from the grave.

In some, there was a weakness, or total defect of memory for several weeks
after their recovery. Dr Woodhouse informed me that he had met with a woman who
after she had recovered, could not recollect her own name.

Perhaps it would be proper to rank that self-deception with respect to the
nature and danger of the disease which was so universal, among the instances of
derangement of mind.

The pain which attended the disorder was different according as the system was
affected by direct or indirect debility. In those cases in which the system
sunk under the violent impression of the contagion, there was little or no
pain. In proportion as the system was relieved from this oppression it
recovered its sensibility. The pain in the head, was acute and distressing. It
affected the eye balls in a peculiar manner. A pain extended in some cases from
the back of the head, down the neck. The ears were affected in several persons
with a painful sensation, which they compared to a string drawing their two
ears together through the brain. The sides, and the regions of the stomach,
liver and bowels, were all, in different people, the scats of either dull or
acute pains. The stomach toward the close of the disorder was affected with a
burning or spasmodic pain of the most distressing nature. It produced in some
cases great anguish of body and mind. In others it produced cries and shrieks
which were often heard on the opposite side of the streets to where the
patients lay. The back suffered very much in this disorder. The stoutest men
complained, and even groaned under it. An acute pain extended in some cases
from the back, to one or both thighs. The arms and legs sympathized with every
other part of the body. One of my patients, upon whose limbs the disease fell,
with its principal force, said that his legs felt as if they had been scraped
with a sharp instrument. The sympathy of friends with the distresses of the
sick, extended to a small part of their misery, when it did not include their
sufferings from pain. One of the dearest friends I ever lost by death, declared
in the height of her illness, that "no one knew the pains of a yellow fever,
but those who felt them."

VI. The senses and appetites exhibited several marks of the universal ravages
of this fever upon the body. A deafness attended in many cases, but it was not
often as in the nervous fever, a favorable symptom. A dimness of sight, was
very common in the beginning of the disease. Many were affected with temporary
blindness. In some there was a loss of sight in consequence of gutta serena, or
a total destruction of the substance of the eye. There was in many persons a
soreness to the touch, which extended all over the body. I have often observed
this symptom to be the forerunner of a favorable issue of a nervous fever, but
it was less frequently the case in this disorder.

The thirst was moderate or absent in some cases, but it occurred in the
greatest number of persons whom I saw in this fever. Sometimes it was very
intense. One of my patients who suffered by an excessive draught of cold water,
declared just before he died, that "he could drink up the Delaware." It was
always an alarming symptom, when this thirst came on in this extravagant degree
in the last stage of the disorder. In the beginning of the fever, it generally
abated upon the appearance of a moist skin. Water, was preferred to all other
drinks.

The appetite for food was impaired in this, as in all other fevers, but it
returned much sooner than is common after the patient began to recover. Coffee
was relished in the remissions of the fever, in every stage of the disorder. So
keen was the appetite for solid, and more especially for animal food, after the
solution of the fever, that many suffered from eating aliment that was improper
from its quality or quantity. There was a general disrelish for wine, but malt
liquors were frequently grateful to the appetite.

Many people retained a relish for tobacco much longer after they were attacked
by this fever, and acquired a relish for it much sooner after they began to
recover, than are common in any other febrile disease. I met with one case in
which my patient, who was so ill as to require two bleedings, continued to chew
tobacco through every stage of his fever.

The convalescence from this disorder was marked in some instances, by a sudden
revival of the venereal appetite. Several weddings took place in the city
between persons who had recovered from the fever. Twelve took place among the
convalescents in the hospital at Bush-hill. I wish I could add, that the
passion of the sexes for each other, among those subjects of public charity,
was always gratified only in a lawful way. Delicacy forbids a detail of the
scenes of debauchery which were practiced near the hospital in some of the
tents, which had been appropriated for the reception of convalescents. It is
not peculiar to the yellow fever to produce this morbid excitability of the
venereal appetite. It was produced in a much higher degree by the plague which
raged in Messina in the year 1743.

VII. The lymphatic and glandular system did not escape without some signs of
the infection of this disease. I met with three cases of swellings in the
inguinal, two in the parotid, and one in the cervical glands: all these
patients recovered without a suppuration of their swellings. They were
extremely painful in one case in which no redness or inflammation appeared. In
the others, there was considerable inflammation, and but little pain.

In one of the cases of inguinal buboes, the whole force of the disease seemed
to be collected into the lymphatic system. The patient walked about, and had no
fever nor pain in any part of his body, except in his groin. In another case
which came under my care, a swelling and pain extended from the groin along the
spermatic cord into one of the testicles. These glandular swellings were not
peculiar to our late epidemic. They occurred in the yellow fever of Jamaica as
described by Dr Williams, and always with a happy issue of the disorder Essay
on the Bilious or Yellow Fever, p. 35.
. A similar concentration of the contagion of the plague in the lymphatic
glands, is taken notice of by Dr Patrick Russel.

VIII. The SKIN exhibited many marks of this fever. It was preternaturally warm
in some cases, but it was often preternaturally cool. In some there was a
distressing coldness in the limbs for two or three days. The yellow color from
which this fever has derived its name, was not universal. It seldom appeared
where purges had been given in sufficient doses. The yellowness rarely appeared
before the third, and generally about the fifth or seventh day of the fever.
Its early appearance always denoted great danger. It sometimes appeared first
on the neck and breast, instead of the eyes. In one of my patients it
discovered itself first behind one of his ears, and on the crown of his head,
which had been bald for several years. The remissions and exacerbations of the
fever seemed to have an influence upon this color, for it appeared and
disappeared altogether, or with fainter or deeper shades of yellow, two or
three times in the course of the disorder. The eyes seldom escaped a yellow
tinge; and yet I saw a number of cases in which the disease appeared with
uncommon malignity and danger, without the presence of this symptom. Two very
different causes have been supposed to produce this yellow color of the skin.
By some it has been attributed to the dissolution of the blood; but I shall say
hereafter, that the blood was seldom dissolved in this fever. The yellow
color, moreover, occurred in those cases where the blood exhibited an
inflammatory crust, and it continued in many persons for five or six weeks
after their recovery. From these facts it is evident, that the yellowness was
in all cases the effect of an absorption and mixture of bile with the blood.

There was a clay-coloured appearance in the face in some cases, which was very
different from the yellow color which has been described. It occurred in the
last stage of the fever, and in no instance did I see a recovery after it.

There were eruptions of various kinds on the skin, each of which I shall
briefly describe.

1. I met with two cases of an eruption on the skin, resembling that which
occurs in the scarlet fever. Dr Hume says, pimples often appear on the pit of
the stomach in the yellow fever of Jamaica. I examined the external region of
the stomach in many of my patients, without discovering this symptom.

2. I met with one case, in which there was an eruption of watery blisters,
which after bursting, ended in deep, black sores.

3. There was an eruption about the mouth in many people, which ended in scabs,
similar to those which take place in the common bilious fever. They always
afforded a prospect of a favorable issue of the disease.

4. Many persons had eruptions which resembled moschetto bites. They were red
and circumscribed. They appeared chiefly on the arms, but they sometimes
extended to the breast. Like the yellow color of the skin, they appeared and
disappeared two or three times in the course of the disorder.

5. Petechiae were common in the latter stage of the fever. They sometimes came
on in large, and at other times in small red blotches; but they soon acquired a
dark color. In most, cases they were the harbingers of death.

6. Several cases of carbuncles, such as occur in the plague, came under my
notice. They were large and hard swellings on the limbs, with a black apex,
which upon being opened, discharged a thin, dark-colored, bloody matter. From
one of these malignant sores, an hemorrhage took place, which precipitated the
death of the amiable widow of Dr John Morris.

7. A large and painful anthrax on the back succeeded a favorable issue of the
fever in the Rev. Dr Blackwell.

8. I met with a woman who showed me the marks of a number of small boils on
her face and neck, which accompanied her fever.

Notwithstanding this disposition to cutaneous eruptions in this disorder, it
was remarkable that blisters were much less disposed to mortify than in the
common nervous fever. I met with only one case in which a deep-seated ulcer
followed the application of blisters to the legs. Such was the insensibility of
the skin in some people, that blisters made no impression upon it.

IX. How far the blood may be considered as the vehicle of the contagion, it is
not my business at present to inquire; nor shall I in this place mention the
different appearances it exhibited when drawn from a vein. It has been supposed
to undergo a change from a healthy to a putrid state; and many of the symptoms
of the fever which have been described, particularly the hemorrhagies and
eruptions on the skin, have been ascribed to this supposed putrefaction of the
blood. It would be easy to multiply arguments to prove, that no such thing as
putrefaction can take place in the blood; and that the symptoms which have been
supposed to prove its existence, are all effects of a sudden, violent, and
rapid inflammatory action, or pressure upon the blood vessels; and hence the
external and internal hemorrhagies. The petechiae on the surface of the skin
depend upon the same cause. They are nothing but effusions of serum or red
blood, from a rupture or preternatural dilatation of the capillary vessels See
Wallis's edition of Sydenham, Vol. I. p. 165. Vol. II. p. 52, 94, 98, 350. De
Haen's Ratio Medendi, Vol. II. p. 162. Vol. IV. p. 172. Gaubii Pathologia 498,
and Dr Sybert's inaugural dissertation, entitled "An attempt to Disprove the
doctrine of the Putrefaction of the Blood in Living Animals," published in
Philadelphia in 1793.
. The smell emitted from persons affected by this disease was far from being of
a putrid nature; and if this had been the case, it would not have proved the
existence of putrefaction in the blood; for a putrid smell is often discharged
from the lungs, and from the pores in sweat, which is wholly unconnected with a
putrid, or perhaps any other morbid state of the blood. There are plants which
discharge an odor, which conveys to the nose a sensation like that of
putrefaction; and yet these plants exist at the same time, in a state of the
most healthy vegetation: nor does the early putrid smell of a body which
perishes with this fever, prove a putrid change to have taken place in the
blood before death. All animals which die suddenly, and without loss of blood,
are disposed to a speedy putrefaction. This has long been remarked in animals
that have been killed after a chase, or by lightning. The poisonous air called
samiel, which is described by Chardin, produces, when it destroys life, instant
putrefaction. The bodies of men who die of violent passions, or after strong
convulsions, or even after great muscular exertion, putrefy in a few hours
after death. The healthy state of the body depends upon a certain state of
arrangement in the fluids. A derangement of these fluids is the natural
consequence of the violent and rapid motions, or of the undue pressure upon the
solids, which have been mentioned. It occurs in every case of death from
indirect debility, whether it be induced by the excessive stimulus of
contagion, by the volatile vitriolic acid which is supposed to constitute the
destructive samiel wind, or by violent commotions excited in the body by
external or internal causes. The practice among fishermen in some countries, of
breaking the heads of their fish as soon as they are taken out of the water, in
order to retard their putrefaction, proves the truth of the explanation I have
given of its cause, soon after death. The sudden extinction of life in the
fish, prevents those convulsive or violent motions which induce sudden
disorganization in their bodies. It was remarkable that putrefaction took place
most speedily after death from the yellow fever, where the commotions of the
system were not relieved by evacuations. In those cases where purges and
bleeding had been used, putrefaction did not take place sooner after death than
is common in any other febrile disease, under equal circumstances of heat and
air.

There is a fact mentioned by Dr Ferriar, from Dr Hamilton, late professor of
anatomy at Glasgow, which may seem at first sight to militate against the facts
I have mentioned. He says that he had observed bodies which were brought into
the dissecting room, that had petechiae on them, were longer in putrefying than
any others. The fevers of which the poor (the common subjects of dissection)
die, are generally of the low nervous kind. Great direct debility is the
characteristic of these fevers. The petechiae which occur in them, appear in
the last stage of this direct debility. They are the effect, not of too much
impetus in the blood, as in the yellow fever, but of a defect or total absence
of it in the last hours of life. The slow progress of the body to putrefaction
after death, in the instances mentioned by Dr Hamilton, seems to depend upon
the same cause as that to which I have ascribed it in those cases of death from
the yellow fever, in which evacuations had been used, viz. direct debility. In
the former cases this slowness of putrefaction is induced by nature -- in the
latter by art. The effects of debility from both causes are, notwithstanding,
the same.

Thus have I described the symptoms of this fever. From the history I have
given, it appears that it counterfeited nearly all the acute and chronic
diseases, to which the human body is subject. An epitome, both of its symptoms
and its theory, is happily delivered by Dr Sydenham in the following words.
After describing the epidemic cough, pleurisy, and peripneumony of 1675, he
adds, "But in other epidemics, the symptoms are so slight from the disturbance
raised in the blood by the morbific particles contained in the mass, that
nature being in a manner oppressed, is rendered unable to produce regular
symptoms that are suitable to the disease; and almost all the phenomenon that
happen are irregular, by reason of the entire subversion of the animal
economy; in which case the fever is often depressed, which of its own nature,
would be very high. Sometimes also fewer signs of a fever appear than the
nature of the disease requires, from a translation of the malignant cause,
either to the nervous system, to some other parts of the body, or to some of
the juices not contained in the blood; whilst the morbific matter is yet
turgid" Wallis's edition, Vol. I. P. 344.
.

The disease ended in death in various ways. In some it was sudden; in others
it came on by gradual approaches. In some the last hours of life were marked
with great pain, and strong convulsions; but in many more, death seemed to
insinuate itself into the system, with all the gentleness of natural sleep. Mr
Powell expired with a smile on his countenance. Dr Griffitts informed me that
Dr Johnson exhibited the same symptom in the last hours of his life. This
placid appearance of the countenance, in the act of dying, was not new to me.
It frequently occurs in diseases which affect the brain and nerves. I lost a
patient three years ago in the gout, who not only smiled, but laughed, a few
minutes before he expired.

I proceed now to mention some peculiarities of the fever which could not be
brought in under any of the foregoing heads.

In every case of this disorder which came under my notice, there were evident
remissions, or intermissions of the fever, or of such symptoms as were
substituted for fever. I have long considered with Mr Senac, a tertian as the
only original type of all fevers. The bilious yellow fever indicated its
descent from this parent disorder. I met with many cases of regular tertians in
which the patients were so well on the intermediate days as to go abroad. It
appeared in this form in Mr Van Berkel the minister of the United Netherlands.
Nor was this mild form of the fever devoid of danger. Many died who neglected
it as a trifling disorder, or who took the common remedies for intermittents to
cure it. It generally ended in a remittent before it destroyed the patient. The
tertian type discovered itself in some people after the more violent symptoms
of the fever had been subdued, and continued in them for several weeks. It
changed from a tertian to a quartan type in Mr Thomas Willing, nearly a month
after his recovery from the more acute and inflammatory symptoms of the
disorder.

It is nothing new for a malignant fever to appear in the form of a tertian. It
is frequently the garb of the plague. Riverius describes a tertian fever which
proved fatal on the third day, which was evidently derived from the same
exhalation which produced a continual malignant fever. De Febre Pestilenti,
vol. xi. p 9^.


The remissions were more evident in this, than in the common bilious fever.
They generally occurred in the forenoon. It was my misfortune to be deprived by
the great number of my patients, of that command of time which was necessary to
watch the exacerbations of this fever under all their various changes, as to
time, force, and duration. From all the observations that were suggested by
visits, at hours that were seldom left to my choice, I was led to conclude,
that the fever exhibited in different people all that variety of forms which
has been described by Dr Cleghorn in his account of the tertian fever of
Minorca. A violent exacerbation on even days was evidently attended with more
danger than on odd days. The same thing was observed by Dr Mitchell in the
Yellow Fever of Virginia in the year 1741. If (says he) the exacerbations were
on equal days, they generally died in the third paroxysm, or the 6th day, but
if on unequal days, they recovered on the 7th.

The deaths which occurred on the 3d, 5th, and 7th days, appeared frequently to
be the effects of the commotions or depression, produced in the system on the
2nd, 4th, and 6th days.

The remission on the third day, was frequently such as to beget a belief that
the disease had run its course, and that all danger was over. A violent attack
of the fever on the 4th day removed this deception, and if a relaxation had
taken place in the use of proper remedies on the 3d day, death frequently
occurred on the 5th or the seventh.

The termination of this fever in life, and death, was much more frequent on
the 3d, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th days, than is common in the mild remitting
fever. Where death occurred on the even days, it seemed to be the effect of a
violent paroxism of the fever, or of great vigor of constitution, or of the
force of medicines which protracted some of the motions of life beyond the
close of the odd days which have been mentioned.

I think I observed the fever to terminate on the third day more frequently in
August, and during the first ten days in September, than it did after the
weather became cool. In this, it resembled the common bilious remittents of our
city, also the simple tertians described by Dr Cleghorn Diseases of Minorca, p.
185.
. The danger seemed to be in proportion to the tendency of the disease to a
speedy crisis, hence more died in August in proportion to the number who were
affected than in September or October, when the disease was left to itself.
But, however strange after this remark it may appear, the disease yielded to
the remedies which finally subdued it, more speedily and certainly upon its
first appearance in the city, than it did two or three weeks afterward.

The disease continued for fifteen, twenty, and even thirty days in some
people. Its duration was much influenced by the weather, and by the use or
neglect of certain remedies (to be mentioned hereafter) in the first stage of
the disorder.

It has been common with authors to divide the symptoms of this fever into
three different stages. The order I have pursued in the history of those
symptoms, will render this division unnecessary. It will I hope be more useful
to divide the patients affected with the disorder into three classes.

The first includes those in whom the stimulus of the contagion, produced the
symptoms of indirect debility, such as coma, languor, sighing, a disposition to
syncope, and a weak, or slow pulse.

The second includes those in whom the contagion acted with less force,
producing great pain in the head, and other parts of the body; delirium,
vomiting, heat, thirst, and a quick, tense, or full pulse, with obvious
remissions or intermissions of the fever.

The third class includes all those persons in whom the stimulus of the
contagion acted so feebly as not to confine them to their beds or houses. This
class of persons affected by the yellow fever, was very numerous. Many of them
recovered without medical aid, or by the use of domestic prescriptions; many of
them recovered in consequence of a spontaneous diarrhoea, or plentiful sweats;
many were saved by moderate bleeding, and purging; while some died, who
conceived their complaints to be occasioned by a common cold, and neglected to
take proper care of themselves, or to use the necessary means for their
recovery. It is not peculiar to the contagion of the yellow fever to produce
this feeble operation upon the system. It has been observed in the southern
states of America, that in those seasons in which the common bilious fever is
epidemic "no body is quite well," and that what are called in those states
"inward fevers" are universal. The smallpox even in the natural way, does not
always confine the patient; and thousands pass through the plague without being
confined to their beds or houses. Dr Hodges prescribed for this class of
patients in his parlour in London in the year 1665, and Dr Patrick Russel did
the same from a chamber window fifteen feet above the level of the street at
Aleppo. Notwithstanding the mild form the plague put on in these cases, it
often proved fatal according to Dr Russel. I have introduced these facts
chiefly with a view of preparing the reader to reject the opinion that we had
two species of fever in the city at the same time; and to show that the yellow
fever appears in a more simple form than with "strongly marked" characters; or
in other words, with a yellow skin, and a black vomitting.

It was remarkable that this fever always found out the weak part of every
constitution it attacked. The head, the lungs, the stomach, the bowels, and the
limbs, suffered more or less, according as they were more or less debilitated
by previous inflammatory, or nervous diseases, or by a mixture of both, as in
the gout.

I have before remarked, that the influenza, the scarlatina, and a mild bilious
remittent, prevailed in the city, before the yellow fever made its appearance.
In the course of a few weeks they all disappeared, or appeared with symptoms of
the yellow fever; so that after the first week of September, it was the
solitary epidemic of the city.

The only case like influenza which I saw after the 5th of September, was in a
girl of 14 years of age, on the 13th of the month. It came on with a sneezing
and cough. I was called to her on the third day of her disorder. The instant I
felt her pulse, I pronounced her disease to be the yellow fever. Her father was
offended with this opinion, although he lived in a highly infected
neighborhood, and objected to the remedies I prescribed for her. In a few days
she died. In the course of ten days, her father and sister were infected, and
both died I was informed, with the usual symptoms of the yellow fever.

It has been an axiom in medicine, time immemorial, that no two contagious
fevers of unequal force can exist long together in the same place. As this
axiom seems to have been forgotten by many of the physicians of Philadelphia,
and as the ignorance or neglect of it, led to that contrariety of opinion and
practice, which unhappily took place in the treatment of the disorder, I hope I
shall be excused by those physicians to whom this fact is as familiar as the
most simple law of nature, if I fill a few pages with proofs of it, from
practical writers.

Thucydides long ago remarked that the plague chased all other diseases from
Athens, or obliged them to change their nature, by assuming some of its
symptoms.

Dr Sydenham makes the same remark upon the plague in London in 1665. Dr Hodges
in his account of the same plague, says that "at the rise of the plague all
other distempers, went into it, but at its declension, that it degenerated into
others, as inflammations, headache, quinsies, dysenteries, smallpox, measles,
fevers, and hectics, wherein the plague yet predominated Dr Hodges Account of
the Plague in London, p. 26.
."

During the prevalence of the plague in Grand Cairo, no sporadic disease of any
kind makes its appearance. The same observation is made by Sauvage in his
account of the plague at Alais in the province of Languedoc Sed hoc observatu
dignum fuit, omnes alios morbos acutos, durante peste ^iluisse, et omnes morbos
acutos e pestis genere suisse. Nosologia Methodica, vol. i. p. 416.
.

The smallpox though a disease of less force than the plague, has often chased
it from Constantinople, probably from its infecting at a greater distance than
the plague. But this exclusive prevalence of a single epidemic is not confined
to the plague and smallpox. Dr Sydenham's writings are full of proofs of the
dominion of febrile diseases over each other: Hence after treating upon a
symptomatic pleurisy, which sometimes accompanied a slow fever in the year
1675, and which had probably been injudiciously treated by some of those
physicians who prescribe for the name of a disease, he delivers the following
aphorism, "whoever in the cure of fevers, has not always in view, the
constitution of the year, inasmuch as it tends to produce some particular
epidemic disease, and likewise to reduce all the cotemporary diseases to its
own form and likeness, proceeds in an uncertain and fallacious way Vol. i. p.
340.
." It appears further from the writings of this excellent physician, that where
the monarchy of a single disease was not immediately acknowledged, by a sudden
retreat of all cotemporary diseases, they were forced to do homage to it, by
wearing its livery. It would be easy to multiply proofs of this assertion, from
the numerous histories of epidemics which are to be found in his works. I shall
mention only one or two of them. A continual fever accompanied by a dry skin,
had prevailed for some time in the city of London. During the continuance of
this fever, the regular smallpox made its appearance. It is peculiar to the
smallpox when of a distinct nature, to be attended by irregular sweats before
the eruption of the pocks. The continual fever now put on a new symptom. It was
attended by sweats in its first stage, exactly like those which attended the
eruptive fever of the smallpox Vol. i. p. 352.
. This despotism of a powerful epidemic, extended itself to the most trifling
indispositions. It even blended itself, Dr Sydenham tells us, with the
commotions excited in the system by the suppression of the lochia, as well as
with the common puerperile fever Vol. ii. p. 164. see also p. 1. p. 109, 122,
204, 212, 233, 274, 355, 358-9, and 436.
. Dr Morton, has left testimonies behind him in different parts of his works,
which establish, in the most ample manner, the truth of Dr Sydenham's
observations. Dr Huxham describes the smallpox as blending some of its
symptoms with those of a slow fever at Plymouth in the year 1729 De Aere ^t
morb. epidem. p. 33, 34.
. Dr Cleghorn mentions a constitution of the air at Minorca, so highly
inflammatory, "that not only tertian fevers, but even a common hurt or bruise
required more plentiful evacuations than ordinary." Page 285.
Riverius informs us in his history of a pestilential fever that prevailed in
France, that "it united itself with phrenitis, angina, pleurisy, peripneumony,
hepatitis, dysentery, and many other diseases De Febre Pestilenti, vol. ii. p.
95.
."

The bilious remitting fever which prevailed in Philadelphia in 1780, chased
away every other febrile disease; and the scarlatina anginosa which prevailed
in our city in 1783 and 1784, furnished a striking proof of the influence of
epidemics over each other. In the account which I published of this disease, in
the year 1789, there are the following remarks. "The intermitting fever which
made its appearance in August, was not lost during the month of September. It
continued to prevail, but with several peculiar symptoms. In many persons it
was accompanied by an eruption on the skin, and a swelling of the hands and
feet. In some it was attended with sore throat, and pains behind the ears.
Indeed such was the prevalence of the contagion which produced the scarlatina
anginosa, that many hundred people complained of sore throats, without any
other symptom of indisposition. The slightest exciting cause, and particularly
cold, seldom failed of producing the disorder Medical Inquiries and
Observations, Land. edit. Vol. I. p. 122.
."

I shall mention only one more authority in favor of the influence of a single
epidemic upon diseases. It is taken from Mr Clark's essay on the epidemic
disease of lying-in women, of the years 1787 and 1788. "There does not appear
to be any thing in a parturient state, which can prevent women from being
affected by the general causes of disease at that time; and should they become
ill, their complaints will probably partake of the nature of the reigning
epidemic Page ^^.
." I have said that the fever sometimes put on the symptoms of dysentery,
pleurisy, rheumatism, colic, palsy, and even of the locked jaw. That these were
not original diseases, but symptomatic affections only of the reigning
epidemic, will appear from other histories of bilious fevers. Dr Balfour tells
us in his account of the intestinal remitting fever of Bengal Page 1^^.
, that it often appeared with symptoms of dysentery, rheumatism, and pleurisy.
Dr Cleghorn and Dr Lind mention many cases of the bilious fever appearing in
the form of a dysentery. Dr Clark ascribes the dysentery, the diarrhoea, the
colic, and even the palsy, to the same contagion which produced the bilious
fever in the East Indies Observations on the Diseases in long Voyages to the
East Indies, Vol. I. p. 13, 14, 48, 151. Vol. II. p. 99, 318. and 320.
; and Dr Hunter, in his treatise upon the diseases of Jamaica, mentions the
locked jaw as one of its occasional symptoms. Even the different grades of this
fever, from the mildest intermittent to the most acute continual fever, have
been distinctly traced by Lancissi to the same marsh exhalation Lib. II. Cap. V.
.

However irrefragably these numerous facts and authorities establish the
assertion of the prevalence of but one powerful epidemic at a time, the
proposition will receive fresh support, from attending to the effects of two
impressions of unequal force made upon the system at the same time: only one of
them is felt: hence the gout is said to cure all other diseases. By its
superior pain it destroys sensations of a less painful nature. The smallpox
and measles have sometimes existed together in the body; but this has, I
believe, seldom occurred, where one of them has not been the predominating
disease Hunter on the Venereal Disease, introduction, p. 3.
. In this respect, this combination of epidemics only conforms to the general
law which has been mentioned.

I beg pardon for the length of this digression. I did not introduce it to
expose the mistakes of those physicians who found as many diseases in our city,
as the yellow fever had symptoms, but to vindicate myself from the charge of
innovation, in having uniformly and unequivocally asserted, after the first
week in September, that the yellow fever was the only febrile disease which
prevailed in the city. I shall hereafter mention some facts upon the subject of
the extent of the contagion, which will add such weight to the assertion, as to
render the disbelief of it, as much a mark of a deficiency of reason, as it is
of reading and observation.

Science has much to deplore from the multiplication of diseases. It is as
repugnant to truth in medicine, as polytheism is to truth in religion. The
physician who considers every different affection of the different systems in
the body, or every affection of different parts of the same system, as distinct
diseases, when they arise from one cause, resembles the Indian or African
savage, who considers water, dew, ice, frost, and snow, as distinct essences:
while the physician who considers the morbid affections of every part of the
body, however diversified they may be in their form or degrees) as derived from
one cause, resembles the philosopher, who considers dew, ice, frost, and snow,
as different modifications of water, and as derived simply from the absence of
heat.

Humanity has likewise much to deplore from this paganism in medicine. The
sword will probably be sheathed for ever, as an instrument of death, before
physicians will cease to add to the mortality of mankind, by prescribing for
the names of diseases.

The facts I have delivered upon this subject will admit of a very important
application to the cure, not only of the yellow fever, but of all other acute
and dangerous epidemics. I shall hereafter assign a final cause for the law of
epidemics which has been mentioned, which will discover an union of the
goodness of the Supreme Being with one of the greatest calamities of human life.

All ages were affected by this fever, but persons between fourteen, and forty
years of age, were most subject to it. Many old people had it, but it was not
so fatal to them, as to robust persons in middle life. It affected children of
all ages. I met with a violent case of the disorder, in a child of four months,
and a moderate case of it, in a child of only ten weeks old. The latter had
caught it from its mother. It had a deep yellow skin. Both these children
recovered.

The proportion of children who suffered by this fever may be conceived from a
single fact. Seventy five persons were buried in the graveyard of the Swedish
Church in the months of August, September, and October, twenty four of whom
were children. They were buried chiefly in September and October; months, in
which children, generally enjoy good health in our city.

Men were more subject to the disease than women. Pregnancy seemed to expose
women to it.

The refugees from the French West Indies, universally escaped it. This was not
the case with the natives of France, who had been settled in the city.

It is nothing new, for epidemics to affect persons of one nation, and to pass
by persons of other nations in the same city or country. At Nimuguen in the
year 1736, Deigner informs us that the French people, (two old men excepted),
and the Jews, escaped a dysentery which was universal among persons of all
other nations. Ramazini tells us that the Jews at Modena, escaped a tertian
fever which affected nearly all the other inhabitants of the town. Shenkius
says that the Dutch and Italians escaped a plague which prevailed for two years
in one of the towns of Switzerland, and Dr Bell, in an inaugural dissertaion
published at Edinburgh in 1779, remarks that the jail fever which attacked the
soldiers of the Duke of Buccleugh's regiment, spared the French prisoners who
were guarded by them. It is difficult to account for these facts. However
numerous their causes may be, a difference in diet which is as much a
distinguishing mark of nations as dress, or manners, will probably be found to
be one of them.

From the accounts of the yellow fever which had been published by many
writers, I was led to believe that the negroes in our city would escape it. In
consequence of this belief, I published the following extract from Dr Lining's
history of the yellow fever as it had four times appeared in Charleston in
South Carolina.

For the American Daily Advertiser.
IT has been remarked, that the black people have in no one instance been
infected with the malignant fever which now prevails in our city. The late Dr
Lining, of South Carolina, long ago made the same remark. There is something
very singular (says the Doctor) in the constitution of the Negroes which
renders them not liable to this fever; for though many of them were as much
exposed as the nurses to the infection, yet I never knew of one instance of
this fever among them, though they are equally subject with the white people to
the bilious fever Essays and Observations, Physical and Literary. Vol. xi. page
409.
.

The only design of this remark is, to suggest to our citizens the safety and
propriety of employing black people to nurse and attend persons infected by
this fever; also, to hint to the black people, that a noble opportunity is now
put into their hands, of manifesting their gratitude to the inhabitants of that
city, which first planned their emancipation from slavery, and who have since
afforded them so much protection and support, as to place them, in point of
civil and religious privileges, upon a footing with themselves.

A day or two after this publication, the following letter from the Mayor of
the city, to Mr Claypoole the printer of the Mail, appeared in his paper.

SIR,
IT is with peculiar satisfaction that I communicate to the public, through
your paper, that the AFRICAN SOCIETY, touched with the distresses which arise
from the present dangerous disorder, have voluntarily undertaken to furnish
nurses to attend the afflicted: and that by applying to ABSALOM JONES and
WILLIAM GRAY, both members of that society, they may be supplied.

MATTHEW. CLARKSON, Mayor.
September 6 th, 1793.

It was not long after these worthy Africans undertook the execution of their
humane offer of services to the sick, before I was convinced I had been
mistaken. They took the disease, in common with the white people, and many of
them died with it. I think I observed the greatest number of them to sicken
after the mornings and evenings became cool. A large number of them were my
patients. The disease was lighter in them, than in white people. I met with no
case of hemorrhage in a black patient.

The tobacconists, and persons who used tobacco did not escape the disease. I
observed snuff-takers to be more devoted to their boxes than usual, during the
prevalence of the fever.

I have remarked formerly that servant maids suffered much by the disease. They
were the only patients I lost in several large families. I ascribe their deaths
to the following causes:

1 st. To the great indirect debility induced upon their systems by fatigue in
attending their masters and mistresses, or their children. Indirect debility,
according to its degrees and duration seems to have had the same effect upon
the mortality of this fever, that it has upon the mortality of an inflammation
of the lungs. When it is moderate and of short duration, it predisposes only to
a common pneumony, but when it is violent and protracted, in its degrees and
duration, it predisposes to a pulmonary consumption.

2 dly. To their receiving large quantities of contagion into their bodies, and
in a most concentrated state by being obliged to perform the most menial
offices for the sick, and by washing, as well as removing infected linen, and
the like.

3 dly. To their being left more alone in confined or distant rooms, and
thereby suffering from depression of spirits, or the want of a punctual supply
of food and medicines.

There did not appear to be any advantage from smelling vinegar, tar, camphor,
or volatile salts, in preventing the disorder. Bark and wine were equally
ineffectual for that purpose. I was called to many hundred people who were
infected after using one or more of them. Nor did the white-washing of walls
secure families from the action of the contagion. I am disposed to believe
garlic was the only substance that was in any degree useful, in preventing the
disorder. I met with several persons who chewed it constantly, and who were
much exposed to the contagion, without being infected. All other substances
seemed to do harm by begetting a false confidence in the mind, to the exclusion
of more rational preservatives. I have suspected further, that such of them as
were of a volatile nature, helped to spread the disease by affording a vehicle
for the contagion through the air.

There was great mortality in all those families who lived in wooden houses.
Whether this arose from the small size of these houses, or from the want of
cleanliness of the people who occupied them, or from the contagion becoming
more accumulated, by adhering to the wood, I am unable to determine. Perhaps it
was the effect of the cooperation of all three of those causes.

I have said formerly that intemperance in drinking predisposed to the disease;
but there were several instances of persons having escaped it who were
constantly under the influence of strong drink. The stimulus of ardent spirits,
probably predominated over the stimulus of the contagion, and thus excited an
artificial fever which defended the system from that which was epidemic.

I heard of some seafaring people who lived on board their vessels who escaped
the disease. The smell of the tar was supposed to have preserved them; but from
its being ineffectual in other cases, I was led to ascribe their escape to the
infected air of the city being diluted by a mixture with the pure air that came
from the water.

Many people who were infected in the city, were attacked by the disease in the
country, but they propagated it in very few instances, even to persons who
slept in the same room with them.

Dr Lind informs us that many persons escaped the yellow fever which prevailed
in Pensacola in the year 1765, by retiring to the ships which lay in the
harbor, and that when the disease had been taken, the pure air of the water
changed it into an intermitting fever Diseases of Warm Climates, p. 169.
. The same changes have frequently been produced in malignant fevers, by
sending patients infected with them from the foul air of a city, into the pure
air of the country.

Persons confined in the House of Employment, in the Hospital, and in the Jail,
were preserved from the fever. The airy and remote situation of those
buildings, was probably the chief means of their preservation. Perhaps they
derived additional security from their simple diet, their exemption from hard
labor, and from being constantly sheltered from heat and cold.

Several families who shut up their front and back doors and windows, and
avoided going out of their houses except to procure provisions, escaped the
disorder.

I have taken some pains to ascertain whether any class of tradesmen escaped
the fever, or whether there was any species of labor which protected from it.
The result of my inquiries is as follows: Three butchers only out of nearly one
hundred who remained in the city, died with the disorder. Many of them attended
the markets every day. Two painters, who worked at their business during the
whole time of the prevalence of the fever, and in exposed situations, escaped
it. Out of forty scavengers who were employed in collecting and carrying away
the dirt of the streets, only one caught the fever and died. Very few
grave-diggers, compared with the number who were employed in that business,
were infected; and it is well known, that scarcely an instance was heard of
persons taking the disease, who were constantly employed in digging cellars.
The fact is not new that grave-diggers escape the contagion of malignant
fevers. It is taken notice of by Dr Clark. There seems to be something in the
fresh earth which attracts or destroys by mixture, contagion of every kind.
Clothes infected by the smallpox are more certainly purified by being buried
under ground, than in any other way. Even poisons are rendered inert, by the
action of the earth upon them. Dogs have long ago established this fact, by
scratching a hole in the ground, and burying their limbs or noses in it, when
bitten by poisonous snakes. The practice I have been told, has been imitated
with success by the settlers upon new lands in several parts of the United
States.

It was said by some physicians in the public papers, that the neighborhood of
the grave-yards was more infected than other parts of the city. The reverse of
this assertion was true in several cases, owing probably to the line of
communication of the contagion being broken by the absence of houses, and to
its being diluted and weakened by its mixture with the air of the grave-yards;
for this air was pure, compared with that which stagnated in the streets.

It was said further, that the disease was propagated by the inhabitants
assembling on Sundays for public worship; and as a proof of this assertion, it
was reported, that the deaths were more numerous on Sundays than on other days;
occasioned by the contagion received on one Sunday, producing death on the
succeding first day of the week. The register of the deaths shows that this was
not the case. I am disposed to believe that fewer people sickened on Sundays,
than on any other day of the week; owing to the general rest from labor, which
I have before said was one of the exciting causes of the disease. From some
facts to be mentioned presently, it will appear probable, that places of public
worship, in consequence of their size, as well as of their being shut up during
the greatest part of the week, were the freest from contagion of any houses in
the city. It is agreeable to discover in this, as well as in all other cases of
public and private duty, that the means of health, and moral happiness are in
no one instance opposed to each other.

There were for several weeks two sources of infection, viz. exhalation, and
contagion. The exhalation infected at the distance of three and four hundred
yards; while the contagion infected only across the streets. The more narrow
the street, the more certainly the contagion infected. Few escaped it in
alleys. After the 15th of September, the atmosphere of every street in the city
was loaded with contagion; and there were few citizens in apparent good health,
who did not exhibit one or more of the following marks of its presence in their
bodies.

1. A yellowness in the eyes, and a sallow color upon the skin.

2. A preternatural quickness in the pulse. I found but two exceptions to this
remark, out of a great number of persons whose pulses I examined. In one of
them it discovered several preternatural intermissions in the course of a
minute. This quickness of pulse occurred in the negroes, as well as in the
white people. I met with it in a woman who had had the yellow fever in 1762. In
two women, and in one man above 70, the pulse beat upwards of 90 strokes in a
minute. This preternatural state of the pulse, during the prevalence of a
pestilential fever in persons in health, is taken notice of by Reverius "Pulsus
sanorum pulsibus similes admodum, periculosi." De Febre Pestilenti, p. 114.
.

3. Frequent and copious discharges by the skin of yellow sweats. In persons
who were much exposed to the contagion, these sweats sometimes had an offensive
smell, resembling that of the washings of a gun.

4. A scanty discharge of high colored or turbid urine.

5. A deficiency of appetite, or a greater degree of it than was natural.

6. Costiveness.

7. Wakefulness.

8. Headache.

9. A preternatural dilatation of the pupils. -- This was universal. I was much
struck in observing the pupil in one of the eyes of a young man who called upon
me for advice, to be of an oblong figure. Whether it was natural, or the effect
of the contagion acting on his brain, I could not determine.

It will be thought less strange, that the contagion should produce these
changes in the systems of persons who resided constantly in the city, when I
add, that many country people who spent but a few hours in the streets in the
day, in attending the markets, caught the disease, and sickened and died after
they returned home; and that others, whom business compelled to spend a day or
two in the city during the prevalence of the fever, but who escaped an attack
of it, declared that they were indisposed during the whole time, with languor
or headache.

I was led to observe and record the above effects of the contagion upon
persons in apparent good health, by a fact I met with in Dr Mitchell's history
of the yellow fever in Virginia in the year 1741. In that fever, blood drawn
from a vein was always dissolved. The same state of the blood was observed in
many persons who had been exposed to the contagion, who discovered no other
symptom of the disease.

A woman whom I had formerly cured of a mania, who lived in an infected
neighborhood, had a fresh attack of that disorder, accompanied by an unusual
menstrual flux. I ascribed both these complaints to the action of the contagion
upon her system.

Citizens thus impregnated with the contagion, communicated it in several
instances to their country friends. The disease produced in this way was very
light, amounting in all the cases that came under my notice, to little more
than a sickness at stomach or vomiting.

The smell of the contagion, as emitted from a patient in a clean room, was
like that of the smallpox, but in most cases of a less disagreeable nature.
Putrid smells in sick rooms were the effects of a mixture of the contagion with
some filthy matters. In small rooms, crowded in some instances with four or
five sick people, there was an effluvia that produced giddiness, sickness at
stomach, a weakness of the limbs, faintness, and in some cases a diarrhoea. I
met with a fetid breath in one patient, which was not the effect of that
medicine which sometimes produces it.

The contagion adhered to all kinds of clothing, and seemed to be propagated
by them. It was in no instance communicated by means of paper; a circumstance
which contributed both to lessen and increase the distress produced by the
disease, by enabling the citizens to keep up an intercourse, by letters with
their country friends.

The state of the atmosphere during the whole month of September, and the first
two weeks in October favored the accumulation of the contagion in the city.

The register of the weather, shows how little the air was agitated by winds
during the above time. In vain were changes in the moon expected to alter the
state of the air. The light of the morning, mocked the hopes that were raised
by a cloudy sky in the evening. The sun ceased to be viewed with pleasure.
Hundreds sickened every day beneath the influence of his rays; and even where
they did not excite the disease, they produced a languor in the body unknown to
the oldest inhabitant of the city, at the same season of the year.

A meteor was seen at two o'clock in the morning on or about the twelfth of
September. It fell between Third-street and the Hospital, nearly in a line with
Pine-street. Moschetoes (the usual attendants of a sickly autumn) were
uncommonly numerous. Here and there a dead cat added to the impurity of the air
of the streets; for many of those animals perished with hunger in the city, in
consequence of so many houses being deserted by the inhabitants who had fled
into the country.

It appears further, from the register of the weather, that there was no rain
between the 25th of August and the 15th of October, except a few drops, hardly
enough to lay the dust of the streets on the 9th of September, and the 12th of
October. In consequence of this drought, the springs and wells failed in many
parts of the country. The dust in some places extended two feet below the
surface of the ground. The pastures were deficient, or burnt up. There was a
scarcity of autumnal fruits in the neighborhood of the city. But while
vegetation drooped or died from the want of moisture in some places, it revived
with preternatural vigor from unusual heat in others. Cherry-trees blossomed,
and apple, pear, and plum-trees bore young fruit in several gardens in Trenton,
thirty miles from Philadelphia, in the month of October.

However inoffensive uniform heat, when agitated by gentle breezes may be,
there is, I believe, no record of a dry, warm and stagnating air, having
existed for any length of time without producing diseases. Hippocrates in
describing a pestilential fever, says the year in which it prevailed, was
without a breeze of wind "Sine aura, usque annus fuit." Epid. 3.
. The same state of the atmosphere for six weeks, is mentioned in many of the
histories of the plague which prevailed in London in 1665. Even the sea air
itself becomes unwholesome by stagnating; hence Dr Clark informs us, that
sailors become sickly after long calms in East India voyages Vol. i. p. 5.
. Sir John Pringle delivers the following aphorism from a number of similar
observations upon this subject. "When the heats come on soon, and continue
throughout autumn, not moderated by winds, or rains, the season proves sickly,
distempers appear early, and are dangerous Diseases of the Army, P. 5. of the
7th London Edition.
."

Who can review this account of the universal diffusion of the contagion of
this disease, its universal effects upon persons apparently in good health, and
its accumulation and concentration, in consequence of the calmness of the air,
and believe, that it was possible for a febrile disease to exist at that time
in our city that was not derived from this contagion?

The West India writers upon the yellow fever have said, that it is seldom
taken twice, except by persons who have spent some years in Europe or America
in the interval between its first and second attack. I directed my inquiries to
this question, and I now proceed to mention the result of them. I met with five
persons during the prevalence of the disease, who had had it formerly; two of
them in the year 1741, and three in 1762, who escaped it in 1793, although they
were all more or less exposed to the contagion. One of them felt a constant
pain in her head while the disease was in her family. Four of them were aged,
and of course less liable to be acted upon by the contagion, than persons in
early or middle life. Mr Thomas Shields furnished an unequivocal proof that the
disease could be taken after an interval of many years. He had it in the year
1762, and narrowly escaped from a violent attack of it last year. Cases of
reinfection were very common during the prevalence of this fever. They occurred
most frequently, where the first attack had been light. But they succeeded
attacks that were severe in Dr Griffitts, Dr Mease, my pupil Mr Coxe, and
several others, whose cases came under my notice.

I have before remarked, that the contagion sometimes excited a fever as soon
as it was taken into the body, but that it often lay there from one to sixteen
days, before it produced the disease. How long it existed in the body after a
recovery from the fever, I could not tell, for persons who recovered were in
most cases exposed to the action of the contagion from external sources. The
preternatural dilatation of the pupils was a certain mark of the continuance of
some portion of the contagion in the system. In one person who was attacked
with the fever on the night of the 9th of October, the pupils did not contract
to their natural dimensions, until the 7th of November.

Having described the effects of the contagion upon the body, I proceed now to
mention the changes induced upon it by death.

Let us first take a view of it as it appeared soon after death. Some new light
may perhaps be thrown upon the proximate cause of the disease, by this mode of
examining the body.

My information upon this subject was derived from the attendants upon the
sick, and from the two African citizens who were employed in burying the dead,
viz. Richard Allen and Absalom Jones. The coincidence of the information I
received from different persons, satisfied me that all that I shall here
relate, is both accurate and just.

A deep yellow color appeared in many cases within a few minutes after death.
In some, the skin became purple, and in others black. I heard of one case in
which the body was yellow above, and black below its middle. In some, the skin
was as pale, as it is in persons who die of common fevers. A placid countenance
was observed in many, resembling that which occurs in an easy and healthful
sleep.

Some were stiff within one hour after death. Others were not so, for six hours
afterward. This sudden stiffness after death, Dr Valli informs us, occurred in
persons who died of the plague in Smyrna in the year 1784 Experiments on Animal
Electricity, p. 90.
.

Some grew cold soon after death, while others retained a considerable degree
of heat for six hours, more especially on their backs.

A stream of tears appeared on the cheeks of a young woman, which seemed to
have flowed after her death.

Some putrefied in a short time after their dissolution, but others had no
smell for twelve, eighteen and twenty hours afterward. This absence of smell
occurred in those cases in which evacuations had been used without success in
the treatment of the disease.

Many discharged large quantities of black matter from the bowels, and others
blood from the nose, mouth and bowels after death. The frequency of these
discharges, gave rise to the practice of pitching the joints of the coffins
which were used to bury the dead.

The morbid appearances of the internal parts of the body as they appear by
dissection after death, from the yellow fever, are different in different
countries, and in the same countries in different years. I consider them all as
effects only of a stimulus acting upon the whole system, and determined more or
less by accidental circumstances, to particular viscera. Perhaps the stimulus
of the contagion determines the fluids more violently in most cases to the
liver, stomach, and bowels, and thereby disposes them more than other parts to
inflammation and mortification, and to similar effusions and eruptions with
those which take place on the skin. There can be no doubt of the contagion
acting specifically upon the liver, and thereby altering the qualities of the
bile. I transcribe with great pleasure the following account of the state of
the bile in a female slave of forty years of age from Dr Mitchell's history of
the yellow fever, as it prevailed in Virginia in the years 1737 and 1741,
inasmuch as it was part of that clue which led me to adopt one of the remedies
on which much of the success of my practice depended.

"The gall bladder (says the Doctor) appeared outwardly of a deep yellow, but
within was full of a black ropy coagulated atrabilis, which sort of substance
obstructed the pori biliarii, and ductus choledochus. This atrabilis was hardly
fluid, but upon opening the gall bladder, it retained its form, and shape,
without being evacuated, being of the consistence of a thin extract, and
within, glutinous and ropy, like soap when boiling. This black matter seemed so
much unlike bile, that I doubted if there were any bile in the gallbladder. It
more resembled bruised or mortified blood, evacuated from the mortified parts
of the liver, surrounding it, although it would stain a knife or probe thrust
into it of a yellow color, which with its ropy consistence, seemed more
peculiar to a bilious humor."

The same appearance of the bile was discovered in several other subjects
dissected by Dr Mitchell.

The liver in the abovementioned slave, was turgid and plump on its outside,
but on its concave surface, two thirds of it were of a deep black color, and
round the gallbladder, it seemed to be mortified and corrupted.

The duodenum was lined on its inside near the gall bladder with a viscid ropy
bile, like that which has been described. Its villous coat was lined with a
thick fur or slime, which when scraped or pealed off, the other vascular and
muscular coats of the gut, appeared red and inflamed.

The omentum was so much wasted, that nothing but its blood vessels could be
perceived.

The stomach was inflamed both on its outside and inside. It contained a
quantity of bile of the same consistence, but of a blacker color than that
which was found in the gall bladder. Its villous coat like that of the
duodenum, was covered with fuzzy and slimy matter. It moreover appeared to be
distended or swelled. This peculiarity in the inner coat of the stomach was
universal in all the bodies that were opened, of persons who died of this
disease.

The lungs instead of being collapsed, were inflated as in inspiration. They
were all over full of black or livid spots. On these spots were to be seen
small vesicles or blisters, like those of an erysipelas or gangrene, containing
a yellow humor.

The blood vessels in general seemed empty of blood, even the vena cava and its
branches; but the vena portarum was full and distended as usual. The blood
seemed collected in the viscera; for upon cutting the lungs or sound liver or
spleen, they bled freely.

The brain was not opened in this body, but it was not affected in three others
whose brains were examined.

Dr Mackittrick, in his inaugural dissertation published at Edinburgh in the
year 1766 "De febre Indiae occidentalis, Maligna Flava," or upon the yellow
fever of the West Indies, says, that in some of the patients who died of it, he
found the liver sphacelated, the gall bladder full of black bile, and the veins
turgid with black fluid blood. In others he found the liver no ways enlarged,
and its "texture only vitiated." The stomach, the duodenum, and ilium, were
remarkably inflamed in all cases. The pericardium contained a viscid yellow
serum, and in a larger quantity than common. The urinary bladder was a little
inflamed. The lungs were sound.

Dr Hume in describing the yellow fever of Jamaica, informs us, that in several
dead bodies which he opened, he found the liver enlarged and turgid with bile,
and of a pale yellow color. In some he found the stomach and duodenum
inflamed. In one case he discovered black spots in the stomach, of the size of
a crown piece. To this account he adds, "that he had seen some subjects opened,
on whose stomachs no marks of inflammation could be discovered; and yet these
had excessive vomiting."

Dr Lind has furnished us with an account of the state of the body after death
in his short history of the yellow fever, which prevailed at Cadiz in the year
1764. "The stomach, (he says) mesentery, and intestines were covered with
gangrenous spots: there were ulcers on the orifice of the stomach, and the
liver and lungs were of a putrid color and texture Diseases of Warm Climates,
p. 125.
."

To these accounts of the morbid appearances of the body after death from the
yellow fever, I shall only add the account of several dissections which was
given to the public in Mr Brown's Gazette, during the prevalence of our late
epidemic, by Dr Physic and Dr Cathrall.

BEING well assured of the great importance of dissections of morbid bodies in
the investigation of the nature of diseases, we have thought it of consequence
that some of those, dead of the present prevailing malignant fever, should be
examined; and without enlarging on our observations, it appears at present
sufficient to state the following facts.

1st. That the brain in all its parts has been found in a natural condition.

2d. That the viscera of the thorax are perfectly sound. The blood, however, in
the heart and veins is fluid, similar in its consistence, to the blood of
persons who have been hanged, or destroyed by electricity.

3d. That the stomach, and beginning of the duodenum are the parts that appear
most diseased. In two persons who died of the disease on the 5th day, the
villous membrane of the stomach, especially about its smaller end, was found
highly inflamed; and this inflammation extended through the pylorus into the
duodenum, some way. -- The inflammation here, was exactly similar to that
induced in the stomach by acrid poisons, as by arsenic, which we have once had
an opportunity of seeing in a person destroyed by it.

The bile in the gallbladder was quite of its natural color, though very
viscid.

In another person who died on the 8th day of the disease, several spots of
extravasation were discovered between the membranes, particularly about the
smaller end of the stomach, the inflammation of which had considerably abated.
Pus was seen in the beginning of the duodenum, and the villous membrane at this
part was thickened.

In two other persons who died at a more advanced period of the disease, the
stomach appeared spotted in many places with extravasations, and the
inflammation disappeared. It contained, as did also the intestines, a black
liquor, which had been vomited and purged before death. This black liquor
appears clearly to be an altered secretion from the liver; for a fluid in all
respects of the same qualities was found in the gallbladder. This liquor was
so acrid, that it induced considerable inflammation and swelling on the
operator's hands, which remained some days. The villous membrane of the
intestines in these last two bodies was found inflamed in several places.

The liver was of its natural appearance, excepting in one of the last persons,
on the surface of which a very few distended veins were seen: all the other
abdominal viscera were of a healthy appearance.

The external surface of the stomach as well as of the intestines, was quite
free from inflammation; the veins being distended with blood, which appeared
through the transparent peritoneum, gave them a dark color.

"The stomach of those who died early in the disease was always contracted; but
in those who died at a more advanced period of it, where extravasations
appeared, it was distended with air."

P. S. PHYSIC, J. CATHRALL.



I have before remarked that these dissections were made early in the disorder,
and that Dr Annan attended a dissection of a body at Bush-hill some time
afterward, in which an unusual turgescence appeared in the vessels of the
brain.

Thus far have I delivered the history of the yellow fever as it affected the
human body with sickness and death. I shall now mention a few of those
circumstances of public and private distress which attended it. I have before
remarked, that the first reports of the existence of this fever were treated
with neglect or contempt. A strange apathy pervaded all classes of people.
While I bore my share of reproach for "terrifying our citizens with imaginary
danger," I answered it by lamenting "that they were not terrified enough." The
publication from the college of physicians soon dissipated this indifference
and incredulity. Fear or terror now sat upon every countenance. The disease
appeared in many parts of the town, remote from the spot where it originated;
although in every instance it was easily traced to it. This set the city in
motion. The streets and roads leading from the city were crowded with families
flying in every direction for safety to the country. Business began to
languish. Water-street between Market and Race-streets became a desert. The
poor were the first victims of the fever. From the sudden interruption of
business, they suffered for a while from poverty, as well as disease. A large
and airy house at Bush-hill about a mile from the city, was opened for their
reception. This house, after it became the charge of a committee appointed by
the citizens on the 14th of September, was regulated and governed with the
order and cleanliness of an old and established hospital. An American and
French physician had the exclusive medical care of it after the 22d of
September.

The contagion after the second week in September, spared no rank of citizens.
Whole families were confined by it. There was a deficiency of nurses for the
sick, and many of those who were employed were unqualified for their business.
There was likewise a great deficiency of physicians from the desertion of some,
and the sickness and death of others. At one time, there were only three
physicians who were able to do business out of their houses, and at this time,
there were probably not less than 6,000 persons ill with the fever.

During the first three or four weeks of the prevalence of the disorder, I
seldom went into a house the first time, without meeting the parents or
children of the sick in tears. Many wept aloud in my entry, or parlour, who
came to ask for advice for their relations. Grief, after awhile descended below
weeping, and I was much struck in observing that many persons submitted to the
loss of relations and friends, without shedding a tear, or manifesting any
other of the common signs of grief.

A cheerful countenance was scarcely to be seen in the city for six weeks. I
recollect once in entering the house of a poor man, to have met a child of two
years old that smiled in my face. I was strangely affected with this sight (so
discordant to my feelings and the state of the city) before I recollected the
age and ignorance of the child. I was confined the next day by an attack of the
fever, and was sorry to hear upon my recovery, that the father and mother of
this little creature died, a few days after my last visit to them.

The streets every where discovered marks of the distress that pervaded the
city. More than one half the houses were shut up, although not more than one
third of the inhabitants had fled into the country. In walking for many hundred
yards, few persons were met, except such as were in quest of a physician, a
nurse, a bleeder, or the men who buried the dead. The hearse alone kept up the
remembrance of the noise of carriages or carts in the streets. Funeral
processions were laid aside. A black man, leading, or driving a horse, with a
corpse on a pair of chair wheels, with now and then half a dozen relations or
friends following at a distance from it, met the eye in most of the streets of
the city at every hour of the day, while the noise of the same wheels passing
slowly over the pavements, kept alive anguish and fear in the sick and well,
every hour of the night In the life of Thomas Story a celebrated preacher among
the Friends, there is an account of the distress of the city in its infant
state from the prevalence of the yellow fever in the autumn of 1699, nearly
like that which has been described I shall insert the account in his own words.
"Great was the fear that fell on all flesh. I saw no lofty or airy countenance,
nor heard any vain jesting to move men to laughter. Every face gathered
paleness, and many hearts were humbled, and countenances fallen, and sunk, as
such that waited every moment to be summoned to the bar, and numbered to the
grave." The same author adds that six, seven, and sometimes eight died of this
fever in a day for several weeks. His fellow traveller and companion in the
ministry Roger Gill, discovered upon this occasion an extraordinary degree of
Christian philanthropy. He publicly offered himself in one of the meetings of
the Society as a sacrifice for the people, and prayed that "God would please to
accept of his life for them, that a stop might be put to the contagion." He
died of the fever a few days afterward.
.

But a more serious source of the distress of the city arose from the
dissentions of the physicians, about the nature and treatment of the fever. It
was considered by some, as a modification of the influenza, and by others as
the Jail fever. Its various grades, and symptoms were considered as so many
different diseases, all originating from different causes. There was the same
contrariety in the practice of the physicians that there was in their
principles. The newspapers conveyed accounts of both to the public, every day.
The minds of the citizens were distracted by them, and hundreds suffered and
died from the delays which were produced by an erroneous opinion of a plurality
of diseases in the city, or by indecision in the choice, or a want of
confidence in the remedies of their physician.

The science of medicine is related to every thing, and the philosopher as well
as the Christian will be gratified by knowing the effects of a great and mortal
epidemic upon the morals of a people. It was some alleviation of the distress
produced by it, to observe its influence upon the obligations of morality and
religion. It was remarked during this time, by many people that the name of the
Supreme Being was seldom profaned either in the streets, or in the intercourse
of the citizens with each other. Two robberies only, and those of a trifling
nature, occured in nearly two months, although many hundred houses were exposed
to plunder, every hour of the day and night. Many of the religious societies
met two or three times a week, and some of them every evening, to implore the
interposition of heaven to save the city from desolation. Humanity and charity
kept pace with devotion. The public have already seen accounts of their
benevolent exercises in other publications. It was my lot to witness the
uncommon activity of those virtues upon a smaller scale. I saw little to blame,
but much to admire and praise in persons of different professions, both sexes,
and of all colors. It would be foreign to the design of this work, to draw
from the obscurity which they sought, the many acts of humanity and charity, of
fortitude, patience, and perseverance which came under my notice. They will be
made public, and applauded elsewhere.

But the virtues which were excited by our calamity, were not confined to the
city of Philadelphia. The United States wept for the distresses of their
capital. In several of the states, and in many cities, and villages, days of
humiliation and prayer were set apart to supplicate the Father of mercies in
behalf of our afflicted city. Nor was this all. From nearly every state in the
Union, the most liberal contributions of money, provisions, and fuel, were
poured in for the relief and support of such as had been reduced to want, by
the suspension of business, as well as by sickness, and the death of friends.

The number of deaths between the first of August and the ninth of November,
amounted to four thousand and forty four. I shall here insert a register of the
number which occurred on each day, beginning on the first of August and ending
on the ninth of November. By comparing it with the register of the weather, it
will show the influence of the latter on the disease. Several of the deaths in
August were from other acute disorders, and a few in the succeeding months were
from such as were of a chronic nature.

died. died. August 1 9 Brought forward 325 2 8 September 1 17 3 9 2 18 4 10 3
11 5 10 4 23 6 3 5 20 7 12 6 24 8 5 7 18 9 11 8 42 10 6 9 32 11 7 10 29 12 5 11
23 13 11 12 33 14 4 13 37 15 9 14 48 16 7 15 56 17 6 16 67 18 5 17 81 19 9 18
68 20 7 19 61 21 8 20 67 22 13 21 57 23 10 22 76 24 17 23 68 25 12 24 96 26 17
25 87 27 12 26 52 28 22 27 60 29 24 28 51 30 20 29 57 31 17 30 63 325 1768
died. died. Brought forward 1768 Brought forward 3318 October 1 74 October 21
59 2 66 22 82 3 78 23 54 4 58 24 38 5 71 25 35 6 76 26 23 7 82 27 13 8 90 28 24
9 102 29 17 10 93 30 16 11 119 31 21 12 111 November 1 13 13 104 2 21 14 81 3
15 15 80 4 15 16 70 5 14 17 80 6 11 18 59 7 15 19 65 8 8 20 55 9 6 3318 Total,
388^ In the above accounts there is a deficiency of returns from several
grave-yard of 163.


From this table it appears that the principal mortality was in the second week
of October. A general expectation had obtained, that cold weather was as fatal
to the contagion of this fever as heavy rains. The usual time for its arrival
had come, but the weather was still not only moderate, but warm. In this awful
situation, the stoutest hearts began to fail. Hope sickened, and despair
succeeded distress in almost every countenance. On the fifteenth of October it
pleased God to alter the state of the air. The clouds at last dropped health in
showers of rain, which continued during the whole day, and which were succeeded
for several nights afterward by cold and frost. The effects of this change in
the weather, appeared first in the sudden diminution of the sick, for the
deaths continued for a week afterward to be numerous, but they were of persons
who had been confined before, or on the day in which the change had taken place
in the weather.

The appearance of this rain was like a dove with an olive branch in its mouth,
to the whole city. Public notice was given of its beneficial effects in a
letter subscribed by the mayor, of Philadelphia, who acted as president of the
committee, to the mayor of New York. I shall insert the whole of this letter.
It contains, besides the above information, a record of the liberality of that
city, to the distressed inhabitants of Philadelphia.

SIR,
I AM favored with your letter of the 12th instant, which I have communicated
to the Committee for the relief of the poor and afflicted of this city.

It is with peculiar satisfaction that I execute their request, by making in
their name, on behalf of our suffering fellow-citizens, the most grateful
acknowledgements, for the seasonable benevolence of the Common Council of the
city of New York. Their sympathy is balm to our wounds.

We acknowledge the divine interposition, whereby the hearts of so many around
us have been touched with our distress, and have united in our relief.

May the almighty disposer of all events be graciously pleased to protect your
citizens from the dreadful calamity with which we are now visited; whilst we
humbly kiss the rod, and improve by the dispensation.

The part, sir, which you personally take in our afflictions, and which you
have so pathetically expressed in your letter, excites in the breasts of the
Committee the warmest sensations of fraternal affection.

The refreshing rain which fell the day before yesterday, though light, and the
cool weather which has succeeded, appear to have given a check to the
prevalence of the disorder; of this we have satisfactory proofs; as well in the
decrease of the funerals, as in the applications for removal to the hospital.

I have at your request, this day drawn upon you, at sight, in favor of the
President and Directors of the Bank of North America, for the sum of five
thousand dollars, the benevolent donations of the Common Council of the city of
New York.

With sentiments of the greatest esteem and regard,

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, MATTHEW. CLARKSON
. Philadelphia, Oct. 17, 1793.
Richard Varick, Mayor of the city of New York.

It is no new thing for bilious fevers of every description, to be checked, or
subdued by wet and cold weather.

The yellow fever which raged in Philadelphia in 1699, and which is taken
notice of by Thomas Story in his Journal, ceased about the latter end of
October, or the beginning of November. Of this there are satisfactory proofs in
the register of the interments in the Friends burying-ground, and in a letter
dated November 9th, Old Style, 1699, from Isaac Norris to one of his
correspondents, which his grandson Mr Joseph P. Norris, politely put into my
hands, with several others, which mention the disease, and all written in that
memorable year in Philadelphia. The letter says, "It has pleased God to put a
stop to our sore visitation, and town and country are now generally healthy."
The same disease was checked by wet and cold weather in the year 1741. Of this
there is a proof in a letter from Dr Franklin to one of his brothers, who
stopped at Burlington, on his way from Boston to Philadelphia on account of the
fever, until he was assured by the Doctor, that a thunder gust which had cooled
the air, had rendered it safe for him to come into the city From a (...) in the
register of the interments in the Friend's (...) ground, (...) year made its
first appearance in the month of June. The following is a copy of that note.
"12th of the 6th month (O. S.) 1741, a malignant yellow fever now spreads
much." Besides that note, there is the following: "25th of the 7th month (O.
S.) 1741, many who died of the above distemper, were persons lively, and
strong, and in the prime of their time.
. Mr Lynford Lardner in a letter to one of his English friends, dated September
24, 1747, Old Style, after mentioning the prevalence of the fever in the city,
says "the weather is now much cooler, and those under the disorder revive. The
symptoms are less violent, and the fever gradually abates."

I have in vain attempted to procure an account of the time of the commencement
of cold weather, in the autumn of 1762. In the short history of the fever of
that year, which I have inserted from my note book, I have said that it
continued to prevail in the months of November and December. The register of
the interments in the Friends burying-ground in those months, confirms that
account. They were nearly as numerous in November and December, as in September
and October. Viz. in September 22, in October 27, in November 19, and in
December 26.

The bilious remitting fever of 1780, yielded to cool weather, accompanied by
rain, and an easterly wind Medical Inquiries and Observations, London Edition,
p. 106.
.

Sir John Pringle will furnish ample satisfaction, to such of my readers as
wish for more proofs of the efficacy of heavy rains, and cold weather, in
checking the progress and violence of autumnal remitting fevers P. 5, 56, 180,
and 323.
.

From the 15th of October, the disease not only declined, but assumed more
obvious inflammatory symptoms. It was, as in the beginning, more necessarily
fatal where left to itself, but it yielded more certainly to art, than it did a
few weeks before. The duration of it was now more tedious, than in the warmer
weather.

There were a few cases of yellow fever in November, and December, after the
citizens who had retired to the country, returned to the city.

I heard of only three persons who returned to the city being infected with the
disorder; so completely was the contagion destroyed in the course of a few
weeks.

In consequence of a proclamation by the Governor, and a recommendation by the
Clergy of Philadelphia, the 12th of December was observed as a day of
thanksgiving throughout the state, for the extinction of the disorder in the
city.

It was easy to distinguish in walking the streets, the persons who had
returned from the country to the city, from those who had remained in it during
the prevalence of the fever. The former appeared ruddy, and healthy, while the
latter appeared of a pale or sallow color.

It afforded a subject of equal surprise and joy to behold the suddenness with
which the city recovered its former habits of business. In the course of six
weeks after the disease had ceased, nothing but fresh graves, and the black
dresses of many of the citizens, afforded a public tra^^ of the distress which
had so lately prevailed in the city.

The month of November, and all the winter months which followed the autumnal
epidemic, were in general healthy. A catarrh affected a number of people in
November. I suspected it to be the influenza which had revived from a dormant
state; and which had not spent itself when it yielded to the predominance of
the yellow fever. This opinion derives some support from a curious fact related
by the late Mr Hunter of the revival of the smallpox in a patient, in whom it
had been suspended for some time by the measles Introduction to a Treatise on
the Venereal Disease, p. 3, of the American edition.
. The few fevers which prevailed in the winter were highly inflammatory. The
smallpox in the natural way was in several instances confluent; and in one or
two fatal. I was prepared to expect this inflammatory diathesis in the fevers
of the winter; for I had been taught by Dr Sydenham, that the diseases which
follow a great and mortal epidemic, partake more or less of its general
character. But the diseases of the winter had a peculiarity still more
extraordinary; and that was, many of them had several of the symptoms of the
yellow fever, particularly a puking of bile, dark-colored stools, and a yellow
eye. Mr Samuel D. Alexander, a student of medicine from South Carolina, who was
seized with a pneumony about Christmas, had with a yellow eye, a dilated pupil,
and a hard pulse which beat only 50 strokes in a minute. His blood was such as
I had frequently observed in the yellow fever. Dr Griffitts informed me, that
he attended a patient on the 9th of January in a pneumony, who had an universal
yellowness on his skin. I met with a case of pneumony on the 20th of the same
month, in which I observed the same degrees of redness in the eyes that were
common in the yellow fever. My pupil Mr Coxe, lost blood in an inflammatory
fever, on the 18th of February, which was dissolved. Mr James Innis, the
brewer, had a deep yellow color in his eyes, on the fourth day of a pneumony,
on the 27th of the same month; and Mr Magnus Miller had the same symptom of a
similar disorder, on the 16th of March. None of these bilious and anomalous
symptoms of the inflammatory fevers of the winter and spring surprised me. I
had been early taught by Dr Sydenham, that the epidemics of autumn often
insinuate some of their symptoms into the winter diseases which follow them. Dr
Cleghorn informs us, that "the pleurisies which succeeded the autumnal tertians
in Minorca, were accompanied by a vomiting and purging of green or yellow
bilious matters Page 273.
.

It belongs to powerful epidemics to be followed by some diseases after they
disappear, as well as to run into others at their first appearance. In the
former case it is occasioned by a peculiar state of the body, created by the
epidemic constitution of the air, not having been changed by the weather which
succeeded it.

The weather in March resembled that of May; while the weather in April
resembled that of March in common years. A rash prevailed in many families in
April, accompanied in a few cases by a sore throat. It was attended with an
itching, a redness of the eyes, and a slight fever in a few instances. The
smallpox by inoculation in this month was more mortal than in former years.
However unimportant these facts may appear at this time, future observations
may perhaps connect them with a similar constitution of the air which produced
our late autumnal epidemic.

The appearance of bilious symptoms in the diseases of the winter, excited
apprehensions in several instances of the revival of the yellow fever. The
alarms though false, served to produce vigilance and industry in the
corporation, in airing and purifying such houses and articles of furniture as
belonged to the poor; and which had been neglected in the autumn, after the
ceasing of the disease.

The modes of purifying houses, beds, and clothes were various. Fumigations of
nitre and aromatic substances were used by some people. Burying infected
articles of furniture under ground, and baking them in ovens, were used by
others. Some destroyed all their beds and clothing that had been infected, or
threw them into the Delaware. Many white-washed their walls, and painted the
wood-work of their house. Is did not conceive the contagion required all, or
any of those means to destroy it. I believed cold and water to be sufficient
for that purpose. I therefore advised keeping the windows of infected rooms
open night and day, for a few days; to have the floors and walls of houses well
washed; and to expose beds and such articles of household furniture as might be
injured by washing, upon the bare earth for a week or two, taking care to turn
them every day. I used no other methods of destroying the accumulated contagion
in my house and furniture, and experience showed that they were sufficient.
Those branches of my family who had been absent during the prevalence of the
fever (amounting to eleven in number) returned to the city on the 22d of
November, and occupied the house and beds which had been highly infected,
without suffering a moment's indisposition from it. The weather of the winter
favored the complete destruction of the contagion. It was alternately moderate
and cold; by which means the contagion, if accidentally revived by the former,
was more effectually destroyed by the latter state of the air.

It is possible a portion of the contagion may exist in clothes or bedding,
under such circumstances of warmth, as to be excited into action in the course
of the approaching summer and autumn; but it cannot spread without a
corresponding constitution of the atmosphere. A trunk full of infected clothes,
the property of Mr James Bingham, who died of the yellow fever in one of the
West India islands about 40 years ago, was opened some months after they were
received by his friends, by a young man who lived in his brother's family. This
young man took the disease, and died; but without infecting any of the family:
nor did the disease spread afterward in the city.

The father of Mr Joseph Paschall was infected with the yellow fever of 1741,
by the smell of a bed in passing through Norris's Alley, in the latter end of
December, after the disease had left the city. He died on the 25th of the
month, but without reviving the fever in the city, or even infecting his family.

In a letter from Dr Senter of Newport, dated January 7th, 1794, I find the
following fact, which I shall communicate in his own words. It is introduced to
support the principle, that the yellow fever cannnot spread in any country
without the concurrence of a predisposing constitution of air. "This place
(says the Doctor) has traded formerly very much to the West India islands, and
more or less of our people have died there every season, when the disease
prevails in those parts. Clothes of these unfortunate people have been
repeatedly brought home to their friends, without any accident happening to
them."

It is not peculiar to the contagion of the yellow fever to require the
concurrence of a morbid constitution of the air to excite it into action. The
contagion of the plague perished twice in the city of Larnica, without
spreading, from the absence of that necessary state of the air, in the year
1759 P. Russel, p. 4.
.

Several persons it is said died of the yellow fever in the summer and autumn
of 1763, the year after it had been epidemic in our city. I witnessed the
symptoms which immediately preceded the death of one of them. Whether the
disease in this case was produced by a revival of the contagion, or by miasmata
generated in the city, I am unable to determine.

Dr Mitchell informs us, that the disease appeared in Virginia in the spring of
1742, after the autumn of 1741. In this case the contagion was probably kept
alive during the winter by the want of cleanliness in the negro-quarters; and
perhaps by moderate weather.

These are the only facts which support the fears of the return of the disease
to our city, in the course of the present year. To aid our hopes, that this
will not be the case, I have great pleasure in adding, that it has never
occurred in successive years either in this city or in Charleston; in one of
which there are records of its having been five, and in the other four times
epidemic.

I feel with my reader the fatigue of this long detail of facts, and equal
impatience with him, to proceed to the history of the treatment of the fever;
but I must beg leave to detain him a little longer from that part of the work,
while I resume the subject of the origin of the fever. It is an interesting
question, as it involves in it the means of preventing a return of the disorder.

Soon after the fever left the city, the governor of the state addressed a
letter to the College of Physicians, requesting to know their opinion of its
origin; if imported; from what place; at what time; and in what manner. The
design of this inquiry was to procure such information as was proper to lay
before the legislature, in order to improve the laws for preventing the
importation or generation of infectious diseases, or to enact new ones, if
necessary for that purpose. To the governor's letter, the College of Physicians
sent the following answer:

SIR,
IT has not been from a want of respect to yourself, nor from inattention to
the subject, that your letter of the 30th ult. was not sooner answered; but the
importance of the questions proposed, has made it necessary for us to devote a
considerable portion of time and attention to the subject, in order to arrive
at a safe and just conclusion.

No instance has ever occurred of the disease called the yellow fever, having
been generated in this city, or in any other parts of the United States, as far
as we know; but there have been frequent instances of its having been imported,
not only into this, but into other parts of North America, and prevailing there
for a certain period of time; and from the rise, progress, and nature of the
malignant fever, which began to prevail here about the beginning of last
August, and extended itself gradually over a great part of the city, we are of
opinion that this disease was imported into Philadelphia, by some of the
vessels which arrived in the port after the middle of July. This opinion we are
further confirmed in by various accounts we have received from unquestionable
authorities.

Signed by order of the College of Physicians, JOHN REDMAN, PRESIDENT.
November 26 th, 1793.
To the Governor of Pennsylvania.

Three members of the College dissented from the report contained in this
letter. They were Dr Redman the President of the College, Dr Foulke, and Dr
Leib.

I am sorry to meet my brethren upon every question of our late epidemic in a
field of controversy. In the present they will have a great advantage over me,
for the prejudices of the citizens of Philadelphia are in their favor.
Loathsome and dangerous diseases have been considered by all nations as of
foreign extraction. The venereal disease and the leprosy have no native
country, if we believe all the authors who have written upon their origin.
Prosper Alpinus, derives the almost yearly plagues of Cairo from Syria, and Dr
Warren flattered the people of Barbados, by an attempt to persuade them, that
the yellow fever of the West Indies, was originally imported from Siam. This
principle of referring the origin of the evils of life, from ourselves to
others, is universal. It discovered itself in paradise, and it is every where,
an essential feature in the character of man.

I have asserted in the introduction to the history of this fever, that I
believed it to have been generated in our city; I shall now deliver my reasons
for that belief.

1. The yellow fever in the West Indies and in all other countries where it is
endemic, is the offspring of vegetable putrefaction. Heat, exercise, and
intemperance in drinking, (says Dr Lind) dispose to this fever in hot climates,
but they do not produce it, without the concurrence of a remote cause. This
remote cause exists at all times, in some spots of the Islands, but in other
parts of even the same islands, where there are no marsh exhalations, the
disease is unknown. I shall not waste a moment in enquiring into the truth of
Dr Warren's account of the origin of this fever. It is fully refuted by Dr
Hillary, and it is treated as chimerical by Dr Lind. They have very limited
ideas of the history of this fever who suppose it to be peculiar to the East or
West Indies. It was generated in Cadiz after a hot and dry summer in 1764, and
in Pensacola in 1765 Lind on the Diseases of Hot Climates, p. 36 and 124.
. The tertian fever of Minorca, when it attacked Englishmen put on the usual
symptoms of the yellow fever Cleghorn, page 176.
. In short, this disease, appears according to Dr Lind, in all the southern
parts of Europe, after hot, and dry weather Diseases of Hot Climates, page 123.
.

2. The same causes (under like circumstances) must always produce the same
effects. There is nothing in the air of the West Indies above other hot
countries, which disposes it to produce a yellow fever. Similar degrees of
heat, acting upon dead and moist vegetable matters, are capable of producing
it, together with all its various modifications, in every part of the world. In
support of this opinion, I shall transcribe part of a letter from Dr Miller, of
the Delaware state.

Dover, Nov. 5, 1793. DEAR SIR,
SINCE the middle of last July, we have had a Bilious Colic epidemic in this
neighborhood which exhibits phenomenon very singular in this climate; and so
far as I am informed, unprecedented in the medical records, or popular
traditions of this country. To avoid unnecessary details, it will suffice at
present to observe, that the disease on this occasion, has assumed not only all
the essential characters, but likewise all the violence, obstinacy and
malignity described by the East and West Indian practitioners. If any
difference can be observed, it seems here to manifest higher degrees of
stubbornness and malignity, than we usually meet in the histories of tropical
writers. In the course of the disease, not only extreme constipation, frequent
vomiting, and the most excruciating pains of the bowels and limbs, harrass the
unhappy patient; but to these succeed paralysis, convulsions, etc. and almost
always uncommon muscular debility, -- oppression of the praecordia, etc. are
the consequence of a severe attack. Bile discharged in enormous quantities,
constantly assumes the most corrupted and acrimonious appearances, commonly
aeruginous in a very high degree, and sometimes quite atrabilious.

The inference I mean to draw from the phenomenon of this disease, as it
appears in this neighborhood, and which I presume will also apply to your
epidemic, is THIS, that from the uncommon protraction and intenseness of our
summer and autumnal heats, but principally from the unusual drought; we have
had since the middle of July, a near approach to a TROPICAL season, and that of
consequence we ought not to be surprised if tropical diseases, even of the most
malignant nature, are ENGENDERED amongst us.


To the above information it may be added, that the dysentery which prevailed
during the late autumn in several of the villages of Pennsylvania, was attended
with a malignity and mortality, unknown before in any part of the state. I need
not pause to remark that this dysentery arose from putrid exhalation, and that
it is like the bilious colic, only a modification of one original genus of
bilious fever.

But further, a malignant fever resembling that which was epidemic in our city,
prevailed during the autumn in many parts of the United States, viz. at Lynn in
Massachusetts, at Weatherfield and Coventry in Connecticut, at New Galloway in
the state of New York, on Walkill and on Pensocken creeks in New Jersey, at
Harrisburgh, and Hummelstown in Pennsylvania, in Caroline country in Maryland,
on the South branch of the Potowmac in Hardy county, also in Lynchburgh and in
Alexandria in Virginia, and in several counties in North Carolina. In none of
these places was there a suspicion of the disease being imported from abroad,
or conveyed by an intercourse with the city of Philadelphia.

It is no objection to the inference which follows from these facts, that the
common remitting fever was not known during the above period in the
neighborhood of this city, and in many other parts of the state, where it had
usually appeared in the autumnal months. There is a certain combination of
moisture with heat, which is essential to the production of the remote cause of
a bilious fever. Where the heat is so intense, or of such long duration as
wholly to dissipate moisture, or when the rains are so great as totally to
overflow the marshy ground, or to wash away putrid masses of matter, no fever
can be produced.

Dr Dazilles, in his treatise upon the diseases of the Negroes in the West
Indies, informs us, that the RAINY season is the most healthy at Cayenne, owing
to the neighboring morasses being DEEPLY overflowed -- whereas at St Domingo,
a DRY season is most productive of diseases; owing to its favoring those
degrees of moisture which produce morbid exhalations. These facts will explain
the reason why, in certain seasons, places which are naturally healthy in our
country, become sickly, while those places which are naturally sickly, escape
the prevailing epidemic. Previously to the dissipation of the moisture from the
putrid masses of vegetable matters in our streets, and in the neighborhood of
the city, there were (as several practitioners can testify) many cases of mild
remittents, but they all disappeared about the first week in September.

It is worthy of notice, that the yellow fever prevailed in Virginia in the
year 1741, and in Charleston in South Carolina in the year 1699, in both which
years, it prevailed in Philadelphia. Its prevalence in Charleston is taken
notice of in a letter dated November 18th, O. S. 1699, from Isaac Norris to one
of his correspondents. The letter says, that "150 persons had died in
Charleston in a few days," that "the survivors fled into the country," and that
"the town was thinned to a very few people." Is it not probable, from the
prevalence of this fever twice in two places in the same years, that it was
produced (as last year) by a general constitution of air, cooperating with
miasmata, which favored its generation in different parts of the continent?
But again, such was the state of the air in the summer of 1793, that it
predisposed other animals to diseases, besides the human species. In some parts
of New Jersey, a disorder prevailed with great mortality among the horses, and
in Virginia among the cows, during the last autumn. The urine in both was
yellow. -- Large abscesses appeared in different parts of the body in the
latter animals, which when opened, discharged a yellow serous fluid. From the
color of these discharges, and of the urine, the disease got the name of the
yellow water.

3. I have before remarked that a quantity of damaged coffee, was exposed at a
time (July the 24th) and in a situation (on a wharf, and in a dock) which
favored its putrefaction, and exhalation. Its smell was highly putrid and
offensive, insomuch that the inhabitants of the houses in Water and Front
Streets, who were near it, were obliged in the hottest weather to exclude it,
by shutting their doors and windows. Even persons, who only walked-along those
streets, complained of an intolerable foetor, which upon enquiring, was
constantly traced to the putrid coffee. It should not surprise us, that this
seed, so inoffensive in its natural state, should produce, after its
putrefaction a violent fever. The records of medicine furnish instances of
similar fevers being produced, by the putrefaction of many other vegetable
substances. Fourteen men out of sixteen, perished by a malignant fever, a few
years ago, at the island of Tortola, from the effluvia generated by some
putrefied potatoes, which were taken out of the hold of a Liverpool vessel.
"The effluvia (says Dr Zimmerman) from a little heap of flax, has been known to
occasion a malignant fever, which proved fatal to the family, in which it first
began, and afterward spread its Contagion through a whole country." Dr Rodgers
in his treatise upon the diseases of Cork, mentions a malignant fever which
swept away a great number of the students of Wadham College in Oxford, "The
singularity of the case (adds the Doctor) engaged all the gentlemen of the
faculty, in a serious inquiry into the causes of so remarkable an effect, and
all agreed that the contagious infection arose from the putrefaction of a vast
quantity of cabbages thrown into a heap out of the several gardens near the
College." Lancissi relates, that one end of the city of Rome was nearly
desolated by the effluvia of some rotted hemp, which lay in the neighborhood
of the city. The same author remarks, that "fevers often prevail at
Constantinople, which owe their origin to the hemp which is brought from Cairo,
and which is put wet into the public granaries, and suffered to ferment during
the summer. It is afterward sold, and the seeds of those diseases are
afterward spread among the people." Many other facts might be adduced of
radishes, turnips, garlic, and sundry other vegetables, generating by
putrefaction, fevers, similar to those which have been mentioned.

4. The rapid progress of the fever from Water-street, and the courses through
which it traveled into other parts of the city, afford a strong evidence that
it was at first propagated chiefly by exhalation from the putrid coffee. It is
remarkable that it passed first through those alleys, and streets which were in
the course of the winds that blew across the dock and wharf where the coffee
lay, and that persons were affected at a much greater distance from
Water-street by that means, than was afterward known by means of the contagion
which was generated by infected persons.

5. Many persons who had worked, or even visited in the neighborhood of the
exhalation from the coffee, early in the month of August, were indisposed
afterward with sickness, puking, and yellow sweats, long before the air of
Water-street was so much impregnated with the contagion, as to produce such
effects; and several patients whom I attended in the yellow fever declared to
me, or to their friends, that their indispositions began exactly at the time
they inhaled the offensive effluvia of the coffee.

6. The first cases of the yellow fever have been clearly traced to the sailors
of the vessel who were first exposed to the effluvia of the coffee. Their
sickness commenced with the day on which the coffee began to emit its putrid
smell. The disease spread with the increase of the poisonous exhalation. A
journeyman of Mr Peter Brown's, who worked near the corner of Race and
Water-streets, caught the disease on the 27th of July. Elizabeth Hill, the wife
of a fisherman was infected by only sailing near the pestilential wharf, about
the first of August, and died at Kensington on the 14th of the same month. Many
other names might be mentioned of persons who sickened during the last week in
July or the first week in August, who ascribed their illnesses to the smell of
the coffee. From three of those persons who came under my notice, the disease
was evidently propagated by contagion: from one of them, to nearly a whole
family, and from another to a girl of eight years old, who was led by curiosity
to examine the yellow color which it was said had appeared in the face of the
infected person, after death.

7. It has been remarked that this fever did not spread in the country, when
carried there by persons who were infected, and who afterward died with it.
This I conceive was occasioned, in part by the contagion being deprived of the
aid of miasmata from the putrid matter which first produced it in our city, and
in part, by its being diluted, and thereby weakened by the pure air of the
country. During four times in which it prevailed in Charleston, in no one
instance, according to Dr Lining, was it propagated in any other part of the
state.

8. It is very remarkable that in the histories of the disorder which have been
preserved in this country, it has six times appeared about the first or middle
of August, and declined, or ceased about the middle of October -- viz. in 1732,
1739, 1745, and 1748 in Charleston; in 1791 in New York, and in 1793 in
Philadelphia. This frequent occurrence of the yellow fever at the usual period
of our common bilious remittents, cannot be ascribed to accidental coincidence,
but must be resolved in most cases into the combination of more active miasmata
with the predisposition of a tropical season. In speaking of a tropical season,
I include that kind of weather in which rains and heats are alternated with
each other, as well as that, which is uniformly warm.

9. Several circumstances attended the late epidemic, which do not occur in the
West India yellow fever. It affected children as well as adults in common with
our annual bilious fevers. In the West Indies Dr Hume tells us it never
attacked any person under puberty. It had, moreover, many peculiar symptoms (as
I have already shown) which are not to be met with in any of the histories of
the West India yellow fever.

10. Why should it surprise us to see a yellow fever generated amongst us? It
is only a higher grade of a fever which prevails every year in our city, from
vegetable putrefaction. It conforms in the difference of its degrees of
violence, and danger to season, as well as climate, and in this respect it is
upon a footing with the smallpox, the measles, the fore-throat, and several
other diseases. There are few years pass, in which a plethoric habit, and more
active but limited miasmata, do not produce Sporadic Cases of true yellow fever
in Philadelphia. It is very common in South and North Carolina and in Virginia,
and there are facts which prove, that not only strangers, but native
individuals, and in one instance, a whole family, have been carried off by it
in the state of Maryland. It proved fatal to one hundred persons in the city of
New York in the year of 1791, where it was evidently generated by putrid
exhalation. The yellow color of the skin, has unfortunately too often been
considered as the characteristic mark of this fever, otherwise many other
instances of its prevalence might be discovered, I have no doubt in every part
of the United States. I wish with Dr Mosely, the term yellow, could be
abolished from the titles of this fever, for this color is not only frequently
absent, but sometimes occurs in the mildest bilious remittents. Dr Haller in
his pathology, describes an epidemic of this kind in Swisserland, in which this
color generally attended, and I have once seen it almost universal in a common
bilious fever which prevailed in the American army in the year 1776.

If any thing could surprise me after reading the report of the College of
Physicians that our late fever was imported, in spite of every possible
evidence to the contrary, it would be the opinion which was delivered publicly
by some leading members of the College, that no fever produced by vegetable
putrefaction and exhalation, had ever been contagious. It is scarcely possible
to open a practical book upon medicine, without meeting with facts which
establish a contrary opinion. The fevers generated by putrid cabbage, mentioned
by Dr Rodgers, and by putrid flax mentioned by Dr Zimmerman, were both
contagious. Dr Lind ascribes the yellow fever every where to marsh or putrid
vegetable exhalations; and this fever, we know, spreads by contagion. Dr Lind,
Jun. establishes the contagious nature of the marsh fever which prevailed in
Bengal in the year 1762. I shall transcribe his words upon this subject.
"Although marsh miasmata (says he) first bring on the disease, yet contagion
presently spreads it, and renders it more epidemic. Thus the Drake Indiaman
continued free from the disorder for two weeks together, when she had no
communication with other ships; whereas as soon as the disorder was brought on
board, many were seized with it within a few days in such a manner as to leave
no room to entertain the least doubt concerning its pestilential nature Page
35, 36.
."

Dr Clark mentions a contagious malignant fever from marsh miasmata, which
prevailed at Prince's Island in the year 1771, and which afterward infected
the crew of the Grenville Indiaman Observations on the Diseases of Long Voyages
to hot countries, vol. i. p. 123, 124.
. The contagious pestilential fever in France, so accurately described by
Riverius, was produced by an exhalation from putrid vegetables, particularly
hemp and flax De Febre Pestilenti, vol. ii. p. 97.
. Even intermittents, the most frequent and the most numerous offspring of
marsh exhalation, are contagious. Of this there are many proofs in practical
authors. Bianchi describes an intermittent which was highly contagious at
Wolfenbuttle in the year 1666 Histor. Hepat. p. 745.
. Dr Clark mentions a number of cases in which this mild species of fever was
propagated by contagion. Dr Cleghorn has established the contagious nature of
intermittents by many facts. After mentioning numerous instances of their
having spread in this way, he says, "These tertian^ have as good a right to be
called contagious as the measles, smallpox, or any other disease Page 132.
." The United States, in common with other countries, have in many places
exhibited proofs of the contagious nature of fevers, produced by putrid
vegetable exhalations. The yellow fever which the citizens of New York wisely
admit to have been generated in their city from vegetable putrefaction in the
year 1791, spread by contagion Addoms's Inaugural Dissertation on the Malignant
Fever which prevailed in New York, during the months of August, September, and
October, in 1791, p. 7.
. The bilious fever which prevailed in Philadelphia in the year 1778, was
evidently contagious; so were the bilious fevers which prevailed during the
last autumn in Weathersfield, Harrisburgh, and on the south branch of the
Potowmac. I hope I shall be excused by the physicians of other states (if this
publication should fall into their hands) for having employed a single page in
combating an error which is so obvious to common observation. My only design in
exposing it, is to prevent a repetition of its fatal influence in the only city
in the world in which it has ever been believed or propagated.

I am far however from denying that this disease has not sometimes been
imported into our country. From the authority of Dr Lind, it appears that this
has once been the case in Philadelphia. In this respect it is upon a footing
with the plague, which is both an imported and a generated disease, in the
cities of the East. I am disposed however to believe that the instances of the
yellow fever being imported are very few, compared with those of its being
generated in our country. What makes this opinion probable is, that neither
Great Britain nor Ireland have ever, to my knowledge, been infected by this
fever, notwithstanding their long and frequent commercial intercourse with the
West India islands. The summers in each of those countries, though seldom hot
enough to generate a contagious yellow or bilious fever, are notwithstanding
warm enough to favor the propagation of an imported contagion of that
disorder. The jail fever which has more than once been introduced into our city
in crowded ships from Holland, I suspect has been sometimes mistaken for the
yellow fever of the West Indies. But I have another reason for discrediting
some of the accounts of the importation of this fever, which have been handed
down to us by former generations, and that is, the manner in which the College
of Physicians decided upon the question of the origin of the disease now under
consideration. The governor of the state requested in his letter to them, to
know whether it was imported; if it were, from what place, at what time, and in
what manner. The report of the College of Physicians takes no notice of either
of those questions. In vain did Dr Foulke call upon the college to be more
definite in their answer to the governor's letter. They had faithfully sought
for the information required, but to no purpose. The character of their
departed brother Dr Hutchinson, for capacity and vigilance in his office, as
inspector of sickly vessels, was urged without effect as an argument against
the probability of the disease being imported. Public report had derived it
from several different islands; had chased it from ship to ship, and from shore
to shore; and finally conveyed it at different times into the city, alternately
by dead and living bodies; and from these tales, all of which when
investigated, were proved to be without foundation, the College of Physicians
composed their letter. It would seem from this conduct of the College as if
medical superstition had changed its names, and that in accounting for the
origin of pestilential fevers, celestial, planetary, and demoniacal influence,
has only yielded to the term -- importation.

Let not the reader reject the opinion I have delivered, because it is opposed
by so great a majority of the physicians of Philadelphia. A single physician
supported an opinion of the existence of the plague at Messina in the year
1743, in opposition to all the physicians (33 in number) of that city. They
denied the disease in question to exist, because it was not accompanied by
glandular swellings. Time showed that they were all mistaken, and the plague,
which might probably have been checked at its first appearance by their united
efforts, was by means of their ignorance, introduced with great mortality into
every part of the city. This disposition of physicians to limit the symptoms of
several other diseases, cannot be sufficiently lamented. The frequent absence
of a yellow color in our late epidemic, led to mistakes which cost the city of
Philadelphia several hundred lives.

The report of the College of Physicians has served to confirm me in an
opinion, that the plagues which occasionally desolated most of the countries in
Europe in former centuries, and which were always said to be of foreign
extraction, were in most instances of domestic origin. Between the years 1006
and 1680, and plague was epidemic 52 times all over Europe. It prevailed 14
times in 14th century. The state of Europe in this long period, is well known.
Idleness, a deficiency of vegetable aliment, a camp life from the frequency of
wars, famine, an uncultivated and marshy soil, small cabins, and the want of
cleanliness in dress, diet, and furniture, all concurred to generate
pestilential diseases. The plagues which prevailed in London every year from
1593 to 1611, and from 1636 to 1649, I suspect were generated in that city. The
diminution of plagues in Europe, more especially in London, appears to have
been produced by the great change in the diet and manners of the people; also
by the more commodious and airy forms of the houses of the poor, among whom the
plague always makes its first appearance. It is true, these plagues were said
by authors to have been imported either directly or indirectly from the Levant;
but the proofs of such importation were in most cases as vague and deficient,
as they were of the West India origin of our late epidemic. The pestilential
fevers which have been mentioned, have been described by authors, by the
generic name of the plague; but some of them appear to have originated from
putrid vegetable exhalations, and to have resembled in most of their symptoms,
the West India and North American yellow fever.

I am aware that the opinion and facts which I have stated upon the origin of
the late epidemic, are not popular with our citizens, but I did not dare to
conceal them; for I am persuaded a knowledge and belief of them, involve in
their consequences, the lives of millions that are yet unborn.

Commerce can no more be endangered than Religion, by the publication of
philosophical truth. On the contrary it must suffer most by the adoption of the
traditional error which I have endeavored to refute, for while the cause of a
malignant fever is obvious to the senses, it will be easy to guard against it;
but while it is believed that the disease may be imported, and no body know,
from what place, at what time, and in what manner, we shall not only be
careless in the midst of filth and danger, but our city will always hold its
character for health by a timid and precarious tenure. I am the more disposed
to expect forgiveness from my fellow citizens for this attempt to serve them,
by the recollection of the sudden change in the health of our city which
followed the arching the offensive dock between Front and Third streets in the
year 1782. By advising that measure (in which I stood nearly alone) I incurred
the censure of several valuable citizens. The bills of mortality however soon
showed that the measure was right, and I have since seen with great pleasure
the extraordinary healthiness of our city, ascribed by indifferent people, to
that, among other causes.

The climate of our country can no more suffer than the commerce of our city,
by this investigation; for it fixes the late fever, and all the other malignant
fevers of the United States, upon putrid vegetable exhalation. Without the
matrix of putrid vegetable matters, there can no more be a bilious or yellow
fever generated amongst us, than there can be vegetation without earth -- water
or air. To ascribe our late disease therefore to the exclusive influence of the
atmosphere, is a reflection upon our climate which is equally unphilosophical
and unjust.

Let it only be clearly proved, and boldly asserted, that a bilious yellow
fever has been, and may be generated in our country, under the circumstances
before mentioned, and the return of it, as also of common bilious and
intermitting fevers may every where be prevented by a due attention to the
cleanliness of the wharfs and suburbs, as well as the streets of our cities,
and towns; by draining and cultivating marshy grounds in their neighborhood,
and in the neighborhood of farm houses, -- and where the last cannot be done,
by sheltering them from the current of vegetable exhalations, by means of a
body of trees that are of speedy growth. In this manner, malignant and deadly
fevers have been banished from most of the cities in Europe.

I have hinted in the course of this history, at the resemblance which the
yellow fever bears to the plague. Before I dismiss this part of my subject, I
shall briefly enumerate the circumstances, and symptoms, which belong to them
in common; and afterward mention those which are peculiar to each of them. The
utility of this digression will, I hope appear hereafter, when I come to
deliver the history of the cure of the yellow fever. -- The principles which
suggested and directed it, will apply alike to both diseases.

The circumstances and symptoms in which the plague, and the yellow fever (as
it lately appeared in our city) resemble each other, are as follow:

In being accompanied and increased by warm weather.

In affecting those people most generally who follow occupations which expose
them to be much heated. The bakers were great sufferers by the plagues at
Aleppo, described by Dr P. Russel.

In affecting persons who are suddenly debilitated by fear or grief.

In affecting all ages; also the poor more than the rich; men more than women;
and persons of robust, more than those of weakly habits.

In attacking with, and without premonitory symptoms.

In being excited by intemperance, and labor.

In being accompanied by a full, tense, depressed, regular, or an intermitting
pulse.

In being accompanied by hemorrhagies. These are less frequent in the plague
than in the yellow fever. -- Abortions are alike common in both diseases.

The following symptoms of our late yellow fever occur likewise in the plague.

Inflammation of the brain.

Inflammation, mortifications, and carbuncles in the alimentary canal and
stomach.

Costiveness or diarrhoea. Copious sweats in the beginning of the disease which
afford relief. -- A discharge of a blackish liquor from the stomach by
vomiting, in the close of the disease.

A moist white tongue, in its beginning, and a dry black tongue in its last
stage.

Absence of heat and thirst in some cases.

Convulsions, syncope, great depression of spirits, exquisite pain, so as to
excite screamings in the sick. Delirium and a temporary loss of memory after
recovery.

A red or a brilliant eye, and great venereal excitability in the convalescent
state of the disease.

Buboes, and an exclusive affection of the lymphatic glands.

Maculae, or red spots resembling flea bites, watery vesicles, or blisters
which end in mortifications, petechiae, anthrax, and carbuncles.

Sizy, dense, or dissolved blood.

The plague appears in the forms of quotidian, tertian, and quartan fevers. It
has different grades, also different durations, from one day to two, three and
four weeks. It is most fatal at its first appearance. Convulsive twitchings of
the tendons are less common in the plague, than in the nervous fever. It chases
away, or unites with all other febrile diseases.

I have before remarked, that during the prevalence of the plague, some
foreigners escape the contagion.

The contagion of the plague infects the atmosphere of a whole city, and is
propagated without contact with the sick. Many people discover marks of the
presence of this contagion in their bodies, who are in apparent good health; a
disposition to sweat is very common in such persons. The disease is sometimes
propagated by contact by means of this sweat, when it affects the hands.

Persons infected with the contagion of the plague, communicate it before they
are sensible of their being affected by it. The contagion is excited at
different times, from the moment it is received into the body, until the 16th
day afterward.

Persons who have had the plague, are capable of re-infection.

Brutes, as cats and dogs are affected in some instances, with symptoms of the
plague, particularly buboes.

Persons confined in Seraglios in Eastern countries, and in Monasteries in
Catholic countries, also grave diggers, very often escape the plague.

The bodies of persons who die of the plague become stiff in some instances
immediately after death. Tears likewise often appear on their cheeks.

Cold weather checks the plague, but not so uniformly as it does the yellow
fever.

The diseases which succeed the plague, appear with more or less of its
symptoms.

It will appear hereafter that the cure of the yellow fever, accorded in
several particulars, with that of the plague.

The circumstances and symptoms in which the plague differs from the yellow
fever are as follow:

A vomiting is less common in the plague, than in the yellow fever. Bile is
less frequently discharged, and the stools are less foetid, and offensive.

There are small horny swellings upon the breast and limbs in the plague which
did not occur in the yellow fever. They are called tokens.

The contagion of the plague does not infect as so great a distance, as the
contagion of the yellow fever.

It affects more universally, than the yellow fever, and (with a few
exceptions) it is more mortal when left to itself.

It sometimes prevails in cold weather. It prevails likewise in a greater
variety of states of the atmosphere.

The body is of its usual, or of a greenish color after death.

The plague is of animal origin. It is derived in some instances from dead
animal matters. The plagues which laid waste the Roman Empire in the reign of
Justinian, are ascribed by Mr Gibbon, to swarms of putrefying locusts. But the
most frequent source of the plague is from human miasmata, rendered
pestilential, by famine, grief, the want of cleanliness, and by a number of
persons crowded together in small rooms, or houses.

The yellow fever has been confounded with the jail or hospital fever. I shall
briefly enumerate the circumstances and symptoms in which they agree and
disagree.

The first are as follow:

The jail-fever affects persons who are debilitated by grief, fear, or
intemperance.

The pulse is sometimes intermitting in this fever. This is taken notice of by
Dr Ferriar.

There are marks of congestion in the brain, without any signs of inflammation
in it after death. There are likewise in this fever great depression of
spirits, sighing, delirium, palsy, and a debilitated state of the memory after
recovery. This occurs more frequently, and in a greater degree, after the jail,
than after the yellow fever.

The eye is sometimes red, and sometimes dull in this fever. There is
frequently an absence of thirst.

There is in the jail fever in its worst state, a suppression or great ^^at in
the urine.

Buboes, petechiae, pain along the spermatic cord, a swelling of one testicle,
ulcers in the throat, and abscesses in different parts of the body, have all
occurred occasionally in this fever.

The circumstances and symptoms in which the jail fever differs from the yellow
fever, are as follow:

It affects persons who have been previously weakened by other diseases, or who
are of weakly habits.

The pulse is seldom full or tense, but generally weak and quick.

The tongue soon loses its whiteness and moisture, and assumes when dry, a dark
color.

The stomach is seldom disordered. The bowels are either in their natural
state, or a diarrhoea attends. The stools are seldom bilious, or
preternaturally foetid.

There are great twitchings in the tendons, and tremors in the tongue, and
limbs.

Intermissions and remissions of the fever are seldom, or scarcely perceptible.

It prevails alike in the winter, spring, and autumn. It is moderated, or
checked by warm weather, provided patients are placed in situations in which
they can breathe a sufficient quantity of fresh air.

It is less contagious and mortal than the yellow fever.

It is derived from human miasmata produced under inferior degrees of all those
circumstances, which favor the generation of the plague. It is, to the plague
in its degree, what the common bilious, is, to the yellow fever.

There is a camp fever described by some authors, which is derived from a
mixture of marsh and human miasmata. Its symptoms are compounded of those which
belong to the bilious, and jail fevers.

I shall not attempt to distinguish the yellow, from the common bilious fever.
They are only different grades of the same disease. The following, appears to
be the natural order of a scale of such fevers as are derived from marsh
miasmata.

1. The yellow fever.

2. The common bilious remitting fever.

3. The intermitting fever.

4. The febricula of authors, or what are called "inward fevers" in the
southern states. Different degrees of force in the remote cause, in conjunction
with a difference in the sensible qualities of the air, frequently produce all
those grades of bilious or marsh fever in different seasons, and sometimes, in
the same season. The increase, or abstraction of accidental stimuli, likewise
often change these different states of bilious fever into each other. Thus,
what are called inward fevers have often been excited by means of a ride, or a
long walk, into an intermittent; an intermittent has been changed by the
premature use of the bark into a remitting fever, and a common remittent, has,
by improper regimen or violent exercise, been excited into a yellow fever. The
danger in each case, is determined by the force of the miasmata, and the state
of the air.

In contemplating the immense proportion of human misery, which is produced by
pestilential diseases, we are naturally led to inquire whether their approaches
are not indicated by some unusual signs in the operations of nature. What is
called instinct in many animals, has repeatedly taught them to foresee, and to
avoid many natural evils; and if reason has not taught man to do the same, it
is probably because its exercises have not been directed to those subjects.

I have endeavored to discover whether any thing uncommon occurred in the
operations of nature in the atmosphere, or in the animal and vegetable kingdoms
in the course of the winter and summer, which preceded our late epidemic. The
result of my inquiries is as follows.

The winter of 1793 was unusually moderate. It was supposed this had an
influence upon the weather which favored the generation and propagation of the
disease. I should have been disposed to admit this opinion, had moderate
winters in Pennsylvania been uniformly succeeded by sickly autumns. Livy
records that a pestilential fever in Rome was preceded by an unusually cold
winter Riverius vol. ii. p. 98.
.

The wild pigeons were common during the winter of 1793 in many parts of
Pennsylvania. But they have occasionally appeared in great stocks in our state
in former winters, without having been the harbingers of a sickly autumn.

Dr P. Russel says, that uncommon and violent diseases generally preceded the
plague at Aleppo. Dr Sydenham informs us, that acute inflammatory fevers were
the forerunners of the plague in London in 1665. I suspect that uncommon
circumstances attending certain diseases, either as to their violence or time
of appearance, will be found to suggest a prelude to a sickly autumn in all
countries. The scarlatina anginosa I have remarked was attended with an
uncommon degree of inflammatory diathesis, in the month of July. Dr Porter
informed me that he had been called to several cases of dysentery, attended
with symptoms of great malignity, in the neighborhood of Frankfort, in the
months of July and August. Dr Senter informed me in a letter dated the 26th of
November, 1793, that "during the last two summer months, fevers and fluxes were
more obstinate than he had ever known them, at Newport in Rhode Island." My
pupil Mr Nathaniel Potter, in a letter from Caroline county, in Maryland, dated
November 1st, 1793, gave me the following information. "On my arrival at this
place, on the first of August, I was informed by gentlemen of the faculty, that
the dysentery had prevailed from the first of June to the fifteenth of July,
with considerable mortality. From observations and communications from
different people in this county, I did not hesitate to predict a sickly autumn;
for it is an invariable maxim here, both among physicians and farmers, that if
the wheat be damaged by rust or blast, a contagious dysentery is soon to
follow; and the sooner in the summer the dysentery appears, the more violent
and mortal will be the diseases of the autumn."

These communications, though short and few, will be useful if they serve to
lead physicians to observe and record hereafter the diseases which precede
universal and mortal epidemics.

There can be no doubt of a warm summer, whether it be wet or dry, having often
preceded malignant autumnal fevers. Mr Norris in a letter to one of his
friends, dated the 24th of August, O. S. says that "the summer of 1699 was the
hottest he had ever felt, and that several had died in the harvest fields with
the violence of the heat." It appears from another of Mr Norris's letters,
dated the 12th of August, O. S. that the yellow fever made its first appearance
in that month. The yellow fevers of 1762 and 1793, were both preceded by warm
summers.

I have one more remark to mention upon this subject, which was communicated to
me by a gentleman who had resided occasionally in southern and tropical
countries. He informed me that he had observed in the month of July, several
weeks before the yellow fever became general, a peculiar and universal
allowness of complexion in the faces of the citizens of Philadelphia, such as
he had observed to precede the prevalence of malignant bilious fevers in hot
climates. Dr Dick informed me that he had observed the same appearance in the
faces of people in Alexandria, accompanied in some cases by a yellowness in the
eyes, during the last summer, and some time before violent bilious fevers
became epidemic upon the banks of the Potowmac.

With these observations I take leave of the history of our late epidemic
fever. A few of its symptoms which have been omitted in the history, will be
included in the method of cure; for they were discovered or produced by the
remedies which were used for that purpose.

The following Page begins an account of the states of the thermometer and
weather, from the first of January to the first of August, and of the states of
the barometer, thermometer, winds, and weather, from the first of August to the
ninth of November, 1793. The times of observation for the first three months
are at 7 in the morning, and 2 in the afternoon; for the next five months they
are at 6 in the morning, and 3 in the afternoon. From the first of October to
the ninth of November, they are as in the first three months.

January, 1793. February, 1793. Therm. Weather. Therm. Weather. D 7h 2h 7h 2h 1
27 30 Cloudy. 9 26 Fair, hazey. 2 30 41 Fair, cloudy. 25 34 Rain, ditto. 3 30
33 Cloudy, rain. 33 37 Cloudy, fair. 4 38 41 Rain, cloudy. 25 46 Cloudy, fair.
5 35 42 Fair, cloudy. 36 44 Cloudy, ditto. 6 33 47 Cloudy, fair. 35 46 Cloudy,
rain. 7 33 51 Fair, fair, 36 40 Cloudy, fair. 8 32 49 Fair, ditto. 28 44
Cloudy, ditto. 9 33 48 Hazey, fair. 42 50 Rain, fair. 10 38 51 Fair, ditto. 38
40 Cloudy, fair. 11 35 48 Fair, clouds. 19 27 Fair, cloudy. 12 31 42 Fair,
ditto. 20 28 Snow, cloudy. 13 28 4^ Fair, do. 22 31 Cloudy, snow. 14 25 27
Hail, snow, sleet. 27 39 Cloudy, fair. 15 32 37 Clouds, mist, 18 40 Fair,
ditto. 16 37 39 Rain, ditto. 29 42 Cloudy, ditto. 17 37 45 Rain, snow, fair. 44
48 Rain, ditto. 18 32 52 Fair, ditto. 39 49 Cloudy, fair. 19 37 48 Fair, do 31
41 Cloudy, rain. 20 33 47 Hazey, cloudy. 52 53 Rain, fair. 21 36 47 Cloudy,
fair. 37 49 Fair, ditto. 22 27 32 Fair, ditto. 29 34 Fair, do. 23 22 37 Fair,
do. 22 34 Snow, cloudy. 24 30 39 Cloudy, do. 54 59 Rain, cloudy. 25 30 41 Fair,
hazey. 34 35 Cloudy, ditto. 26 31 -- Fair. 35 43 Rain, mist. 27 23 38 Fair,
cloudy, snow. 43 43 Rain, cloudy. 28 35 45 Cloudy, fair. 14 26 Fair, ditto. 29
29 37 Fair, ditto. 30 22 23 Snow, hail. 31 25 32 Cloudy, fair. March, 1793.
April, 1793. Therm. Weather. Therm. Weather. D 7h 2h 7h 2h 1 20 ^8 Fair, ditto.
45 70 Cloudy, fair. 2 31 51 Hazey, cloudy. 47 71 Fair, ditto. 3 48 63 Rain,
fair. 56 80 Fair, do. 4 43 61 Hazey, ditto. 51 72 Cloudy, fair. 5 51 52 Rain,
fair. 53 61 Cloudy, rain. 6 32 50 Fair, ditto. 60 76 Misty, fair. 7 36 62 Fair,
do. clouds. 51 65 Fair, do. 8 54 60 Cloudy, rain. 46 74 Fair, do. 9 26 41 Fair,
ditto. 55 71 Fair, cloudy. 10 29 51 Fair, do. 50 56 Fair, do. 11 43 55 Rain,
do. 37 63 Fair, do. 12 40 43 Cloudy, do. 54 62 Cloudy, rain, fair. 13 38 39
Cloudy, fair. 49 62 Fair, do. 14 26 44 Fair, do. 50 70 Fair, do. 15 32 59 Fair,
do. 45 55 Rain, cloudy. 16 52 62 Cloudy, fair. 46 62 Cloudy, fair. 17 51 72
Cloudy, fair. 48 67 Fair, clouds, fair. 18 58 69 Hazey, cloudy. 52 66 Cloudy,
fair. 19 53 59 Fair, do. 52 75 Fair, do. 20 42 61 Fair, do. 52 49 Rain, cloudy.
21 41 43 Rain, cloudy. 44 47 Cloudy, ditto. 22 31 47 Fair, do. 43 46 Rain,
cloudy. 23 35 57 Fair, do. 42 63 Fair, do. 24 37 50 Fair, do. 44 68 Fair, do.
25 35 59 Fair, do. 45 65 Cloudy, cloudy. 26 47 54 Cloudy, rain. 53 57 Cloudy,
rain. 27 43 51 Fair, cloudy. 47 46 Rain, do. 28 33 45 Fair, clouds, fair. 44 54
Rain, cloudy. 29 34 57 Fair, do. 40 59 Fair, do. 30 41 58 Cloudy, fair. 40 65
Fair, do. 31 42 61 Cloudy, fair. May, 1793. June, 1793. Therm. Weather. Therm.
Weather. D. 7h 2h 7h 2h 1 45 69 Foggy, cloudy. 53 61 Rain, showery. 2 52 73
Fog, clouds, fair. 54 64 Clouds, showers. 3 60 63 Rain, do. 55 62 Cloudy, rain,
fair, 4 60 80 Fair, do. 54 60 Rain, do. cloudy. 5 55 56 Cloudy, do. 58 72
Cloudy, fair, rain. 6 47 58 Cloudy, fair. -- 71 Cloudy, rain, 7 50 68 Cloudy,
fair. 68 78 Fair, do. 8 59 78 Cloudy, fair. 65 -- Fair, do. 9 61 79 Foggy,
fair. 70 88 Fog, fair. 10 65 71 Rain, hazey. 74 90 Fair, do. 11 55 75 Cloudy,
fair. 76 90 Fair, do. 12 61 76 Cloudy, rain. 75 88 Fair, showers. 13 57 78
Fair, do. 74 81 Cloudy, rain. 14 59 83 Fair, cloudy. 63 77 Fair, do. 15 60 71
Fair, do. 63 82 Fair, hazey. 16 50 69 Fair, do. 67 85 Fair, do. 17 48 74 Fair,
do. 74 89 Fair, showers. 18 61 81 Cloudy, fair. 73 88 Fair, do. 19 65 85 Fair,
rain. 77 91 Fair, do. 20 65 87 Fair, do. 79 88 Fair, rain, fair. 21 68 86 Fair,
do. clouds. 75 85 Cloudy, rain. 22 72 80 Clouds, gusts. 58 78 Cloudy, fair, 23
94 79 Cloudy, fair. 58 78 Fair, do. 24 58 75 Fair, do. 60 79 Fair, do. 25 52 70
Fair, cloudy. 67 74 Cloudy, rain. 26 61 66 Rain, do. 66 69 Cloudy, rain. 27 68
84 Cloudy, fair. 68 80 Cloudy, fair. 28 70 68 Fair, clouds, rain. 71 85 Cloudy,
fair. 29 57 62 Cloudy, rain, clouds. 77 88 Cloudy, do. 30 54 57 Cloudy, rain.
74 90 Fair, do. 31 54 60 Clouds, do. JULY, 1793.
Barometer. Therm. Wind. Weather. Days. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 6 P. M. 6 A. M.
3 P. M. 1 30 0 29 9 77 88 W W fair. 2 29 8 29 7 77 81 W fair, showers. 3 29 9
30 0 74 80 E E cloudy, 4 30 1 30 0 70 83 E SW cloudy, fair, rain. 5 30 0 29 9
76 90 NW SW fair, do. 6 29 9 29 9 78 91 SW SW cloudy, thunder. 7 29 9 30 0 73
88 NE NW fair, clouds. 8 30 1 30 1 72 85 E E cloudy, fair. 9 30 0 29 8 73 81 S
SW cloudy, do. 10 30 0 30 0 70 84 W NW fair, do. 11 30 0 30 0 74 88 NW NW fair,
clouds. 12 30 1 30 2 70 84 N N fair, do. 13 30 1 30 0 68 83 NW NW fair, do. 14
30 0 30 0 65 80 N Calm fair, hazey. 15 30 0 29 9 66 75 SW SW cloudy, do. 16 29
8 29 7 70 83 W W rain, fair. 17 29 8 29 9 68 81 NW NW fair, do. 18 30 0 30 0 66
86 W SW fair, do. 19 29 9 29 9 75 85 SW W fair, cloudy, rain. 20 30 0 30 0 72
87 W NW fair, do. shower. 21 30 1 30 1 70 86 NW NW fair, do. 22 30 0 30 0 72 87
SW SW fair, do. 23 30 0 30 0 73 91 SW SW fair, cloudy. 24 29 9 29 9 75 89 Calm
W cloudy, fair. 25 30 1 30 1 71 83 NW NNW fair, do. 26 30 2 30 2 63 82 N NE
fair, do. 27 30 2 30 1 64 81 S clam S fair, cloudy. 28 30 1 30 0 72 85 Calm NNE
cloudy, fair. 29 30 1 30 1 74 85 SSE NE cloudy, do. rain. 30 30 1 30 0 73 86 S
SW cloudy, fair. 31 29 9 29 8 76 80 SSW SW cloudy, rain, fair. AUGUST, 1793.
Barometer. Therm. Wind. Weather. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P.
M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 29 95 30 0 65 77 WNW NW cloudy, fair, 2 30 1 30 1 63 81 NW
SW fair, fair, 3 30 6 29 95 62 82 N NNE fair, fair, 4 29 97 30 0 65 87 S SW
fair, fair, 5 30 5 30 1 73 90 SSW SW fair, fair, 6 30 2 30 0 77 87 SW W cloudy,
fair, 7 30 12 30 1 68 83 NW W fair, fair, 8 30 1 29 95 69 86 SSE SSE fair,
rain, 9 29 8 29 75 75 85 SSW SW cloudy, fair, 10 29 9 29 9 67 82 W SW fair,
fair, 11 30 0 30 0 70 84 SW WSW cloudy, cloudy, 12 30 0 30 0 70 87 W W fair,
fair, 13 30 5 30 0 71 89 SW W fair, fair, 14 30 0 29 95 75 82 SW SW fair, rain,
15 30 0 30 1 72 75 NNE NE fair, cloudy, 16 30 1 30 1 70 83 NNE NE fair, fair,
17 30 1 30 0 71 86 SW SW fair, fair, 18 30 1 30 1 73 89 calm SW fair, fair, 19
30 1 30 0 72 82 N N fair, cloudy, 20 30 1 30 12 69 82 NNE NNE fair, fair, 21 30
15 30 25 62 83 N NNE fair, fair, 22 30 3 30 35 63 86 NE SE fair, fair, 23 30 25
30 15 63 85 calm S fair, fair, 24 30 1 30 1 73 81 calm calm cloudy, rain, 25 30
1 30 1 71 66 NE NE rain, gr. rain 26 30 15 30 2 59 69 NE NE cloudy, cloudy, 27
30 2 30 2 65 73 NE NE cloudy, cloudy, 28 30 2 30 15 67 80 S calm cloudy,
clearin. 29 30 16 30 15 72 86 calm SW cloudy, fair, 30 30 1 30 1 74 87 calm SW
fair, fair, 31 30 0 30 0 74 84 SW NW rain, fair, SEPTEMBER, 1793.
Barometer. Therm. Wind. Weather. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P.
M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 30 0 29 30 71 86 calm SW fog, fair, 2 29 75 29 8 73 86 SW
SW fair, fair, 3 80 0 60 NW N fair, fair, 4 30 15 30 15 55 75 W W fair, fair, 5
30 15 30 1 62 80 SE S fair, cloudy, 6 29 97 29 95 70 89 WSW W fair, cloudy, 7
30 0 30 0 65 77 WNW NW fair, fair, 8 30 1 30 1 64 70 calm calm cloudy, cloudy,
9 30 0 30 0 66 80 SE NW rain, fair, 10 30 0 30 0 64 72 N NNE fair, cloudy, 11
30 1 30 0 62 72 NNE N cloudy, fair, 12 29 96 29 9 58 76 NW NNW fair, fair, 13
29 95 30 0 57 72 NW N fair, fair, 14 30 0 30 5 58 79 NW NW fair, fair, 15 30 0
29 97 65 80 N S fair, fair, 16 29 9 29 70 84 S SW cloudy, fair, 17 29 8 29 85
66 67 N N cloudy, cloudy, 18 30 3 44 N fair, 19 30 4 30 35 45 70 calm SW fair,
fair, 20 30 3 30 15 54 69 calm SE hazey, hazey, 21 30 0 29 0 59 78 calm cloudy,
fair, 22 30 0 30 0 63 83 calm cloudy, fair, 23 30 1 30 1 62 81 calm SE cloudy,
cloudy, 24 30 (...) 30 2 65 70 NE ENE cloudy, fair, 25 30 15 30 0 61 68 NE NE
cloudy, cloudy, 26 29 8 29 7 58 79 N N cloudy, fair, 27 29 7 64 NW NW cloudy,
fair, 28 30 5 30 15 54 73 NW NW fair, fair, 29 30 3 30 3 56 74 NE ENE cloudy,
fair, 30 30 35 30 3 57 75 calm SW foggy, fair. OCTOBER, 1793.
Barometer. Therm. Winds. Weather. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 2 P.
M. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 1 30 15 30 5 64 80 SW SW cloudy, fair. 2 29 9 30 5 70 73 W
NNW cloudy, fair, 3 30 2 30 15 50 72 W SW fair, fair, 4 29 75 29 7 59 72 SW W
cloudy, cloudy, 5 30 0 30 1 58 66 N N fair, fair, 6 30 3 30 3 43 66 NE W fair,
fair, 7 30 45 46 calm fair, 8 30 6 30 6 53 68 N N fair, fair, 9 30 5 30 4 53 70
NW NW fair, fair, 10 30 2 30 2 49 74 E NW fair, fair, 11 30 0 29 85 51 74 W W
fair, fair, 12 26 6 29 55 58 64 SW NW rain, rain, 13 29 85 29 9 49 69 NW NW
fair, fair, 14 30 5 30 0 52 76 SW SW calm, fair, 15 29 75 29 8 56 54 SW N fair,
rain, 16 30 0 30 ^ ^7 ^3 NNW N fair, fair, 17 30 1 30 1 37 60 NE NE fair, fair,
18 30 1 30 1 41 62 NW NW fair, fair, 19 30 0 29 9 51 66 N N cloudy, fair, 20 30
0 30 0 44 54 NW N fair, fair, 21 30 0 30 2 49 59 N NW fair, fair, 22 29 6 29 5
51 65 NW NW fair, fair, 23 29 8 29 8 47 60 W W fair, fair, 24 30 3 30 4 36 59 W
NW fair, fair, 25 30 4 30 3 46 71 S S cloudy, do.h-w. 26 30 2 30 2 60 72 calm
SW cloudy. cloudy, 27 30 3 30 3 44 44 NNE NNE cloudy, cloudy, 28 30 2 30 1 34
37 N N cloudy, cloudy, 29 29 85 29 85 28 44 NNW NW fair, fair, 30 30 1 30 1 28
49 calm SW hazey, hazey, 31 30 15 30 2 42 45 calm NNE cloudy, rain, NOVEMBER,
1793.
Barometer. Therm. Winds. Weather. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 7 A. M. 2 P.
M. 7 A. M. 2 P. M. 1 30 1 30 1 40 41 NNE NE rain, cloudy, 2 30 3 30 25 32 49
NNE NE fair, fair, 3 30 1 30 0 43 56 calm SW cloudy, cloudy, 4 29 8 29 9 55 67
SW SW cloudy, fair, 5 30 15 30 1 50 64 NE NE rain, rain, 6 29 8 29 65 63 67 S S
cloudy, cloudy, 7 29 8 29 8 44 64 calm SW fair, fair, 8 29 8 29 85 43 56 SSW SW
fair, fair, 9 29 9 29 95 42 64 SW SW fair, fair,

Of the Method of Cure.
IN the introduction to the history of the fever, I mentioned the remedies
which I used with success, in several cases which occurred in the beginning of
August. I had seen, and recorded in my note book, the efficacy of gentle purges
in the yellow fever of 1762; but finding them unsuccessful after the 20th of
August, and observing the disease to assume uncommon symptoms of great indirect
debility, I laid them aside, and had recourse to a gentle vomit of ipecacuanha
on the first day of the fever, and to the usual remedies for exciting the
action of the sanguiferous system. I gave bark in all its usual forms of
infusion, powder, and tincture. I joined wine, brandy, and aromatics with it. I
applied blisters to the limbs, neck, and head. Finding them all ineffectual, I
attempted to rouse the system by wrapping the whole body, agreeably to Dr
Hume's practice, in blankets dipped in warm vinegar. To these remedies I added
one more: I rubbed the right side with mercurial ointment, with a view of
exciting the action of the vessels in the whole system, through the medium of
the liver, which I then supposed to be principally, though symptomatically,
affected by the disease. None of these remedies appeared to be of any service;
for although three out of thirteen recovered of those to whom they were
applied, yet I have reason to believe that they would have recovered much
sooner had the cure been trusted to nature. Perplexed and distressed by my want
of success in the treatment of this fever, I waited upon Dr Stephens, an
eminent and respectable physician from St Croix, who happened then to be in our
city, and asked for such advice and information upon the subject of the
disease, as his extensive practice in the West Indies would naturally suggest.
He politely informed me that he had long ago laid aside evacuations of all
kinds in the yellow fever; that they had been found to be hurtful, and that the
disease yielded more readily to bark, wine, and above all, to the use of the
cold bath. He advised the bark to be given in large quantities by way of
glyster, as well as in the usual way; and he informed me of the manner in which
the cold bath should be used, so as to derive the greatest benefit from it.
This mode of treating the yellow fever appeared to be reasonable. I had used
bark in the manner he recommended it in several cases of sporadic yellow fever
with success in former years. I had moreover the authority of several other
physicians of reputation in its favor. Dr Cleghorn tells us, that "he
sometimes gave the bark when the bowels were full of vicious humors. These
humors (he says) are produced by the fault of the circulation. The bark by
bracing the solids, enables them to throw off the excrementitious fluids, by
the proper emunctories Page 223.
."

I began the use of each of Dr Stevens's remedies the next day after my
interview with him, with great confidence of their success. I prescribed bark
in large quantities; in one case I ordered it to be injected into the bowels
every four hours. I directed buckets full of cold water to be thrown frequently
upon my patients. The bark was offensive to the stomach, or rejected by it in
every case in which I prescribed it. The cold bath was grateful, and produced
relief in several cases by inducing a moisture on the skin. For a while I had
hopes of benefit to my patients from the use of these remedies, but in a few
days, I was distressed to find they were not more effectual than those I had
previously used. Three out of four of my patients died to whom the cold bath
was administered in addition to the tonic remedies before mentioned.

Baffled in every attempt to stop the ravages of this fever, I anticipated all
the numerous and complicated distresses in our city, which pestilential
diseases have so often produced in other countries. The fever had a malignity,
and an obstinacy which I had never before observed in any disease, and it
spread with a rapidity and mortality, far beyond what it did in the year 1762.
Heaven alone bore witness to the anguish of my soul in this awful situation.
But I did not abandon a hope that the disease might yet be cured. I had long
believed that good was commensurate with evil, and that there does not exist a
disease for which the goodness of Providence has not provided a remedy. Under
the impression of this belief, I applied myself with fresh ardour to the
investigation of the disease before me. I ransacked my library, and pored over
every book that treated of the yellow fever. The result of my researches for a
while was fruitless. The accounts of the symptoms and cure of the disease by
the authors I consulted, were contradictory, and none of them appeared
altogether applicable to the prevailing epidemic. Before I desisted from the
inquiry to which I had devoted myself, I recollected that I had among some old
papers, a manuscript account of the yellow fever as it prevailed in Virginia in
the year 1741, which had been put into my hands by Dr Franklin, a short time
before his death. I had read it formerly, and made extracts from it into my
lectures upon that disorder. I now read it a second time. I paused upon every
sentence; even words in some places arrested and fixed my attention. In reading
the history of the method of cure, I was much struck with the following
passages.

"It must be remarked, that this evacuation (meaning by purges) is more
necessary in this, than in most other fevers. The abdominal viscera are the
parts principally affected in this disease, but by this timely evacuation,
their feculent corruptible contents are discharged, before they corrupt and
produce any ill effects, and their various emunctories, and secerning vessels
are set open, so as to allow a free discharge of their contents, and
consequently a security to the parts themselves, during the course of the
disease. By this evacuation the very minera of the disease, proceeding from the
putrid miasma fermenting with the salivary, bilious, and other inquiline
humors of the body, is sometimes eradicated by timely emptying the abdominal
viscera on which it first fixes, after which a gentle sweat does as it were nip
it in its bud. Where the primae viae, but especially the stomach, is loaded
with an offensive matter, or contracted, and convulsed with the irritation of
its stimulus, there is no procuring a laudable sweat, till that is removed;
after which a necessary quantity of sweat breaks out of its own accord, these
parts promoting it when by an absterging medicine, they are eased of the burden
or stimulus which oppresses them."

"All these acute putrid fevers, ever require some evacuation to bring them to
a perfect crisis, and solution, and that even by stools, which must be promoted
by art, where nature does not do the business herself. On this account an
ill-timed scrupulousness about the weakness of the body, is of bad consequence
in these urging circumstances; for it is that which seems chiefly to make
evacuations necessary, which nature ever attempts, after the humors are fit to
be expelled, but is not able to accomplish for the most part in this disease;
and I can affirm, that I have given a purge in this case, when the pulse has
been so low, that it could hardly be felt, and the debility extreme, yet both
one, and the other have been restored by it."

"This evacuation, must be procured by lenitive chologoque purges."

Here I paused. A new train of ideas suddenly broke in upon my mind. I believed
the weak and low pulse which I had observed in this fever, to be the effect of
debility of the indirect kind, but the unsuccessful issue of purging, and even
of a spontaneous diarrhoea, in a patient of Dr Hutchinson's had led me not only
to doubt of, but to dread its effects. My fears from this evacuation were
confirmed, by the communications I had received from Dr Stevens. I had been
accustomed to raising a weak and low pulse in pneumony and apoplexy, by means
of blood-letting, but I had attended less to the effects of purging in
producing this change in the pulse. Dr Mitchell in a moment dissipated my
ignorance and fears upon this subject. I adopted his theory, and practice, and
resolved to follow them. It remained now only to fix upon a suitable purge to
answer the purpose of discharging the contents of the bowels. I have before
described the state of the bile in the gallbladder, and duodenum in an extract
from the history of a dissection made by Dr Mitchell. I suspected that my want
of success in discharging this bile, in several of the cases in which I
attempted the cure by purging, was owing to the feebleness of my purges. I had
been in the habit of occasionally purging with calomel in bilious and
inflammatory fevers, and had recommended the practice the year before in my
lectures, not only from my own experience, but upon the authority of Dr Clark.
I had moreover, other precedents for its use in the practice of Sir John
Pringle, Dr Cleghorn, and Dr Balfour, in diseases of the same class with the
yellow fever. But these were not all my vouchers for the safety, and efficacy
of calomel. In my attendance upon the military hospitals during the late war, I
had seen it given combined with jalap in the bilious fever by Dr Thomas Young,
a senior surgeon in the hospitals. His usual dose, was ten grains of each of
them. This was given once or twice a day, until it procured large evacuations
from the bowels. For a while I remonstrated with the Doctor against this purge,
as being disproportioned to the violence and danger of the fever; but I was
soon satisfied that it was as safe as cremor tartar, or glauber's salts. It was
adopted by several of the surgeons of the hospital, and was universally known,
and sometimes prescribed, by the simple name of ten and ten. This mode of
giving calomel occurred to me in preference to any other. The jalap appeared to
be a necessary addition to it, in order to quicken its passage through the
bowels; for calomel is slow in its operation, more especially when it is given
in large doses. I resolved after mature deliberation, to prescribe this purge.
Finding ten grains of jalap insufficient to carry the calomel through the
bowels, in the rapid manner I wished, I added fifteen grains of the former, to
ten of the latter; but even this dose was slow, and uncertain in its operation.
I then issued three doses, each consisting of fifteen grains of jalap, and ten
of calomel; one to be given every six hours until they procured four or five
large evacuations. The effects of this powder, not only answered, but far
exceeded my expectations. It perfectly cured four out of the first five
patients to whom I gave it, notwithstanding some of them were advanced several
days in the disorder. Mr Richard Spain, a block-maker, in Third-street, took
eighty grains of calomel, and rather more of rhubarb and jalap mixed with it,
on the two last days of August, and on the first day of September. He had
passed twelve hours, before I began to give him this medicine, without a pulse,
and with a cold sweat on all his limbs. His relations had given him over, and
one of his neighbors complained to me, of my neglecting to advise them to make
immediate preparations for his funeral. But in this situation, I did not
despair of his recovery. Dr Mitchell's account of the effects of purging in
raising the pulse, exciting a hope that he might be saved provided his bowels
could be opened. I now committed the exhibition of the purging medicine to Mr
Stall, one of my pupils, who mixed it, and gave it with his own hand three or
four times a day. At length, it operated and produced two copious, foetid
stools. His pulse rose immediately afterward, and a universal moisture on his
skin, succeeded the cold sweat on his limbs. In a few days he was out of
danger, and he now lives in good health as the first fruits of the efficacy of
mercurial purges in the yellow fever.

After such a pledge of the safety and success of my new medicine, I gave it
afterward with confidence. I communicated the prescription to such of the
practitioners as I met in the streets. Some of them I found had been in the use
of calomel for several days, but as they had given it in small and single doses
only, and had followed it by large doses of bark, wine, and laudanum, they had
done little or no good with it. I imparted the prescription to the College of
Physicians, on the third of September, and endeavored to remove the fears of
my fellow citizens, by assuring them that the disease was no longer incurable.
Mr Lewis, the lawyer, Dr M'llvaine, Mrs Bethel, her two sons, and a servant
maid, and Mr Peter Baynton's whole family, (nine in number) were some of the
first trophies of this new remedy. The credit it acquired, brought me an
immense accession of business. It still continued to be almost uniformly
effectual in all those which I was able to attend, either in person, or by my
pupils. Dr Griffitts, Dr Say, Dr Pennington, and my former pupils who had
settled in the city, viz. Dr Leib, Dr Porter, Dr Annan, Dr Woodhouse, and Dr
Mease, were among the first physicians who adopted it. I can never forget the
transport with which Dr Pennington ran across the street, to inform me, a few
days after he began to give strong purges, that the disease, yielded to them in
every case. But I did not rely upon purging alone, to cure the disease. The
theory of its proximate cause, which I had adopted, led me to use other
remedies, to abstract excess of stimulus from the system. These were
blood-letting, cool air, cold drinks, low diet, and applications of cold water
to the body. I had bled Mrs Bradford, Mrs Leaming, and one of Mrs Palmer's sons
with success, early in the month of August. But I had witnessed the bad effects
of bleeding in the first week in September, in two of my patients who had been
bled without my knowledge, and who appeared to have died in consequence of it.
I had moreover, heard of a man who had been bled on the first day of the
disorder, who died in twelve hours afterward. These cases produced caution,
but they did not deter me from bleeding as soon as I found the disease to
change its type, and instead of tending to a crisis on the third, to protract
itself to a later day. I began by drawing a small quantity at a time. The
appearance of the blood, and its effects upon the system, satisfied me of its
safety and efficacy. Never before did I experience such sublime joy as I now
felt in contemplating the success of my remedies. It repaid me for all the
toils and studies of my life. The conquest of this formidable disease, was not
the effect of accident, nor of the application of a single remedy; but, it was
the triumph of a principle in medicine. The reader will not wonder at this
joyful state of my mind, when I add a short extract from my note book, dated
the 10th of September. "Thank God! Out of one hundred patients, whom I have
visited, or prescribed for, this day, I have lost none."

Being unable to comply with the numerous demands which were made upon me for
the purging powders, notwithstanding I had requested my sister, and two other
persons to assist my pupils in putting them up; and finding myself unable to
attend all the persons who sent for me, I furnished the apothecaries with the
recipe for the mercurial purges, together with a copy of the following
directions, for giving them, and for the treatment of the disorder.

"As soon as you are affected, (whether by night or day) with a pain in the
head, or back, sickness at stomach, chills or fever; more especially, if those
symptoms be accompanied by a redness, or faint yellowness in the eyes, take one
of the powders in a little sugar and water, every six hours, until they produce
four or five large evacuations from the bowels -- drink plentifully of water
gruel, or barley water, or chicken water, or any other mild drink that is
agreeable, to assist the operation of the physic. It will be proper to lie in
bed while the medicine is operating; by which means a plentiful sweat will be
more easily brought on. After the bowels are thoroughly cleansed, if the pulse
be full or tense, eight or ten ounces of blood should be taken from the arm,
and more, if the tension or fullness of the pulse should continue. Balm tea,
toast and water, lemonade, tamarind water, weak camomile tea, or barley water
should be drank during this state of the disorder -- and the bowels should be
kept constantly open, either by another powder, or by small doses of cremor
tartar, or cooling salts, or by common opening glysters; but if the pulse
should become weak and low after the bowels are cleansed, infusions of camomile
and snake-root in water, elixir of vitriol, and laudanum; also wine and water,
or wine, punch, and porter should be given, and the bark either in infusion in
water or in substance, may be administered in the intermission of the fever.
Blisters may likewise be applied to the sides, neck, or head in this state of
the disorder, and the lower limbs may be wrapped up in flannels wetted in hot
vinegar or water. The food should consist of gruel, sago, panada, tapioca, tea,
coffee, weak chocolate, wine whey, chicken broth, and the white meats,
according to the weak or active state of the system. The fruits of the season
may be eaten with advantage at all times. Fresh air should be admitted into the
room in all cases, and cool air when the pulse is full and tense. The floor
should be sprinkled now and then with vinegar, and the discharges from the body
be removed as speedily as possible."

"The best preventives of the disorder, are a temperate diet, consisting
chiefly of vegetables, great moderation in the exercises of body and mind, warm
clothing, cleanliness, and a gently open state of the bowels."

Hitherto there had been great harmony among the physicians of the city,
although there was a diversity of sentiment as to the nature and cure of the
prevailing fever. But this diversity of sentiment and practice, was daily
lessening, and would probably have ceased altogether in a few days, had not the
following publication subscribed A. K. and said to be written by Dr Adam Kuhn,
made its appearance on the 11th of September, in the General Advertiser, from
which it was copied into all the papers of the city.

PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 7 th, 1793. SIR,
I RECEIVED your letter to day, and shall with pleasure give you every
information in my power respecting the malignant fever, which proves so fatal
among us. As I consider debility and putrefaction the alarming circumstances to
be attended to, and to be obviated from the earliest commencement of the
disease, my method of treatment is instituted accordingly, and has been
generally successful. I do not administer any emetic, do I give a laxative,
unless indicated by costiveness, when I recommend cream of tartar or castor
oil, but prefer a clyster to either. In case of nausea I order a few bowls of
camomile tea to be taken* if the nausea continues, it is to be relieved with
the saline draught in a state of effervescence, elixir of vitriol, and if
necessary, laudanum. The sickness of the stomach may also be alleviated by
applying mint, cloves, or any other spice with wine or spirits to the pit of
the stomach. The stomach being composed, 20 drops of elixir of vitriol are to
be taken every two hours in a tea cup full of (...) cold camomile tea, and if
bark can be retained, two drachms of the best pale bark in substance are to be
given every two hours, alternately with the elixir of vitriol. When an ounce of
bark has been administered in this manner, the dose is to be diminished to one
dram every two hours, as the continuance of the large doses might disorder
the stomach or bowels. Should the bark prove purgative it will be necessary to
give 10 or 15 drops of laudanum after every stool. But if the bark cannot be
retained on the stomach, 20 drops of elixir of vitriol are to be taken every
hour, and recourse must be had to bark clysters.

Two ounces of bark are to be put into three half pints of boiling water, and
boiled down to a pint; the decoction to be strained, and to 4 ounces of the
decoction we add from two to four drachms of finely powdered bark and fifty
drops of laudanum. This mixture is to be injected every four hours or oftener if
the symptoms are violent. One or two glasses of Madeira wine may be added to
each injection where the debility is great. Wine is to be given from the
beginning; at first the weaker wines such as claret and rhenish; if these
cannot be had, Lisbon or Madeira diluted with rich lemonade. The quantity is to
be determined by the effects it produces and by the state of debility which
prevails, guarding against its occasioning or increasing the heat, restlessness
and delirium. I prefer pale bark from a conviction that most of the red bark
offered for sale, is adulterated. But I place the greated dependence for the
cure of the disease, on throwing cool water twice a day over the naked body.
The patient is to be placed in a large empty tub, and two buckets full of
water, of the temperature of about 75 or 80 degrees of Fahrenheit's
thermometer, according to the state of the atmosphere, are to be thrown over
him.

He is then to be wiped dry and put to bed; it is commonly followed by an easy
perspiration and is always attended with great refreshment to the patient. This
remedy however must be applied from the earliest attack of the disease and
continued regularly through the whole course of it. Of regimen it is needless
to say much to you: ripe fruits, sago with wine, and rich wine-whey are the
most proper. A spacious chamber with a free circulation of air, and repeatedly
changing the bed and body linen are highly necessary. If the bark clysters
should bring on costiveness the laudanum may occasionally be omitted; if this
is not attended with the desired consequences, we have recourse to a common
injection. Sprinkling the chamber with vinegar, washing the face, neck, hands
and feet with it, and then wiping them dry, will have their use. The fumes of
vinegar and of nitre will contribute much to sweeten the air in the chamber.

I am, etc. A. K.
N. B. The practice of applying the cold bath in fevers is not new. In a
malignant fever which prevailed at Breslau in Silesia and proved extremely
fatal, yielded to none of the usual remedies, Dr De Haehn a physician of the
place had recourse to this remedy and found it effectual. It has also been used
with advantage in England in putrid fevers. In many of the West India islands
it is generally employed in their malignant fevers. Dr Stevens, a gentleman of
high character in his profession, who is now in this city, assures me that in
the island of St. Croix where he practiced medicine many years, it has been
found more effectual than any method heretofore practiced.

I am moreover indebted to Dr Stevens for the following observations: that
laxatives are never employed but when clysters are not attended with the
desired effect of moving the bowels; that in violent attacks of the disease the
bark clysters are repeated every two hours, and the water is applied to the
body every 6 or 8 hours and even more frequently; that when there is a
disposition to diarrhoea, the elixir of vitriol has a tendency to increase it,
and is therefore laid aside, and that the disease which he has seen in this
country is of the same nature with the malignant fever of the West Indies.




To obviate the effects of this letter upon the minds of the citizens, I
published the next day an account of the ill success which had attended the use
of the remedies recommended by Dr Kuhn, in my practice, and of the happy
effects of mercurial purges and bleeding. This publication was concluded with
the following remarks.

The yellow fever now prevailing in our city, differs very materially from that
which prevails in the West Indies, and in several particulars from that of the
year 1762. This will easily be believed, by all those who attend to the
influence of climate and seasons, upon diseases. Prescribing for the name of a
disease, without a due regard to the above circumstances, has slain more than
the sword.

My only design in withdrawing myself for a moment from the solemn duties to my
fellow citizens, in which I am now engaged, is to bear a testimony against a
method of treating the present disorder, which if persisted in, would probably
have aided it in desolating three fourths of our city.

I have had so many unequivocal proofs of the success of the short and simple
mode which I have adopted, of treating this disorder, that I am now satisfied,
that under more favorable circumstances of attendance upon the sick, the
disease would yield to the power of medicine with as much certainty as a common
intermitting fever.

BENJ. RUSH.
September 11, 1793.

The above address to the citizens, produced the following letter from Dr Kuhn
to the Mayor of the city.

SIR,
IF you are of opinion that the enclosed statement can have the least tendency
to abate the apprehensions of the citizens, I beg of you to make any use of it
you may think proper.

I am, with respect, Your most humble servant, A. KUHN.
September 13, 1793.
Matthew Clarkson, Esquire. Mayor of the city of Philadelphia.

"FROM the 23d of August, the day on which I saw the first patient in the
yellow fever, to the the third of September, when I was myself confined with a
remittent fever, I visited sixty persons ill of various complaints. The greater
part were indisposed with remittent and intermittent fevers, which always
prevail among us at this season of the year, which all yielded readily to our
mode of treating those diseases, except in one gentleman, who had been many
years an invalid. Seven only of this number had the yellow fever; three of them
were patients of other gentlemen of the Faculty. Of these seven, I was called
to four, in the early stage of the disease. Three of them are now well; the
other was in the fourth day of the disease, when I became unwell myself. He had
then no unfavourable symptoms; but died on the eighth day from the time he was
seized."

A day or two afterward, the following letter appeared in all the newspapers
from Mr Hamilton, the Secretary of the Treasury of United States, to the
College of Physicians.

GENTLEMEN,
MOTIVES of humanity and friendship to the citizens of Philadelphia, induce me
to address to you this letter, in the hope that it may be in some degree
instrumental in diminishing the present prevailing calamity. It is natural to
be afflicted not only at the mortality which is said to obtain, but at the
consequences of that undue panic which is fast depopulating the city, and
suspending business both public and private.

I have myself been attacked with the reigning putrid fever, and with violence
-- but I trust that I am now completely out of danger. This I am to attribute,
under God, to the skill and care of my friend Doctor Stevens, a gentleman
lately from the island of St. Croix, one to whose talents I can attest, from an
intimate acquaintance began in early youth, whose medical opportunities have
been of the best, and who has had the advantage of much experience both in
Europe (having been in Edinburgh some years since, when the same fever raged
there) and in the West Indies, where it is frequent. His mode of treating the
disorder varies essentially from that which has been generally practiced -- And
I am persuaded, where pursued, reduces it to one of little more than ordinary
hazard.

I know him so well, that I entertain no doubt, that he will freely impart his
ideas to you, collectively or individually; and being in my own person a
witness to the efficacy of his plan, I venture to believe, that if adopted, and
if the courage of the citizens can be roused, many lives will be saved, and
much ill prevented. I may add, that as far as can be yet pronounced, its
efficacy has been alike proved on Mrs Hamilton, who is now in the disorder,
contracted from me, with every favorable appearance.

In giving you this information, Gentlemen, I have done what I thought
discharging a duty. I only add, that if any conference with Dr Stevens, is
desired, that he is going tomorrow to New York, from which journey he has been
detained several days on my account.

I am, Gentlemen, with respect, your obedient servant,A. HAMILTON.
September, 11. He lodges at Mrs Williams's, corner of Spruce and Third streets.



College of Physicians.

This letter was followed by a letter from Dr Stephens to Dr Redman, the
president of the College of Physicians, which was published in the Federal
Gazette of the 16th of September.

SIR,
IN compliance with the request of the learned body over whom you preside, I
now cheerfully transmit them a few brief and detached observations on the
nature and treatment of the present malignant and fatal disorder which prevails
in this city. Their humane anxiety to ascertain the real character of the
complaint, and to establish some fixed and steady mode of cure for it, are
fresh proofs of their benevolence, and clearly evinces that disinterested
liberality for which they are so eminently distinguished. I only regret that
their application to me has approached so near the moment of my departure, that
I have not sufficient leisure to elucidate the subject so amply and so
satisfactorily as the importance of it deserves. Imperfect, however, as the
enclosed sketch may be, I can with truth assure them, that it is the result of
extensive experience and accurate observation; and that it is dictated solely
by a philanthropic desire of checking the ravages of disease, and of restoring
tranquillity to the dejected minds of the public.

This disorder arises from contagion. Its approaches are slow and insiduous at
the commencement. It is ushered in with a slight degree of languor and
lassitude, loss of appetite, restlessness and disturbed dreams, depression of
spirits, and a want of inclination to perform the ordinary occupations of life.
The patient does not consider himself sufficiently sick to complain or call in
the assistance of a physician. His feelings are rather unpleasant than
alarming. This train of symptoms continue for two or three days, and if not
removed by timely aid, is succeeded by a sharp pain in the head, anxiety, and
suppression about the praecordia, a feeble pulse, great prostration of
strength, and a variety of other morbid phenomena, which are too well known to
the faculty to need description. In the first stage of the disorder, a little
attention, and the well directed efforts of a skilful practitioner, may
generally prove successful in mitigating the violence of future symptoms, and
preventing either much danger or long confinement.

At the first appearance of languor, lassitude, etc. especially if the patient
has been near the source of contagion, he should carefully avoid all fatigue of
body and application of mind. Every thing that can tend to debilitate should be
carefully guarded against. He should remain at perfect rest. His diet should be
fuller and more cordial than usual, and a few extraordinary glasses of old
Madeira may be allowed. He should take the cold bath every morning; and if his
sleep is disturbed, a gentle opiate combined with a few grains of the volatile
salts and some grateful aromatic may be administered at night. A few doses of
good genuine bark may be taken in powder during the day; and if the stomach
should be affected with nausea, a strong decoction of the same may be
substituted. Great care should be taken to keep the mind of the patient calm
and serene, -- neither to terrify it with needless apprehension, nor alarm it
by the melancholy relation of the spreading mortality which surrounds him. It
is at this stage of the complaint, that the physician may lay the foundation of
future success. But unfortunately, it is also the period of the disease which
is commonly too much neglected by the patient. Gentlemen of the faculty are
rarely called in until the symptoms are more alarming and dangerous. But it is
a matter of material consequence to the patient to know that by a little
attention at the commencement, and by carefully watching the approaches of the
disease even though it should be contracted, it may be rendered mild, and may
terminate favorably. It is also of equal consequence for practitioners to
attend to these particulars in laying down the prophylaxis to their patients.

When the disorder has gained ground and become violent and when the danger is
imminent, the most unremitted exertions should be made by the physician to
mitigate the symptoms. The nausea and vomiting may be relieved by an infusion
of camomile flowers, given frequently until the stomach is sufficiently emptied
of all crude matter. Small doses of a cordial mixture composed of the oil of
peppermint and compound spirits of lavender, may then be taken until the fever
abates. If, notwithstanding, the irritability of the stomach should still
continue, recourse must be instantly had to the cold bath, which must be used
every two hours or oftener if the urgency of the symptoms should require it.
After each immersion a glass of old Madeira, or a little brandy burnt with
cinnamon, may be administered. Flannel cloths wrung out of spirits of wine,
impregnated with spices, may be applied to the pit of the stomach, and changed
frequently.

An injection containing an ounce of powdered bark, mixed with thin salap or
^ago, to which a tea-spoon full of laudanum has been added, should be
administered. These injections may be continued every two or three hours,
omitting the laudanum after the first. As soon as the stomach can bear the
medicines and nourishment, the bark may be administered in small doses; as much
Madeira wine may be given as the patient can bear without affecting his head,
or heating him too much. All emetics and violent cathartics should be avoided.
If the bowels should not be sufficiciently open, a laxative clyster may be
necessary, or a few grains of powdered rhubarb added to each dose of bark until
the desired effect is produced. If diarrhoea should prevail, it must be checked
by starch injections blended with laudanum by the tinctura E. kino japonica, or
a decoction of carcarilla. All drastic cathartics do injury when the disease is
in its advanced stage. If stupor, coma, or delirium should come on, a large
blister should be applied between the shoulders, and small ones to the thighs;
stimulant cataplasms should also be applied to to the soles of the feet: when
hemorrhagies appear, the elixir of vitriol may be administered in conjunction
with the bark, but great care should be taken to prevent it from affecting the
bowels.

If the pulse should be much sunk, the prostration of strength great, and
subsultus tendinum take place, small doses of the liquor mineralis Hoffmanni,
or even vitriolic ether diluted with water may be given. Musk and camphor in
this stage of the disease have likewise proved effectual. Upon the whole, sir,
I may sum up this hasty outline, by inculcating the use of the tonic plan in
its fullest extent, and by warning against the ill consequences of debilitating
applications, or profuse evacuations in every period of the disease: the cold
bath, bark and wine, a spacious well ventilated room, frequent change of bed
and body linen, and attention to rest and quiet, if properly persevered in,
will in most cases prove successful, and strip this formidable disease of its
malignity, its terror, and its danger.

The description I have given of this disorder, and the utility of the plan of
cure I have laid down, are confirmed by experience and coincides with our
reason and the soundest theory; the cause producing the effect is a strong
debilitating power; the symptoms occasioned by its application, indicate
extreme debility in the animal functions, and great derangement of the nervous
system: ought not therefore the remedies adapted to this complaint to be
cordial, stimulating, and tonic? Should not violent evacuations, which
evidently weaken and relax, be avoided? These are hints which it would be
presumptuous and assuming in me to extend or dwell upon: to gentlemen of such
eminence as your colleagues, it is sufficient to point out what reason and
experience conjointly suggest to me. Their superior judgment will, I am
convinced, supply every deficiency, and enable them to pursue that plan which
is best adapted to public utility, and the effectual removal of the present
dreadful malady. If the few observations I have suggested be serviceable to the
inhabitants of this city, my intentions will be fully answered, and my feelings
completely gratified.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, EDWARD STEVENS.
Sept. 16 th, 1793.
John Redman, M. D. president of the College of Physicians.

An essay upon the theory of this disease at this juncture, would have been as
ill-timed as a discourse upon tactics would be to an army in the height of a
battle; but Dr Stevens's publication made it necessary for me to appeal to the
reason of my brethren upon the theory of the disease. I did it in a few words
in the following address to the College of Physicians.

GENTLEMEN,
IT is with extreme regret that I have read Dr Steven's letter to the president
of our College in one of the newspapers. It will, I fear, cooperate with Dr.
Kuhn's plan of treating the disorder, and Mr Hamilton's well-meant letter, in
adding to the mortality of the disorder. If I should survive my present
labors, I hope to prove that Dr Stevens's theory of the disease in the West
Indies, is as erroneous, as the practice he has recommended has been fatal, in
Philadelphia. It is a most inflammatory disorder in its first stage. The
contagion, it is true, in its first action upon the system, frequently produces
debility; but the debility here is of the indirect kind, and arises wholly from
an excess of the stimulus of contagion upon the system. This indirect debility,
as in many other diseases, yields only to the abstraction of other stimuli, and
to none so speedily as to large evacuations from the bowels and the
blood vessels.

I have so high an opinion of Dr Stevens's candor and liberality as a gentleman
and a physician, that I shall make no apology for thus publicly dissenting from
his opinions and practice.

Could patients be visited by physicians as often, and attended by nurses as
carefully, as in other acute diseases, I am satisfied that the mode of treating
it which I have adopted and recommended, would soon reduce it in point of
danger and mortality, to a level with a common cold.

From, Gentlemen, Your sincere friend and brother, B. RUSH.
Sept. 17 th, 1793.

During this controversy with the opinions and practice of Dr Kuhn and Dr
Stevens, I published in the Federal Gazette, the following letter to the
College of Physicians; also some additions to the directions I had published
with the mercurial purges.

GENTLEMEN,
As the weekly meetings of our College have become no longer practicable, I
have taken the liberty of communicating to you, the result of further
observations upon the prevailing epidemic.

I have found bleeding to be useful, not only in cases where the pulse was full
and quick, but where it was slow and tense. I have bled in one case, where the
pulse beat only 48 strokes in a minute, and recovered my patient by it. The
pulse became more full and more frequent after it. This state of the pulse
seems to arise from an inflamed state of the brain, which shows itself in a
preternatural dilatation of the pupils of the eyes. It is always unsafe to
trust to the most perfect remissions of fever and pain in this state of the
pulse. It indicates the necessity of more bleeding and purging. I have found it
to occur most frequently in children.

I have bled twice in many, and in one acute case, four times, with the
happiest effects. I consider intrepidity in the use of the lancet at present to
be as necessary, as it is in the use of mercury and jalap, in this insidious
and ferocious disease.

I lament the contrariety of opinion among the members of our College, upon the
remedies proper in this disease. This contrariety seems to arise from the
yellow fever being confounded with the jail or hospital fever. The fevers of
Breslau, Vienna, and Edinburgh, mentioned in some late publications, in which
the cold bath was used with so much success, were of the latter kind. The two
diseases are totally different from each other in their cause, seasons of
prevailing, symptoms, danger, and method of cure.

From, Gentlemen, Your friend and brother, BENJ. RUSH.
Sept. 12 th, 1793.

FEDERAL GAZETTE.
Dr Rush regrets, that he is unable to comply with all the calls of his fellow
citizens, who are indisposed with the prevailing fever. He begs leave to
recommend to such of them as cannot have the benefit of medical aid, to take
the mercurial purges, which may now be had with suitable directions at most of
the apothecaries, and to lose ten or twelve ounces of blood as soon as is
convenient after taking the purges, if the headache and fever continue. Where
the purges cannot be obtained, or do not operate speedily, bleeding may now be
used before they are taken. The almost universal success with which it has
pleased God to bless the remedies of strong mercurial purges and bleeding in
this disorder, enables Dr Rush to assure his fellow citizens, that there is no
more danger to be apprehended from it, when those remedies are used in its
early stage, than there is from the measles or the influenza.

Dr Rush assures his fellow citizens further, that the risk from visiting and
attending the sick, in common cases, at present, is not greater than from
walking the streets. He hopes this information will be attended to, as many of
the sick suffer greatly from the want of the assistance of bleeders, and of the
attendance of nurses and friends.

While the disease was so generally mortal, or the successful mode of treating
it only partially adopted, Dr Rush advised his friends to leave the city: at
present he conceives this advice to be unnecessary; not only because the
disease is now under the power of medicine, but because the citizens who now
wish to fly into the country, cannot avoid carrying the infection with them.
They had better remain near to medical aid, and avoid exciting the infection
into action, which is now in their bodies, by a strict attention to former
directions.

Dr R. does not believe it will be prudent for those persons who are in the
country to return to town, until after frost or heavy rains have taken place;
both of which alike weaken or destroy the contagion of the yellow fever.

September 12 th, 1793.

Having mentioned the conditional use of bark, wine, and laudanum, in my first
publication, and finding them not only useless, but hurtful, I published the
following address to the citizens of Philadelphia, on the 16th of September. In
this address I repeated my advice to live upon a milk and vegetable diet.

Dr Rush recommends to all such of his fellow citizens as are exposed to the
contagion of the prevailing fever, to live upon a milk and vegetable diet, and
take cooling purges once or twice a week. The effects of this regimen in
rendering the disease mild (where it is taken) are nearly the same as in
preparing the body for the smallpox.

Dr R. advises those persons who cannot obtain the attendance of a physician,
by no means to take vomits, bark, wine, or laudanum, during the first three or
four days of the disorder. As the disease is highly inflammatory at present in
its first stages, the only proper remedies for it are, strong purges, copious
bleeding, if the pulse be full or tense, or if it be slower than natural, and
at the same time subject to pauses in its pulsation.

During this inflammatory state of the disease, the drinks should be simple and
cold. No animal food should be tasted; cool air should be admitted into the
room, and napkins dipped in pump water, should be applied frequently to the
forehead.

Dr. R. recommends further, that the beds and clothes of persons who have had
the disease, should, upon no account, be exposed to the heat of the sun, but be
washed in warm, or soaked in cold water.

"It would be an act of great humanity to the city, to provide all the
physicians and bleeders, with horses and chairs, as it will be impossible for
them long to escape the disease, while they are so much pre-disposed to it by
constant fatigue."

September 16 th, 1793.

I shall mention hereafter the substitutes I used for the tonic remedies which
I had thus publicly decried.

On the 20th of September the following publication appeared in the Federal
Gazette, subscribed by Dr Currie.

Mr BROWN,
IT affords me particular satisfaction, that I now have it in my power to
inform my fellow citizens, that the progress of the infectious fever has
greatly abated, and that with a little longer perseverance in avoiding
intercourse with the infected, as far as humanity will permit, paying at the
same time, proper attention to fumigating and ventilating the houses, clothing,
and utensils from whence the sick have been removed, or where they have been
confined, the infection which has proved so mortal, will most certainly, be
entirely eradicated in a few days. The best method for effecting this, is
contained in a late publication by the learned Dr Russel.

I have made the strictest enquiry respecting the number at present confined by
the genuine yellow fever, and am convinced that it does not exceed 40 or 50 in
the whole city.

There is, however, another formidable disease prevalent, by which, I have
reason to believe, there are above a thousand ill at this time.

The disease I mean, is the common remittent or fall fever. This fever,
however, is not infectious.

When the remitting fever attacks persons not fully recovered from the effects
of the influenza, (which is also still prevalent here) it occasions a violent
determination of the blood to the head, accompanied with acute pain, a redness
of the eyes, with a faint tinge of yellow -- the pulse is quick and the skin
hot. This is the disease which is so much under the power of blood-letting and
purging; and is as different from the infectious, or genuine yellow fever, as
the sun is from the moon, or light from darkness.

In the fall fever, which succeeds the influenza, the eye is sprightly, though
red, the face turgid and flushed: -- Whereas, in the genuine yellow fever, the
eye is dull and inanimate, and suffused with a dusky brown, the face pale,
shrunk, and cadaverous, almost from the first attack. It is in the remitting
fever, with the violent affection of the head, that the mode of treatment
advised by Dr Rush, can only be proper; and not in the infectious or yellow
fever. On the contrary, in the yellow fever, it cannot fail of being certain
death. In the yellow fever, the means recommended by Dr Kuhn and Dr Stevens,
are the most effectual, and the only ones that can be relied on, with such a
variation as circumstances, and the period of the disease may indicate.

It is in the fall fever, circumstanced as already described, that there is
safety in visiting and attending the sick, because this fever is not
contagious. Can there be the same safety in visiting patients confined with the
genuine yellow fever, which made its appearance in Water-street, the third of
August last? Let those judge who have had opportunities of seeing its ravages!
Is that fever, in which the bond of union is immediately dissolved between the
solids and fluids, and where the purple current issues from every pore, the
same as that, for which Dr Rush directs bleeding and purging? and can there be
safety in visiting persons so affected? Have we all got the contagion of the
yellow fever in our bodies, only waiting for some exciting cause to put it into
action? By no means. The disease, which Dr Rush calls the yellow fever, and of
which Dr P. says he has cured such numbers by the new method, is only the fall
fever, operating on persons who have been previously affected by the influenza.

It is time the veil should be withdrawn from your eyes, my fellow citizens!

WM. CURRIE.
Sept. 17 th, 1793.

To this, I published the following answer the next day.

Dr Rush is extremely sorry to differ from his friend Dr Currie, in his opinion
respecting the prevailing epidemic, published in the Federal Gazette of last
evening. Dr R. asserts, from the authority of Dr Sydenham, as well as from the
observations of three and thirty years upon epidemic diseases, that no two
epidemics of unequal force can exist long together in the same place; and he is
sure, from what he has seen of the present disease, that all the fevers now in
the city, are from one cause, and that they all require different portions of
the same remedies. Dr R. has no other motives for wishing to be believed by his
fellow citizens in these assertions, than to beget a confidence in them, in
remedies, which he conceives to be as rational, as he knows them to be
successful in the prevailing disorder. If Dr Currie will consult Blane, Hume,
Lining, and Hillary, upon the subject of the yellow fever, he will find that
they all describe it as making its first attack with the symptoms of a bilious
remittent. Dr R. perfectly recollects its appearing not only in this form, but
in that of an intermittent, in the year 1762.

Among many arguments which might be adduced to prove that all our present
fevers arise from one source, and require the same treatment, (varied according
to their degrees of violence) Dr R. will mention only one, and that is, he has
cured many persons by plentiful purging and bleeding, of the present epidemic,
who have lived in families, in which persons had died with a black vomiting,
and a yellow skin.

No one can suppose that Dr. R's late indisposition (after having been
constantly exposed for three weeks, to the contagion of the yellow fever in all
its degrees of malignity) was not occasioned by an attack of that disorder, and
yet he owes his perfect recovery through divine goodness, simply to two copious
bleedings, and two doses of the mercurial medicine, and that too, in the short
term of only two days.

September 18 th, 1793.

Besides the publications I have mentioned, Dr Wistar addressed a history of an
attack he had of the fever, to the physicians of Philadelphia, in the General
Advertiser of the 26th of September. He began it by observing, that "he
believed many persons had been supposed to have been cured of the disease, who
had never had it," and he concluded without deciding upon any of the remedies
which were the subjects of controversy. He added a strong testimony from his
own experience of the efficacy of cool air in abating the excessive action of
the arterial system.

I pass over many anonymous essays upon the fever, which appeared in the
newspapers; also several, from medical gentlemen who beheld the disease at a
distance. They all tended more or less to distract the public mind, and to
lessen the confidence of the citizens in the simple, and powerful remedies
which I had recommended.

In support of the efficacy of these remedies, Dr Porter, Dr Annan, and Dr
Mease, gave very decided testimonies in the public papers. I shall insert as an
epitome of them all, the following letter from Dr Porter.

DEAR SIR,
AS I know it will afford you much pleasure, I send you the following statement
of cases. Within three days past I have been called to thirty seven persons
laboring under the prevailing epidemic. I have treated them all in the new
method, with the greatest success; nearly half of them are so far recovered as
to require no farther assistance from me. I cannot avoid mentioning one case of
a man in whom the advantages of bleeding were remarkable. -- The pain in his
head was so violent as to lead me to order bleeding previous to purging -- from
some inaccuracy in the operation, he lost a greater quantity than I directed,
his attendants suppose sixteen ounces; the consequence however was, that at my
next visit I found that my patient had walked out perfectly recovered. This
case was clearly marked with all the symptoms attendant on the disease in its
first stages, particularly pain in the head and redness in the eyes.

With great regard, I am your Obedient servant, JOHN PORTER.
September 17.
Dr Rush.

The safety of the new remedies (as they were sometimes called) was finally
admitted by their greatest enemies, but their efficacy was supposed to be
confined only to common remittents, to the influenza, or to pleurisies, and
other inflammatory fevers; for those diseases were believed to be constantly
present in the city; and the certificates which were published of large
families having been cured of the yellow fever by the new remedies, were
discredited, or treated with contempt, because the patients had recovered
without a yellow color in their faces.

To refute this error, as well as to show that I was not singular in my
opinions respecting blood-letting, purges, and opium, I published the following
extracts from Dr Mosely, in the Federal Gazette of the 11th of October.

MR BROWN,
A NUMBER of the physicians of this city, who suppose that we have two fevers
now prevailing among us, have asserted that a yellow color is essential to
what is called the yellow fever. The following extract from Dr Mosely will show
how much they have been mistaken. This judicious physician practiced physic
many years in Jamaica, and saw the fever which he describes, in all its
different forms.

"I have used (says the Doctor) the word yellow in compliance with custom; but
I even distrust that name, as the inexperienced may be looking out for that
appearance, and not find, until it is too late, the disease he has to contend
with. And indeed, the yellowness of the skin, like the black vomiting, is not
an invariable symptom of this fever. Those who are fortunate enough to recover,
seldom have it; and many die without its appearance. Besides, the yellowness
alone, leads to nothing certain; it may arise from an inoffensive suffusion of
bile." p. 411 -- second edition.

The present epidemic has likewise been called a putrid fever and the remedies
for the cure of that species of fever have been very generally prescribed. The
following extract from the same author will show the error and mischief of that
opinion and practice:

"This disease is in the highest degree possible, an inflammatory one,
accompanied with such symptoms, in a greater extent as attend all inflammatory
fevers, and most strikingly the reverse of any disease that is putrid, or of
one continued exacerbation. It attacks all such people and under such
circumstances as are seldom the objects of putrid diseases." p. 412.

In another place he says, Bleeding must be performed, and repeated every six
or eight hours, or whenever the exacerbations come on, while the heat, fullness
of pulse, and pains continue; and if these symptoms be violent and obstinate,
and do not abate during the first 36 or 48 hours of the fever, bleeding should
be executed even to fainting. Taking away only six or eight ounces of blood
because the patient may be faint, which is a symptom of the disease, is doing
nothing toward the cure. Where bleeding is improper, no blood should be taken
away; where it is proper that quantity will not relieve, and it is losing that
time, which can never be regained. p. 427 -- 428.

On PURGES, the doctor makes the following remarks.

"When a sufficient quantity of blood has been taken away, (which is never
done) let the patient's habit be what it may, while the heat, reiterated
exacerbations, flushings in the face, thirst, pains in the head, and burning in
the eyes remain, the next step is to evacuate the contents of the bowels, and
turn the humors downwards." p. 435.

Speaking of opium, the Doctor says, In a fever so highly inflammatory, where
the contents of the whole alimentary canal are so hot and acrid, opium must be
a fatal medicine. p. 459.

To these quotations I shall only add, that the disease, from the influence of
the cool weather is probably more universally, and more highly inflammatory, in
our city, and requires more copious evacuations than in the Island of Jamaica.
It certainly requires more speedy and more plentiful bleeding than a common
pleurisy, inasmuch as the blood vessels, rendered weak by the previous hot
summer, are in more danger of being ruptured both externally and internally,
from the violent stimulus of the contagion, than in an inflammatory fever,
which succeeds cold weather.

BENJ. RUSH.
October 9, 1793.

In justice to Dr Currie, I take great pleasure in inserting the following
short address to the citizens, in which the retracts the opinion he had given
to the public in the Federal Gazette of the the 20th of September.

October 2d, 1793.
ALL the physicians engaged in practice at present in the city, agree with Dr
Rush that blood-letting and copious purging are requisite in the cure of the
prevailing epidemic, in every case, where inflammatory symptoms are evident,
and that the dispute hitherto has been about the name of the disease, rather
than the proper mode of treatment.

W. CURRIE.


The conclusion of the above address was unfortunately erroneous. The dispute
between the physicians turned upon more interesting points than the name of the
disease, as must be very obvious from the perusal of the preceding pages.

I have suppressed a letter to Dr John Rodgers of New York, dated the third of
October, containing a short history of the treatment of the disease, only
because it will be detailed more fully in this work. That publication was
intended as an answer to many letters which I received from practitioners in
the country, requesting an account of my mode of treating the disorder. I have
likewise suppressed a second letter to Dr Rodgers, containing some extracts
from Dr Sydenham, which were intended to establish the exclusive influence of
powerful epidemics over inferior febrile diseases. This subject has been
discussed in a more ample manner in the history of the fever.

From the different publications which I have inserted, it appears that there
were two modes of practice pursued; the one dictated by an opinion that the
disease was highly putrid, and the other, that it was of a highly inflammatory
nature. But besides these there were two other modes of treating the disease,
the one by moderate purging with calomel only, and moderate bleeding, on the
first or second day of the fever, and afterward by the copious use of bark,
wine, laudanum, and aromatic tonics. This practice was supported by an opinion,
that the fever was inflammatory in its first, and putrid in its second stage;
the other mode referred to, was peculiar to the French physicians, several of
whom had arrived in the city from the West Indies just before the disorder made
its appearance. Their remedies were various. Some of them prescribed nitre,
cremor tartar, camphor, centaury tea, the warm bath, glysters, and moderate
bleeding, while a few, used lenient purges, and large quantities of tamarind
water, and other diluting drinks. The dissentions of the American physicians
threw a great number of patients into the hands of these French physicians.
They were moreover supposed to be better acquainted with the disease than the
physicians of the city, most of whom it was well known had never seen it before.

I shall hereafter inquire into the relative success of each of the four modes
of practice which have been mentioned.

Having delivered a general account of the remedies which I used in this
disorder, I shall now proceed to make a few remarks upon each of them. I shall
afterward mention the effects of the remedies used by other physicians.

OF PURGING.
I HAVE already mentioned my reasons for promoting this evacuation, and the
medicine I preferred for that purpose. It had many advantages over any other
purge. It was detergent to the bile and mucus which lined the bowels. It
probably acted in a peculiar manner upon the biliary ducts, and it was rapid in
its operation. One dose was sometimes sufficient to open the bowels; but from
two to six doses were often necessary for that purpose; more especially as part
of them was frequently rejected by the stomach. I did not observe any
inconvenience from the vomiting which was excited by the jalap. It was always
without that straining which is produced by emetics; and it served to discharge
bile when it was lodged in the stomach. I did not rest the discharge of the
contents of the bowels on the issue of one cleansing on the first day. There is
in all bilious fevers, a reproduction of morbid bile as fast as it is
discharged. I therefore gave a purge every day while the fever continued. I
used castor oil, salts, cremor tartar, and rhubarb (after the mercurial purges
had performed their office) according to the inclinations of my patients, in
all those cases where the bowels were easily moved; but where this was not the
case, I gave a single dose of calomel and jalap every day. Strong as this purge
may be supposed to be, it was often ineffectual; more especially after the 20th
of September, when the bowels became more obstinately constipated. To supply
the place of the jalap, I now added gamboge to the calomel. Two grains and an
half of each made into a pill, were given to an adult every six hours until
they procured four or five stools. I had other designs in giving a purge every
day besides discharging the re-accumulated bile. I had observed the fever to
fall with its principal force upon such parts of the body as had been
previously weakened by any former disease. By creating an artificial weak part
in the bowels, I diverted the force of the fever to them, and thereby saved the
liver and brain from fatal or dangerous congestions. The practice was further
justified by the beneficial effects of a plentiful spontaneous diarrhoea in the
beginning of the disorder In some short manuscript notes upon Dr Mitchell's
account of the yellow fever in Virginia, in the year 1741, made by the late Dr
Kearsley, Sen. of this city, he remarks, that in the yellow fever which
prevailed in the same year in Philadelphia "some recovered by an early
discharge of black matter by stool." This gentleman, Dr Redman informed me,
introduced purging with Glauber salts in the yellow fever in our city. He was
preceptor to Dr Redman in medicine.
; by hemorrhagies from the bowels, when they occurred from no other parts of
the body, and by the difficulty or impracticability of reducing the system by
means of plentiful sweats. The purges seldom answered the intentions for which
they were given, unless they produced four or five stools a day. As the fever
showed no regard to day or night in the hours of its exacerbations, it became
necessary to observe the same disregard to time in the exhibition of purges; I
therefore prescribed them in the evening at all times when the patient had
passed a day without two or three plentiful stools. When purges were rejected,
or slow in their operation, I always directed opening glysters to be given
every two hours. The effects of purging were as follow:

1. It raised the pulse when low, and reduced it when it was preternaturally
tense or full.

2. It revived and strengthened the patient. This was evident in many cases, in
the facility with which patients who had staggered to a close-stool, walked
back again to their beds, after a copious evacuation. Dr Sydenham takes notice
of a similar increase of strength after a plentiful sweat in the plague. They
both acted by abstracting excess of stimulus, and thereby removing indirect
debility.

3. It abated the paroxism of the fever. Hence arose the advantage of giving a
purge in some cases in the evening, when an attack of the fever was expected in
the course of the night.

4. It frequently produced sweats when given on the first or second day of the
fever, after the most powerful sudorifics had been taken to no purpose.

5. It sometimes checked that vomiting which occurs in the beginning of the
disorder; and it always assisted in preventing the more alarming occurrence of
that symptom, about the 4th or 5th day.

6. It removed obstructions in the lymphatic system. I ascribe it wholly to the
action of mercury, that in no instance did any of the glandular swellings,
which I formerly mentioned, terminate in a suppuration.

7. By discharging the bile through the bowels as soon and as fast as it was
secreted, it prevented in most cases a yellowness of the skin.

However salutary the mercurial purge was, objections were made to it by many
of our physicians; and prejudices, equally weak and ill-founded, were excited
against it. I shall enumerate and answer those objections.

1. It was said to be of too drastic a nature. It was compared to arsenic; and
it was called a dose for a horse. This objection was without foundation.
Hundreds who took it declared they had never taken so mild a purge. I met with
but one case in which it produced bloody stools; but I saw the same effect from
a dose of salts. It sometimes, it is true, operated from twenty to thirty times
in the course of twenty-four hours; but I heard of an equal number of stools in
two cases from salts and cremor tartar. It is not an easy thing to affect life,
or even subsequent health, by copious or frequent purging. Dr Kirkland mentions
a remarkable case of a gentleman who was cured of a rheumatism by a purge,
which gave him between 40 and 50 stools. This patient had been previously
affected by his disorder 16 or 18 weeks Treatise on the Inflammatory
Rheumatism, vol. i. p. 407.
. Dr Mosely not only proves the safety, but establishes the efficacy of
numerous and copious stools in the yellow fever. Dr Say probably owes his life
to three-and-twenty stools procured by a dose of calomel and gamboge, taken by
my advice. Dr Redman was purged until he fainted, by a dose of the same
medicine. This venerable gentleman, in whom 70 years had not abated the ardour
of humanity, nor produced obstinacy of opinion, came forward from his
retirement, and boldly adopted the remedies of purging and bleeding, with
success in several families, before he was attacked by the disease. His
recovery was as rapid, as the medicine he had used was active in its operation.
Besides taking the above purge, he lost twenty ounces of blood by two bleedings
Dr Redman was not the only instance furnished by the disorder, in which reason
got the better of the habits of old age, and of the formalities of medicine.
About the time the fever declined, I received a letter from Dr Shippen, Sen.
(then above 82 years of age) dated Oxford Furnace, New Jersey, October 13th,
1793, in which, after approving in polite terms of my mode of practice, he adds
"Desperate diseases require desperate remedies. I would only propose some small
addition to your present method. Suppose you should substitute, in the room of
the jalap, six grains of gamboge, to be mixed with 10 or 15 grains of calomel;
and after a dose or two as occasion may require, you should bleed your patients
almost to death, at least to fainting; and then direct a plentiful supply of
mallows tea, with fresh lemon juice, and sugar and barley water, together with
the most simple, mild, and nutritious food." The Doctor concludes his letter by
recommending to my perusal Dr Dover's account of nearly a whole ship's crew
having been cured of a yellow fever, on the coast of South America, by being
bled until they fainted.
.

But who can suppose that a dozen or twenty stools in a day could endanger
life, that has seen a diarrhoea continue for several months, attended with
fifteen or twenty stools every day, without making even a material breach in
the constitution? Hence Dr Hillary has justly remarked, that it rarely or never
happens that the purging in this disease, though violent, takes the patient
off, but the fever and inflammation of the bowels Diseases of Barbados, p. 212.
. Dr Clark in like manner remarks, that evacuations do not destroy life in the
dysentery, but the fever with the emaciation or mortification which attend and
follow the disease Diseases in Voyages to Hot Climates, vol. ii. p. 322.
.

2. A second objection to this mercurial purge was, that it excited a
salivation, and sometimes loosened the teeth. I met with but two cases in which
there was a loss of teeth from the use of this medicine, and in both, the teeth
were previously loose or decayed. The salivation was a trifling evil, compared
with the benefit which was derived from it. I lost only one patient in whom it
occurred. I was taught by this accidental effect of mercury, to administer it
with other views, than merely to cleanse the bowels, and with a success which
added much to my confidence in the power of medicine over this disease. I shall
mention those views under another head.

3. It was said that the mercurial purge, excoriated the rectum, and produced
the symptoms of pain and inflammation in that part, which were formerly
mentioned.

To refute this charge, it will be sufficient to remark that the bile produces
the same excoriation and pain in the rectum in the bilious and yellow fever,
where no mercury has been given to discharge it. In the bilious remitting fever
which prevailed in Philadelphia in 1780, we find the bile which was discharged
by "gentle doses of salts, and cream of tartar, or the butternut pill, was so
acrid as to excoriate the rectum, and so offensive as to occasion in some
cases, sickness and faintness both in the patients, and in their attendants
Medical Inquiries and Observations, London edition, vol. i. p. 112.
."

Dr Hume says further upon this subject, that the rectum was so much excoriated
by the natural discharge of bile in the yellow fever, as to render it
impossible to introduce a glyster pipe into it.

4. It was objected to this purge, that it inflamed, and lacerated the stomach
and bowels. In support of this calumny, the inflamed and mortified appearances
which those viscera exhibited upon dissection in a patient who died at the
hospital at Bush-hill, were spoken of with horror in some parts of the city. To
refute this objection, it will only be necessary to review the account formerly
given of the state of the stomach and bowels after death from the yellow fever,
in cases in which no mercury had been given. I have before taken notice that
Sir John Pringle, and Dr Cleghorn, had prescribed mercurial purges with success
in the dysentery, a disease in which the bowels are affected with more
irritation and inflammation than in the yellow fever. Dr Clark informs us that
he had adopted this practice. I shall insert the eulogium of this excellent
physician, upon the use of mercury in the dysentery in his own words. "For
several years past, when the dysentery has resisted the common mode of
practice, I have administered mercury with the greatest success; and am
thoroughly persuaded that it is possessed of powers to remove inflammation, and
ulceration of the intestines, which are the chief causes of death, in this
distemper Vol. ii. p. 342.
."

5. It was urged against this powerful and efficacious medicine, that it was
prescribed indiscriminately in all cases; and that it did harm in all weak
habits. To this I answer, that there was no person so weak by constitution, or
a previous disease, as to be injured by a single dose of this medicine. Mrs
Meredith the wife of the Treasurer of the United States, a lady of uncommon
delicacy of constitution, took two doses of the powder in the course of twelve
hours, not only without any inconvenience, but with an evident increase of
strength soon afterward. Many similar cases might be mentioned. Even children
took two or three doses of it with perfect safety. This will not surprise those
physicians who have been in the practice of giving from ten to twenty grains of
mercury, with an equal quantity of jalap, as a worm purge, and from fifty to an
hundred grains of calomel in the course of four or five days, in the internal
dropsy of the brain. But I am happy in being able to add further, that many
women took it in every stage of pregnancy without suffering the least
inconvenience from it. Out of a great number of pregnant women whom I attended
in this fever, I did not lose one to whom I gave this medicine, nor did any of
them suffer an abortion. One of them had twice miscarried in the course of the
two or three last years of her life. She bore a healthy child three months
after her recovery from the yellow fever.

No one has ever objected to the indiscriminate mode of preparing the body for
the smallpox by purging medicines. The uniform inflammatory diathesis of that
disease, justifies the practice, in a certain degree in all habits. The yellow
fever admits of a sameness of cure much more than the smallpox, for it is more
uniformly and more highly inflammatory. An observation of Dr Sydenham, upon
epidemics applies in its utmost extent to our late fever. "Now it must be
observed (says this most acute Physician) that some epidemic diseases, in some
years are uniformly and constantly the same Vol. i. p. 9.
." However diversified our fever was in some of its symptoms, it was in all
cases accompanied by more or less inflammatory diathesis, and by a morbid state
of the alimentary canal.

Much has been said of the bad effects of this purge from its having been put
up carelessly by the apothecaries, or from its having been taken contrary to
the printed directions, by many people. If it did harm in any one case (which I
do not believe) from the former of the above causes, the fault is not mine.
Twenty men employed constantly in putting up this medicine, would not have been
sufficient to have complied with all the demands which were made of me for it.
Hundreds who were in health, called or sent for it as well as the sick, in
order to have it in readiness in case they should be surprised by the disorder
in the night, or at a distance from a physician.

In all the cases, in which this purge was supposed to have been hurtful, when
given on the first or second day of the disorder, I believe it was because it
was not followed by repeated doses of the same, or of some other purge; or
because it was not aided by blood-letting. I am led to make this assertion, not
only from the authority of Dr Sydenham, who often mentions the good effects of
bleeding in moderating or checking a diarrhoea, but by having heard no
complaints of patients being purged to death by this medicine, after
blood-letting was universally adopted by all the physicians in the city.

It was remarkable that the demand for this purging powder continued to
increase under all opposition, and that the sale of it by the apothecaries was
greatest toward the close of the disease. I shall hereafter say, that this was
not the case with the West India remedies.

It is possible that this purge sometimes proved hurtful when it was given
after the 5th day of the disorder, but it was seldom given for the first time
after the third day, and when it was, the patient was generally in such a
situation that nothing did him either good or harm.

I derived great pleasure from hearing after the fever had left the city, that
calomel had been given with success as a purge in bilious fevers in other parts
of the Union besides Philadelphia. Dr Lawrence informed me that he had cured
many patients by it, of the yellow fever which prevailed in New York in the
year 1791, and the New York papers have told us that several practitioners had
been in the habit of giving it in the autumnal fevers, with great success in
the Western parts of that state. They had probably learned the use of it from
Dr Young, who formerly practiced in that part of the United States, and who
lost no opportunity of making its praises public, wherever he went.

My pupil Mr Potter gave calomel and jalap in large doses, with great success
in the bilious fever of Caroline county in Maryland, before he knew that I had
adopted that purge in the cure of our epidemic. He had heard the history of its
origin and use from me, some months before, in a conversation upon bilious
fevers in my shop.

I have only to add to my account of that purging medicine, that under an
expectation, that the yellow fever would mingle some of its bilious symptoms,
with the common inflammatory fevers of the winter, and first spring months, I
gave that purge in the form of pills in every case of inflammatory fever to
which I was called. The fatal issue of several fevers in the city, during the
winter, in which this precaution had been neglected, satisfied me that my
practice was proper and useful.

It is to be lamented that all new remedies are forced to pass through a fiery
ordeal. Opium and bark were long the objects of terror and invective in the
schools of medicine. They were administered only by physicians for many years,
and that too with all the solemnity of a religious ceremony. This superstition
with respect to those medicines, has at last passed away. It will I hope soon
be succeeded by a time, when the prejudices against ten and ten, or ten and
fifteen, will sleep with the vulgar fears which were formerly entertained of
the bark producing diseases and death, years after it had been taken, by "lying
in the bones."

OF BLOOD-LETTING.
THE theory of this fever which led me to administer purges, determined me to
use blood-letting, as soon as it should be indicated. I am disposed to believe,
that I was tardy in the use of this remedy, and I shall long regret the loss of
three patients, who might probably have been saved by it. I cannot blame myself
for not having used it earlier, for the immense number of patients which poured
in upon me, in the first week of September, prevented my attending so much to
each of them, as was necessary to determine upon the propriety of this
evacuation. I was in the situation of a surgeon in a battle, who runs to every
call, and only stays long enough with each soldier, to stop the bleeding of his
wound, while the increase of the wounded, and the unexpected length of the
battle, leave his original patients to suffer from the want of more suitable
dressings. The reasons which determined me to bleed were,

1. The state of the pulse, which became more tense, in proportion as the
weather became cool.

2. The appearance of a moist, and white tongue on the first day of the
disorder; a certain sign of an inflammatory fever!

3. The frequency of hemorrhagies from every part of the body, and the perfect
relief given in some cases, by them.

4. The symptoms of congestion in the brain resembling those which occur in the
first stage of hydrocephalus internus, a disease in which I had lately used
bleeding with success.

5. The character of the diseases which had preceded the yellow fever. They
were all more or less inflammatory. Even the scarlatina anginosa had partaken
so much of that diathesis, as to require one bleeding to subdue it.

6. The warm and dry weather which had likewise preceded the fever. Dr Sydenham
attributes a highly inflammatory state of the smallpox, to a previously hot
and dry summer; and I have since observed that Dr Hillary, takes notice of
inflammatory fevers having frequently succeeded hot and dry weather in
Barbados Diseases of Barbados, p. 16, 43, 46, 48, 52. 122.
. He informs us further, that the yellow fever is always most acute and
inflammatory, after a very hot season P. 147.
.

7. The authority of Dr Mosely had great weight with me in advising the loss of
blood, more especially as his ideas of the highly inflammatory nature of the
fever, accorded so perfectly with my own.

8. I was induced to prescribe blood-letting by recollecting its good effects
in Mrs Plalmer's son, whom I bled on the 20th of August; and who appeared to
have been recovered by it.

Having begun to bleed, I was encouraged to continue it by the appearance of
the blood, and by the obvious and very great relief my patients derived from it.

The following is a short account of the appearances of the blood drawn from a
vein in this disorder.

1. It was in the greatest number of cases, dense, and of a scarlet color,
without any separation into crassamentum and serum.

2. There was in many cases a separation of the blood into crassamentum and
yellow serum.

3. There were a few cases in which this separation took place, and the serum
was of a natural color.

4. There were many cases in which the blood was as sizy as in pneumony and
rheumatism.

5. The blood was in some instances covered above with a blue pellicle of sizy
lymph, while the part which lay in the bottom of the bowl was dissolved. The
lymph was in two cases mixed with green streaks.

6. It was in a few instances of a dark color, and as fluid as molasses. I saw
this kind of blood in a man who walked about his house during the whole of his
sickness, and who finally recovered. Both this, and the 5th kind of blood which
has been mentioned, occurred chiefly where bleeding had been omitted
altogether, or used too sparingly in the beginning of the disorder.

7. In some patients, the blood, in the course of the disease, exhibited nearly
all the appearances which have been mentioned. They were varied by the time in
which the blood was drawn, and by the nature and force of the remedies which
had been used in the disorder.

The effects of blood-letting upon the system were as follow:

1. It raised the pulse when depressed, and quickened it, when it was
preternaturally slow, or subject to intermissions.

2. It reduced its force and frequency.

3. It checked in many cases, the vomiting which occurred in the beginning of
the disorder, and thereby enabled the stomach to retain the purging medicine.
It likewise assisted the purge in preventing the dangerous or fatal vomiting
which came on about the 5th day.

4. It lessened the difficulty of opening the bowels. Upon this account, in my
publication of the 12th of September, I advised bleeding to be used before, as
well as after taking the mercurial purge. Dr Woodhouse informed me that he had
several times seen patients call for the close stool while the blood was
flowing from the vein.

5. It removed delirium, coma, and obstinate wakefulness. It also prevented or
checked hemorrhagies; hence perhaps another reason why not a single instance of
abortion occurred in such of my female patients as were pregnant.

6. It disposed in some cases to a gentle perspiration.

7. It lessened the sensible debility of the system, hence patients frequently
rose from their beds, and walked across their rooms in a few hours after the
operation had been performed.

8. The redness of the eyes frequently disappeared in a few hours after
bleeding. Mr Coxe observed a dilated pupil to contract to its natural size,
within a few minutes after he had bound up the arm of his patient. I remarked
in the former part of this work, that blindness in many instances attended or
followed this fever. Only two such cases occurred among my patients. In one of
them it was of short continuance, and in the other it was probably occasioned
by the want of sufficient bleeding. In every case of blindness that came to my
knowledge, bleeding had been omitted, or used only in a very moderate degree.

9. It eased pain. Thousands can testify this effect of blood-letting. Many of
my patients whom I bled with my own hand, acknowledged to me while the blood
was flowing, that they were better; and some of them declared, that all their
pains had left them, before I had completely bound up their arms.

10. But blood-letting had in many cases an effect, the opposite of easing
pain. It frequently increased it in every part of the body, more especially in
the head. It appeared to be the effect of the system rising suddenly from a
state of indirect debility, and of an increased action of the blood vessels
which took place in consequence of it. I have frequently seen complaints of the
breast, and of the head, made worse by a single bleeding, and from the same
cause. It was in some cases an unfortunate event in the yellow fever, for it
prevented the blood-letting being repeated, by exciting, or strengthening the
prejudices of patients and physicians against it. In some instances, the
patients grew worse after a second, and in one, after a third bleeding. This
was the case in Miss Redman. Her pains increased after three bleedings, but
yielded to the fourth. Her father Dr. Redman concurred in this seemingly absurd
practice. It was at this time, my old master reminded me of Dr Sydenham's
remark, that moderate bleeding did harm in the plague, where copious bleeding
was indicated, and that in the cure of that disorder, we should leave nature
wholly to herself, or take the cure altogether out of her hands. The truth of
this observation was very obvious. By taking away as much blood as restored the
blood vessels to a morbid degree of action, without reducing this action
afterward, pain, congestion, and inflammation, were frequently increased, all
of which were prevented, or occurred in a less degree, when the system rose
gradually from the state of depression which had been induced by indirect
debility. Under the influence of the facts and reasonings which have been
mentioned, I bore the same testimony in acute cases, against what was called
moderate bleeding, that I did against bark, wine and laudanum in this fever.

11. Blood-letting when used early on the first day, frequently strangled the
disease in its birth, and generally rendered it more light, and the
convalescence more speedy and perfect. I am not sure that it ever shortened the
duration of the fever where it was not used within a few hours of the time of
its attack. Under every mode of treatment, it seemed disposed after it was
completely formed to run its course. I was so satisfied of this peculiarity in
the fever, that I ventured in some cases to predict the day on which it would
terminate, notwithstanding I took the cure entirely out of the hands of nature.
I did not lose a patient on the third, whom I bled on the first, or second day
of the disorder.

12. In those cases which ended fatally, blood-letting restored, or preserved
the use of reason, rendered death easy, and retarded the putrefaction of the
body after death.

I shall now mention some of the circumstances which directed and regulated the
use of this remedy.

1. Where bleeding had been omitted, for three days, in acute cases it was
seldom useful. Where purging had been used, it was sometimes successful. I
recovered two patients who had taken the mercurial purges, whom I bled for the
first time on the 7th day. One of them was the daughter of Mr James Cresson,
the other was a journeyman ship-carpenter at Kensington. In those cases where
bleeding had been used on the first day, it was both safe and useful to repeat
it every day afterward, during the continuance of the fever.

2. I preferred bleeding in the exacerbation of the fever. The remedy here was
applied when the disease was in its greatest force. A single paroxism, was like
a sudden squall to the system, and unless abated by bleeding, or purging,
produced universal disorganization. I preferred the former to the latter remedy
in cases of great danger, because it was more speedy, and more certain in its
operation.

3. I bled in several instances in the remission of the fever, where the pulse
was tense or chorded. It lessened the violence of the succeeding paroxism.

4. I bled in all those cases in which the pulse was preternaturally slow,
provided it was tense. Mr Benj. W. Morris, Mr Thomas Wharton Jun. and Mr Wm.
Sansom, all owe their lives probably to their having been bled in the above
state of the pulse. I was led to use bleeding in this state of the pulse, not
only by the theory of the disease which I had adopted, but by the success which
had often attended this remedy, in a slow and depressed state of the pulse in
apoplexy and pneumony. I had, moreover, the authority of Dr Mosely in its
favor, in the yellow fever, and of Dr Sydenham, in his account of a new fever,
which appeared in the year 1685. The words of the latter physician are so
apposite to the cases which have been mentioned, that I hope I shall be excused
for inserting them in this place. "All the symptoms of weakness (says our
author) proceed from nature's being in a manner oppressed, and overcome by the
first attack of the disease, so as not to be able to raise regular symptoms
adequate to the violence of the fever. I remember to have met with a remarkable
instance of this several years ago, in a young man I then attended; for though
he seemed in a manner expiring, yet the outward parts felt so cool, that I
could not persuade the attendants he had a fever, which could not disengage,
and show itself clearly, because the vessels were so full as to obstruct the
motion of the blood. However, I said, that they would soon find the fever rise
high enough upon bleeding him. Accordingly after taking away a large quantity
of blood, as violent a fever appeared as ever I met with, and did not go off
till bleeding had been used three or four times Vol. ii p. 351.
."

5. I bled in those cases in which the fever appeared in a tertian form,
provided the pulse was full and tense. I well recollect the surprise with which
Mr Van Berkel heard this prescription from me, at a time when he was able to
walk and ride out on the intermediate days of a tertian fever. The event which
followed this prescription, showed that it was not disproportioned to the
violence of his disease, for it soon put on such acute and inflammatory
symptoms as to require six subsequent bleedings to subdue it.

6. I bled in those cases where patients were able to walk about, provided the
pulse was the same as has been mentioned under the 4th head. I was determined
as to the propriety of bleeding in these two supposed mild forms of the fever,
by having observed each of them when left to themselves frequently to terminate
in death.

7. I paid no regard to the dissolved state of the blood, when it appeared on
the first or second day of the disorder, but repeated the bleedings afterward
in every case, where the pulse continued to indicate it. It was common to see
sizy blood succeed that which was dissolved. This occurred in Mr Josiah Coats,
and Mr Samuel Powel. Had I believed that this dissolved state of the blood
arose from its putrefaction, I should have laid aside my lancet as soon as I
saw it; but I had long ago parted with all ideas of putrefaction in bilious
fevers. The refutation of this doctrine, was the object of one of my papers in
the Medical Society of Edinburgh, in the year 1767. The dissolved appearance of
the blood, I suppose to be the effect of a certain action of the blood vessels
upon it. It occurs in fevers in which no putrid, or foreign matter has been
introduced into the system. The typhoid pneumony described by Dr Huxham in his
epidemics, and well known in the southern states of America, in the spring of
the year, has never been ascribed to any other remote cause, than the sensible
qualities of the air.

8. The presence of petechiae did not deter me from repeating blood-letting,
where the pulse retained its fullness or tension. I prescribed it with success
in the cases of Dr Mease, and of Mrs Gebler, in Dock-street, in each of whom
petechiae had appeared. Bleeding was equally effectual in the case of the Rev.
Mr Keating at a time when his arms were spotted with that species of eruptions
which I have compared to moscheto-bites. I had precedents in Dr De Haen Ratio
medendi, Vol. ii. p. 162. Vol. iv. p. 172.
, and Dr Sydenham Vol. 1. p. 210, and 264.
in favor of this practice. So far from viewing these eruptions as signs of
putrefaction, I considered them as marks of the highest possible inflammatory
diathesis. They disappeared in each of the above cases after bleeding.

9. In determining the quantity of blood to be drawn, I was governed by the
state of the pulse, and by the temperature of the weather. In the beginning of
September, I found one or two moderate bleedings sufficient to subdue the
fever; but in proportion as the system rose by the diminution of the stimulus
of heat, and the fever put on more visible signs of inflammatory diathesis,
more frequent bleedings became necessary. I bled many patients twice, and a few
three times a day. I preferred frequent and small, to large bleedings, in the
beginning of September; but toward the height and close of the epidemic, I saw
no inconvenience from the loss of a pint, and even twenty ounces of blood at a
time. I drew from many persons seventy and eighty ounces in five days; and from
a few, a much larger quantity. Mr Gribble, cedar-cooper, in Front-street, lost
by ten bleedings an hundred ounces of blood; Mr George, a carter in
Ninth-street, lost about the same quantity by five bleedings; and Mr Peter
Mierken, one hundred and fourteen ounces in five days. In the last of the above
persons the quantity taken was determined by weight. Mr Toy, blacksmith near
Dock-street, was eight times bled in the course of seven days. The quantity
taken from him was about an hundred ounces. The blood in all these cases was
dense, and in the last very sizy. They were all attended in the month of
October, and chiefly by my pupil Mr Fisher; and they are all this day living
and healthy instances of the efficacy of copious blood-letting, and of the
intrepidity and judgment of their young physician. Children, and even old
people, bore the loss of much more blood in this fever, than in common
inflammatory fevers. I took above thirty ounces, in five bleedings, from a
daughter of Mr Robert Bridges, who was then in the 9th year of her age. Even
great debility, whether natural or brought on by previous diseases, did not in
those few cases in which it yielded to the fever, deprive it of the uniformity
of its inflammatory character. The following letter from my friend Dr
Griffitts, written soon after his recovery from a third attack of the fever,
and just before he went into the country for the re-establishment of his
health, will furnish a striking illustration of the truth of the above
observation.

I CANNOT leave town without a parting adieu to my kind friend, and sincere
prayers for his preservation.

I am sorry to find that the use of the lancet is still so much dreaded by too
many of our physicians; and while lamenting the death of a valuable friend this
morning, I was told that he was bled but once during his disorder. Now if my
poor frame, reduced by previous sickness, great anxiety, and fatigue, and a
very low diet, could bear seven bleedings in five days, besides purging, and no
diet but toast and water, what shall we say of physicians who bleed but once?

October 19 th, 1793.

I have compared a paroxism of this fever to a sudden squall; but the disease
in its whole course was like a tedious equinoctial gale, acting upon a ship at
sea; its destructive force was only to be opposed by handing every sail, and
leaving the system to float, as it were, under bare poles. Such was the
fragility (if I may be allowed the expression) of the blood vessels, that it
was necessary to unload them of their contents, in order to prevent the system
sinking, from hemorrhagies, or from effusions in the viscera, particularly the
brain.

9. Such was the indomitable nature of the pulse in some patients, that it did
not lose its force after numerous and copious bleedings. In all such cases, I
considered the diminution of its frequency, and the absence of a vomiting, as
signals to lay aside the lancet. The continuance of this preternatural force in
the pulse, appeared to be owing to the contagion which was universally diffused
in the air, acting upon the arterial system in the same manner that it did in
persons who were in apparent good health.

Thus have I mentioned the principal circumstances which were connected with
blood-letting, in the cure of the yellow fever. I shall now consider the
objections that were made to it at the time, and since the prevalence of the
fever.

It was said that the bleeding was unnecessarily copious; and that many had
been destroyed by it. To this I answer, that I did not lose a single patient
whom I bled seven times, or more, in this fever. As a further proof that I did
not draw an ounce of blood too much, it will only be necessary to add, that
hemorrhagies frequently occurred after a third, a fourth, and in one instance
(in the only son of Mr William Hall) after a sixth bleeding had been used; and
further, that not a single death occurred from natural hemorrhagies in the
first stage of the disorder. A woman who had been bled by my advice, awoke the
night following in a bath of her blood; which had flowed from the orifice in
her arm. The next day she was free from pain and fever. There were many
recoveries in the city from similar accidents. There were likewise some
recoveries from copious natural hemorrhagies in the more advanced stages of the
disorder, particularly when they occurred from the stomach and bowels. I left a
servant maid of Mrs Morris's, in Walnut-street, who had discharged at least
four pounds of blood from her stomach, without a pulse, and with scarcely a
symptom that encouraged a hope of her life; but the next day I had the pleasure
of finding her out of danger.

It is remarkable that fainting was much less common after bleeding in this
fever, than in common inflammatory fevers. This circumstance was observed by Dr
Griffitts, as well as myself. It has since been confirmed to me by three of the
principal bleeders in the city, who performed the operation upwards of four
thousand times. It occurred chiefly in those cases where it was used for the
first time on the third or fourth day of the disease. A swelling of the legs,
moreover, so common after plentiful bleeding in pneumony and rheumatism, rarely
succeeded the use of this remedy in the yellow fever.

2. Many of the indispositions, and much of the subsequent weakness of persons
who had been cured by copious blood-letting, have been ascribed to it. This is
so far from being true, that the reverse of it has occurred in many cases. Mr
Mierken worked in his sugar-house in good health, nine days after his last
bleeding; and Mr Gribble, and Mr George seem by their appearance to have
derived fresh vigor from their evacuations. I could mention the names of many
people who think their constitutions have been improved by the use of those
remedies; and I know several persons in whom they have carried off habitual
complaints. Mr Richard Wells attributes his relief from a chronic rheumatism to
the copious bleeding and purging which were used to cure him of the yellow
fever; and Mr William Young, the bookseller, was relieved of a chronic pain in
his side, by means of the same remedies.

3. It was said, that blood-letting was prescribed indiscriminately in all
cases, without any regard to age, constitution, or the force of the disease.
This is not true as far as it relates to my practice. In my prescriptions for
patients whom I was unable to visit, I advised them, when they were incapable
of judging of the state of the pulse, to be guided in the use of bleeding, by
the degrees of pain they felt, particularly in the head; and I seldom advised
it for the first time, after the second, or third day of the disorder.

In pneumonies which affect whole neighbourhoods in the spring of the year,
bleeding is the universal remedy. Why should it not be equally so, in a fever
which is of a more uniform inflammatory nature, and which tends more rapidly to
effusions, in parts of the body, much more vital than the lungs?

I have before remarked, that the debility which occurs in the yellow fever, is
of the indirect kind. The debility in the plague is of the same nature. It has
long been known that direct debility is to be removed by the gradual
application of stimuli, but it has been less observed, that the excess of
stimulus in the system is best removed in a gradual manner, and that too, in
proportion to the degrees of indirect debility, which exist in the system.

This principle in the animal economy has been acknowledged by the practice of
occasionally stopping the discharge of water from a canula in tapping, and of
blood from a vein, in order to prevent fainting.

Childbirth, induces fainting, and sometimes death, only by the sudden
abstraction of the stimulus of distention and pain.

In all those cases where purging or bleeding have produced death in the yellow
fever or plague, when they have been used on the first or second day of those
disorders, I suspect that it was occasioned by the quantity of the stimulus
abstracted, being disproportioned to the degrees of indirect debility. The
following facts will I hope throw light upon this subject.

1. Dr Hodges informs us, that "although blood could not be drawn in the
plague, even in the smallest quantity without danger, yet an hundred times the
quantity of fluids, was discharged in pus from buboes without inconvenience
Page 114.
."

2. Pareus, after condemning bleeding in the plague, immediately adds an
account of a patient, who was saved by an hemorrhage from the nose which
continued two days Skenkius, Lib. vi. p. 881.
."

3. I have before remarked that bleeding proved fatal in three cases in the
yellow fever in the month of August; but at that time, I saw one, and heard of
another case, in which death seemed to have been prevented by a bleeding at the
nose. Perhaps the uniform good effects which were observed to follow a
spontaneous hemorrhage from an orifice in the arm, arose wholly from the
gradual manner in which the stimulus of the blood was in this way abstracted
from the body. Dr Williams relates a case of the recovery of a gentleman from
the yellow fever by means of small hemorrhagies which continued three days from
wounds in his shoulders made by being cupped. He likewise mentions several
other recoveries by hemorrhagies from the nose, after "a vomiting of black
humors, and a hiccup had taken place Essay on the Bilious or Yellow Fever of
Jamaica, P. 40.
:"

4. There is a disease in North Carolina known among the common people by the
name of the "pleurisy in the head." It occurs in the winter after a sickly
autumn, and seems to be an evanescent symptom of a bilious remitting fever. The
cure of it has been attempted by bleeding, in the common way, but generally
without success. It has however, yielded to this remedy in another form, that
is, to the discharge of a few ounces of blood obtained by thrusting a piece of
quill up the nose.

5. Riverius describes a pestilential fever which prevailed at Montpelier in
the year 1623, which carried off one half of all who were affected by it De
Febre Pestilenti, vol. ii. p. 145, 146, and 147.
. After many unsuccessful attempts to cure it, this judicious physician
prescribed the loss of two or three ounces of blood. The pulse rose with this
small evacuation. Three or four hours afterward, he drew six ounces of blood
from his patients, and with the same good effect. The next day, he gave a
purge, which he says rescued his patients from the grave. All whom he treated
in this manner recovered. The whole history of this epidemic is highly
interesting, from its agreeing with our late epidemic in so many of its
symptoms, more especially as they appeared in the different states of the pulse.

An old and intelligent citizen of Philadelphia, who remembers the yellow fever
of 1741, says that when it first made its appearance, bleeding was attended
with fatal consequences. It was laid aside afterward, and the disease
prevailed with great mortality, until it was checked by the cold weather. Had
blood been drawn in the manner mentioned by Riverius, or had it been drawn in
the usual way, after the abstraction of the stimulus of heat by the cool
weather, the disease might probably have been subdued, and the remedy of blood
letting, thereby have recovered its character.

Dr Hodges has another remark in his account of the plague in London in the
year 1665, which is still more to our purpose than the one which I have quoted
from it upon this subject. He says that "bleeding as a preventive of the plague
was only safe and useful, when the blood was drawn by a small orifice, and a
small quantity taken at different times Page 209.
."

I have remarked in the history of the yellow fever of last autumn, that it was
often cured on the first or second day by a copious sweat. The Rev. Mr Ustick
was one among many whom I could mention, who were saved from a violent attack
of the fever, by this evacuation. It would be absurd to suppose that the
contagion which produced the disease, was discharged in this manner from the
body. The sweat seemed to cure the fever, only by lessening the quantity of the
fluids, and thus gradually removing the indirect debility of the system. The
profuse sweats which sometimes cure the plague, as well as the disease which is
brought on by the bite of poisonous snakes, seem to act in the same way.

The system under the impression of the contagion of a malignant fever,
resembles a man struggling beneath a load of two hundred weight, who is able to
lift only one hundred and seventy-five. In order to assist him it will be to no
purpose to attempt to infuse additional vigor into his muscles by the use of a
whip or of strong drink. Every exertion will serve only to waste his strength.
In this situation (supposing it impossible to divide the weight which confines
him to the ground) let the pockets of this man be emptied of their contents,
and let him be stripped of so much of his clothing, as to reduce his weight
five and twenty or thirty pounds. In this situation he will rise from the
ground; but if the weights be abstracted suddenly, while he is in an act of
exertion he will rise with a spring that will endanger a second fall, and
probably produce a temporary convulsion in his system. By abstracting the
weights from his body more gradually, he will rise by degrees from the ground,
and the system will accommodate itself in such a manner to the diminution of
its pressure, as to resume its erect form, without the least deviation from the
natural order of its appearance and motions.

It has been said that the stimulating remedies of bark, wine, and the cold
bath, were proper in our late epidemic in August, and in the beginning of
September, but that they were improper afterward. If my theory be just, they
were more improper in August and the beginning of September, than they were
after the disease put on the outward and common signs of inflammatory
diathesis. The reason why a few strong purges cured the disease at its first
appearance was, because they abstracted in a gradual manner some of the immense
portion of stimulus under which the arterial system labored, and thus
gradually relieved it from its low degrees of indirect debility. Bleeding was
fatal in these cases, only because it removed this indirect debility in too
sudden a manner.

The principle of the gradual abstraction, as well as of the gradual
application of stimuli to the body, in all the diseases of indirect debility on
the one hand, and of direct, on the other, opens a wide field for the
improvement of medicine. Perhaps all the discoveries of future ages will
consist more in a new application of established principles, and in new modes
of exhibiting old medicines, than in the discovery of new theories, or of new
articles of the Materia Medica.

The reasons which induced me to prescribe purging and bleeding, in so liberal
a manner, naturally led me to recommend COOL and FRESH AIR to my patients. The
good effects of it were obvious in almost every case in which it was applied.
It was equally proper whether the arterial system was depressed, or whether it
discovered in the pulse, a high degree of morbid excitement. Dr Griffiths
furnished a remarkable instance of the influence of cool air upon the fever.
Upon my visiting him on the morning of the eighth of October, I found his pulse
so full and tense, as to indicate bleeding, but after sitting a few minutes by
his bedside, I perceived that the windows of his room had been shut in the
night by his nurse, on account of the coldness of the night air. I desired that
they might be opened. In ten minutes afterward, the Doctor's pulse became so
much slower and weaker, that I advised the postponement of the bleeding, and
recommended a purge instead of it. The bleeding notwithstanding became
necessary, and was used with great advantage in the afternoon of the same day.

The cool air was improper only in those cases where a chilliness attended the
disease.

For the same reason that I advised cool air, I directed my patients to use
cold DRINKS. They consisted of lemonade, tamarind, jelly, and raw apple water,
toast and water, and of weak balm, and camomile tea. The subacid drinks were
preferred in most cases, as being not only most agreeable to the taste, but
because they tended to correct by mixture, the acrid quality of the bile. All
these drinks were taken in the early stage of the disorder. Toward the close
of it, I permitted the use of porter and water, weak punch, and when the
stomach would bear it, weak wine-whey.

I forbad all cordial and stimulating food in the active state of the arterial
system. The less my patients ate, of even the mildest vegetable food, the
sooner they recovered. Weak coffee, which (as I have formerly remarked) was
almost universally agreeable, and weak tea were always inoffensive. As the
action of the pulse diminished, I indulged my patients with weak chocolate;
also with milk, to which roasted apples, or minced peaches, and (where they
were not to be had,) bread, or Indian mush were added.

Toward the crisis, I advised the drinking of weak chicken, veal, or mutton
broth, and after the crisis had taken place, I permitted mild animal food to be
eaten in a small quantity, and to be increased according to the waste of the
excitability of the system. This strict abstinence which I imposed upon my
patients did not escape obloquy, but the benefits they derived from it, and the
ill effects which arose in many cases from a contrary regimen, satisfied me
that it was proper in every case in which it was prescribed.

COLD WATER was a most agreeable and powerful remedy in this disorder. I
directed it to be applied by means of napkins to the head, and to be injected
into the bowels by way of glyster. It gave the same ease to both, when in pain,
which opium gives to pain from other causes. I likewise advised the washing of
the face and hands, and sometimes the feet with cold water, and always with
advantage. It was by suffering the body to lie for some time in a bed of cold
water, that the inhabitants of the island of Massuah cured the most violent
bilious fevers Bruce's Travels.
. When applied in this way, it gradually abstracts the heat from the body, and
thereby lessens the action of the system. It differs as much in its effects
upon the body from the cold bath, as rest in a cold room, differs from exercise
in the cold and open air.

I was first led to the practice of the partial application of cold water to
the body, in fevers of too much force in the arterial system, by observing its
good effects in active hemorrhagies, and by recollecting the effects of a
partial application of warm water to the feet, in fevers of an opposite
character. Cold water when applied to the feet as certainly reduces the pulse
in force and frequency, as warm water applied in the same way, produces
contrary effects upon it. In an experiment which was made at my request by one
of my pupils, by placing his feet in cold pump water for a few minutes, the
pulse was reduced 24 strokes in a minute, and became so weak as hardly to be
perceptible.

In the use of the remedies which were necessary to overcome the inflammatory
action of the system, I was obliged to reduce it below its natural point of
excitement. In the present imperfect state of our knowledge in medicine,
perhaps no disease of too much action, can be cured without it.

I have said in another place, that I was early obliged to desist from the use
of wine, bark, and laudanum in the first stage of this disorder. I found them
as offensive to the stomach, and nearly as hurtful in its second stage, as I
had found them in its first. In this situation new resources in the materia
medica were opened to me. I had observed a favorable issue of the fever in
every case, in which a spontaneous discharge took place from the salivary
glands. I had observed further, that all such of my patients (one excepted) as
were salivated by the mercurial purges recovered in a few days. This, early
suggested an idea to me that the calomel might be applied to other purposes,
than the discharging of bile from the bowels. I ascribed its salutary effects
when it salivated in the first stage of the disorder, to the excitement of
inflammation and effusion in the throat, diverting them from more vital parts
of the body. In the the second stage of the disorder, I was led to prescribe it
as a stimulant, and with a view of obtaining this operation from it, I aimed at
exciting a salivation as speedily as possible in all cases. Two precedents
encouraged me to make trial of this remedy.

In the month of October 1789, I attended a gentleman in a bilious fever, which
ended in many of the symptoms of a typhus mitior. In the lowest state of his
fever, he complained of a pain his right side, for which I ordered half an
ounce of mercurial ointment to be rubbed on the part affected. The next day, he
complained of a sore mouth, and in the course of four and twenty hours, he was
in a moderate salivation. From this time his pulse became full and slow, and
his skin moist. His sleep and appetite suddenly returned, and in a day or two
he was out of danger. The second precedent for a salivation in a fever, which
occurred to me was in Dr Haller's short account of the works of Dr Cramer
Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae, vol. iii. p. 491.
, and which I had a year before copied into my note book. The practice was
moreover, justified in point of safety, as well as the probability of success,
by the accounts which Dr Clark has lately given of the effects of a salivation
in the dysentery Diseases of long voyages to Hot Climates, vol. ii. p. 334.
. I began by prescribing the the calomel in small doses, at short intervals,
and afterward I directed large quantities of the ointment to be rubbed upon
the limbs. The effects of it in every case in which it affected the mouth, were
salutary. Dr Woodhouse improved upon my method of exciting the salivation, by
rubbing the gums with calomel, in the manner directed by Mr Clare. It was more
speedy in its operation in this way than in any other, and equally effectual.
Several persons appeared to be benefited by the mercury introduced into the
system in the form of an ointment, where it did not produce a salivation. Among
these, were the Rev. Dr Blackwell, and Mr John Davis.

Since the above account was written of the good effects (...) mercurial
salivation in this fever, I have had great satisfaction in discovering that it
was prescribed with equal, and even greater success, by Dr Wade in Bengal, in
the year 1791, and by Mr Chisholm in the island of Granada, in the cure of
bilious yellow fevers Medical Commentaries, vol. xviii. p. 209. 388.
. Dr Wade did not lose one, and Mr Chisholm lost only one, out of forty eight
prtients in whom the mercury affected the salivary glands. The latter gave 150
grains of colomel, and applied the strongest mercurial ointment below the groin
of each side, in some cases. He adds further, that not a single instance of a
relapse occurred, where the disease was cured by salivation.

After the reduction of the system, blisters were applied with great advantage
to every part of the body. They did most service when they were applied to the
crown of the head. I did not see a single case, in which a mortification
followed the sore, which was created by a blister.

Brandy and water, or porter and water, when agreeable to the stomach, with now
and then a cup of chicken broth, were the drinks I prescribed to assist in
restoring the tone of the system.

In some cases I directed the limbs to be wrapped in flannels dipped in warm
spirits, and cataplasms of bruised garlic to be applied to the feet. But my
principal dependence, next to the use of mercurial medicines, for exciting a
healthy action in the arterial system, was upon mild and gently stimulating
food. This consisted of rich broths, the flesh of poultry, oysters, thick
gruel, mush and milk, and chocolate. I directed my patients to eat or drink a
portion of some of the above articles of diet every hour or two during the day,
and in cases of great debility, I advised their being waked for the same
purpose two or three times in the night. The appetite frequently craved more
savoury articles of food, such as beef-stakes, and sausages; but they were
permitted with great caution, and never 'till the system had been prepared for
them by a less stimulating diet.

There were several symptoms which were very distressing in this disorder, and
which required a specific treatment.

For the vomiting, with a burning sensation in the stomach, which came on about
the 5th day, I found no remedy equal to a table spoonful of sweet milk taken
every hour, or to small draughts of milk and water. I was led to prescribe this
simple medicine, from having heard from a West India practitioner, and
afterward read in Dr Hume's account of the yellow fever, encomiums upon the
milk of the cocoa-nut for this troublesome symptom. Where sweet milk failed of
giving relief, I prescribed small doses of sweet oil, and in some cases a
mixture of equal parts of milk, sweet oil and molasses. They were all intended
to dilute, or blunt the acrimony of the humors which were either effused, or
generated in the stomach. Where they all failed of checking the vomiting, I
prescribed weak camomile tea, or porter, or cider and water, with advantage. In
some of my patients, the stomach rejected all the mixtures, and liquors which
have been mentioned. In such cases, I directed the stomach to be left to itself
for a few hours, after which it sometimes received and retained the drinks that
it had before rejected, provided they were administered in a small quantity at
a time.

The vomiting was sometimes stopped by a blister applied to the external region
of the stomach.

A mixture of liquid laudanum and sweet oil, applied to the same place, gave
relief where the stomach, was affected by pain only, without a vomiting.

I have formerly mentioned that a distressing pain often seized the lower part
of the bowels. I was early taught that laudanum was not a proper remedy for it.
It yielded in almost every case, to two or three emolient glysters, or to the
loss of a few ounces of blood.

The convalescence from this fever was in general rapid, but in some cases it
was very slow. I was more than usually struck by the great resemblance which
the system in the convalescence from this fever, bore to the state of the body
and mind in old age. It appeared, 1. in the great weakness of the body, more
especially of the limbs. 2. In uncommon depression of mind, and in a great
aptitude to shed tears. 3. In the absence or short continuance of sleep. 4. In
the frequent occurrence of appetite, and in some cases in its inordinate
degrees. And 5. In the loss of the hair of the head, or in its being suddenly
changed in some cases to a gray color.

Pure air, gentle exercise, and agreeable society, r^^oved the debility both of
body and mind of this premature, and temporary old age. I met with a few cases,
in which the yellow color continued for several weeks after the patient's
recovery from all the other symptoms of the fever. It was removed most speedily
and effectually by two or three moderate doses of calomel and rhubarb.

A feeble and irregular intermittent, was very troublesome in some people,
after an acute attack of the fever. It yielded gradually to camomile or
snake-root tea, and country air.

In a publication dated the 16th of September, I recommended a diet of milk and
vegetables, and cooling purges to be taken once or twice a week, to the
citizens of Philadelphia. This advice was the result of the theory of the
disease I had adopted, and of the successful practice which had arisen from it.
In my intercourse with my fellow citizens, I advised this regimen to be
regulated by the degrees of fatigue and contagion to which they were exposed. I
likewise advised moderate blood-letting to all such persons as were of a
plethoric habit. To men whose minds were influenced by the publications in
favor of bark and wine, and who were unable at that time to grasp the extent
and force of the contagion of this terrible fever, the idea of dieting,
purging, or bleeding the inhabitants of a whole village or city, appeared to be
extravagant and absurd: but I had many precedents, besides the authority of
reason, in favor of the advice. Dr Mitchell recommended moderate bleeding with
success, as a preventive of the yellow fever in Virginia, in the year 1741. A
military surgeon belonging to the French troops at Hispaniola, assured Dr
Foulke that he had for many years bled the recruits from France, as soon as
they arrived, and thereby secured them from a seasoning by the yellow fever.
The less mortality of this disorder in the French and Spanish, than in the
English Islands, has been justly attributed to the natives of France and Spain
carrying with them to the West Indies more temperate habits, in the use of wine
and animal food, than the natives of Great Britain. I had moreover, the analogy
of the regimen made use of to prepare the body for the smallpox and plague, in
favor of this advice. Dr Haller has given extracts from the histories of two
plagues, in which the action of the contagion was prevented, or mitigated, by
bleeding Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae, vol. ii. p. 93, and 387.
. Dr Hodges confirms the utility of the same practice. The benefits of low
diet, as a preventive of the plague, were established by many authors, long
before they received the testimony of the benevolent Mr Howard in their favor.
Socrates in Athens, and Justinian in Constantinople, were preserved by means of
their abstemious modes of living, from the plagues which occasionally ravaged
those cities. By means of the low diet, gentle physic, and occasional
bleedings, which I thus publicly recommended, the disease was prevented in many
instances, or rendered mild where it was taken. But my efforts to prevent the
disease in my fellow-citizens, did not end here. I advised them, not only in
the public papers, but in my intercourse with them, to avoid heat, cold,
labor, and every thing else that could excite the contagion (which I knew to
be present in all their bodies) into action. I forgot upon this occasion the
usual laws which regulate the intercourse of man with man in the streets, and
upon the public roads, in my excursions into the neighborhood of the city. I
cautioned many persons whom I saw walking or riding in an unsafe manner, of the
danger to which they exposed themselves; and thereby I hope prevented an attack
of the disorder in many people. If in a single instance I unhappily excited an
emotion of terror in a fellow-citizen, by this conduct, I thus publicly ask his
pardon. There should be no ceremony in calling to a man to avoid a precipice;
or in pulling him out of a fire.

It was from a conviction of the utility of low diet, gentle evacuations, and
of carefully shunning all the exciting causes which I have mentioned, that I
concealed in no instance from my patients, the name of their disorder. This
plainness, which was blamed by weak people, produced strict obedience to my
directions, and thereby limited the propagation of the fever in many families,
or rendered it when taken, as mild as inoculation does the smallpox. The
opposite conduct of several physicians, by preventing the above precautions,
increased the mortality of the disease; and in some instances contributed to
the extinction of whole families. Such have been, and ever will be, the effects
of ignorance and fraud in the profession of medicine.

I proceed now to make a few remarks upon the remedies recommended by Doctors
Kuhn and Stevens, and by the French physicians.

Had the whole materia medica been ransacked, there could not have been found
any three medicines more opposite to the disorder than bark, wine, and
laudanum. In every case in which I prescribed bark, it was offensive to the
stomach. In several tertians which attended the convalescence from a common
attack of the fever, I found it always unsuccessful, and once hurtful. Mr
Willing took it for several weeks without effect. About half a pint of a weak
decoction of the bark produced in Mr Samuel Meredith, a paroxism of the fever,
so violent as to require the loss of ten ounces of blood to moderate it. Dr
Annan informed me that he was forced to bleed one of his patients twice, after
having given him a small quantity of bark, to hasten his convalescence. If in
any case it was inoffensive, or did service, I suspect it must have acted upon
the bowels as a purge. Dr Sydenham says the bark cured intermittents by this
evacuation Vol. i. p. 440.
; and Mr Bruce says it operated in the same way, when it cured the bilious
fevers at Massuah.

Wine was nearly as disagreeable as the bark to the stomach, and equally
hurtful. I tried it in every form, and of every quality, but without success.
It was either rejected by the stomach, or produced in it a burning sensation. I
should suspect that I had been mistaken in my complaints against wine, had I
not since met with an account in Skenkius of its having destroyed all who took
it in the famous Hungarian fever, which prevailed with great mortality over
nearly every country in Europe, about the middle of the 16th century Omnes qui
vini potione non abstinuerunt, interiere, adeo ut summa spes salvationis in
vini abstinentia collocata videreter. Lib. vi. p. 847.
. Dr Wade declares wine to be "ill adapted to the fevers of Bengal, where the
treatment has been proper in other respects."

Laudanum has been called by Dr Mosely "a fatal medicine" in the yellow fever.
In one of my patients who took only fifteen drops of it, without my advice, to
ease a pain in his bowels, it produced a delirium, and death in a few hours. I
was much gratified in discovering that my practice, with respect to the use of
opium in this fever, accorded with Dr Wade's in the fever of Bengal. He tells
us that "it was mischievous in almost every instance, even in combination with
antimonials."

The spices were hurtful in the first stage of the fever, and when sufficient
evacuations had been used, they were seldom necessary in its second.

The elixir of vitriol was in general, offensive to the stomach.

The cold bath was useful in those cases where its sedative prevailed over its
stimulating effects. But this could not often happen, from the suddenness and
force with which the water was thrown upon the body. In two cases in which I
prescribed it, it produced a gentle sweat, but it did not save life. In a third
it removed a delirium, and reduced the pulse for a few minutes, in frequency
and force, but this patient died. The recommendation of it indiscriminately in
all cases was extremely improper. In that chilliness and tendency to fainting
upon the least motion, which attended the disorder in some patients, it was an
unsafe remedy. I heard of a woman who was seized with delirium immediately
after using it, from which she never recovered; and of a man who died a few
minutes after he came out of a bathing tub. Had this remedy been the exclusive
antidote to the yellow fever, the mortality of the disease would have been but
little checked by it. Thousands must have perished from the want of means to
procure tubs, and of a suitable number of attendants to apply the water, and to
lift the patient in and out of bed. The reason of our citizens ran before the
learning of the friends of this remedy, and long before it was abandoned by the
physicians; it was rejected as useless, or not attempted, because
impracticable, by the good sense of the city. It is to be lamented that the
remedy of cold water has suffered in its character by the manner in which it
was advised. In fevers of too much action, it reduces the morbid excitement of
the blood vessels, provided it be applied without force, and for a considerable
time to the body. It is in the jail fever, and in the second stage of the
yellow fever only, in which its stimulant and tonic powers are proper. Dr
Jackson establishes this mode of using it, by informing us, that when it did
service, it "gave vigor and tone" to the system Fevers of Jamaica.
.

The third mode of practice which I mentioned in this fever consisted of a
union of the evacuating, and tonic remedies. The physicians who adopted this
mode, gave calomel by itself in small doses on the first, or second day of the
fever, bled once or twice in a sparing manner, and gave the bark, wine, and
laudanum in large quantities upon the first appearance of a remission. After
they began the use of these remedies, purging was omitted, or if the bowels
were moved, it was only by means of gentle glysters. This practice I shall say
hereafter was not much more successful than that which was recommended by Dr
Kuhn and Dr Stevens. It resembled throwing water and oil at the same time upon
a fire, in order to extinguish it.

The French remedies were nitre, and cremor tartar in small doses, centaury
tea, camphor, and several other warm medicines; subacid drinks taken in large
quantities, the warm bath, and moderate bleeding.

After what has been said, it must be obvious to the reader, that the nitre and
cremor tartar in small doses, could do no good, and that camphor and all
cordial medicines must have done harm. The diluting subacid drinks which the
French physicians gave in large quantities were useful in diluting and blunting
the acrimony of the bile, and to this remedy assisted by occasional bleeding, I
ascribe most of the cures which were performed by those physicians.

Those few persons in whom the warm bath produced copious and universal sweats
recovered, but in nearly all the cases which came under my notice, it did harm.

I come now to inquire into the comparative success of the four different modes
of practice which have been mentioned.

I have already said that ten out of thirteen patients whom I treated with
bark, wine, and laudanum, and that three out of four, in whom I added the cold
bath to those remedies, died. Dr Pennington informed me, that he had lost all
the patients, (six in number) to whom he had given the above medicines. Dr
Johnson assured me with great concern, about two weeks before he died, that he
had not recovered a single patient by them. Whole families were swept off,
where these medicines were used. But further, most of those persons who caught
the fever in the city, and sickened in the country, or in the neighboring
towns, and who were treated with tonic remedies, died. There was not a single
cure performed by them in New York, where they were used with every possible
advantage. But why do I multiply proofs of their deadly effects? The clamours
of hundreds whose relations had perished by them, and the fears of others,
compelled those physicians who had been most attached to them, to lay them
aside, or to prepare the way for them (as it was called) by purging and
bleeding. The bathing tub soon shared a worse fate than bark, wine, and
laudanum, and long before the disease disappeared, it was discarded by all the
physicians in the city.

In answer to these facts, we have been told that Mr Hamilton, and his family
recovered by the use of Dr Stevens's remedies. I shall not say of those cures,
what some gentlemen of the faculty who had seen but little of the disease, and
who had forgotten that a powerful epidemic banishes, or unites with all other
diseases, have said of my cures, viz. that they were not of the yellow fever.
It was impossible for Mr Hamilton to have had a fever at that time of any other
kind. The neighborhood in which he lived, was healthy, and he had been daily
exposed at his office in Chesnut-street, to the contagion of the prevailing
epidemic. The disease in this case was either very light, or Mr Hamilton owes
more to the strength of his constitution, and the goodness of heaven, than most
of the people who recovered from the disorder. That it was light in all the
branches of Mr Hamilton's family who were infected by him, I infer from this
being the case in every similar instance in which the disease spread in the
country.

"Success (says Dr Sydenham) is not a sufficient proof of the excellency of a
method of cure in acute diseases, since some are recovered by the imprudent
procedure of old women; but it is further required, that the distemper should
be easily cured, and yield conformably to its own nature Vol. ii. p. 254.
," and again, speaking of the cure of the new fever of 1685, this incomparable
physician observes, "If it be objected, that this fever frequently yields to a
quite contrary method to that which I have laid down, I answer, that the cure
of a disease by a method which is attended with success only now and then in a
few instances, differs extremely from that practical method, the efficacy
whereof appears both from its recovering greater numbers, and all the practical
phenomena happening in the cure Vol. ii. p. 354.
."

After what has been said of Mr Hamilton's cure, it will not be expected that I
should say any thing of the three patients mentioned in Dr Kuhn's letter to the
mayor who recovered under the use of Dr Stevens's remedies. The fourth patient
mentioned by Dr Kuhn, whom he left on the 4th day of the disease with "no
unfavourable symptoms" was Dr Hutchinson. I visited him the day after Dr Kuhn
left him, and found him sitting in a chair near the head of his bed, with all
his clothes on, as if he had been in his usual health. A short examination of
his case, satisfied me that he was in extreme danger. His face was suffused
with blood. He had a full pulse, and an hemorrhage from his gums, which last
symptom I was told came on the day before. I pressed him to take a strong
mercurial purge, but he refused it. From that moment I despaired of his
recovery. He died three days afterward.

The reader will naturally pause after reviewing these remarks upon the above
cures, and ask, whether it was consistent with the rules of just and safe
reasoning in medicine, to deduce a general and uniform method of treating this
disorder, from the favorable issue of only four or five cases, and whether it
was candid, to condemn in the most unqualified manner, a contrary mode of
practice, after repeated public, and private declarations, that it had at that
time, cured several hundred people.

Far be it from me to deny that indirect debility may not be overcome by such
stimuli as are more powerful than those which occasion it. This has sometimes
been demonstrated by the efficacy of bark, wine, and laudanum, in the confluent
and petechial smallpox; but even this state of that disorder, yields more
easily to blood-letting, or to plentiful evacuations from the stomach and
bowels on the first or second day of the eruptive fever. This I have often
proved, by giving a large dose of tartar emetic, and calomel, as soon as I was
satisfied from circumstances, that my patient was infected with the smallpox.
But the indirect debility of the yellow fever appears to be much greater than
that which occurs in the smallpox, and hence it more uniformly resisted the
most powerful tonic remedies.

I have publicly asserted, that the remedies which I adopted, and of which I
have given a history, cured a greater proportion than ninety-nine out of an
hundred of all who applied to me on the first day of the disorder before the
15th day of September. I regret that it is not in my power to furnish a list of
them, for a majority of them were poor people, whose names are still unknown to
me. I was not singular in this successful practice in the first appearance of
the disorder. Dr Penington assured me on his death bed, that he had not lost
one, out of forty-eight patients whom he had treated agreeably to the
principles and practice I had recommended. Dr Griffitts triumphed over the
disease in every part of the city, by the use of what were called the new
remedies. My former pupils spread by their success, the reputation of purging,
and bleeding, wherever they were called. Unhappily the pleasure we derived from
this success in the treatment of the disorder, was of short duration. Many
circumstances contributed to lessen it, and to revive the mortality of the
fever. I shall briefly enumerate them.

1. The distraction produced in the public mind, by the recommendation of
remedies, the opposites in every respect of purging and bleeding.

2. The opinion which had been published by several physicians, and inculcated
by others, that we had other fevers in the city besides the yellow fever. This
produced a delay in many people in sending for a physician, or in taking
medicines for two or three days, from a belief that they had nothing but a
cold, or a common fever. Some people were so much deceived by this opinion,
that they refused to send for physicians lest they should be infected by them,
with the yellow fever. In most of the cases in which these delays took place,
the disease proved mortal.

To obviate a suspicion, that I have lave laid more stress upon the fatal
influence of this error than is just, I shall here insert an extract of a
letter I have lately been favored with from Mr John Connelly one of the city
committee, who frequently left his brethren in the City Hall, and spent many
hours in visiting and prescribing for the sick. "The publications (says he) of
some physicians that there were but few persons infected with the yellow fever,
and that many were ill with colds and common remitting and fall fevers, proved
fatal to almost every family which was credulous enough to believe them. That
opinion (...) its hundreds, if not its thousands, many of whom did not send for
a physician until they were in the last stage of the disorder, and beyond the
power of medicine."

3. The interference of the friends of the stimulating system, in dissuading
patients from submitting to sufficient evacuations.

4. The deceptions which were practiced by some patients upon their physicians
in their reports of the quantity of blood they had lost, or of the quality, and
number of their evacuations by stool.

5. The impracticability of procuring bleeders as soon as bleeding was
prescribed. Life in this disease, as in the apoplexy, frequently turned upon
that operation being performed within an hour. It was often delayed from the
want of a bleeder, one or two days.

6. The inability of physicians, from the number of their patients, and from
frequent indisposition, to visit the sick, at such times, as was necessary to
watch the changes in their disorder.

7. The great accumulation, and concentration of the contagion in sick rooms
from the continuance of the disease in the city, whereby the system was exposed
to a constant stimulus, and the effect of evacuations was thus defeated.

8. The want of skill or fidelity in nurses to administer the medicines
properly, to persuade patients to drink frequently; also to supply them with
food or cordial drinks when required in the night.

9. The great degrees of indirect debility induced in the systems of many of
the people who were affected by the disorder, from fatigue in attending their
relations or friends.

10. The universal depression of mind, amounting in some instances to despair,
which affected many people. What medicine could act upon a patient who awoke in
the night, and saw through the broken and faint light of a candle, no human
creature, but a black nurse, perhaps asleep in a distant corner of the room;
and who heard no noise, but that of a hearse conveying, perhaps a neighbor or a
friend, to the grave? The state of mind under which many were affected by the
disease, is so well described by the Rev. Dr Smith in the case of his wife, in
a letter I received from him in my sick room, two days after her death, that I
hope I shall be execused for inserting an extract from it. It forms a part of
the history of the disease. The letter was written in answer to a short note of
condolence which I sent to the Doctor immediately after hearing of Mrs Smith's
death. After some pathetic expressions of grief, he adds, "The scene of her
funeral, and some preceding circumstances, can never depart from my mind. On
our return from a visit to our daughter, whom we had been striving to console
on the death of Mrs Keppele, who was long familiar, and dear to both, my dear
wife passing the burying ground gate, led me into the ground, viewed the graves
of her two children, called the old grave digger, marked a spot for herself as
close as possible to them and the grave of Dr Phineas Bond, whose memory she
adored. Then by the side of the spot she had chosen, we found room and chose
mine, pledging ourselves to each other, and directing the grave digger that
this should be the order of our interment. We returned to our house. Night
approached. I hoped my dear wife had gone to rest as she had chosen since her
return from nursing her daughter, to sleep in a chamber by herself, through
fear of infecting her grandchild and me. But it seems she closed not her eyes;
sitting with them fixed through her chamber window on Mrs Keppele's house,
'till about midnight she saw her hearse, and followed it with her eyes as far as
it could be seen. Two days afterward Mrs Rodgers, her next only surviving
intimate friend, was carried past her window, and by no persuasion could I draw
her from thence, nor stop her sympathetic foreboding tears, so long as her eyes
could follow the funeral, which was through two squares, from Fourth to Second
street, where the hearse disappeared." The Doctor proceeds in describing the
distress of his wife. But pointed as his expressions are, they do not convey
the gloomy state of her mind with so much force as she has done it herself in
two letters to her niece Mrs Cadwallader, who was then in the country. The one
was dated the 9th, the other the 11th of October. I shall insert a few extracts
from each of them. "October 9th; It is not possible for me to pass the streets
without walking in a line with the dead. Passing infected houses, and looking
into open graves. This has been the case for many weeks. "I don't know what to
write, my head is gone, and my heart is torn to pieces." "I entreat you to have
no fears on my account. I am in the hands of a just and merciful God, and his
will be done."

October 11th: "Don't wonder that I am so low to day. My heart is sunk down
within me." The next day this excellent woman sickened, and died on the 19th of
the same month.

If in a person possessed naturally of uncommon equanimity, and fortitude, the
distresses of our city, produced such dejection of spirits, what must have been
their effect upon hundreds, who were not endowed with those rare and
extraordinary qualities of mind? Death in this, as well as in many other cases
in which medicine had done its duty, appeared to be the inevitable consequence
of the total abstraction of the energy of the mind in restoring the natural
motions of life.

Under all the circumstances which have been mentioned, which opposed the
system of depletion in the cure of this fever, it was still far more successful
than any other mode of cure that had been pursued before in the United States
or in the West Indies.

Three out of four died of the disorder in Jamaica, under the care of Dr Hume.

Dr Blane considers it as one of the "most mortal" of diseases, and Dr Jackson
places a more successful mode of treating it, among the subjects which will
admit of "innovation" in medicine.

After the 15th of September my success was much limited, compared with what it
had been before that time. But at no period of the disease did I lose more than
one in twenty of those whom I saw on the first day, and attended regularly
through every stage of the fever; provided they had not been previously worn
down by attending the sick.

The following statement which will admit of being corrected, if it be
inaccurate, will I hope, establish the truth of the above assertions.

About one half of the families whom I have attended for many years, left the
city. Of those who remained, many were affected by the disorder. Out of the
whole of them, after I had adopted my second mode of practice, I lost only five
heads of families, and about a dozen servants and children. In no instance did
I lose both heads of the same family. My success in these cases was owing to
two causes; 1st, To the credit my former patients gave to my public
declaration, that we had only one fever in the city; hence they applied on the
first day, and sometimes on the first hour of their indisposition; and 2dly, To
the numerous pledges many of them had seen of the safety and efficacy of
copious blood-letting by my advice, in other diseases: hence my prescription of
that necessary remedy, was always obeyed in its utmost extent. Of the few
adults whom I lost, among my former patients, two of them were old people; two
took laudanum without my knowledge; and one refused to take medicine of any
kind; all the rest had been worn down by previous fatigue.

I have before said that a great number of the blacks were my patients. Of
these not one died under my care. This uniform success among those people, was
not owing altogether to the mildness of the disease, for I shall say presently,
that a great proportion of a given number died under other modes of practice.

In speaking of the comparative effects of purging and bleeding, it may not be
amiss to repeat, that not one pregnant woman to whom I prescribed them died, or
suffered abortion. Where the tonic remedies were used, abortion or death, and
in many instances both, were nearly universal.

Many whole families, consisting of five, six, and in three instances, of nine
members, were recovered by plentiful purging and bleeding. I could swell this
work by publishing a list of those families; but I take more pleasure in
adding, that I was not singular in my success in the use of the above remedies.
They were prescribed with great advantage by many of the physicians of the
city, who had for a while given tonic medicines without effect. I shall not
mention the names of any of the physicians who totally renounced those
medicines, lest I should give offense by not mentioning them all. Many large
families were cured by some of them, after they adopted and prescribed copious
purging and blood-letting. One of them cured ten in the family of Mr Robert
Haydock, by means of those remedies. In one of that family the disease came on
with a vomiting of black bile.

But the use of the new remedies was not directed finally by the physicians
alone. The clergy, the apothecaries, many private citizens, several intelligent
women, and two black men, prescribed them with great success. Nay more, many
persons prescribed them to themselves; and as I shall say hereafter, with a
success that was unequalled by any of the regular or irregular practitioners in
the city.

It was owing to the almost universal use of purging and bleeding, that the
mortality of the disease diminished in proportion as the number of persons who
were affected by it, increased about the middle of October. It was scarcely
double of what it was in the middle of September, and yet six times the number
of persons were probably at that time confined by it.

The success of copious purging and bleeding was not confined to the city of
Philadelphia. Several persons who caught the disease in town, and sickened in
the country, were cured by them.

Could a comparison be made of the number of patients who died of our late
fever, after having been plentifully bled and purged, with those who died of
the yellow fever in the years 1699, 1741, 1747, and 1762, I am persuaded that
the proportion would be very small in the year 1793, compared with the former
years It appears from one of Mr Norris's letters, dated the 9th of November, O.
S. that there died 220 persons in the year 1699, with the yellow fever. Between
80 and 90 of them he says belonged to the society of Friends. The city at this
time probably did not contain more than 2 or 3000 people, many of whom it is
probable fled from the disorder.
. Including all who died under every mode of treatment, I suspect the mortality
to be less in proportion to the population of the city, and the number of
persons who were affected, than it was in any of the other years that have been
mentioned.

Not less than 6000 of the inhabitants of Philadelphia probably owe their lives
to purging and bleeding, during the late autumn.

I proceed with reluctance to inquire into the comparative success of the
French practice. It would not be difficult to decide upon it from many facts
that came under my notice in the city; but I shall rest its merit wholly upon
the returns of the number of deaths at Bush-hill. This hospital, after the 22d
of September, was put under the care of a French physician, who was assisted by
one of the physicians of the city. The hospital was in a pleasant and airy
situation; it was provided with all the necessaries and comforts for sick
people that humanity could invent, or liberality supply. The attendants were
devoted to their duty; and cleanliness and order pervaded every room in the
house. The reputation of this hospital, and of the French physician, drew
patients to it in the early stage of the disorder. Of this I have been assured
in a letter from Dr Annan, who was appointed to examine and give orders of
admission into the hospital, to such of the poor of the district of Southwark,
as could not be taken care of in their own houses. Mr Olden has likewise
informed me, that most of the patients who were sent to the hospital by the
city committee (of which he was a member) were in the first stage of the fever.
With all these advantages, the deaths between the 22d of September and the 6th
of November, amounted to 448 out of 807 patients who were admitted into the
hospital within that time. Three fourths of all the blacks (nearly 20) who were
patients in this hospital died. A list of the medicines prescribed there may be
seen in the minutes of the proceedings of the city committee. Calomel and jalap
are not among them. Moderate bleeding and purging with Glauber salts, I have
been informed, were used in some cases by the physicians of this hospital. The
proportion of deaths to the recoveries, as it appears in the minutes of the
committee from whence the above report is taken, is truly melancholy! I hurry
from it therefore to a part of this work, to which I have looked with pleasure,
ever since I sat down to compose it.

I have said that the clergy, the apothecaries, and many other persons who were
uninstructed in the principles of medicine, prescribed purging, and bleeding
with great success in this disorder. Necessity gave rise to this undisciplined
sect of practitioners, for they came forward to supply the places of the
regular bred physicians who were sick or dead. I shall mention the names of a
few of those persons who distinguished themselves as volunteers in this new
work of humanity. The late Rev. Mr Fleming one of the ministers of the Catholic
church, carried the purging powders in his pocket, and gave them to his poor
parishioners with great success. He even became the advocate of the new
remedies. In a conversation I had with him on the 22d of September, he informed
me, that he had advised four of our physicians whom he met a day or two before,
"to renounce the pride of science, and to adopt the new mode of practice, for
that he had witnessed its good effects in many cases." Mr John Keihmle, a
German apothecary, has assured me that out of 314 patients whom he visited, and
187 for whom he prescribed from the reports of their friends, he lost only 47
(which is nearly but one in eleven) and that he treated them all agreeably to
the method which I had recommended. The Rev. Mr Schmidt one of the ministers of
the Lutheran church, was cured by him. I have before mentioned an instance of
the judgment of Mr Connelly, and of his zeal in visiting and prescribing for
the sick. His remedies were bleeding and purging. He moreover, bore a constant
and useful testimony against bark, wine, laudanum, and the warm bath In the
letter before quoted, from Mr Connelly he expresses his opinion of those four
medicines in the following words. "Laudanum, bark, and wine, have put a period
to the existence of some, where the fever has been apparently broken, and the
patients in a fair way of recovery; a single dose of laudanum has hurried them
suddenly into eternity. I have visited a few patients, where the hot bath was
used, and am convinced that it only tended to weaken, and relax the system,
without producing any good effect."
. Mrs Paxton in Carter's alley, and Mrs Evans the wife of Mr John Evans in
Second-street, were indefatigable; the one in distributing mercurial purges
composed by herself, and the other in urging the necessity of copious bleeding
and purging among her friends and neighbors, as the only safe remedies for the
fever. These worthy women were the means of saving many lives The yellow fever
prevailed at the Caraccos in South America in October 1793, with great
mortality, more especially among the Spanish troops. Nearly all died who were
attended by Physicians. Recourse was finally had to the old women, who were
successful in almost every case to which they were called. Their remedies were
a liquor called ^aren^ado (a species of lemonade) and a tea made of a root
called fistula. With these drinks, they drenched their patients for the first
two or three days. They induced plentiful sweats, and probably, after blunting,
discharged the bile from the bowels. I received this information from an
American gentleman who had been cured by one of those amazons in medicine, in
the above way.
. Absalom Jones, and Richard Allen, two black men, spent all the intervals of
time, in which they were not employed in burying the dead, in visiting the poor
who were sick, and in bleeding and purging them, agreeably to the directions
which had been printed in all the news papers. Their success was unparalleled
by what is called regular practice. This encomium upon the practice of the
blacks, will not surprise the reader when I add, that they had no fear of
putrefaction in the fluids, nor of the calumnies of a body of fellow citizens
in the republic of medicine, to deter them from plentiful purging and bleeding.
They had besides no more patients, than they were able to visit two or three
times a day. But great as their success was, it was exceeded by those persons
who in despair of procuring medical aid of any kind, purged and bled
themselves. This palm of superior success, will not be withheld from those
people, when I explain the causes of it. It was owing to their early use of the
proper remedies, and to their being guided in the repetition of them, by the
continuance of a tense pulse, or of pain and fever. A day, an afternoon, and
even an hour, were not lost by these people in waiting for the visit of a
Physician who was often detained from them, by sickness, or by new and
unexpected engagements, by which means the precious moment for using the
remedies, with effect, passed irrevocably away. I have stated these facts from
faithful inquiries, and numerous observations. I could mention the names, and
families of many persons who thus cured themselves. One person only shall be
mentioned, who has shown by her conduct what reason is capable of doing when it
is forced to act for itself. Mrs Long, a widow, after having been twice
unsuccessful in her attempts to procure a physician, undertook at last to cure
herself. She took several of the mercurial purges, agreeably to the printed
directions, and had herself bled seven times in the course of five or six days.
The indication for repeating the bleeding, was the continuance of the pain in
her head. Her recovery was rapid, and complete. The history of it was
communicated to me by herself, with great gratitude, in my own house, during my
second confinement with the fever. To these accounts of persons who cured
themselves in the city, I could add many others, of citizens who sickened in
the country, and who cured themselves by plentiful bleeding and purging,
without the attendance of a physician.

From a short review of these facts, reason, and humanity awake from their long
repose in medicine, and unite in proclaiming, that it is time to take the cure
of pestilential fevers out of the hands of physicians, and to place it in the
hands of the people. Let not the reader startle at this proposition. I shall
give the following reasons for it.

1. In consequence of these pestilential fevers affecting a great number of
people at one time, it has always been, and always will be impossible, for them
all to have the benefit of medical aid, more especially as the proportion of
physicians to the number of sick, is generally diminished upon these occasions,
by desertion, sickness and death.

2. The safety of committing to the people the cure of pestilential fevers,
particularly the yellow fever and the plague, is established by the simplicity
and uniformity of their proximate cause, and of their remedies. However
diversified they may be in their symptoms, the system in both diseases is
always under a state of indirect debility, and in all cases requires the
abstraction of stimulus in a greater or less degree, or in a sudden or gradual
manner. There can never be any danger of the people injuring themselves by
mistaking any other disease for a yellow fever, or a plague, for no other
febrile disorder can prevail with them. It was probably to prevent this
mistake, that the Benevolent Father of mankind, who has permitted no evil to
exist which does not carry its antidote along with it, originally imposed that
law upon all great and mortal epidemics.

3. The history of the yellow fever in the West Indies, proves the advantage of
trusting patients to their own judgment. Dr Lind has remarked, that a greater
proportion of sailors who had no physicians, recovered from that fever, than of
those who had the best medical assistance. The fresh air of the deck of a ship,
a purge of salt water, and the free use of cold water, probably triumphed here
over the cordial juleps of physicians.

4. By committing the cure of this and other pestilential diseases to the
people, all those circumstances which prevented the universal success of
purging, and bleeding in our late epidemic, will have no operation. The fever
will be mild in most cases, for all will prepare themselves to receive it by a
vegetable diet, and by moderate evacuations. The remedies will be used the
moment the disease is felt, or even seen, and the contagion generated by it,
will be feeble and propagated only to a small distance from such patients.
There will then be no disputes among physicians about the nature of the disease
to distract the public mind, for they will seldom be consulted in it. None will
suffer from chronic debility induced by previous fatigue, in attending the
sick, nor from the want of nurses, for few will be so ill as to require them,
and there will be no "foreboding" fears of death or despair of recovery, to
invite an attack of the disease, or to ensure its mortality.

The smallpox was once as fatal as the yellow fever and the plague. At
present, it yields as universally to a vegetable diet, and evacuations, in the
hands of apothecaries, the clergy, and even of the good women, as it does in
the hands of Doctors of physic.

They have narrow conceptions, not only of the divine goodness, but of the
gradual progress of human knowledge, who suppose that all pestilential diseases
shall not, like the smallpox, sooner or later cease to be the scourge and
terror of mankind.

For a long while air, water and even the light of the sun, were dealt out by
physicians to their patients with a sparing hand. They possessed for several
centuries the same monopoly of many artificial remedies. But a new order of
things is rising in medicine as well as in government. Air, water, and light
are taken without the advice of a physician, and bark and laudanum are now
prescribed every where by nurses, and mistresses of families, with safety and
advantage. Human reason cannot be stationary upon these subjects. The time
must, and will come, when in addition to the above remedies, the general use of
calomel, jalap, and the lancet, shall be considered among the most essential
articles of the knowledge, and rights of man.

It is no more necessary, that a patient should be ignorant of the medicine he
takes to be cured by it, than that the business of government should be
conducted with secrecy in order to ensure obedience to just laws. Much less is
it necessary that the means of life should be prescribed in a dead language, or
dictated with the solemn pomp of a necromancer. The effects of imposture in
every thing are like the artificial health produced by the use of ardent
spirits. Its vigor is temporary, and is always followed by misery and death.

The belief that the yellow fever and the plague are necessarily mortal, is as
much the effect of a superstitious torpor in the understanding, as the ancient
belief, that the epilepsy was a supernatural disease, and that it was an
offense against heaven to attempt to cure it. It is partly from the influence
of this torpor in the minds of some people, that the numerous cures of the
yellow fever performed by a few simple remedies, were said to be of other
diseases. It is necessary, for the conviction of such persons, that patients
should always die of that, and other dangerous disorders, to prove that they
have been affected by them.

The repairs which our world is undergoing, as far as they relate to the
melioration of the condition of man, will be incomplete, until pestilential
fevers cease to be numbered among the widest outlets of human life.

There are many things which are now familiar to women and children which were
known a century ago only to a few men who lived in closets, and were
distinguished by the name of philosophers.

We teach an hundred things in our schools less useful, and many things more
difficult, than the knowledge that would be necessary to cure a yellow fever or
the plague.

In my attempts to teach the citizens of Philadelphia by my different
publications, the method of curing themselves of our late fever, I observed no
difficulty in their apprehending every thing that was addressed to them, except
what related to the different states of the pulse. All the knowledge that is
necessary to discover when blood-letting is proper, might be taught to a boy or
girl of twelve years old in a few hours. I taught it in less time to several
persons during the prevalence of our late epidemic.

I should as soon believe that ratafia was intended by the Author of Nature, to
be the only drink of man, instead of water, as believe that the knowledge of
what relates to the health and lives of a whole city, or nation, should be
confined to one, and that a small or a privileged order of men. -- But what
have physicians, what have universities, or medical societies done after the
labors, and studies of many centuries toward lessening the mortality of
pestilential fevers? They have either copied, or contradicted each other in all
their publications. Plagues and malignant fevers, are still leagued with war
and famine, in their ravages upon human life.

Botallus in France, and Dr Sydenham in England, it is true, long ago used the
proper remedies for those disorders with universal success; but they were
unable to introduce them into general practice. The reason is obvious: They
recommended them in their writings only to physicians. At the expense of an
immense load of obloquy, I have addressed my publications to the people. The
appeal though hazardous, in the present state of general knowledge in medicine,
has succeeded. The citizens of Philadelphia are delivered from their fears of
copious evacuations, of cold air, and cold water, and above all, of a sore
mouth from mercury, in the cure of the yellow fever; and the pride and
formalities of medicine, as far as they relate to this disease, are now as
completely discarded in our city, as the deceptions of witchcraft were, above a
century ago.

To prevent the propagation and mortality of this fever, it will be necessary
when it makes its appearance in a city or country, to publish an account of
those symptoms which I have called the precursors of the disease, and to exhort
the people as soon they feel those symptoms, to have immediate recourse to the
remedies of purging or bleeding. The danger of delay in using one, or both
those remedies, should be inculcated in the strongest terms, for the disease,
like Time, has a lock on its forehead, but is bald behind. The bite of a
rattle-snake is seldom fatal, because the medicines which cure it, are applied,
or taken, as soon as the poison comes in contact with the blood. There is less
danger to be apprehended from the contagion of the yellow fever in the system
than from the poison of the snake, provided the remedies for it, are
administered within a few hours after it is excited into action.

Let persons who are subject to chronic pains, or diseases of any kind, be
advised not to be deceived by them. Every pain at such a time, is the beginning
of the disease; for the contagion I have said, always acts first on debilitated
parts of the body. From an ignorance of this law of epidemics many persons by
delaying their applications for help, perished with our late fever.

Let nature be trusted in no case whatever, to cure this disease; and let no
attack of it, however light, be treated with neglect. Death as certainly
performs his work, when he steals on the system in the form of a mild
intermittent, as he does, when he comes on with the symptoms of apoplexy, or a
black vomiting.

Cleanliness in houses and dress, cannot be too often inculcated during the
prevalence of a yellow fever.

Lastly, Let those who are in health be directed to prepare their bodies by
means of a low diet, for the reception of the disease in the manner that has
been formerly mentioned; and let pleasure, and even labor, where it exposes
men to the heat of the sun, or of a culinary fire, be every where suspended.
Thus, while the system is prepared to bend like the willow, the contagion of
the fever will pass over it, without doing any harm.

Let it not be supposed, that I mean, that the history which I have given of
the method of cure of our late epidemic, should be applied in all its parts, to
the yellow fevers which may appear hereafter in the United States, or which
exist at all times in the West India islands. Season and climate vary this, as
well as all other diseases. Bark and wine, so fatal in our late, may be proper
in a future yellow fever. But without the fear of being refuted, I will
notwithstanding assert, that the proper remedies for this fever at all times,
and in all places in its first stage, must be evacuations. The only inquiry,
when the disease makes its appearance, should be, from what part of the body
these evacuations should be procured; the order which should be pursued in
obtaining them, and the quantity of each of the matters to be discharged, which
should be withdrawn at a time.

Thus far did I venture from my theory of the disease, and from the authorities
of Dr Hillary and and Dr Mosely, to decide in favor of evacuations in the
yellow fever in hot climates; but Dr Wade, and Mr Chisholm again support me by
their practice in the fevers of the East and West Indies. They both gave strong
mercurial purges, and bled in some cases. Dr Wade confirmed by his practice,
the advantage, of gradually abstracting stimulus from the system. He never drew
blood even in the most inflammatory cases, until he had first discharged the
contents of the bowels. The Doctor has further established the efficacy of a
vegetable diet, and of water as a drink, as the best means of preventing the
disorder in a hot climate.

The manner in which the contagion of the plague acts upon the system, is so
much like that which has been described in the yellow fever, and the accounts
of the efficacy of low diet in preparing the body for its reception, and of
copious bleeding, cold air and cold water, in curing it, are so similar, that
all the directions which relate to preventing, mitigating, or curing the yellow
fever, may be applied to it. The fluids in the plague show a greater tendency
to the skin, than they do, in the yellow fever. Perhaps upon this account, the
early use of powerful sudorifics may be more proper in the former, than in the
latter disorder. From the influence of early purging, and bleeding in promoting
sweat in the yellow fever; there can be little doubt, but the efforts of nature
to unload the system in the plague through the channel of the pores, might be
accelerated by the early use of the same remedies. One thing with respect to
the plague is certain; that its cure depends upon the abstraction of stimulus,
either by means of plentiful sweats, or of purulent matter from external sores.
Perhaps the efficacy of these remedies depends wholly upon their diminishing
the indirect debility of the system in a gradual manner. If this be the case,
those natural discharges might be easily and effectually imitated by small and
repeated bleedings.

To correspond in quantity with the discharge from the skin, blood-letting in
the plague should be copious. A profuse sweat continued for twenty four hours,
cannot fail of wasting many pounds of the fluids of the body. This was the
duration of the critical sweats in the famous plague which was known by the
name of the English sweating sickness, and which made its appearance in the
army of Henry VII. in Milford-Haven in Wales, and spread from thence through
every part of the kingdom.

The principles which lead to the prevention and cure of the yellow fever and
the plague, apply with equal force to the mitigation of the measles, and to the
prevention or mitigation of the scarlatina anginosa, the dysentery, and the
jail or hospital fever. I have remarked in a former publication Medical
Inquiries and Observations, vol. ii. page 244.
, that a previous vegetable diet lessened the violence and danger of the
measles. Dr Sims taught me several years ago, to prevent or mitigate the
scarlatina anginosa, by means of gentle purges after children are infected by
it Medical Memoirs, vol. i.
. Purges of salts have in many instances preserved whole families and
neighbourhoods from the dysentery where they have been exposed to the
contagion. During the late American war, an emetic seldom failed of preventing
an attack of the hospital fever, when given in its forming state Medical
Inquiries and Observations. London Edition, vol. i. page 211.
. I have had no experience of the effects of previous evacuations in abating
the violence, or preventing the mortality of the malignant sore throat, but I
can have no doubt of their efficacy from the sameness of the state of the
system in that disorder, as in other malignant fevers. The debility induced in
it, is of the indirect kind, and the supposed symptoms of putrefaction, are
nothing but the disguised effects of a sudden and violent pressure of an
inflammatory stimulus upon the arterial system.

With these observations I close the history of the rise, progress, symptoms,
and treatment of the bilious remitting yellow fever which lately appeared in
Philadelphia. My principal aim has been to revive, and apply to it, the
principles, and practice of Dr. Sydenham, and however coldly those principles,
and that practice may be received by some physicians of the present day, I am
satisfied that experience in all ages, and in all countries will vouch for
their truth and utility.

NARRATIVES of escapes from great dangers of shipwreck, war, captivity, and
famine, have always formed an interesting part of the history of the body, and
mind of man. But there are deliverances from equal dangers, which have hitherto
passed unnoticed; I mean, from pestilential fevers. I shall briefly describe
the state of my body and mind, during my intercourse with the sick in our late
epidemic. The account will throw additional light upon the disorder, and
probably illustrate some of the laws of the animal economy. It will moreover
serve to furnish a lesson to all who may be placed in similar circumstances, to
commit their lives without fear, to the protection of that BEING who is able to
save to the uttermost, not only from future, but from present evil.

Some time before the fever made its appearance, my wife and children went into
the state of New Jersey where they had long been in the habit of spending the
summer months. My family about the 25th of August, consisted of my mother, a
sister who was on a visit to me, a black servant man, and a mulatto boy. I had
five pupils, viz. Warner Washington, and Edward Fisher, of Virginia, John
Alston of South Carolina, and John Redman Coxe (grandson to Dr Redman) and John
Stall both of this city. They all crowded around me upon the sudden increase of
business, and with one heart devoted themselves to my service, and to the cause
of humanity.

The credit which the new mode of treating the disease acquired in all parts of
the city, produced an immense influx of patients to me from all quarters. My
pupils were constantly employed; at first in putting up purging powders, but
after a while (...) in bleeding and visiting the sick.

Between the eighth and the 15th of September I visited and prescribed for,
between an hundred and an hundred and twenty patients a day. Several of my
pupils visited a fourth or fifth part of that number. For a while we refused no
calls. In the short intervals of business which I spent at my meals, my house
was filled with patients, chiefly the poor, waiting for advice. For many weeks
I seldom ate without prescribing for numbers as I sat at my table. To assist me
at these hours, as well as in the night, Mr Stall, Mr Fisher and Mr Coxe
accepted of rooms in my house, and became members of my family. Their labors
now had no remission.

Immediately after I adopted the antiphlogistic mode of treating the disorder,
I altered my manner of living. I left off drinking wine and malt liquors. The
good effects of the disuse of these liquors, helped to confirm me in the theory
I had adopted of the disease. A troublesome headache, which I had occasionally
felt, and which excited a constant apprehension that I was taking the fever,
now suddenly left me. I likewise at this time left off eating solid animal
food, and lived wholly, but sparingly, upon weak broth, potatoes, raisins,
coffee, and bread and butter.

From my great intercourse with the sick, my body became highly impregnated
with the contagion. My eyes were yellow, and sometimes a yellowness was
perceptible in my face. My pulse was preternaturally quick, and I had profuse
sweats every night. These sweats were so offensive as to oblige me to draw the
bed-cloths close to my neck to defend myself from their smell. They lost their
foetor entirely upon my leaving off the use of broth, and living entirely upon
milk and vegetables. But my nights were rendered disagreeable, not only by
these sweats, but by the want of my usual sleep, produced in part by the
frequent knocking at my door, and in part by anxiety of mind, and the stimulus
of the contagion upon my system. I lay down in conformity to habit only, for my
bed ceased to afford me rest or refreshment. When it was evening, I wished for
morning; and when it was morning, the prospect of the labors of the day,
caused me to wish for the return of evening. The degrees of my anxiety may be
easily conceived, when I add, that I had at one time upwards of thirty heads of
families under my care: among these were Mr Josiah Coats, the father of eight,
and Mr Benjamin Scull, and Mr John Morrell, each fathers of ten children. They
were all in imminent danger; but it pleased God to make me the instrument of
saving each of their lives. I rose at 6 o'clock, and generally found a number
of persons waiting for advice in my shop or parlour. Hitherto the success of my
practice gave a tone to my mind, which imparted preternatural vigor to my
body. It was meat and drink to me to fulfill the duties I owed to my fellow
citizens in this time of great and universal distress. From a hope that I might
escape the disease, by avoiding every thing that could excite the contagion in
my body into action, I carefully avoided the heat of the sun, and the coldness
of the evening air. I likewise avoided yielding to every thing that should
raise or depress my passions. But at such a time, the events which influence
the state of the body and mind are no more under our command, than the winds or
weather. On the evening of the 14th of September, after eight o'clock, I
visited the son of Mrs Berriman, near the Swedes' church, who had sent for me
early in the morning. I found him very ill. He had been bled in the forenoon by
my advice, but his pulse indicated a second bleeding. It would have been
difficult to procure a bleeder at that late hour. I therefore bled him myself.
From hanging over his breath and blood for ten minutes, and afterward riding
home in the night air, debilitated as I was by the labors of the day, I found
myself much indisposed the ensuing night. I rose notwithstanding at my usual
hour. At 8 o'clock I lost ten ounces of blood, and immediately afterward got
into my chair, and visited between forty and fifty patients before dinner. At
the house of one of them, I was forced to lie down a few minutes. In the course
of this morning's labors, my mind was suddenly thrown off its pivots, by the
last look, and the pathetic cries of a friend for help, who was dying under the
care of a French physician. I came home about two o'clock, and was seized
immediately afterward with a chilly fit and a high fever. I took a dose of the
mercurial medicine, and went to bed. In the evening I took a second purging
powder, and lost ten ounces more of blood. The next morning I bathed my face,
hands, and feet in cold water for some time. I drank plentifully during the day
and night of weak hyson tea, and of water, in which current jelly had been
dissolved. At eight o'clock I was so well as to admit persons who came for
advice into my room, and to receive reports from my pupils of the state of as
many of my patients as they were able to visit; for unfortunately they were not
able to visit them all (with their own) in due time; by which means several
died. The next day I came down stairs, and prescribed in my parlour for not
less than an hundred people. On the 19th of the same month, I resumed my
labors, but in great weakness. It was with difficulty that I ascended a pair
of stairs, by the help of a banister. A slow fever, attended with irregular
chills, and a troublesome cough, hung constantly upon me. The fever discovered
itself in the heat of my hands, which my patients often told me were warmer
than their own. The contagion now began to affect me in small and infected
rooms, in the most sensible manner. On the morning of the 4th of October I
suddenly sunk down in a sick room upon a bed, with a giddiness in my head. It
continued for a few minutes, and was succeeded by a fever which confined me to
my house the remaining part of the day.

Every moment in the intervals of my visits to the sick, was employed in
prescribing in my own house for the poor, or in sending answers to messages
from my patients; time was now too precious to be spent in counting the number
of persons who called upon me for advice. From circumstances, I believe it was
frequently 150, and seldom less than 50 in a day, for five or six weeks. The
evening did not bring with it the least relaxation from my labors. I received
letters every day from the country, and from distant parts of the Union,
containing inquiries into the mode of treating the disorder, and after the
health and lives of persons who had remained in the city. The business of every
evening was to answer these letters, also to write to my family. These
employments by affording a fresh current to my thoughts, kept me from dwelling
on the gloomy scenes of the day. After these duties were performed, I copied
into my note book all the observations I had collected during the day, and
which I had marked with a pencil in my pocket book in sick rooms, or in my
carriage. To these constant labors of body and mind were added distresses,
from a variety of causes. Having found myself unable to comply with the
numerous applications that were made to me, I was obliged to refuse many, every
day. My sister counted forty seven in one forenoon before 11 o'clock. Many of
them left my door with tears, but they did not feel more distress than I did,
from refusing to follow them. Sympathy when it vents itself in acts of
humanity, affords pleasure, and contributes to health, but the reflux of pity,
like anger, gives pain, and disorders the body. In riding through the streets,
I was often forced to resist the entreaties of parents imploring a visit to
their children, or of children to their parents. I recollect, and even yet, I
recollect with pain, that I tore myself at one time from five persons in
Moravian-alley who attempted to stop me; by suddenly whipping my horse, and
driving my chair as speedily as possible beyond the reach of their cries.

The solicitude of the friends of the sick for help, may further be conceived
of, when I add, that the most extravagant compensations were sometimes offered
for medical services, and in one instance, for only a single visit. I had no
merit in refusing these offers, and I have introduced an account of them, only
to inform such physicians as may hereafter be thrown into a similar situation,
that I was favored with an exemption from the fear of death, in proportion as
I subdued every selfish feeling, and labored exclusively for the benefit of
others. In every instance in which I was forced to refuse these pathetic and
earnest applications, my distress was heightened by the fear, that the persons
whom I was unable to visit, would fall into improper hands, and perish by the
use of bark, wine, and laudanum.

But I had other afflictions besides the distress which arose from the abortive
sympathy which I have described. On the 11th of September, my ingenious pupil
Mr Washington, fell a victim to his humanity. He had taken lodgings in the
country, where he sickened with the disorder. Having been almost uniformly
successful in curing others, he made light of his fever, and concealed the
knowledge of his danger from me, until the day before he died. On the 18th of
September Mr Stall sickened in my house. A delirium attended his fever from the
first hour it affected him. He refused, and even resisted force when used to
compel him to take medicine. He died on the 23d of September This accomplished
youth had made great seize in his profession. He possessed with an
uncommon genius for science, talents for music, painting and poetry. The
following copy of an unfinished letter to his father (who had left the city)
was found among his papers, after his death. It shows that the qualities of his
heart, were equal to those of his head.

Philadelphia, September 15, 1793. MY DEAR FATHER,
I TAKE every moment I have to spare to write to you, which is not many, but
you must excuse me as I am doing good to my fellow creatures. At this time
every moment I spend in idleness, might probably cost a life. The sickness
increases every day, but most of those who die, die for want of good
attendance. We cure all we are called to on the first day, who are well
attended, but so many Doctors are sick, the poor creatures are glad to get a
Doctor's servant.



. Scarcely had I recovered from the shock of the death of this amiable youth,
when I was called to weep for a third pupil, Mr Alston, who died in my
neighborhood, the next day. He had worn himself down before his sickness, by
uncommon exertions in visiting, bleeding, and even sitting up with sick people.
At this time Mr Fisher was ill in my house. On the 26th of the month at 12
o'clock Mr Coxe my only assistant was seized with the fever, and went to his
grand father's. I followed him with a look, which I feared would be the last,
in my house. At two o'clock my sister who had complained for several days,
yielded to the disorder, and retired to her bed. My mother followed her, much
indisposed, early in the evening. My black servant man had been confined with
the fever for several days, and had on that day for the first time quitted his
bed. My little mulatto boy of eleven years old, was the only person in my
family who was able to afford me the least assistance. At 8 o'clock in the
evening, I finished the business of the day. A solemn stillness at that time
pervaded the streets. In vain did I strive to forget my melancholy situation by
answering letters, and by putting up medicines to be distributed next day among
my patients. My faithful black man crept to my door, and at my request sat down
by the fire, but he added by his silence and dullness, to the gloom which
suddenly overpowered every faculty of my mind.

On the first day of October at two o'clock in the afternoon, my sister died. I
got into my carriage within an hour after she expired, and spent the afternoon
in visiting patients. According as a sense of duty, or as grief has
predominated in my mind, I have approved, and disapproved of this act, ever
since. She had borne a share in my labors. She had been my nurse in sickness,
and my casuist in my choice of duties. My whole heart reposed itself in her
friendship. Upon being invited to a friend's house in the country, when the
disease made its appearance in the city, she declined accepting the invitation,
and gave as a reason for so doing, that I might probably require her services
in case of my taking the disorder, and that if she were sure of dying, she
would remain with me, provided that by her death, she could save my life. From
this time I declined in health and strength. All motion became painful to me.
My appetite began to fail. My night sweats continued. My short and imperfect
sleep, was disturbed by distressing, or frightful dreams. The scenes of them
were derived altogether from sick rooms, and grave yards. I concealed my
sorrows as much as possible from my patients, but when alone, the retrospect of
what was past, and the prospect of what was before me, the termination of which
was invisible, often filled my soul with the most poignant anguish. I wept
frequently when retired from the public eye, but I did not weep over the lost
members of my family alone. I beheld or heard every day of the deaths of
citizens useful in public, or amiable in private life. It was my misfortune to
lose as patients, the Rev. Mr Fleming and Mr Graesel, both exhausted by their
labors of piety and love among the poor, before they sickened with the
disorder. I saw the last struggles of departing life in Mr Powel, and deplored
in his death, an upright and faithful servant of the public, as well as a
sincere and affectionate friend. Often did I mourn over persons who had by the
most unparalleled exertions, saved their friends and families from the grave,
at the expense of their own lives. Many of these martyrs to humanity, were in
humble stations. Among the members of my profession with whom I had been most
intimately connected, I had daily cause of grief and distress. I saw the great
and expanded mind of Dr Penington, shattered by delirium, just before he died.
He was to me dear and beloved, like a younger brother. He was moreover a Joab
in the contest with the disease. Philadelphia must long deplore the premature
death of this excellent physician. Had he lived a few years longer, he would
have filled an immense space in the republic of medicine Before he finished his
studies in medicine, he published a volume of ingenious and patriotic "Chemical
and OEconomical Essays, designed to illustrate the connection between the
theory, and practice of chemistry, and the application of that science to some
of the arts and manufactures of the United States of America."
. It was my affliction to see my friend Dr John Morris breathe his last, and to
hear the first effusions of the most pathetic grief from his mother, as she
bursted from the room in which he died. But I had distress from the sickness,
as well as the deaths of my brethren in physic. My worthy friends Dr Griffitts.
Dr Say, and Dr Mease, were suspended by a thread over the grave, nearly at the
same time. Heaven in mercy to me, as well as in kindness to the public, and
their friends, preserved their lives. Had they died, the measure of my sorrows
would have been complete.

I have said before, that I early left off drinking wine; but I used it in
another way. I carried a little wine in a vial in my pocket, and when I felt
myself fainty, after coming out of a sick room, or after a long ride, I kept
about a spoonful of it in my mouth for half a minute, or longer, without
swallowing it. So weak and excitable was my system, that this small quantity of
wine refreshed and invigorated me as much as half a pint would have done at any
other time. The only difference was, that the vigor I derived from the wine in
the former, was of shorter duration than when taken in the latter way.

For the first two weeks after I visited patients in the yellow fever, I
carried a rag wetted with vinegar, and smelled it occasionally in sick rooms:
but after I saw and felt the signs of the universal presence of the contagion
in my system, I laid aside this, and all other precautions. I rested myself on
the bedside of my patients, and I drank milk, or eat fruit in their sick
rooms. Besides being saturated with the contagion, I had another security
against being infected by my patients, and that was, I went into scarcely a
house which was more infected than my own. Most of the people who called upon
me for advice, left a portion of contagion behind them. Four persons died next
door to me on the east; three a few doors above me on the west; and five in a
small frame house on the opposite side of the street, toward the south. On the
north side, and about 150 feet from my house, the fever prevailed with great
malignity in the family of Mr James Cresson. But this was not all. Many of the
poor people who called upon me for advice, were bled by my pupils in my shop,
and in the yard, which was between it, and the street. From the want of a
sufficient number of bowls to receive their blood, it was sometimes suffered to
flow and putrify upon the ground. From all these sources, streams of contagion
were constantly poured into my house, and conveyed into my body by the air, and
in my aliment. Thus charged with the fuel of death, I was frequently disposed
to say with Job, and almost without a figure, to "corruption, thou art my
father; and to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister."

The deaths of my pupils and sister have often been urged as objections to my
mode of treating the fever. Had the same degrees of labor and fatigue which
preceded the attack of the yellow fever in each of them, preceded an attack of
a common pleurisy, I think it probable that some, or perhaps all of them, would
have died with it. But when the influence of the concentrated contagion which
filled my house, was added to that of constant fatigue upon their bodies, what
remedies could be expected to save their lives? Under the above circumstances,
I consider the recovery of the other branches of my family from the fever (and
none of them escaped it) with emotions, such as I should feel, had we all been
revived from apparent death, by the exertions of a humane society.

In getting hastily out of my carriage about the 22d of September, I wounded
one of my fingers with a small nail. As my hands were constantly exposed to the
contagion of the fever in feeling pulses, I had this wound carefully wrapped
up, from an apprehension that the contagion when received directly into the
blood, might more certainly excite the fever, than when received in the
ordinary way. In the hurry of business, the rag dropped off my finger without
my noticing it. The wound inflamed, but healed notwithstanding in a few days,
and I found no inconvenience from it.

The issue of this accident was highly satisfactory to me, as it established
the analogy between the smallpox and yellow fever, and confirmed me in the
propriety of preparing the body for the reception of the latter, by the same
regimen, as for the former disorder.

For upwards of six weeks I did not taste animal food, nor fermented liquors of
any kind. The quantity of aliment which I took inclusive of drinks, during this
time, was frequently not more than one or two pounds in a day. Yet upon this
diet, I possessed for a while uncommon activity of body. This influence of
abstinence upon bodily exertion, has been happily illustrated by Dr Jackson in
his directions for preserving the the health of soldiers in hot climates. He
tells us, that he walked an hundred miles in three days in Jamaica, during
which time he breakfasted on tea, supped on bread and sallad, and drank nothing
but lemonade or water. He adds further, that he walked from Edinburgh to London
in eleven days and an half, and that he traveled with the most ease when he
only breakfasted and supped, and drank nothing but water. The fatigue of riding
on horseback, is prevented or lessened by abstinence from solid food. Even the
horse suffers least from a quick and and long journey, when he is fed sparingly
with hay. These facts add weight to the arguments formerly adduced, in favor
of a vegetable diet in preventing or mitigating the action of the contagion of
malignant fevers upon the system. In both cases the abstraction of stimulus,
removes the body further from the reach of indirect debility.

Food supports life as much by its stimulus, as by affording nourishment to the
body. Where an artificial stimulus acts upon the system, the natural stimulus
of food ceases to be necessary. Under the influence of this principle, I
increased, or diminished my food with the signs I discovered of the increase,
or diminution of the contagion in my body. Until the 15th of September I drank
weak coffee, but after that time, I drank nothing but milk, or milk and water
in the intervals of my meals. I was so satisfied of the efficacy of this mode
of living, that I believed life might have been preserved, and a fever
prevented, for many days with a much greater accumulation of the contagion in
my system, by means of a total abstinence from food. Poison is a relative term,
and an excess in quantity, or a derangement in place, is necessary to its
producing deleterious effects. The contagion of the yellow fever produced
sickness and death, only from the excess of its quantity, or from its force
being increased by the addition of those other stimuli which I have elsewhere
called exciting causes.

In addition to low diet, as a preventive of the disorder, I obviated
costiveness by taking occasionally a calomel pill, or by chewing rhubarb.

I had read, and taught in my lectures, that fasting increases acuteness in the
sense of touch. My low living had that effect in a certain degree upon my
fingers. I had a quickness in my perception, of the state of the pulse in the
yellow fever, that I had never experienced before in any other disorder. My
abstemious diet, assisted perhaps by the state of my feelings, had likewise an
influence upon my mind. Its operations were performed with an ease, and a
celerity, which rendered my numerous, and complicated duties, much less
burdensome, than they would probably have been under other circumstances of
diet, or a less agitated state of my passions.

My perception of the lapse of time was new to me. It was uncommonly slow. The
ordinary business and pursuits of men appeared to me in a light that was
equally new. The hearse and the grave mingled themselves with every view I took
of human affairs. Under these impressions I recollect being as much struck with
observing a number of men employed in digging the of cellar a large house, as I
should have been at any other time, in seeing preparations for building a
palace upon a cake of ice. I recollect further, being struck with surprise
about the 1st of October, in seeing a man busily employed in laying in wood for
the approaching winter. I should as soon have thought of making provision for a
dinner on the first day of the year 1800.

In the account of my distresses, I have passed over the slanders which were
propagated against me by some of my brethren. I have mentioned them only for
the sake of declaring in this public manner, that I most heartily forgive them;
and that if I discovered at any time, an undue sense of the unkindness and
cruelty of those slanders, it was not because I felt myself injured by them,
but because I was sure they would irreparably injure my fellow citizens, by
lessening their confidence in the only remedies that I believed to be effectual
in the reigning epidemic. One thing in my conduct toward these gentlemen may
require justification; and that is, my refusing to consult with them. A
Mohammedan and a Jew might as well attempt to worship the Supreme Being in the
same temple, and through the medium of the same ceremonies, as two physicians
of opposite principles and practice, attempt to confer about the life of the
same patient. What is done in censequence of such negotiations (for they are
not consultations) is the ineffectual result of neutralised opinions; and
wherever they take place, would be considered as the effect of a criminal
compact between physicians, to assess the property of their patients, by a
shameful prostitution of the dictates of their consciences. Besides, I early
discovered that it was impossible for me by any reasonings, to change the
practice of some of my brethren. Humanity was therefore on the side of leaving
them to themselves; for the extremity of wrong in medicine, as in morals and
government, is often a less mischief, than that mixture of right and wrong
which serves by palliating, to perpetuate evil.

After the loss of my health, I received letters from my friends in the
country, pre^^^^g me in the strongest terms to leave the city. Such a step had
become impracticable. My aged mother was too infirm to be removed, and I could
not leave her. I was moreover, part of a little circle of physicians, who had
associated themselves in support of the new remedies. This circle would have
been broken by my quitting the city. The weather varied the disease, and in the
weakest state of my body, I expected to be able from the reports of my pupils,
to assist my associates in detecting its changes, and in accommodating our
remedies to them. Under these circumstances, it pleased God to enable me to
reply to one of the letters that urged my retreat from the city, that "I had
resolved to stick to my principles, my practice, and my patients, to the last
extremity."

On the ninth of October, I visited a considerable number of patients, and as
the day was warm, I lessened the quantity of my clothing. Toward evening I was
seized with a pain in the back, which obliged me to go to bed at eight o'clock.
About twelve I awoke with a chilly fit. A violent fever with acute pains in
different parts of my body, followed it. At one o'clock I called for Mr Fisher
who slept in the next room. He came instantly, with my affectionate black man
to my relief. I saw my danger painted in Mr Fisher's countenance. He bled me
plentifully and gave me a dose of the mercurial medicine. This was immediately
rejected. He gave me a second dose, which likewise acted as an emetic, and
discharged a large quantity of bile from my stomach. The remaining part of the
night was passed under an apprehension that my labors were near an end. I
could hardly expect to survive so violent an attack of the fever, broken down,
as I was, by labor, sickness and grief. My wife and seven children, whom the
great and distressing events that were passing in our city, had jostled out of
my mind for six or seven weeks, now resumed their former place in my
affections. My wife had stipulated, in consenting to remain in the country, to
come to my assistance in case of my sickness; but I took measures, which,
without alarming her, proved effectual in preventing it. My house was a
Lazaretto, and the probability of my death, made her life doubly necessary to
my family. In the morning, the medicine operated kindly, and my fever abated.
In the afternoon it returned, attended with a great inclination to sleep. Mr
Fisher bled me again which removed the sleepiness. The next day the fever left
me, but in so weak a state, that I awoke two successive nights with a faintness
which threatened the extinction of my life. It was removed each time by taking
a little aliment. My convalescence was extremely slow. I returned in a very
gradual manner to my former habits of diet. The smell of animal food, the first
time I saw it at my table, forced me to leave the room. During the month of
November, and all the winter months I was harrassed with a cough, and a fever
somewhat of the hectic kind. The early warmth of the spring, removed those
complaints, and I now enjoy, through divine goodness, my usual state of health.

I should be deficient in gratitude, were I to conclude this narrative without
acknowledging my obligations to my surviving pupils Mr Fisher and Mr Coxe, for
the great support and sympathy I derived from them in my labors and distresses.

I take great pleasure likewise in acknowledging my obligations to my former
pupil Dr Woodhouse, who assisted me in the care of my patients, after I became
so weak as not to be able to attend them with the punctuality their cases
required. The disinterested exploits of these young gentlemen in the cause of
humanity, and their success in the treatment of the disorder, have endeared
their names to hundreds, and at the same time, afforded a prelude of their
future eminence and usefulness in their profession.

But wherewith shall I come before the great FATHER and REDEEMER of men, and
what shall I render unto him for the issue of my life, from the grave?

-- Here all language fails --

"Come then, expressive silence, muse his praise."

FINIS.

