INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON THE EFFECTS OF THE PASSIONS UPON THE BODY; SUBMITTED
TO THE EXAMINATION OF THE Rev. John Ewing, S. T. P. Provost, THE MEDICAL
PROFESSORS AND TRUSTEES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF MEDICINE, ON THE 19th DAY OF MAY, 1794.

By Henry Rose, of Virginia, HONORARY MEMBER OF THE PHILADELPHIA MEDICAL AND
CHEMICAL SOCIETIES, AND MEMBER OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL SOCIETY.

Know then, whatever cheerful and serene
Supports the mind, supports the body too:
Hence the most vital movement mortals feel,
Is Hope, the balm and life -- blood of the soul,
It pleases and it lasts.
ARMSTRONG. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD,
NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1794.

TO WILLIAM SHIPPEN, M. D. PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY, SURGERY, etc. IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
A MAN whose character, as a Professor, is deservedly considered in many
respects as unparalleled, and as a Physician and a Citizen, justly stands in
the highest point of esteem. -- Whilst I am paying this tribute, permit me,
Sir, to acknowledge, with what assiduity, care, and diligence, you have
conducted me through the arcana of Nature to this post of honor; and gratitude
will not allow me to pass unnoticed the undisguised acts of friendship and
hospitality I always experienced during my stay within your walls.

With the highest sense of Respect, Dear Sir, I remain your obliged Friend and
Pupil, The AUTHOR.

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON, ESQUIRE, OF VIRGINIA.
SINCE the Era that a pamphlet of this nature has been thought a necessary
exaction from a Student of Medicine, so Custom has made it equally necessary to
issue it to the world under the protection of some Character that shall be
highly estimated in the field of Literature, and as I humbly conceive yours,
Sir, to stand foremost in this New World; together with the many important
medical hints I received from your conversation, I am induced to prefix your
name to this Essay.

With the sincerest Respect and Esteem, I am, your very obedient And humble
Servant, The AUTHOR.

A DISSERTATION, etc.
THE mind and body although widely different in themselves, yet they are so
formed, and wonderfully united in us, that the one may be affected by the other
in reciprocal sympathy.

So intimate is this existing connection, that every sensation of the mind, in
a manner affects the body, the one, therefore, will be affected by the diseases
of the other. Every person must be sensible of the ^^^ections of the will, nor
was the pride of the Stoics free from this, although they denied these
affections to interrupt their divine wisdom. Philosophers, therefore, feigned
to know many things concerning the seat of the will in the body. Aristotle and
the Peripatetics, placed it in the heart, and the ancients in the brain. Plato
divided and distinguished all the passions into two, the covetous and
irascible, the former he placed in the heart, the latter in the liver. There
are some again who divide the various passions farther, and give to each
affection of the mind separate seats. And finally, Helmontius, and Des Carts,
place all the passions and faculties collectively; the former in the (...)
upper orifice of the stomach, the latter in the Pineal gland. That the brain is
the seat of the mind, is a point, I believe, admitted (...) all (...), but
whether occupying that particular part, the Pineal gland, will not be decided
here* either pro or con; but that the mind, will or passions, operate upon the
corporeal part of our system, through the medium of the Nerves, whether
considered as taking their origin from the Encephalon, or as mere appendages
thereto. All this, I say, appears probable from the effects of ligatures, made
upon the nerves, and of the destruction of their continuity. It appears that in
either, in an entire state, motions may be communicated from the brain to other
parts of the system, and from the latter to the former; from injuries done the
Brain, by either external or internal violence, the laws of sensation are
impaired, and sometimes destroyed; and from the same experiments it would
appear, that the Brain is the organ of sensation and volition, and of the
several intellectual operations intervening between these; all which is
confirmed by the effects of the organic affection of the Brain upon the
intellectual faculties.

The Brain is thus the sensorium or corporeal organ more immediately the seat
of, or connected with the mind, and so far as corporeal organ is employed, all
the thoughts arising in consequence of impression are the operations of the
Brain and are modified by its various conditions.

Without entering into a discussion of the laws of sensation, either of
impression or of consciousness it is adequate to our purpose, to premise, that
the mind seems to be excited by the force of impression, from the pleasure or
pain arising from it, by the degree of emotion or passion produced by these;
and by the emotion being more or less related to the person feeling; and it may
not be amiss to add here, that the mind is capable of receiving but one
impression at a time.

With this, it remains for us to consider how far the passions, as appendages
of the mind are connected with the body and how far they are conducive to
health or disease.

The passions are necessary and natural parts of our constitution, and by the
order of nature they never were intended as a source of disease either to body
or mind; on the contrary when caused to roll within their destined orbits, they
prove reciprocally serviceable to each other.

As to the body, they preserve the health of that, not only by exciting us to
exercise; but likewise as an agency and necessary stimulus to the support of
life, by immediately and separately affecting the circulation of the blood, for
in proportion as these internal senses are absent, the motion of the
circulating mass is diminished and the function of secretion impeded. Neither
is this sentient principle of itself sufficient, to preserve a due composition
and proper assimilation of the fluids, for the purposes of secretion and
nutrition. For the plastic power of the fluids is so great that should it
happen that the necessary stimulus to motion be withheld they may coagulate
into a viscid mass. This is notified in a deep and protracted sleep; this
situation in which the mind rests, renders the circulation flow and the blood
itself discovers a disposition to staguate. Hence if the sleep be still further
protracted, the fluids of the body will acquire a tenacity that will be
difficult to destroy, and thereby the purpose for which they were intended by
nature will be defeated. Neither ought these injuries to be ascribed alone to
the body's being in a state of rest, but to an insensibility or inactivity of
the passions. The same space of time is passed by persons in a state of
watchfulness, the passions then in a state of imperfect action, without any
exercise of the body, when the fluids are neither rendered viscid nor the
circulation retarded.

It is equally certain that some of the passions diminish the circulation of
the blood, and produce a temporary suspension of the secretions. If these are
not truly immoderate and of long continuance they may be quickly removed, by a
resuscitation of the more alert passions of the mind.

And here it is to be remarked that these two kinds of passions, which we will
call the impelling or repelling or in other words, those that increase and
those that diminish the power of the vital and natural functions, which are
very wisely and curiously to be opposed to each other, by which means, the one
can be moderated, and corrected by the other. For if the mind is acted upon
always by the more vivid and more active senses; the spirits will be exhausted,
and the excitability will be worn down so far as to be but little influenced by
the most powerful stimuli of any kind. But the repelling or debilitating check
this unnatural and diseased state of excitement, strike an equilibrium, and
reduce the system to the standard of health.

Such appear to be the resulting convenience of the passions, when curbed, and
kept within due bounds. But as all things are put in a worse situation when
changed from a law of nature; so, the passions when they exceed either way
their certain order and limits, they become dissolute and ought to be avoided;
not because they disturb the tranquillity of the mind alone, but as they injure
the temperament of the body. They, with a rapid and tumultuous impetus
precipitate the motion of the blood and spirits, or diminish their energy so
far as entirely to subdue them. Again, they violently contract or immoderately
relax the solids.

These few things being premised, we next proceed to distinguish each passion*
but previously it will not be improper to observe, that it is not my intention
in the following pages to describe the more trifling emotions of the mind, or
to run into metaphisical subtilties, but to particularize the symptoms of the
more important, at the same time shall (...) their phenomena and the diseases
of which they are productive.

All the motions of the mind although various in the ^^^ture and effects, seem
to arise from impressions made upon our organs of sense, which may prove of a
pleasant or unpleasant nature, and accordingly excite emotions agreeable to the
object presented. Of the first description, are joy, desire and hope; and of
the last are grief, hatred and fear; these being the primitive, and upon which
the others must depend, and of which they are compounded. And these are
faculties of the mind that constitute the (...) of life; but, when perverted or
erring in extremes, (...) destructive to its existence. Thus the extravagance
of (...) may be exalted into enthusiasm bordering upon madness, and excessive
fear may sink into despair.

When joy seizes the breast, the heart suddenly leaps, the eyes shine with
splendor, the cheeks partake of a beautiful redness and an ornamenting light
beams on the countenance; The body is agreeably relaxed, and a proportion of
blood, exciting the most pleasing sensations, is thrilled to the most remote
part of the system. But, although, the impetus of the blood be increased, it
must be observed, that this affection has not that influence upon the arterial
system that disposes it to febrile action, but such a warmth is induced only,
as proves grateful. A tone of the solids consistent with health, most generally
attends at the same time the circulation becomes equable, and in a state
proportionate to the state of the solids. It frequently produces a flow of
tears, which generally serves to relieve nature, and are mostly accompanied
with high mental gratification. Superfluous joy being moderated by the general
mode of evacuation renders the body more agile and lively, and very much
assists the whole assimilating faculty. But when immoderate, produces effects
equally as distressing and (...) as a moderate proportion proves beneficial. It
quickly like other powerful stimuli wears down the excitability, indirect
debility is induced and frequently death. Hence the necessity of imparting good
news gradually and accommodating stimulus to excitability. The celebrated
Boerhaave affords us an instance of the effects of immoderate joy in a girl,
and history gives us many cases of the same sort. The story of the Roman mother
is well known, who was bewailing the death of her son, he suddenly and
unexpectedly appeared, the mother dropped down dead the instant he entered the
apartment. Here the excitability was accumulated, whilst the woman was
laboring under the debilitating passion of grief, indirect debility was
induced, and instant death followed. Our Professor of the institutes makes
mention of a case, the man was a doorkeeper to Congress, he expired suddenly
upon the receipt of news, that would have been a balm to his soul, viz. the
capture of Lord Cornwallis. Therefore the greatest deference ought to be paid
to the observation of Seneca; res severa est verum gaudi^^^^.

Desire being a passion compounded of hope and fear, its effects must at times
he very much varied. When united with hope, it quickens the circulation of the
blood and occasions a great flow of spirits; but when with fear, it diminishes
the last described power; at the same time the moving fiber is reduced to a
state of atony, and febrile diseases not unfrequently ensue. It also varies
agreeable to the nature of the thing it craves. To describe all the species of
this passion would be endless; therefore I will make choice of the most
principal one, namely, the passion of love, or a desire of some grateful form.

When accidentally the form of a Venus has been presented to our view, love
seems to arise within us, gradually, all warmth is caused to vanish from the
mind, the flow and tumult of the passions, subside, and the affected languish
into all pleasantness and softness; and harmony, with her silver train,
ornaments all his walks. Solitude, (...) and evening walks are sought for,
objects of pity are cherished, and all the effusions of sentiment are tender,
sedate and sympathetic, and frightful dreams infest the tedious night. Nor is
there wanting a consentaneous emotion of the body, a gentle sensation creeps
through all the nervous system, the circulation becomes equable, and the solids
are reduced to an agreeable degree of relaxation. Such are the effects of Love
in its primitive and incipient stages, before it has made impressions of a
permanent and fixed nature. But when it becomes deeper sented, it disturbs the
serenity of the mind, and the general economy of the body -- the countenance
then becomes hung over with languor, the eyes indicate some remarkable desire;
the breast rises and falls like the disturbed waters of the ocean, with deep
and languishing sighs. The body becomes effeminated, and it unlocks every manly
power of the soul. The afflicted person is particularly agitated when in
presence of the beloved object. The heart leaps, and its Systole and Dyastole
is repeated with increased rapidity; the pulse performs an inordinate action;
the countenance at first is suffused with redness and then suddenly becomes
pale. In proportion to the vehemence of the passion, these symptoms are
increased, and when violently excited, fever attended with great heat,
palpitation of the heart, and H^ller's Physiology Vol. v. Page 582.
a sense of burning through the whole circulatory system, has been the
consequence. Sometimes the breathing is laborious, the eyes are veiled with a
cloud of mist, and the body is covered with a cold sweat. No passion so
imperceptibly undermines the constitution as the one now under consideration;
debility, the predisposing cause and mother of almost every disease, to which
the human species is liable, inevitably follows: that pleasant langour, which
at first was so welcome to the body, at length proves to be its destroyer. From
the beginning the induced debility and effeminacy, the various perturbations,
which immediately follow, cannot be sustained without the greatest agitation of
both body and mind. But the irregular and desultory flow of the spirits, the
inequable flow of the blood, and the disordered secretions which invariably
take place, so far derange and exhaust the whole system, that frequently this
state ends in an incurable Tabes: Thus, the emperor Antiochus, secretly pined
away, the cause of his disease being kept a secret from his Physicians. When
this passion exceeds the bounds ascribed to it by nature, and the object of his
wishes cannot be obtained, it sometimes induces melancholia, and sometimes
mania; varying agreeable to the temperament of the body, and also according to
the degree of excitement, when this disappointment is made.

Hope exhilerates the mind to a grateful anticipation; from whence appears in
the body the more placid effects of a lenient joy. It is this sweet and
inestimable comfort that principally leads us on to respected old age, and it
is this averts the sadness and horrible despair, that are too often cherished,
viz. the evils and misfortunes that await mankind through life. Without this
faculty, the functions of the animal economy, must soon be eclipsed, neither
has man any resource, from whence the vital, and natural powers, as far as a
mental agent is necessary, can be so well support.

That unwelcome guest, grief, makes its appearance, with tears, weeping and
sobbing. Inspiration and expiration become deep and difficult, the eyes lose
their animating brilliancy and become fixed, and the unfortunate, stand with an
immovable countenance; the relaxed cheeks assume a livid paleness, and nothing
but gloom is painted in the imagination. Whilst this hostile emotion occupies
the breast, health, joy and felicity languish and disappear, the muscular
system is brought to a state of relaxation, the nervous to a state of
diminished sensibility, and the vital and voluntary motions are retarded and
oppressed. No passion so far impairs the healthy functions of the stomach, the
appetite is destroyed and indigestion induced; the intestines are (...) and
distended with wind; the secretions and excretions are irregular. Hysteria,
hypo^^^^driasis, dropsy, tabe^, and fatal marasmus are too often the serious
consequences. It impedes the transit of the blood through the Lungs, difficult
and deep respiration ensue, the efforts of nature to quicken the deficient
motion of the blood; by occupying the whole attention, and suspending the
stimulus of a more exhilirating passion, it renders all the senses dull and
imperfect, but particularly vision. When it is less oppressive, and protracted,
the whole body imperceptibly is led into a state of emaciation. But grief in
excess has imitated the violent efforts of anger, and terminated in phrenitis,
apoplexy, mania and suicide.

Hatred, when sudden and vehement, is called anger, -- which next offers itself
for consid^^^tion. When this passion has reached its summit, the eyes are
forced forward, and made protuberant, they burn with envy, the muscles of the
forehead, supercilia, and of all the face are thrown into violent and contorted
positions, the blood bursts into the face, the lips take on the tremulous
motion, the voice is thick and stammering. Anger excites and contracts all the
moving fibers, the muscular strength at one time is doubly increased, and at
another its power is very much diminished, different in different persons,
according to their several constitutions; it accelerates the motion and
increases the impetus of the blood. All these causes conspiring, the vessels
are thrown into febrile action. In this apparently universal constriction, the
Rima Glottidis is spasmodically affected, and the voice becomes rough and
violent; during this situation of the Glottis the salivary glands discharge
copiously, with a frothing at the mouth, which symptoms often accompany this
furor. Hence also the proportion of air necessary to the inflation of the
Lungs, being withheld, the return of the blood by the Jugular veins and
descending Cava, of course must be considerably impeded, the countenance
becomes flushed, and sometimes of a livid hue, to the same power of contraction
as mentioned above, the corrugation and contorsion of the muscles must be
owing. Anger much increases perspiration and all the different secretions of
the body, an increased secretion and discharge of bile very frequently follow,
with contortions of the Abdominal Viscera. By this strong action and reaction
of the vessels and their contents, recent and sometimes long confirmed
Cicatrices are torn asunder. Again, it is frequently attended, or rather there
is consequent to it apoplexy, pleurisy, haemorrhages, phrenites, violent fever,
and in females, a suppression of milk, and cancerous affections of the Mammae;
but to these odious and disagreeable hosts, both to body and mind, there
sometimes follow great debility, langour and depression; as the turbulent ocean
sinketh into a calm.

When the passion of fear has occupied the mind of man, the lively rouge of the
cheeks is seen to vanish, the hairs of the head to tremble, and erect their
ends to the heavens Fear has been known to turn the hair white in the course of
a very few minutes.
, the eyes roll with uncertain hope, the astonished heart leaps, the joints
tremble and withdraw from their destined duty, a cold clammy sweat is
discharged from every pore of the body. Fear is seen to repel and debilitate
the powers of life, sometimes its influence has quite a different effect; but
generally universal debility, chills, trepidation, and relaxation of the
different sphincters of the body. The peristaltic motion of the intestines is
increased, diarrhea Falconer, page 39.
, Icterus, and schirrus gangrene have been noticed as the effects of fear. It
weakens the power of digestion, and causes flatulencies, eructations, acidity
and other concomitants of dyspepsia. By this depression of spirits, a necessary
stimulus to life and more particularly of health is suspended; by this means
also the power of the Heart and Arteries to propel the blood to their
extremities is diminished, the blood consequently is accumulated about the
Heart and Lungs, a small quick pulse indicant of this oppression generally
attends. This state remaining until it is assisted by the intervention of some
potent stimulus, sufficient to enable her to propel the blood to the
superficies; to this follows an increased degree of heat, followed by
perspiration, analogous to the efforts of nature in an intermittent fever.
When, as yet its violence remains, and terror is pronounced, it does not
suppress the power of the spirits, but on the contrary instigates them to
strong and powerful endeavors, it excites the latent energy of the system into
vigorous action, and whilst these tumultuous and irregular exertions are kept
up, it appears as if all opposition would be compelled to yield. Non Vultus non
calor unus. It has a remarkable effect in rendering those, under its influence,
more liable to the infection of contagious diseases. Clarke Page 164.
in his observation on the predisposing causes of the remittent fever of the
East Indies, takes notice of the debilitating passions, such as grief and fear,
and marks them as the most powerful causes. And asserts that it is owing to
this circumstance that fevers and alvine fluxes are so fatal to young
adventurers, who annually emigrate in expectation of acquiring riches, and upon
their arrival, finding all their delusive hope suddenly dissipated, they become
low spirited, and are carried off in a very few hours. Whilst others as little
inured to the climate and exposed to the same remote causes, but who have
better prospects, either escape the epidemic or have it in a less malignant
form, when attacked.

When the impression has been very strong, tremors, melancholy, palsy,
apoplexy blindness, abortions, disjunctions of the futures of the cranium and
death itself have been the melancholy consequences. Sometimes however its
effects have been instrumental to the cure of many of the serious afflictions
of our frail machine; Pains of the body and maniacal disorders have frequently
been removed by inspiring ideas of fear and apprehension of danger -- By this
however it cannot be denied but that this passion, when highly excited will
prove a most powerful stimulant. Violent exertions of strength have been shown,
speech has been restored to the dumb, and strength to the parylytic patient.
Gout, sciatica, intermittent fevers, diarrhea, and epilepsey have in turn been
cured, and persons on the brink of eternity have been restored by it.

Fear and grief combined with anger, when frequent and long continued,
debilitate the whole body, suppress perspiration and diminish the vital heat,
hence there follows dropsey, palsy, and many cronic diseases, that render the
person a burden to himself and friends the remainder of his miserable
existence.

The effects of grief are more equable, than the irregular and disultory
operations of fear.

The passions as yet undescribed, although they partake of one or the other
that has already been noticed, or a composition of many; each has its proper
character, which may be exposed in a few words, and I will give a short sketch
of pride.

In this, the eyebrows and forehead, are elevated, the eyes behold every
object with the utmost disdain and contempt, the breast and face become tumid,
the deportment of body firm and elevates itself as it were on high; which we
possess either as the gift of nature or of fortune; agreeable to its origin it
renders them more or less cheerful, expands and fills the heart with warm
blood, but as there is always joined to this some nisus of the mind, to support
its supposed dignity, so it increases the impetus of the blood, gives an
increased tone to the muscular system but more particularly to the muscles of
the face and upper extremities; pride resists the effects of the more relaxing
passions, but it may be too much indulged* and thereby give too much ragidity
to the different fibers of the system, and hence by the frequent renewal of it,
that state which verges upon anger being kept up, the high degree of excitement
existing at the same time in the vessels of the brain, either terminates in the
melancholy diseases produced by anger itself or in an obstinate collapse; or in
other words indirect debility is induced in the brain as in other parts of our
complicated machine; and may it not be owing to these two states that the
consequent diseases are of so opposite a nature, sometimes melancholy and at
others mania, either of a tonic or atonic description?

Shame suffuses the countenance and breasts with a redness and glowing heat,
the lips tremble, the knees shake, the eyes are dejected, and the voice clings
to the jaws. The influenced person can neither think or speak rightly or
naturally. Shame partakes a little of grief and is opposed to pride, for it
arises from the bad, abject opinion we have formed of ourselves. Whereas pride
gives temporary strength to our whole system, and particularly to the head
neck, and superior extremities, on the contrary when these parts are under the
influence of shame, they are in a state of relaxation, as must be conspicuously
evident, from the position of the muscles of the face and upper extremities as
above described. Hence a larger proportion of blood is transmitted to the head,
and the face is rendered more red than natural. And may it not be from the same
cause that this degree of perturbation of the brain and most of the senses as
well external as internal, arises In the sudden flow of blood to the face, when
under the influence of shame, may not the mind have a power of stimulating the
arteries, of a particular part and increase their osciliatory motion, in the
same manner that the motion of the heart is increased by any violent affection
of the mind, or in the same manner that any named muscle of the body is brought
into action by the will, and very frequently this motion takes place without
the presence of the will, which occasionally may be the case with the arteries
in time of blushing?
? This mode of accounting for the symptoms of shame, appear to be somewhat
verified, from its appearing more frequently in the younger part of the human
species, in whom the superior parts are more relaxed, and in a more irritable
state. This affection sometimes, in Plethoric persons, terminate in apoplexy.

There is a species of joy arising from the presentation of an object to the
eye or to the imagination, the incoherency and absurdity of which produces
laughter. The Lungs exercise their whole strength, in this convulsive motion,
from hence it contributes to increase and agitate the whole circulating mass,
and also from its having the power of exciting into action the more vivid
exertions of the mind as well as body: laughter aids in the removal of
melancholia and leucophlegmatia. But how far a long continuance of it shall
prove detrimental, and be productive of the consequences incidental to a
sthenic diathesis suddenly induced, must be sufficiently evident. Apoplexy and
Peripneumony have succeeded this passion. Thus Zeuxis is said to have died
suddenly from the laughter excited by a comic work, the production of his own
imagination.

Pity is that sensation of the mind, through which we are affected, by the
evils and misfortunes of one or more persons; it seems to be formed by the
union of joy and grief; the one being called forth by afflictions, the other
from a tacit approbation of that passion; the influence of this upon the
different functions of the animal economy is so very moderate as to afford
little or no interruption. For although there is a proportion of grief present,
yet the mind conscious of its own rectitude, resists this impending oppression
and keeps up an healthy degree of excitement. Its effects are seldom very
powerful, but it has been observed to have greater influence on the Lachrimal
gland, than even sorrow itself.

Envy distorts the mouth, eyes and muscles of the face, and the whole
countenance. It is composed of desire, anger and grief: The desire of a certain
gratification, grief at the absence of that; and anger, pointed at him who
possesses that gratification. These disorderly emotions much derange the
serenity of the mind, and make appear a repugnance through every function of
the body. A proportion of sadness constituting a proportional part of this
passion depresses and debilitates the power of both body and mind. Whilst anger
and desire act their part, the system takes on a sthenic diarhesis; should it
so happen, that they were alternated, a balance might be struck, and the issue
would be favorable: but it most generally happens that the one or the other
mounts the carr and drives on to a state of disorder. It is said to cause
paleness of the countenance and to excite the biliary discharge Falconer Page
44.
. Its other effects resemble those of the passions of which it is composed, as
above remarked.

As yet there remains one passion more to be mentioned which is nearly allied
to envy, but more vehement and complicated, namely, Jealousy. This occasionally
shows love, fear, grief, pride, desire and anger. In the midst of so much
contention, how far the system must be injured, and how far this ought to be
held up as the causes of many diseases must be evident, and I hope sufficiently
so, from the influence of these several passions when taken in a separate point
of view.

Those moving in a high or public sphere of life, who are infested with honors
and persecuted with solicitations, who are obliged to dissemble their feeling
as given them by nature, and live as it were at variance with themselves, also
experience in their health the bad effects of ambition, and such
disappointments and unwished for vicissitudes as are inseparable from human
affairs.

All these sudden and accidental emotions of the mind affect the corporeal
functions openly and at repeated paroxisms. Indeed there are three appetites of
an inferior order, namely, lust, hunger and thirst; but as they do not take
their origin from the mind, and it is only secondarily affected, and that they
have their influence by the intervention of a certain predisposition of the
body, I shall therefore omit the consideration of them here as not appertaining
to our subject.

The symptoms of the passions being so far laid down, and I hope with
sufficient accuracy and perspicuity to prevent their being confounded with each
other, I will in the next place endeavor to show in what manner they may be
opposed to each other with advantage so as to keep up or obtain an equilibrium,
being the principal preventative against their influence as disposing to
derangement and disorder.

When truly each passion separately shall be in an immoderate degree, they
interrupt the functions of the system, so each has his opponent and rejects or
presides over him in turn. Thus joy is opposed to grief; for what the latter
shall retard the former will accelerate, for as grief relaxes and diminishes
the mobility of the Hypocondriac region, and the contained Viscern, so,
laughter, partaking of Joy, shakes and agitates these parts with a degree of
briskness, removes the present immobility, gives new tone to their diathesis,
and raises the diminished excitement. In a similar manner, love softens the
harsh features brought forth by anger, and fear suppresses what hope excites.

Such is the wise counsel of nature teaching us moderation and the mode of
preserving and procuring an equable temper. But unless we should form these
into an inseparable chaos, we destroy that variety so useful in itself. That
variety which proves so essential to mankind, in inducing them to turn their
attention to the different objects and pursuits that present themselves, upon
this great theater of the universe. Besides all this, some one of the passions
must prevail, and govern the mind; and every being has his peculiar attachment
and inclination to adhere to some of these affections. With these affections,
there are generally attending some peculiar temperament and habit of body. --
But as the mind in this particular, is like the body, which has become
accustomed to the performance of some duty or business, which it returns to at
particular periods, without being disordered, it bears this stimulus without
being sensible of its impression. Here, the mind, in the ordinary pursuits of
business is habituated to the action of some stimulus afforded by itself; but
this being withdrawn or superseded by one of a different kind, derangement and
disorder are produced, both in body and mind, or in each seperately, according
to its power.

In the next piece, I will endeavor to show, how far the passions differ from
each other in different temperament; and in the first place, it appears, that
in a sanguine temperament of the body, the passions are more violent, yet
quick, and in succession more various, the mind is prone to joy, hope and
pleasure. In the choleric they are excited with more difficulty, but when
brought into action, they are sound to be more permanent and violent than in
the sanguine. In these various emotions of the mind, when once we allow them to
make a deep impression, their visits become too often repeated; anger and pride
principally come under this description. In melancholy, the emotions of the
mind are never violent, but slow and constant, and always sad, apprehending
some impending evil. The Phlegmatic are seldom, if ever, troubled with excesses
of the passions of either kind, and seldomer indulge the most inoffensive.

There is so intimate a connection of every disposition of the mind, with the
peculiar temperament of the body, that when ever a special disposition of the
body is contracted, by the indulgence of some one of the passions, we
necessarily induce a consentaneous temperament of the body; and vice versa,
when a particular habit of the body is formed, a peculiar disposition of mind
follows.

From this mutual connection existing between the disposition of the mind and
the temperament and habit of body, and from the dependence of the one upon the
other, for their respective functions, when either is diseased, a remedy for
the one will be equally (...) the other. To explain this, I will recite a few
examples.

In those habits of the body that dispose to melancholy and grief, the mind
should be strongly acted upon in the first situation, nor ought it to be
allowed to dwell long upon any one subject. Grief, fear, and a too depressed
opinion of ourselves, always attend this disposition of the body. So^^ requires
a considerable proportion of hope and pride, to resist the depression induced
by the former. At the same time it will not be thought improper to direct such
medicines as will dilute, and increase the volume and impetus of the general
circulating mass; and to administer such as will diminish the immobility of the
nervous power. The cholerie who for the most part are daring, proud and cruel
ought to be reduced to a state of more lenity, by love and pity, and to be
depressed by shame; in this case much good may be done by dilution and the
exhibition of such medicines as will take off the existing rigidity and lower
the general ex^^ts (...) those whose habits are warm and sanguine, whose minds
are most easily operated upon, and are affected in the most violent manner by
the exhilirating passions, it not only must prove serviceable in this case, to
diminish the storm, by opposing it with the less inebriating emotions of the
mind, such as grief and fear, but to lessen the strength of the moving fiber,
and the tone of the arterial system, by confining the patient to a
refrigerating and low diet. The Phlegmatic, whose minds are under the influence
of too great a degree of torpor; may be roused into action by anger and
elevated by joy; at the same time we should attempt to excite a diathesis,
verging upon the sthenic, by the methods best known to effectuate that purpose.

This, I hope, will suffice to have been said upon the different temperaments.
A proper regulation of the passions must avail much in acute and chronic
diseases, and appears to be a circumstance of the utmost and last importance in
their prevention as well as the cure.

How far a placid and equable temper of mind contributes to the removal of
every fever of an acute kind, must be evident to every accurate observer of
nature.

In slow and nervous fevers it is no less beneficial to relieve the mind by
inspiring hope and adding new vigor to the system by the welcome news of joy.
In all obstructions, and more particularly the humoral Asthma, it would seem to
be a matter of considerable importance to excite laughter. For the repeated
contractions and convulsions of the diaphragm may be expedient in removing the
infartion of the Lungs. In the suppurative stage of tubercles of the Lungs, may
not this act on prove equally serviceable? Those who have observed the
medicinal virtues of terror, remark that it sometimes is followed by good
effects. But since the presence of this passion has produced very melancholy
consequences, we ought to have recourse to an expedient of so formidable a
nature, with the utmost caution, and then, but upon the most urgent and
desperate occasions, as we do in the administration of every powerful remedy.
The use made of it in removing Hiccough, is commonly known, and its powerful
influence was sufficiently known to the immortal Boerhaave.

Besides all this, the mind demands no less attention in the healing of wounds.
For the stimulating or impelling emotions contribute much to the increase of
inflammation and suppuration; and on the other hand, the debilitating or
repelling may and will have a contrary operation. And among the various and
many effects of the passions upon the constitution, we must not omit to mention
of what immense application they have been in the prevention of an exacerbation
of the intermittent fever, and also in aiding the system to contend with the
contagion of infectious diseases.

There are worthy of notice, some functions of the mind which cannot with the
strict rules of order be reduced to the class of passions, yet of much
consequence to the Physician, and as an operation of the mind upon the body,
may be subjoined to what has been mentioned in the foregoing pages. The first
of these is a high degree of faith and confidence in the efficacy of remedies.
Whether this operates by engrossing the mind and attention, and thereby
rendering it inaccessible to other impressions, or by imparting such a degree
of tone or strength as enables the system to resist their attacks, is difficult
to determine; but I am rather inclined to believe that both are concerned, and
that they reciprocally assist each other. This power is found most efficacious
in such disorders as recur at intervals. It however, is observable that unless
the prepossession is very great, it is apt to fail in producing a cure. Another
mental affection which has produced wonderful effects, is a determined
resolution to resist the access of the complaint. However extraordinary this
may seem, yet that it has been practiced with great success, is a matter beyond
doubt. It appears to have its influence in a manner similar to the power last
spoken of, and to have been serviceable in nervous and periodical complaints.
This appears to be not only a stimulus to the nervous system, but also a
general and powerful tonic. And must it not be by the agency of this power of
the mind, and its influence upon the body that the supposed possessors of
animal magnetism effect such wonderful cures?

From the view here taken, of the influence of the passions upon the corporeal
and vital systems, we may generally infer, that in cases where the powers of
life are brought below the standard of health, endeavors should be made to
excite into action such passions as will aid in counteracting the leading
symptoms of the disease. And when the disease itself consists in, or is
agravated by too high a degree of excitement of the vital functions, recourse
may be had to the debilitating ones.

In doing this many difficulties remain yet to be got over, relative to the
application of these potent and precarious instruments; since they cannot be
brought to Chemical anylisis that we may ascertain their real and possessed
virtues; neither can we form any judgment of their extent or quality, by their
effects. For what may have a moderate operation in one economy, may in another
be sufficient, to carry the system above the wished for point, and be succeeded
by indirect debility* and since we are left so much in the dark, upon the
manner of applying these agents, to the removal of diseases, and the difficulty
of exciting them, when wanting, I fear it will be an insurmountable barrier to
their use; though we may look forward with pleasure, to the time, when future
ages will surmount this obstacle, and teach us how we are to accommodate these
remedies to the excitability of the system.

THE END.

