Dr. Robbins' Anniversary Sermon.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22, 1793; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE
LANDING OF OUR ANCESTORS IN THAT PLACE, IN 1620.

Published at the request of those who heard it, and others; with some
enlargements, and particular anecdotes relating to their sufferings before they
left England; never before published.

BY CHANDLER ROBBINS, D. D.

" -- He commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their
children -- who should arise and declare them to their children, that they
might set their hope in GOD, and not forget THE WORKS OF GOD, but keep his
commandments."

PSA. lxxviii.5, 6, 7. BOSTON: PRINTED BY JOSEPH BUMSTEAD, UNION-STREET. 1794.

AN Anniversary Sermon.
PSALM lxxvii.11. I WILL REMEMBER THE WORKS OF THE LORD;
SURELY I WILL REMEMBER THY WONDERS OF OLD.

TO contemplate the being and the works of GOD, is an employment at once the
most noble, the most satisfying and delightful, that can possibly engage* the
minds of intelligent creatures. Indeed this is the great end of their being.
This is the employment of angels, and of all the heavenly hosts. Their
distinguished powers, are constantly engaged in "looking into," and admiring
"the manifold wisdom," order and beauty, which shine with peculiar glory in the
works of their Maker. And after all the discoveries they have made, still new,
and increasing wonders arise, which add fresh ardor to their desires, and
growing delight and happiness to their minds. And thus it will continue to be,
to all eternity. -- And the nearer we resemble these heavenly intelligences,
the greater pleasure shall we take in viewing and contemplating these objects:
until, lost in wonder, we shall be ready to exclaim, Great and mavelous are
thy works, LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints!

That which principally engages the pious mind in this delightful employment,
is, that in the discovery of the glory of the divine character, displayed in
his works, he is led to more high and exalted ideas of the blessed God, and is
thence excited to praise and adore him, to love and trust in him as the alone
SUPREME GOOD -- the only soul-satisfying Object, "in whom is all his salvation
and all his desire."

It was on this ground, the Psalmist uttered the pious resolution in the text,
"I will remember the works of the Lord -- surely I will remember thy wonders of
old." No object afforded him so much delight -- no hours were so agreeably
employed, as those spent in meditating upon, and recalling to his mind, the
great things GOD had done for the children of men; and particularly, the mighty
acts of his power and grace, in favor of his ancient chosen people, in times
of old. -- He refers here, doubtless to the wonders which were wrought by the
almighty hand, in the emancipation of Israel from their cruel bondage in Egypt,
and the great salvation they experienced afterward.

The passage before us would lead us into a wide and delightful field for
serious and useful meditation. But the time allotted me, and the present
season, will only permit me to consider some of them, which I shall endeavor,
under this general DOCTRINE --

That it is a duty incumbent on ALL, and it will be the delight of the truly
pious mind, frequently to recollect the WORKS of GOD, and to acknowledge with
gratitude his ancient WONDERS to our FATHERS.

Since, by the providence of God, my brethren, this day falls out on the
anniversary of the landing of our FOREFATHERS in this place, this subject seems
well calculated to afford us some agreeable and profitable improvement of that
great and astonishing event -- an event, which has been followed with such
great and important consequences to this land; which has laid the foundation of
this NEW WORLD; and all those surprising scenes which have already taken place
in it -- as well as those still greater ones which are now in action, and
others which will succeed them, to the end of time.

We who are now on the stage, have seen so much in our day, that, it is hoped,
we shall never forget "the works of the Lord;" besides those ancient "wonders"
which we have heard with our ears, and of which our fathers have told us.

It will be proper for us to consider

I. FIRST, what these works of the Lord are, which we should remember.

II. What is implied in the remembrance of them.

III. The benefits which result from a due remembrance of the works of the Lord.

I. We are first to consider what those works of the Lord are, which demand our
devout recollection.

The WORKS of God are great and manifold, and none of them are to be forgotten,
or excluded from pious observance. For "ALL his works praise him." They are all
wonderful, and loudly proclaim the glory of their divine Author. -- But when we
speak of the works of the Lord, they are usually distributed under these three
heads -- the work of creation -- the works of providence -- and his works of
grace. All these bear the most evident and glorious signatures of God.

The work of CREATION exhibits such a display of the divine perfections of its
Author, as demands the most explicit acknowledgement and praise of all rational
intelligences. How astonishing must be the power of that Being, who, by a
single act of his will, could cause this glorious fabric of the UNIVERSE, in a
moment, to spring from nothing into existence; and in such beautiful order,
grandeur and harmony! How striking and how solemn are those words, God said,
"LET there be light, and there WAS light!" "He spoke and it was done -- he
commanded, and it stood fast." How is the serious, reflecting mind struck with
amazement, likewise, at the vast number, and almost infinite variety of created
existences, in every part of the universe! "The heavens" above us, with all
their shining train, "declare" in the most expressive language, "the glory of
their Creator." "The firmament shows his handy work." Wherever we turn our
eyes, divine power, wisdom and goodness meet them. All creatures, animate and
inanimate are full of glowing evidences of Deity. Our own bodies -- "how
fearfully and wonderfully are they made!" Our immortal souls bear a still
nearer resemblance to, and more clearly display the wisdom and glory of their
great Original. -- Thus, by the work of creation, and "by the things that are
made, are to be seen and understood his ETERNAL POWER and GODHEAD."

The works of PROVIDENCE are no less remarkable, than those of creation.
Indeed, so necessary is a DIVINE power for the preservation of the world in
existence and order, that this has been, and not improperly, called a continued
act of creation. None but the same omnipotent hand, which made the world, could
uphold it, a moment, in being. The constant preservation of created existence,
is therefore, as strong an argument for the being of a GOD, as the first
production of them from nothing. It is as much " in HIM" and from him, that "we
live and move," as that we " have our being." -- But the providence of God, is
not only concerned in upholding creation, and continuing all things in being,
but in the special ordering and directing all creatures and things, so as to
answer the great and wise ends for which they were made. And this extends to
all things in the moral, as well as the natural world: and comprehends all
events which take place in both. Accordingly God is said to "work all things
according to the counsel of his will." And that he has not only "the sparrow,"
and the hairs of our heads, and all material things, but even "the hearts of
all in his hand, and turns them whithersoever he pleases, as the rivers of
water are turned." And that he "works in men, both to will and to do, of his
own good pleasure.

DAVID justly received it as a most joyful consideration (and so do all good
men) that every thing was under God's direction and control. That all
creatures and all events were entirely and absolutely at his disposal. "The
Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice." The government of the universe is in
safe hands, because in the hands of a Being who is infinitely just and wise --
who cannot err, and who will direct all to the best ends possible. "The Judge
of all the earth will do right" -- however dark many things in providence, may
now appear to us. For he is as wise as he is powerful, and as good as he is
wise.

In considering this part of the subject, the works of providence, a very large
field opens to our view; in which, it is my purpose principally to walk, at
this time; and to endeavor to aid our mutual contemplations, on so pleasing a
theme. And I have no doubt, that before we shall have finished our mental walk,
we shall see what abundant reason we have, to unite with the Psalmist in the
text, and say, we will remember the works of the Lord; surely we will remember
his wonders of old.

If the divine PROVIDENCE extend to the smallest, and most minute events, as we
have heard; how much more to those great revolutions and those important
affairs, which have, and which are continually, taking place in the world, in
all ages: and especially to those which more immediately respect MAN, as the
subject of moral government. But we will pursue this path a little further. --

In "remembering the works of the Lord," in the government of providence, our
minds are carried back to the commencement of ages -- to the earliest dawn of
time. For no sooner had JEHOVAH spoke creation into existence, but he began to
exhibit his own glorious character on its theater; and to give the most clear
evidences of his wisdom, goodness and power, in his conduct toward his new
world; and particularly, his noble creature MAN -- the brightest image of
himself, among all the creatures of this lower world. Here we are led to take a
view of the original covenant, which God made with the first father of our race
-- His holy and happy condition, at his first formation -- the delightful
situation assigned him in the garden of paradise -- and the more delightful
communion he enjoyed with his Maker, GOD -- in full possession of his love, and
of all the joys of innocence -- a stranger to want and sorrow, because a
stranger to sin.

But, alas! from this pleasing scene, this state of primitive happiness and
moral rectitude, we are led, by the history of providence, soon to behold a
melancholy reverse of things -- in that awful catastrophe, presented to us, in
the guilty apostasy of man from his God, by a transgression of his law. --
Thence to the deplorable state of the whole human race, in consequence of his
sin -- the death and ruin which have overwhelmed the world, "by one man's
disobedience," by which, "many were made sinners."

But in the midst of this scene of darkness, and woe, we are led to behold the
first beam of hope, which shone upon this ruined world, in the gracious promise
of a SAVIOR, under the character of " the seed of the woman." -- In further
looking into the records of providence, we are carried on to view the sad
effects of the apostasy of man, in the dreadful destruction of the old world,
by a universal flood of water, for their daring wickedness, and their awful
defection from God. -- After this, to the divine kindness to NOAH, in
preserving him and his household from the common desolation, by means of an ark;
precious emblem of that glorious sanctuary -- that ark of safety, JESUS CHRIST
-- the only "hiding place" for guilty sinners, from a more terrible flood of
divine indignation, coming upon all the finally impenitent. -- Thence we are
led to see the exemplary vengeance which fell on the devoted cities of SODOM
and Gomorrah, which were turned into ashes, and condemned with an overthrow,
for an example to those, who, after, should live ungodly. -- With pleasing
wonder, we then contemplate God's gracious calling of Abraham, and his
distinguished regard to this Father of the faithful, and to his seed after him
-- The miraculous preservation of Moses; and his call and commission to be the
messenger of God's mercy to his afflicted people, and the instrument of their
deliverance from bondage. -- Thence we come to the amazing story of the
hardened monarch of Egypt who knew not the Lord, nor would he though at
Heaven's order, "let Israel go:" And whose signal obduracy would not be
overcome by all the plagues of Egypt. -- From thence to the final rescue of the
armies of Israel, from his oppressive hands -- The institution of the passover,
an instructive rite, to be observed in grateful commemoration of their
deliverance -- Their distress, soon after at the Red sea -- Their miraculous
escape from their enraged enemies -- the song of praise, they then sung, and
their seeming gratitude to their God, for this signal salvation -- but -- their
speedy revolt, and awful murmuring against the Lord and his servant Moses. --
The anger of God against their ingratitude, and yet his astonishing patience
toward them, under all their rebellion -- Their long wanderings a 40 years
journey, in the wilderness -- where thousands of their carcases fell, for their
unbelief -- Their safe arrival at last, and their happy settlement in the land
of Canaan, the Lord "driving out, by little and little, the Heathen nations,
and thus fulfiling his promise made 400 years before, to Abraham their
FOREFATHER. --

THESE, which I have but briefly hinted at, are some of those " works of the
Lord" which belong to his providential government of men -- and these are " the
wonders of old," which ought to be remembered with devout acknowledgment and
praise to God.

But besides these, the Lord, "whose hand is not shortened," has wrought great
and mavelous works in PROVIDENCE, toward other nations and people; and that,
in every successive generation, down to the present eventful period. And we may
justly view, as none of the least of these, the great and astonishing events,
which have taken place in our own land, within eighteen years past -- and which
have been attended with consequences, so important not only to this country,
but to others, and most probably, will be in the event, to all the nations of
the world. To the revolution in America, as a mean, in the hand of providence,
may probably, be ascribed, the surprising scenes which are acting on the
European Continent at the present day; where the nations, like a potters
vessel, are dashing to pieces, one against another. The present period appears
to be big with as important events, as ever the world has witnessed, as it
respects the political state of mankind; and I believe, ultimately, the moral
state too. -- The grand contest between freedom and tyranny -- liberty and
slavery, is carried on with amazing ardour -- with the most obstinate
resolution. And the event must be, soon, either glorious or dreadful. -- But it
is a sweet and quieting consolation to the friends of religion, that "the Lord
God omnipotent reigns" -- that events are entirely in his hands -- That he
sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers -- that he brings the PRINCES to nothing, he makes the JUDGES
of the earth as vanity. Isai. xl.22.
And it is matter of unspeakable thankfulness and satisfaction that God is the
unalterable friend of righteousness, and "abhors the oppressor and evil
doer." And that, "wherein any deal proudly, the Lord is above them."

It was observed just now, that these great revolutions in providence, will,
most likely, produce great changes in the moral as well as political state of
the world. -- It seems to have been, for a number of years past, my brethren,
the evident design of Heaven, by these convulsions and overturnings in the
world, to bring on, or at least, to prepare the way for ushering in those
glorious and important events, which are so frequently foretold in scripture,
respecting the advancement of the cause of truth and righteousness -- the more
universal spread of the gospel, and the enlargement of the kingdom of our
divine Redeemer on earth -- when "the kingdom of this world shall be given to
Christ -- and all the ends of the earth shall see and rejoice in his salvation.
-- And when the Lord shall build up Zion, he will appear in his GLORY." --

But to return -- among other various "works of the Lord" in providence, let
us, on this occasion* more particularly look into the history, of our own
country, and this day call to "remembrance, those wonders of old" which the
Lord wrought for our pious progenitors, whose bodies lie mingled with the dust,
in THIS PLACE, where we their children dwell -- but whose souls, have long time
no doubt been at rest with GOD.

As, in the first discovery of AMERICA, the hand of God was most visibly seen,
and ought forever to be remembered with gratitude -- so, it has evidently been
the object of the peculiar care of Heaven, through every successive period of
time, to the present day. It seems to have been, from the beginning, a
remarkable Theater of great and astonishing "works of the Lord." Our history,
from the first landing of our FATHERS in this town, has been a history of
wonders; and will furnish, to every generation, perhaps, as much matter for
pious reflection and gratitude, as that of any nation or people that ever
existed on earth. That of the children of Israel seems the nearest to resemble
it: as any one may observe, who is acquainted with them both.

I propose here, agreeably to the words of our text, to give a brief narration
of some of "the wonderful works of God, toward our ancestors, which we, their
posterity, ought to remember," and which, it is peculiarly proper, we should
call to mind, on this anniversary. In doing this, although the accounts chiefly
must be derived necessarily from historical facts, the substance of which some
of you, perhaps, may have been already acquainted with -- yet, I shall bring to
your view, some circumstances -- some ancient anecdotes, which, I presume, have
never yet been made public, at least, which I have never seen. I shall take
them from the first book of the very ancient records of this church, now in my
hands. And I hope some useful entertainment, may be afforded at least to the
rising generation among us; and on the present occasion, it will not be
improper to have the minds of all, even of those who once knew them, to be
stirred up by way of remembrance.

I would begin, by observing to you, that the moving cause of our fathers
leaving ENGLAND, their native land, and transplanting themselves, finally, in
these then "dark corners of the earth," was, the cruel persecution and
religious oppression, they met with in their own land: originating in a spirit
of intolerance which then prevailed, especially in the Episcopal hierarchy; a
spirit, now abhorred, as much by the enlightened and pious members of that
communion, as perhaps by any others whatever; and which is viewed as a
miserable relick of ancient popish superstition and bigotry. Our fathers were
not indulged the reasonable liberty of worshipping their God agreeably to their
own consciences. And though they made no disturbance in the State, but were
peaceable members of society, yet because they could not, in conscience, submit
to unscriptural impositions, nor bow their necks to the yoke of human
inventions, they were loaded with heavy fines and forfeitures -- nay, hunted
about like "partridges on the mountains," and persecuted as pests to society.
And merely for exercising that Christian liberty, which Christ has given them,
they were seized and many of them imprisoned -- others had their houses beset,
and watched night and day, and with difficulty escaped their hands; and most of
them were obliged to fly and leave their habitations, and all means of
subsistence.

Under these burdens they groaned for a considerable time, but still continued,
as they had done, to meet as often as they could for the worship of God,
(though privately for fear of their enemies) under the pastoral care of that
famous and learned divine, Mr. John Robinson, the FIRST PASTOR of this ANCIENT
CHURCH: until at length, their burdens became intolerable; and they, by joint
consent, resolve to fly their native country, and seek an asylum in Holland,
where they had heard, was a general toleration given to all denominations of
Christians; and where some of their own countrymen had gone before, under like
troubles. The undertaking, they knew, was hazardous, and likely to be attended
with great expense and difficulty. For their enemies watched them continually,
and would do every thing in their power to prevent their escape. What a
dreadful situation! They can neither be suffered to live at home, in peace, nor
to go abroad for it. The ports and harbors are watched: strict orders given by
authority, not to suffer them to escape. They are obliged to use the most
private methods possible, and give extravagant fees to the sailors -- and yet
were often betrayed by them. Twice they attempted to remove, and though with
the utmost possible privacy, yet they were discovered before they could get
away. -- One instance of this, I find, which is very affecting, and which I
shall here mention, in the words of the records.

"There was a large company of them purposed to get passage at Boston in
Lincolnshire, for HOLLAND; and for that end, had hiered a ship wholly to
themselves, and made agreement with the master, to be ready at a certain day,
and take them and their goods in at a convenient place appointed; where they
all, accordingly, attended in reddiness. After long waiting, and large
expenses, the master, tho he kept not his word as to the day, yett came at
last, and took them in, in the night -- and when he had got them and their
goods aboard, he betrayed them; having beforehand, complotted with the
searchers and other officers so to do, who took them and putt them into open
boats, and there rifled and ransacked them, searching them to their shirts
for money -- " offering the most brutal violence to the women, such as is not
fit to be named: "and then carrye'd them back into the town, marching them
about the streets, and making them a spectacle and wonderment to the
multitude, who came fflockinge on all sides to behold them."

Thus their design is broken up, and they come off with loss, indignity and
shame.

The next year, however, they made another attempt, though with little better
success than the former. There are some circumstances attending this also,
which are so very peculiar and affecting, that it may not be amiss to give a
particular account of them, which I shall do likewise, nearly in the words of
the records.

"These adventurers, not willing to trust their own countrymen the second time,
after they had met with such base treatment from them, heard of a Dutch
shipmaster at Hull, having a ship of his own, belonging to ZEALAND. They made
an agreement with him, and acquainted him with their condition and design,
hoping to find more friendship in him, than in those of their own nation. He
bad them not fear, for he would do well enough. He was, by appointment, to take
them in between Grimsley and Hull, where was a large common, a good way distant
from any town. Now against the time prefixed, that they might be in less danger
of being discovered, they divide their company, and send on the women and
children, with the goods, to the place first, in a small barque, which they had
hired for that purpose. And the men were to go by land and meet them there, at
the day appointed. But it so fell out, that they were all at the place, a day
or two before the ship came. When she arrived, they found the barque, with the
women, etc. aground, near the shore, it being low water. The shipmaster
perceiving this, in order to lose no time, sent his boat to take the men
aboard, whom he saw walking along the shore. But after the first boatful was
got aboard, and she was ready to go for more, they lift up their eyes, and
behold a large company of horse and footmen coming with full speed upon them.
For by some treachery, their enemies had got notice of it, and the whole
country thereabout was raised to take them. The men on the shore, had just
time, by flight, to escape their pursuers. -- But think, reader, of the
sorrowful fate of the poor, piteous mothers and children in the barque, who
fall a prey into their merciless hands! Can thou think of this scene of
heartfelt distress, without a tear of sympathy for them!

'But what becomes of the few that had just been carried aboard the ship? Here
is presented another scene, courteous reader, almost too much for the writer to
narrate. -- The Dutchman, seeing they were detected by the English, swore his
country's oath (sacrament!) he would not wait a minute longer. And having a
fair wind, he gave orders to weigh anchor, hoist sail, and away for Holland. --
Our men on board, in vain represent to him, their own, and the distress of
their wives and children left behind in the barque. And with their parting
eyes, they saw them taken by their enemies, and could give them no relief.
Themselves also, were in the most destitute condition, not having a shift of
clothes, more than they had on their backs, and some of them scarce a penny to
help themselves withal -- All they had being put aboard the barque. O what
would we give, said they, to be on shore again! but all in vain -- there is no
remedy. They must sadly part, rent from their families and friends, and going
to a strange country, where they know neither people nor language. -- Yet this
is but, in a sense, the beginning of sorrows to this desolate few. A terrible
storm comes on, in their passage, which continued for seven days and nights
together, in which they saw neither sun, moon nor stars, and were driven to the
coast of Norway. At length it increased to such violence, that all hopes of
life seemed gone -- the mariners themselves despairing of ever seeing land.
After some time, a doleful shriek is heard -- "she founders -- she sinks -- she
sinks!" -- But behold, "in the mount the Lord is seen!" when man's hope and
help wholly falls, then the Lord's power and mercy appeared. And while the
poor sailors, with trembling, yield to despair, our pious company on board are
plying the oar of prayer. And with great faith and fervency, but calm and
"without distraction," even while the water ran into their mouths and ears, are
heard to cry, " Yet LORD thou can save! -- yet LORD thou can save!" When,
to the astonishment of the whole crew, the ship rises -- the wind lessens, and
the storm abates; and the mariners get courage to manage the ship. Their
spirits revive, and the Lord fills the afflicted hearts of our brethren, with
such comforts, as every one cannot understand, or conceive of. And now, in a
short time, they arrive at their desired haven, where the people come flocking
about them, being amazed at their deliverance." And while their hearts overflow
with gratitude, their mouths repeat the words of David, O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, for his wonderful works to the children of men!

Let us now return to the scattered company that were left on the English
shore. The most of them, as we have observed before, made shift to escape and
hide themselves from their pursuers -- a few only tarrying in order to afford,
if possible, some little comfort to the women and children. But pitiful it was,
indeed, to see the condition of these poor creatures. What weeping and crying
on every side -- some for their husbands, who were carried away in the ship --
others melted in tears to see their poor little ones hanging about them, crying
for fear, and quaking with the cold. Being thus apprehended, they are hurried
away from one place to another, and from one justice to another; until, in the
end, they know not what to do with them. To imprison so many women and innocent
children for no other crime or cause than their being obliged to go with their
husbands, seemed to be unreasonable, and they knew, all would cry out against
them. And to send them home again, was as difficult; for, as the truth was,
they alleged, they had no homes to go to; for they had sold, and otherwise
disposed of their houses and livings. In short, after they had been thus '
turmoiled' and harrassed a long time, and conveyed from one constable to
another, the officers being wearied out, were glad, in the end, to get rid of
them on any terms.

A pious remark is made here, in our records, worthy of notice, which I give,
as there recorded. -- The writer says,

I may not omit the fruit that came heerby; for by these foe public
troubles, in so many eminent places, their cause became famous, and
occationed many to look into the same. And their godly carryage and
christian behavior was such as left a deep impression in the minds of many.
And although some few shrunk at those first conflicts and sharp beginninges, (as
it was noe marvel,) yett many more came on with ffreshe corrage, and greatly
anymated others. And in the end, notwithstanding all these storms of opsition,
they all got over to Hollande at length, some at one time, and some at
another, and met together again according to their hearts desires, with noe
small rejoiceing.

They, having thus arrived, minister and people, to a land, though of
strangers, yet, of peace and liberty, stayed the first year at Amsterdam, a
large city, full of trade and people. But on account of some unhappy disputes
and contentions of a religious nature, that prevailed there at that time, which
had well nigh ruined Mr. Smith's church, who had gone over thither from England
before them, they prudently resolved, in season, to remove, lest the contagion
should spread among them also. They accordingly, did remove to Leyden, a city
about 20 miles south of Amsterdam, where they were kindly received, and here
they settle themselves, and live, in the greatest harmony, as brethren, for
about eleven years; where they enjoyed much comfort, under the ministry of
their beloved and faithful pastor, Mr. Robinson. It seemed like a kind of
heavenly rest to them, after the storms and troubles they had passed through.
For here they walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, and were edified. And here many more were added to them. For the flames
of religious tyranny and persecution continued so to increase in England, that
many more fled over to them, for the sake of enjoying liberty and the rights of
conscience. So that they became a very large congregation.

But time and changes render every thing uncertain, even our most precious
enjoyments, in this world. And they found, at length, that this place was not
to be their "continuing city." There were a number of things concurred as
reasons for their removal to some other place or country -- the hardness of the
land -- the difficulty of getting a living from it, and the dearness of
provisions -- These were very discouraging to them, and caused many of their
children to leave them and become soldiers or sailors, to the great grief of
their parents. Besides, the immorality and loose way of living among that
people, especially the profanation of the sabbath, setting a bad example to
their children -- was very grievous. But above all, the desired hope they had
of spreading the gospel of CHRIST, and laying a foundation for the advancement
of religion and the kingdom of CHRIST in this remote part of the world. --
These, were some of the chief reasons which induced our ancestors to determine
on a removal from Holland.

Accordingly, previous to so great an undertaking, and agreeably to their pious
character, they first of all, set apart a day for prayer, to seek direction
from God, in the important affair now under consideration. That scriptural
direction being always their maxim, In all thy ways acknowledge GOD, and he
will direct thy paths. And after due deliberation, they come to a resolution of
removing to America; and accordingly set about the necessary preparations for
it. They make application to the king, for permission to go under the royal
sanction, but are refused. They renew their request, and endeavor to engage
some of the great men of the nation, to aid their cause. Sometimes they meet
with encouragement, and again are disappointed. Some speak well of them, others
misrepresent and villify them; and thus they are tossed between hope and fear
-- spend a great deal of time, are at vast expense and labor, until, at last,
they gained their point so far, as that they are encouraged to make
preparations for their voyage.

They hired two ships for the purpose, concluded upon the number who should go
over first; for all could not go at this time. And as the major part of the
company tarried behind, their pastor stayed with them. While the others, with
their pious elder, Mr. BREWSTER, prepare to embark. And now comes on another
most trying scene, viz. their parting. This is almost too affecting to think
of, when we consider the cordial love and unanimity which bound them together,
as with the tenderest cord. This, still more strengthened by the mutual sorrows
and distresses they had gone through -- considering also what dangers on the
sea they were going to encounter -- and that, like Abraham of old, they were
"going they know not whither," into a new world -- and especially, as this
would probably be, as it was, a final parting, with many of them. These
considerations served to make this a most affecting occasion to them all.

But before they separate, they conclude to spend one day more together in
religious devotion, as a day of humiliation and prayer. On this occasion,
besides pouring out their souls to the Lord in fervent prayer, supplications
and tears, Mr. ROBINSON preached to them, from those words in EZRA viii.21.
Then I proclaimed a FAST there, at the river AHAVA, that we might afflict
ourselves there before GOD, to seek of him a right way for US, and for our
LITTLE ONES, and for all our substance. -- "And now, the trying time being
come, that they must depart, (say the records) they were accompanied by most of
their brethren out of the city, into a town called Half-Haven, where the ship
lay ready to receive them. So they left that goodlye and pleasant city, which
had been their resting place, near twelve years. But they knew they were
pilgrims, and looked not much on those things, but lifted up their eyes to
Heaven, their dearest country, and quieted their spirits. When they came to
the place, they found the ship, and all things ready. That night was spent
with little sleep by most, but with christian discourse and other like real
expressions of true christian love. The next day, the wind being fair, they
went aboard, their friends accompanying them -- but truly doleful was the sight
of that sad partinge -- to see what sythes and sobbes, and prayers did sound
among them, what tears did gush from every eye, and expressions which so
piersed each others heart, that sundry of the Dutch strangers that stood on
the Kees as spectators, could not refrain from tears. Yett comfortable and
sweet it was, to see such livelye and true expressions of dear and unfeigned
love. -- But the tide calling them to depart, their Rev. Pastor falling down
on his knees, and they all with him, with watery cheeks commended them, with
most fervent prayers to the Lord, and his blessinge, and then with mutual
embraces, and many tears, they took their leaves of one another, which proved
to be their last leave, with many of them. Then hoysinge sail, with a
prosperous wind, they came, in a short time to Southampton, where the other
ship lay, and the rest of the company waitinge for them."

They now put to sea -- but had not proceeded far, before one of the ships
proved so leaky, that they found it was, by no means safe to proceed on the
voyage; and finally they are obliged to leave her behind, with a number of
their companions who had embarked in her. But they had been inured to
disappointments, and bore it with great patience, and concluded that as many as
could, should take passage in the other larger ship, and on Sept. 6 th, they
sailed the last time from England for AMERICA. -- It reminds us of Noah and his
little family, housed in the ark, secure in the arms of divine protection and
love, while storms and billows roar around them. The same GOD protected our
fathers, while they cheerfully commit themselves, under his care, to the
boisterous element, in search of an unknown land. He had, in his providence,
raised up a number of men of singular piety and superior wisdom and fortitude,
to go before them in this great undertaking; among whom, the names of Carver --
Bradford -- Winslow -- Prince -- Standish -- Brewster -- Morton, and others,
are never to be forgotten by the inhabitants of Plymouth, or by the sons of
New England. These were raised up by divine providence to encourage and lead
them, in this important enterprise and "on they come, all alone, a small and
feeble band, through contrary storms and boisterous seas, which they were never
used to; late in the year -- a terrible winter approaching, their wives and
poor piteous children with them -- going to a strange land. -- But the Lord is
with them, and is their guide. -- he divides the seas before them, and leads
them through in safety." -- And thus they are brought, after a tedious passage
of more than nine weeks to this long-expected shore.

"But Oh! how horrid and dismal, do these newfound regions appear! on the
rivers and shores, nothing but sights of wretched, naked and barbarous savages,
adorers of devils -- the earth covered with hideous thickets, which will
require infinite toil to subdue -- a cold winter for a third part of the year
-- no friends to welcome them -- no inns to entertain or refresh them, no
houses, much less towns to repair unto, to seek for succor. -- It is recorded
in scripture, as a great mercy to the apostle Paul and his shipwrecked
companions, that the Barbarians showed them no small kindness in refreshing
them. But these savage Barbarians when they met them, (as after will appear)
were readier to fill their sides with arrows, than otherwise to comfort them."

What could be more terrible to human appearance, than their situation and
prospects at this time! surely had not "the everlasting arm" supported them,
they must have sunk in despair, amidst this gloom, at their first arrival. But
it is evident the whole design was of God, and he was determined to complete it
-- for, "as for GOD, his way is perfect."

They arrived at Cape-Cod, Nov. 10th. 1620, where, on their bended knees, they,
first of all, give thanks to their guardian God, for his kind protection over
them through a long and dangerous voyage. In the next place, they wisely formed
a set of laws and regulations, for the well ordering of the company, and enter
into, and sign a solemn contract before they went ashore; and this was the
foundation of their civil government. -- The whole number belonging to their
company, great and small, was 101 souls. One, indeed, had died on their
passage, but they had another born at sea, so that the same number arrived,
that embarked in England.

And now they enter upon a new scene. Though past the dangers of the seas, yet
there are other, and greater difficulties to surmount, before they can gain a
peaceable settlement. They are wholly unacquainted with the country. They find
the place where they first landed, by no means suitable for them. They travel
with their arms in their hands, from place to place, through wet and cold, in
this late season of the year -- often, for days and nights, lying exposed, in
the wilderness, to the open air and inclement sky. And to add to their
affliction, the master of the ship grows impatient and fretful -- threatens
that if they do not speedily find a place for settlement, he will turn their
families, goods and effects upon the naked shore. The Indians, several times,
surprise and fall upon them with their bows and arrows, which pierce their
clothes -- but their God suffered them not to touch their lives. -- After many
days spent in a fruitless search for a convenient place, they at length,
conclude, by the advice of one of their company, to come in quest of this
harbor. And he engages, (having touched here once before, in a voyage of
discovery) to be their Pilot. They accordingly man their boat for the
enterprise, with some of their principal men, and set out.

The particular circumstances of this affair, having so immediate a connection
with this anniversary occasion, although minute, yet may be deemed worthy of
recital -- which I shall give in the words of the writer.

They are now in the Bay, in a small shallop. After some hours sailing, it
begins to snow and rain. It is now Friday afternoon. The wind rises, and blows
with great violence. The sea grows rough -- they brake their rudder. It is as
much as two men can do to steer her with oars. The storm increases, and night
coming on, they carrying what sail they can, to get into the harbor, broke
their mast in three pieces -- their sails fall overboard, in a very grown sea,
and they are like to founder suddenly. Yet, by the mercy of Heaven, they
recover, and the flood being with them, they strike into the supposed harbor.
But the pilot was deceived -- and cries out, "Lord be merciful, my eyes never
saw this place before." -- They, with some difficulty, get her about soon as
possible, and providence showing a fair sound before them, though very dark and
rainy, they get under the lee of a small island, in our harbor, Called Clark's
Island, from the man who first stepped ashore.
but are still divided about going ashore, lest they fall into the midst of
savages. Some keep the boat -- but others, worn out with wet, cold and fatigue,
venture ashore, and with great difficulty kindle a fire. After midnight, the
wind shifting, and the weather growing very cold, the rest are glad to get to
them; and here they stay that night. In the morning they discovered it to be an
island, secure from Indians; and it being the last day of the week, here they
dry their clothes, rest themselves, and give thanks to God for their many
deliverances.

And here, I find, the next day, they kept the Christian sabbath, being about
20 in number. The first sabbath ever observed in a religious manner, in this
town, and in this part of the world.

The next day, they proceeded to sound out the harbor, find it commodious for
their purpose, came ashore at this place -- found several running brooks and
old cornfields, but no inhabitants: a dreadful plague, as they were afterward
informed, having broke out among the Indians in this place, a little before,
which carried off the inhabitants. Thus divine providence, in a signal manner
seemed to go before them, to prepare a place for them.

Upon the whole, they judge this a suitable spot for settlement; and return to
the ship at the Cape, with the news of their discovery, to the rest of their
companions. Upon which, the ship sails for this harbor; where our worthy and
pious ANCESTORS, in this month December, and on this day of the month, as our
history dates it, just 173 years ago, here, on this very spot which we now
inhabit, began their settlement.

It would take up more time than is alloted for the present discourse, to
attempt a further enumeration of the many hardships they endured the following
winter, and afterward; by hunger and cold, by open enemies, and false friends,
here and abroad; as well as by wasting sickness; by which, more than half their
number were carried off, within a year after their landing.

It may suffice to have complied with the particuular design of this discourse;
which was, to give a brief account of some of the principal occurrences,
relating to our forefathers, until their landing in this place. I will only
observe in general, that as the first settlers of this country, evidently, were
actuated, not by worldly motives, but by those of religion and conscience, by
an ardent zeal for the glory of God -- the pure worship and unadulterated
doctrines of the gospel; and an earnest desire, themselves of enjoying, and
leaving to their children the enjoyment of those rights and liberties which God
had given them; so it has remarkably appeared that a peculiar blessing of
heaven has followed them and their posterity, in that this land has been the
special care of God's kind and gracious providence, from generation to
generation down to our day. And although their descendants have been called to
witness some scenes of distress and trouble; and enemies of various
descriptions, and in various ways, have risen up against us; and at certain
periods, we have seemed to be threatened with destruction; yet the Lord God of
our fathers has from time to time appeared in a most wonderful manner, for our
deliverance. He has saved us by his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten
us the victory. So that we have had occasion to stand still and see the
salvation of God -- and may, with the utmost propriety this day, set up our "
Ebenezer," and say, with thankfulness "hitherto the Lord has helped us."

As it is not to the purpose of the present occasion, so I shall not proceed to
mention particularly, at this time, the many "wonderful works" which "our
fathers' God" has wrought for us of later years; which ought ever to be
remembered with equal gratitude and admiration. And our admiration may well be
increased when we contemplate the moral state and character of this people --
our manifold provoking abominations -- our ingratitude -- our abuse of peculiar
privileges -- and our great degeneracy and defection from the pious ways of our
forefathers. -- Yet God has not dealt with us according to our deserts, but he
has saved us; "not for our righteousness sake, but for his own name's sake." So
that we are now become a great and independent NATION; enjoying the happiest
constitution and the freest government in the world. A government, the farthest
removed from civil and religious imposition and tyranny, of any people under
Heaven.

And now brethren, can we reflect upon this series of remarkable events in the
government of ^ROVIDENCE, and not say, with the deepest gratitude, in the
language of the text, "we will remember the works of the Lord; surely we will
remember his wonders of old."

We now proceed, as was proposed, briefly to consider

III. Thirdly, his works of GRACE. And these 'demand a noble song.' Here we
shall see such glorious displays of the divine perfections, as are far more
astonishing than, either the work of creation, or those of providence. In this
view of our text, we are led to contemplate those stupendous works of love and
power, of wisdom and grace, which employ the inquisitive minds of holy angels,
who "desire to look into them," and are filled with heavenly admiration when
they behold them. These are the works which will employ the praises of
unnumbered myriads of the "redeemed from among men," to all eternity. Here the
whole mystery of redemption by Jesus Christ, opens to our view, and exhibits
the united splendour of all the perfections of Deity. In this work, we behold
"Christ crucified," the only ground of the hope of guilty man. In this work,
are included, all the means of salvation -- the blessed WORD of God -- the
ORDINANCES of the gospel -- sabbaths and all the precious days and means of
grace which we enjoy. In a special manner, to this belongs the gift of the HOLY
SPIRIT, which is the SUM of the Redeemer's purchase, and of all spiritual
blessings -- his gracious operations and saving influences upon the hearts of
men -- awakening the secure, convincing and converting sinners -- opening the
eyes of the blind -- sanctifying and comforting his own people. To the same
work also, belong, Christ's erecting a visible Church and kingdom in the world
-- making continual additions to it -- guarding and defending it from its
powerful enemies, so that the gates of hell, have not, nor ever will prevail
against it.

Moreover, this branch of the subject comprehends all those merciful restraints
which God lays upon the lusts of men; whereby they are prevented from running
to the greatest excess, and committing the most open daring, constant acts of
wickedness -- but for which restraint, this world would become a mere hell --
as there is no act of impiety and wickedness too bad for the depraved heart of
man, to be guilty of.

God's works of grace, also include all those remarkable reformations and
revivals of religion, which take place at any time, through the wonderful
pouring out of the HOLY SPIRIT; whereby Satan's kingdom is weakened, and the
interest of our blessed LORD JESUS gloriously advanced -- the souls of men
delivered from the awful bondage of sin, and from that dreadful state of guilt
and condemnation, in which all unrenewed sinners are involved -- and are
brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

And I may add, this branch of the subject also includes all those works of
grace which WILL take place in future times, before the end of the world -- all
those astonishing things which shall come to pass in that remarkable period
called the MILLENIUM -- a period so much, and so frequently spoken of in the
holy scriptures; when the Holy Spirit will be poured out in such copious
effusions, and in so glorious a manner, that this present wicked world will, in
a great measure, re^^mble HEAVEN. -- No wars nor contentions -- all will be
love and peace and brotherly harmony -- " The wolf shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid -- the calf and the young lion and
the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them; and there shall be
none to hurt or destroy -- " and when holiness to the Lord shall be written
upon all our enjoyments. What a glorious day will this be! The Lord hasten it
in its time!

Thus I have considered the first which was the principal head intended to be
insisted on, upon the present occasion.

II. With respect to the manner in which we are to " remember the works of the
Lord," it should be, by a serious attentive observance of them -- by a firm
belief of God's universal government, and that all these works are the effects
of his wisdom, his power and goodness -- together with a disposition to give
him the glory due to his name, by a humble, devout, grateful acknowledgement of
God in them, and a studious desire and care to live in some measure answerable
to such discoveries and manifestations of his perfections.

III. As to the benefits resulting from a due remembrance of the works of God,
which was the last thing proposed -- they are very many and great. It will
excite us to a humble and joyful adoration of him -- to supreme love to him, as
the fountain of all excellence and goodness -- a reverential fear of him as
being a great and holy, a just and powerful God; also, to lively gratitude, for
such astonishing displays of his love, wisdom and benevolence, for which* we
shall feel our immense obligations to him -- likewise to a humble resignation
to his government, and a quiet submission to his will; as he is a Being on whom
we, and all creatures are absolutely dependent, and to whom, it is our highest
happiness to be entirely and for ever devoted. -- In a word, it will excite in
us an ardent desire for the ENJOYMENT of him, both here and hereafter, as the
only supreme felicity -- the only satisfying portion. And thus, as the result
of all, we shall be ready to adopt the language of DAVID, as the true
expression of our hearts, Whom have I in heaven but THEE, and there is nothing
on earth, which I desire besides THEE. I proceed to the

IMPROVEMENT.

I. In the view of the preceding subject, we may well exclaim, what a MONSTER
is an Atheist! is it possible, that a rational creature should deny the being
and the providence of GOD; when he has, all around him, such a full blaze of
evidence of both; from all the works he beholds -- from his own existence, and
from every creature and thing he is daily conversant with? -- Surely, such
creatures, if any such there are, deserve not the name of rational -- with
utmost propriety are they therefore, in scripture, styled fools. For none,
certainly but "the fool will say, there is no God."

2dly. It must be an evidence of deep depravity in man -- of amazing stupidity
and hardness of heart, not to be affected with gratitude and love, at the
consideration of the wonderful works of GOD. Especially his works of grace. And
yet, alas! how common are the instances of this depravity! how many are there,
who enjoy the gospel, in which are displayed the brightest evidences of divine
wisdom -- of infinite love and grace; and yet they treat it as an idle tale --
although it reveals to them, the only possible way of salvation for them. Oh!
how great must be the guilt -- and how aggravated the condemnation of such
sinners, finally remaining in this condition! The Barbarians of Africa will
rise up in judgment against them. For, if the Heathen, who have only the volume
of creation to read, by which to discover the being and will of their Maker; if
these will be found guilty before God, for not glorifying him as God, where
shall the gospel-sinner appear; and what must be his guilt and punishment!

3d. We may infer from our subject, the peculiar obligations which we, the
inhabitants of this ANCIENT TOWN are under to reflect, with adoring gratitude,
upon those "wonders of old," which the Almighty wrought for our forefathers, of
blessed memory -- his tender care and goodness to them, through all their
singular dangers, and distresses, both before -- at, and after their landing in
this place. Perhaps there never was a dispensation of providence toward any
body of people under heaven (except the Israelitish nation) so full of wonders
as this, toward our ancestors. They are first persecuted in their own land; by
this, they are driven to take refuge in a neighboring state; but not able to
continue there, they are at length, directed and encouraged to seek an asylum
in this, then howling, wilderness. And all this, to lay a foundation for those
sacred and inestimable blessings, civil and religious, which we their children
this day enjoy. What dangers, yea, what "deaths often," did they undergo, that
they might leave us in the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of the rights of
conscience, and of that liberty wherewith the Lord of nature has made us free.
No hazards could discourage them -- no difficulties were too great to endure --
no obstacles or enemies were powerful enough to damp the ardour of their
resolution, or cause them to give over the design. They began it with God* and
heaven, all along, smiled on the great undertaking.

It is worthy of particular remembrance, that this country had been discovered
a hundred and ten years before their arrival here, and before any effectual
settlements were made in it. Several attempts had, indeed, been formed with
this view, but they were by persons who appear to have been actuated merely
from worldly motives, and mercenary views; and their designs were all blasted
by the hand of providence -- They met with a series of crosses of one kind and
another, till they gave over the attempt. Until at length, this pious people,
forced by cruel oppression, from their own land, are spirited to attempt a
settlement in this country. "To this end," says a pious remarker, "how did the
Lord bear them as on eagle's wings -- He made the depths of the sea a way for
the ransomed of the Lord to pass over," and brings them with joy, to the place
of their desire. And having cast out multitudes of the heathen before their
arrival, he gives them favor in the eyes of the rest, so that they dwell in
peace, in the midst of many powerful nations, who could, otherwise, have
swallowed them up for a great many years together. He builds them houses to
dwell in, and prepares them fields for planting -- he greatly increases their
substance, and multiplies their households, so that the wilderness soon became a
fruitful field, and the desert rejoices and blossoms as the rose.

We are now enjoying the fruit of their labors. And how should our hearts glow
with gratitude to heaven, when we reflect upon the amazing difference between
our circumstances and theirs! while they were persecuted for righteousness
sake, we enjoy the worship and ordinances of God without molestation or danger.
While they were obliged to wander about, in a great measure friendless and
destitute -- we are surrounded with friends and have comfortable habitations.
While they were often pinched with hunger and want, WE have even a luxuriant
affluence of all the comforts of life. In a word, while they were in perpetual
fear from savage enemies, and often waked out of sleep, by the noise and terror
of them, we may rest on our beds in safety, enjoy peace, and quietness, and
have none to make us afraid.

4thly. In reflecting on the foregoing subject, we may infer, that no length of
time should efface from our memory, or cause us to forget the noble principles,
both civil and religious which actuated our FATHERS in their glorious and
arduous undertaking.

As to their civil principles, an ardent love of liberty -- an unshaken
attachment to the rights of men, with a desire to transmit them to their unborn
race -- were those which governed them. And they were willing to hazard every
thing dear to them, that they might secure these blessings for them and us.

And with regard to their religious principles, these are well known by all,
who have any tolerable acquaintance with their history. It is known, with what
sacred zeal, and unwavering perseverance they believed, professed, taught and
defended the glorious truths of God's word -- the great, fundamental doctrines
of the gospel. Such as the apostasy and total depravity of human nature by sin.
Man's utter inability to deliver himself from that state of guilt and ruin, in
which he is involved by transgression -- or to satisfy the divine law -- work
out righteousness, or make atonement for sin. -- The absolute necessity of
regeneration, by the supernatural agency of the Holy Spirit -- the sovereignty
of divine grace in the conversion of sinners -- the true and proper DEITY of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST -- the necessity of faith in Christ, as the only
condition of an interest in him, and in all the benefits of his purchase -- the
righteousness of Christ the only meritorious ground of our justification before
God -- obedience and good works as absolutely necessary, and the never-failing
fruits and evidence of a true faith -- holiness of heart and life, without
which no man can see the Lord" -- and the final and unfrustrable perseverance
of true Christians in grace and holiness, to eternal life, through the promise
and power of God, and the all-prevalent intercession of Jesus Christ.

A person must be a great stranger to the character and history of our fathers,
who does not know these were their avowed sentiments and principles, as to the
doctrines of religion. These were truths, dearer to them than their estates --
yea, than life itself. And they are but the same doctrines which have been held
and preached by the most famous PROTESTANT DIVINES in England, Scotland and
America, since the REFORMATION from popery. Divines as eminent for learning and
piety, perhaps, as ever adorned the Christian world.

And, in this connection, I may observe farther, without impropriety -- That it
is not a little remarkable, that through the singular goodness and watchful
care of divine providence toward the children of our forefathers, these same
doctrines have, invariably, from generation to generation, been preached in
this town, the fear of our ancestors, with becoming boldness, zeal and
affection, by all my predecessors in office, who now "rest from their labors,
and their works follow them." -- And if I may take the liberty, I will humbly
add -- that these great and infinitely important truths, I have endeavored,
according to my capacity, to preach and declare, with all plainness, to you --
to your fathers and to your children. For the truth of this, I hope I have a
witness in your own breasts. -- And as I am bound to "watch for your souls, as
one that must give an account," so I am determined, by the grace of Christ
enabling me, still to declare them to you. And, as I hope to live and die in
the belief and comfort of them, myself -- as I am satisfied they have been a
sweet support to many of your and my departed friends, in a dying hour, and
their only ground of hope -- so I am fully persuaded they are the only
foundation, on which we can leave the world in peace. I may therefore, under
these views, with great propriety, adopt the words of the apostle -- "Necessity
is laid upon me, and woe unto me; if I preach not this gospel."

5thly. Our subject naturally reminds us of the peculiar obligations we are
under to "remember" with highest praise and gratitude the works of grace, which
God has wrought -- the wonderful work of redemption by Jesus Christ -- the
application of it by the Holy Spirit, in the conversion of sinners from age to
age; bringing them out of the dark, miserable and wretched kingdom of Satan,
into the kingdom of the Lord Jesus -- subduing the enmity of their minds, and
bringing them to a cordial reconciliation to God. Thankfully should we
"remember, likewise, all those gracious seasons of revival of religion, by the
out-pouring of the spirit of God, whereby poor sinners are delivered from the
cruel bondage of the Devil, and vindicated into the glorious liberty of the
children of God." And while speaking on this subject, I might justly be
chargeable with criminal ingratitude, should I neglect to mention, with deep
humility and thankfulness, the wonderful work of God's grace and power which we
in this place have witnessed the year past. See the Appendix.
We humbly hope and trust, that through the infinite mercy of God, many have
experienced that divine, renewing work of grace upon their hearts, which they
will "remember" with grateful praises to all eternity. May their hope " purify
them, even as Christ is pure." To conclude, let us ever retain a thankful
"remembrance of the works of the Lord, and the wonders" he has wrought both for
our fathers of old, and for us their children, in later times -- and consider
the amazing ingratitude we shall be guilty of, should we, either forget, or not
live answerable to our obligations. Let us set a high value upon those
privileges, civil and sacred, which we now enjoy, as we would avoid the guilt
of the blackest ingratitude to Heaven -- and of casting a sacrilegious contempt
upon the memory and blood of our ancestors. We are bound by the most sacred
ties of duty to GOD -- of esteem and gratitude to our fathers -- and of
affection and concern for our children, to maintain a religious and inviolable
regard for those invaluable blessings, which have been handed down to us,
through such a channel of sufferings, labor and danger.

May the Lord God of our fathers still delight to dwell with us, and to do us
good as he did to them* may the divine Spirit be poured out more and more upon
us, for the revival of pure and primitive Christianity! may his loving kindness
never depart from us or from our children. And may we strive to be "followers
of them who through faith and patience are now inheriting the promises." And O!
may we and ours, at last, with them, in a world of perfect love, see and adore,
with wonder and delight, the mysteries of providence, and grace* which shall
then be opened up, to our everlasting joy and satisfaction; and with them, and
all the heavenly hosts, may we join in anthems of praise and hallelujahs to the
FATHER, to the SON and to the HOLY GHOST, one God over all, blessed for
ever-more. -- AMEN.

APPENDIX.
AFTER the foregoing sermon was prepared for the press, it was suggested, that
perhaps, some more particular account of what is hinted at in the Improvement,
relative to a revival of religion in this place, might be gratifying to some,
particularly to those who, living at a distance, may have heard something of
it, but from imperfect representations, may not have been able to form just
conceptions of it -- and hoping it will not be offensive to any; especially
since it coincides so naturally, with the preceding text and subject -- it is
concluded to subjoin the following, by way of appendix; which is taken from a
particular account of this matter, which the writer has recorded, in the
records of this church: which is as follows --

" Nov. 9 th. 1793. After the example of my venerable and pious predecessor,
the Rev. Mr. Leonard, (on an occasion, in some respects, similar) I think it
may be for the glory of God, the honor of the Redeemer, the comfort of his
children, and the benefit of posterity, to mention here, and leave upon record,
the wonderful displays of God's rich and sovereign grace toward this people,
in a remarkable revival of religion, through the blessed out-pouring of the
Spirit of God, this year -- which first began to appear, the latter part of
Dec. and beginning of Jan. last. No uncommon dispensation of providence -- no
public calamity, or any thing of that nature, had taken place, which might be
assigned as an awakening cause of it. It seemed, apparently, to be by the
still, small voice of the Spirit of God, the Author of all true religion -- by
his secret, but powerful operation upon the minds of one and another; until,
from small beginnings, it became more and more extensive; and at length, a
general solemnity and serious concern seemed visibly to prevail through the
town. The minds and attention of the greater part of the people appeared to be,
in a greater or less degree, arrested on the subject of religion and the great
concerns of another world. Besides the stated worship on Lord's days, we had
frequent lectures in public and in private, on week days; and religious
meetings for conference and social worship in private houses, several evenings
in the week, in different parts of the town. Among which, it was remarkable,
that the young children, from seven or eight, to fifteen years old, voluntarily
agreed to meet once or twice a-week under the patronage, and by the consent of
their parents and guardians; at which times they prayed, sang, read and
conversed upon the great things of another world; and behaved with great
decency, order and unusual solemnity; commonly to the number of 30 and 40 --
oftentimes more, even to 70 and 80 -- several times to upwards of 90 -- and
yet, surprising it was to observe, with what silence, they behaved, in coming
to, and going from, as well as at their meetings. Most certainly, for a
considerable time -- even for several months, there was a visible and happy
alteration among the youth and children -- and there is reason to hope, some
have been made partakers of a saying change. -- Besides these, great numbers,
of different ages, in the town, have been seriously engaged and deeply
impressed with the infinitely important concerns of their souls and of
eternity. And we have abundant reason humbly to hope, that a goodly number have
really been made the happy subjects of the infinitely rich, free and sovereign
grace of God -- who have witnessed a good confession before men, and who
hitherto, all have appeared to be of blameless life and to walk agreeably to
their profession -- O that they may continue, and endure to the end! more than
50 have, within a few months, been added to our communion, and many more, it is
expected, will join, who have expressed their desires, and who entertain a hope
of their being the subjects of real religion, at this time.

It is also to be remarked, with gratitude and satisfaction, that during this
wonderful season of divine power and goodness here, the work has been
remarkably free from those irregularities, disorders, enthusiastic reveries,
and those corrupt mixtures, which, in times past, have been the unhappy
occasion of great stumbling to many serious minds, and of bitter opposition
from others, and which have brought great and indeliable reproach upon
religion. -- And although it is not to be expected, while the world stands, and
while the church of Christ is in its militant state, but that there will be
every where, some, who disregard religion wholly, caring for none of these
things -- others who are enemies to Christ and his kingdom, and will be opposed
to the truths and cause of God -- and others again, who profess to be friendly
to religion, but have different conceptions of some things relating to it, from
others; toward whom, we would be very far from feeling an uncharitable
disposition -- yet, I say, we have reason to speak of it with thankfulness,
there has been less visible opposition to this work, than has been usual, at
such times: which may probably (under a divine influence, and the restraining
grace of God) be, in some measure, the effect of that Spirit of liberty, of
toleration and free inquiry, more prevalent at this day, than in former times.

It is very pleasant to behold many, who formerly led vicious, careless and
ungodly lives, and who appeared to live without God in the world; nor had any
thought or concern about their souls and an another life, now become serious
and reformed, delighting themselves in religion, and of a holy, heavenly
deportment and conversation. And it is beautiful to see many who are quite
young, publicly owning Christ before the world, and engaged in practical
religion, devoting themselves to the service of God in the days of their youth
-- thus crying " Hosanna to the Son of David." That passage has been truly
verified amongst us, Out of the mouths of babes, and children, the Lord has
ordained praise.

It is likewise a pleasing consideration to observe that fervent, Christian
love and unity, and that sweet communion, which subsists among the professed
friends of CHRIST; who frequently meet together, and "speak often one to
another," of the great things of CHRIST's kingdom, and his glorious power and
grace, to their mutual edification, comfort and quickening. And we have found
unspeakable benefit from such private conferences; and have reason to believe,
they have been remarkably owned of God, as a means of keeping alive a sense of
God, and a savor of religion and eternal things, in our own souls; agreeable
to that word As iron sharpeneth iron, so does the countenance of a man his
friend. We have often been, on these occasions, constrained to believe and say,
"Surely God is in this place -- " and with the disciples, "It is good for us to
be here." And blessed be the name of God, that we still have the gracious and
evident tokens of the divine presence among us, and the influences of his Holy
Spirit; when it is now more than ten months, since the awakening and attention
began. And with regard to myself (if I may be allowed to speak so personally) I
am sure I have the utmost reason to remark, with lively and humble gratitude,
the goodness of God, to an unworthy creature, in strengthening, and supporting
him (naturally of a very feeble constitution) under arduous labors, in
preaching more abundantly -- visiting -- conversing with persons under
spiritual trouble -- conference-meetings, etc. for so long a time together. It
is to be ascribed alone to the goodness and power of God, whose "strength has
been made perfect in weakness." And to him be all, all the praise and glory for
ever; and may his name be magnified more and more -- and his work be still
carried on here and throughout the land! And may these drops of mercy be a
happy prelude of a more glorious and plentiful shower of divine grace, and may
the world be filled with the glory of the Lord! -- This record is here made, as
a grateful memorial, to the honor of the blessed REDEEMER: and may the
generations which shall come after us, see it and praise his name. -- Let them
"remember the works of the Lord; surely let them remember his wonders of old."

CHANDLER ROBBINS.


