ENGRAVED FOR THE TRIAL OF MAURICE MARGAROT



MAURICE MARGAROT.

Questions put to the Lord Justice Clerk.

Marg. Did you use these words -- What sho:^ you think of giving him 100 lashes
together with Botany Bay -- or words to that purpose?


L J Ck. Go on -- Put your quest:s if you have any more.


Marg. Did any person -- Did a Lady, say to you, that the Mob would not allow
you to whip him: and my Lord, did you not say that the Mob would be the better
for letting a little BLOOD?


THE TRIAL OF MAURICE MARGAROT, BEFORE THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY, (...) On
the (...) 14th (...), 1794, (...) INDICTMENT FOR SEDITIOUS PRACTICES.

TAKEN IN SHORTHAND BY MR. RAMSEY.

LONDON: PRINTED. -- NEW YORK: REPRINTED, BY JAMES CAREY, No. 91, BROAD-STREET.

INDICTMENT.
GEORGE, etc. FORASMUCHAS it is humbly meant and complained to us, by our right
trusty ROBERT DUNDAS, Esquire of Arniston, our Advocate, for our interest upon
MAURICE MARGAROT, merchant in Marybon, London, No. 10, High Street, residing or
lately residing, at the Black Bull Inn, head of Leith Walk, parish of St.
Cuthbert's, and County of Edinburgh: THAT WHEREAS, by the laws of this, and of
every well governed realm, SEDITION is a crime of an heinous nature, and
severely punishable, YET TRUE IT IS, AND OF VERITY, That the same Maurice
Margarot has presumed to commit, and is guilty actor, or art and part of said
crime: IN SO FAR AS, the said Maurice Margarot having been named a delegate by
an association of seditious people, calling themselves the Corresponding
Society of London, did repair to Edinburgh with the wicked and felonious
purpose of joining and cooperating with an illegal association of evil
disposed and seditious persons, who originally designed themselves, The General
Convention of the friends of the people; but who have of late assumed the
designation of the British Convention of the delegates of the people,
associated to obtain universal suffrage and annual parliaments; and which
illegal association, under the names and designations above mentioned, have
been in the practice, during the months of October and November last, as well
as in the beginning of the present month of December, 1793, of holding various
seditious and illegal meetings at a Mason's lodge, or room in Black-fryars
wynd, in the city of Edinburgh, and elsewhere, to the public prosecutor
unknown; and which meetings, though held under pretense of procuring a reform
in parliament, were evidently of a dangerous and destructive tendency, with a
deliberate and determined intention, to disturb the peace of the community, and
to subvert the present constitution of the country: with which view they
imitated, both in the form and tenor of their proceedings, that Convention of
people, the avowed enemies of this country, who at present usurp the government
of France, and with whom Great Britain then was and still is at war: That the
said Maurice Margarot, from his arrival in Edinburgh, did, as a delegate from
the said Corresponding Society, in London, constantly attend the illegal
meetings of the above mentioned association, and did cooperate with them, on
different occasions, and act as preses or chairman of their meetings, and did
take an active and distinguished part in their deliberations and proceedings;
and that while the said Maurice Margarot continued to attend the said illegal
meetings, as a delegate, or was officiating in the capacity of president, as
above mentioned, various seditious and inflammatory votes and resolutions were
passed, some of which he moved, others of which he seconded, and to all of
which he gave his concurrence and approbation, by voting for passing the same;
and which seditions votes and resolutions, as also the inflammatory speeches
that were delivered on those occasions, by authority of the said meetings, were
inserted in minutes of their procedure, taken at the time, and which afterward
by their order, or under their authority, were published in a newspaper, called
the Edinburgh Gazetteer, of Tuesday, November 26th, 1793, being No. 78; of
Tuesday, December 3d, 1793, being No. 79; and of Tuesday, December the 10th,
1793, being No. 80, all of that paper; and were by that means circulated among
the lieges; That the said Maurice Margarot did also, when attending in his
capacity of delegate at the illegal meetings of the said association, utter and
make various seditious and inflammatory speeches, tending to vilify our present
happy constitution, and to withdraw therefrom the confidence and attachment of
our subjects; and did likewise move resolutions, tending to disseminate the
seditious and unconstitutional principles, by which these meetings were
actuated. And particularly the said Maurice Margarot, at a meeting of the said
Convention, held on Tuesday 19th of November last, 1793, or on some other day
of that month, in a Mason lodge, or room in Black-fryars wynd, in the city of
Edinburgh, did wickedly and feloniously make the following motion, or one of a
similar import; That previous to the publishing an address to the public, a
Committee be forthwith appointed, to consider the means and draw up the
outlines of a plan of general union and corporation between the two nations, in
their constitutional pursuit of a thorough parliamentary reform. Which motion,
or one of the same tendency, having been approved of, was passed unanimously by
the said illegal association; and which motion clearly demonstrated a wish and
intention, on the part of the said Maurice Margarot, of propagating the
seditious tenets of that association over the whole kingdom, and of exciting
our subjects in England, in contempt of legal authority, to adopt the same
unconstitutional conduct which the said Maurice Margarot and his associates had
presumed to follow.

And further, on Monday, the 25th of November 1793, or on some other day of
that month, another illegal meeting, of the abovenamed association, held at
the aforesaid Mason lodge or room, in Black-fryars wind, or in some other place
to the public prosecutor unknown; upon a motion being made in the following
words, or words of the same import: That in case the minister, or any other
member, bring into the House of Commons a motion for a Convention Bill, as
passed in Ireland, for preventing the people from meeting according to their
just rights by the revolution, the same motion shall be noticed to the
delegates of the respective societies immediately to meet in Convention, to
assert their rights; which motion having become the subject of consideration
the following day, the said Maurice Margarot did then wickedly and feloniously
utter and make the following speech, or one of the like import and tendency:
This is an excellent motion, and the event, which it alludes to, ought to be
the tocsin to the friends of liberty to assemble. It seems however to be
imperfect: it does not mention any place of meeting, neither does it specify
the time when the delegates are to assemble; for the word immediately is
indefinite, and will not convey the same meaning to persons residing in
different parts of the country. By those who live near to the place of meeting
it will be understood, that they are to repair there next day. By those at a
greater distance, within a few days; and by those still further off, a week
after such information is received. But the Committee of regulations have in
their report an article of the same purport, which, in my opinion, is
preferable to our friend Callendar's motion; which, as this motion comes
properly under the charge of regulations, I wish that it were referred to that
committee. I therefore move that the report be read, that the Convention may
judge whether the article I allude to sufficiently provides for the intention
of the motion now before the Convention.

I believe that the Convention will be convinced, that the clause of the report
of the Committee of regulations comprehends the spirit and intention of Citizen
Callendar's motion, and also extends farther, inasmuch as it provides for a
number of cases equally dangerous to liberty, as a Convention Bill; it will be
found also, that this business of calling a meeting of the Convention had
better be entrusted to a select Committee, appointed for the particular purpose
of watching every act which may militate against the rights of the people. And
I maintain that the proper place for this motion to appear is among the
regulations of the Convention.

And further, on the 28th day of the said month of November, 1793, or upon one
or other of the days above mentioned, the said illegal and seditious meeting
did, after discussion of the said motion, in the room or Mason lodge in
Black-fryars wynd aforesaid, wickedly and seditiously come to the resolution of
the following import and tenor: That this Convention considering the calamitous
consequences of any act of the legislature which may tend to deprive the whole
or any part of the people of their undoubted right to meet, either by
themselves, or by delegation, to discuss any matter relative to their common
interest, whether of a public or private nature; and holding the same to be
totally inconsistent with the first principles and safety of society, and also
subversive of our known and acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby
declare, before God and the World, that we shall follow the wholesome example
of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate against
the constitution of our Country, and shall continue to assemble and consider of
the best means by which we can accomplish a real representation of the people
and annual election, until compelled to desist by superior force.

And we do resolve,

That the first notice given for the introduction of a Convention Bill, or any
Bill of a similar tendency to that passed in Ireland in the last Session of
Parliament;

Or any Bill for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, or the act for
preventing wrongous imprisonment, and against undue delays in trials in North
Britain;

Or in case of an Invasion,

Or the admission of any troops whatsoever into Great Britain or Ireland -- all
or any of these calamitous circumstances shall be a signal to the different
delegates to repair to such place as the secret committee of this Convention
shall appoint, and the first seven members shall have power to declare the
sittings permanent, and twenty-one shall constitute a Convention and proceed to
business.

The Convention does therefore resolve, that each delegate, immediately upon
his return home, do convene his constituents and explain to them the necessity
of electing a delegate or delegates, and of establishing a fund without delay
against any of these emergencies, for his or their expense, and that they do
instruct the said delegate or delegates to hold themselves ready to depart at
one hour's warning.

And further the said Maurice Margarot did at the said illegal meeting after
the aforesaid resolution was so passed wickedly and feloniously make a motion
in the following words, or in words of a similar import and tendency: That a
secret committee of three and the secretary be appointed to determine the place
where such Convention of emergency shall meet; that such place shall remain a
secret with them and with the secretary of this Convention; and that each
delegate shall at the breaking up of the present session, be entrusted with a
sealed letter, containing the name of the place of meeting. This letter shall
be delivered unopened to his constituents, the receipt of which shall be
acknowledged by a letter to the secretary, preserved in the same state until
the period shall arrive at which it shall be deemed necessary for the delegate
to set off -- which motion was unanimously approved of. --

And further, the said Maurice Margarot did, on Wednesday the 4th of December,
1793, or on one or other of the days of that month, or November preceding, in
another illegal meeting of the abovenamed Association, held at the aforesaid
Mason Lodge, or room in blackfryar's-wynd, or some other place to the public
Prosecutor unknown, wickedly and feloniously utter and make the following
speech, or one of a similar import and tendency:

Your committee of Regulations have not been able to bring forward the
remainder of their report this evening, they have not however been idle, they
have been employed in another manner in your service. It has been observed that
we admit spies, under the name of strangers. I say they are welcome; and if the
men by whom they are employed, were to come here, they should be welcome also:
for we have no secrets which we dare not avow. But the intelligence which I
have (...) communicate will show that those who are not friendly to (...), and
who have an interest in supporting the existing (...) are using every endeavor
to put a stop to our meet^^^ (...). If they abide by law we are safe; for they
cannot deny (...) we are met for a legal and constitutional purpose; but as the
people in power may take measures against us not warranted by law, we ought to
be prepared. I have in my hand the outlines of a motion which I would wish to
propose in a fuller house. However I shall in the mean time observe, that I am
informed there are many men who are desirous of dispersing us by force, we
ought therefore to prepare against such dispersion. We have already appointed a
secret committee, for fixing a place of meeting on certain emergencies: and we
ought to be equally well provided against the present case; for if we shall
happen to be dispersed to night, how or where are we to rally again? To do this
your Committee suggests a resolution to the following effect; but which I shall
leave to be drawn up by the Council of the table: That the moment of any
illegal dispersion of the present Convention shall be considered as a summons
to the Delegates to repair to the place of meeting, appointed for the
Convention of Emergency by the secret committee; and that the secret committee
is instructed to proceed without delay to fix the place of meeting. I hope that
what has been already said will convince the Convention that your Committee of
Regulations, though they have not been able to bring forward their report, have
not neglected their duty; and it will convince our enemies that we do not
altogether neglect them, they will see that we proceed with regularity, and
that we have an eye upon them while they have spies upon us. I therefore move
for leave to bring in this motion -- Which motion afterward passed unanimously.
-- The said Maurice Margarot, after moving the said resolution, not only gave
his assent to pass the same, but allowed himself to be named one of the four
members of which said secret Committee was composed, and agreed to act in that
capacity. And further, on Friday, December 6th, 1793, or some other day of that
month, the said illegal association having again assembled in a room or
workshop belonging to, or possessed by John Laing, wright, situated in Lady
Lawson's yard, south side of Cross Causeway, in the parish of St. Cuthbert and
sheriffdom of Edinburgh; the Sheriff Substitute of Edinburgh, with others his
assistants, having, in the discharge of his duty, repaired to the said room or
workshop, with a view to disperse said illegal Association, the said Maurice
Margarot, with others his associates, did then and there resist the said
Sheriff Substitute, and did peremptorily refuse to disperse until forced so to
do: that on this occasion the said Maurice Margarot was called to the chair,
and acted as preses or chairman of the said illegal meeting after the
appearance of the Sheriff Substitute; and, in open contempt and defiance of all
legal authority, vindicated the proceedings of the meeting, and peremptorily
refused to leave the chair unless compulsion was used: in consequence of which
the Sheriff Substitute was under the necessity of taking him by the arm and
pulling him out of the chair, and of using force in dispersing the rest of his
associates: That this conduct of the said Maurice Margarot was highly
aggravated by this circumstance: That the said illegal association had been the
very evening before dispersed by the civil magistrate. And the said Maurice
Margarot having been apprehended and brought before Harry Davidson, Esquire Sheriff
Substitute of the shire of Edinburgh, on the 5th of December, 1793, did in his
presence emit a declaration of that date, which is signed by the said Sheriff
Substitute, the said Maurice Margarot having declined to sign the same; and
when the said Maurice Margarot had been so apprehended, sundry papers having
been found in his possession, or claimed by him, the same were afterward
inspected in his presence, by authority of the Sheriff of Edinburgh, and two
several lists or inventories of those papers were made up, one of which,
containing ten articles, is subscribed by William Scott, procurator fiscal of
the county of Edinburgh, and by Joseph Gerrald, of Hart-street, Bloomsbury
Square, London; and the other, consisting of nine articles, is subscribed by
the said William Scott, and by the Sheriff Substitute of Edinburgh, as the said
Maurice Margarot refused to sign the same. Which inventories, together with the
whole articles thereof, except No. 1. of the first inventory; as also the
foresaid declaration emitted by him before the Sheriff Substitute of Edinburgh;
together with a paper signed by the said Maurice Margarot and by John Wardlaw,
quoted on the back, "Motion of M. Margarot," and signed by the said Sheriff
Substitute, as relative to the aforesaid declaration; as also the scroll or
draught of the minutes of the said General Convention, from the 20th of October
to the 4th of December, 1793, consisting of 95 pages; as also Nos. 78, 79, and
80 of the Edinburgh Gazetteer above mentioned being all to be used in evidence
against the said Maurice Margarot, will for that purpose, in due time, be
lodged in the hands of the Clerk of the High Court of Justiciary, before which
he is to be tried, that he may have an opportunity of seeing the same. At least
times and places above mentioned, the said acts of Sedition were committed, and
the said Maurice Margarot is guilty, actor, or art and part thereof. All which,
or part thereof, being found proven by the verdict of an assize before our Lord
Justice General, Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, in
a Court of Justiciary, to be holden by them within the criminal Courthouse at
Edinburgh, upon the 9th day of January next to come, the said Maurice Margarot,
above complained upon, ought to be punished with the pains of law, to deter
others from committing, the like crimes in all times coming. Our will is
herefore, etc.

LIST OF WITNESSES.
1 Harry Davidson, Esquire sheriff substitute of the county of Edinburgh. 2 William
Scott, procurator-fiscal of the said county of Edinburgh. 3 James Williamson,
clerk to the said William Scott. 4 Archibald Welsh, clerk to the said William
Scott. 5 Joseph Mack, writer in Edinburgh. 6 James Lion, indweller in
Edinburgh. 7 John M'Donald, indweller in Edinburgh. 8 Neil M'Glashan, indweller
in Edinburgh. 9 William Ross, clerk in the Gazetteer office, Edinburgh. 10
George Ross, clerk in the Gazetteer office, Edinburgh. 11 Alexander Aitchison,
student of medicine, residing in Canon-gate of Edinburgh. 12 John Clark, mason,
in Edinburgh. 13 Alexander Bell, tobacconist, in Canon-gate of Edinburgh. 14
Andrew Newton, formerly tobacconist in Dunse, now residing in St. Patrick's
Square, Edinburgh. 15 John Gourlay, watchmaker, in Edinburgh. 16 Alexander
Reid, joiner and cabinet-maker, residing in Edinburgh. 17 David Downie,
goldsmith, in Edinburgh. 18 Thomas Cockburn, merchant, Lawn-market, Edinburgh.
19 John Wardlaw, writer, in Edinburgh. 20 Samuel Paterson, merchant, in
Lucken-booths of Edinburgh. 21 John Laing, wright, in Nicolson-street,
Edinburgh. 22 The Right Hon. Thomas Elder, Lord Provost of the city of
Edinburgh. 23 Neil M'Vicar, Esquire one of the magistrates of Edinburgh. 24 James
Laing, one of the city depute clerks of Edinburgh. 25 James Burnet, grocer, in
Edinburgh, preses of the society of constables. 26 Alexander Frazer, grocer,
one of the constables of Edinburgh.
J. ANSTRUTHER, A. D.

LIST OF ASSIZE.
John Grindlay, rectifier of spirits, Edinburgh. James Gordon, brewer there.
John Howden, sadler there. Thomas Hotchkis, brewer there. 5 Samuel Gilmour,
rope-maker there. James Clark, farrier there. Walter Smeaton, painter there.
James Mill, tanner there. James Clarkson, baker there. 10 William Murray,
merchant there. William Scott, plumber there. Robert Norie, painter there.
William Smyth, stabler there. Robert Armstrong, plumber there. 15 Charles
Robertson, printer there. Andrew Bruce, merchant there. Thomas Cleghorn,
coach-maker there. Henry Farquharson, carver there. John Balfour, merchant
there. 20 John Saunders, shoemaker there. John Baxter, glazier there. James
Dickson, seedsman there. John Wilson, coach-maker there. Robert Young,
upholsterer there. 25 William Ainslie, sadler there. John Scott, watchmaker
there. William Fraser, tinsmith there. Gilbert Meason, merchant there.
Alexander Weir, painter there. 30 Henry Murray, perfumer there. William
Marshall, plumber there. John Brough, wright there. David Steuart, merchant
there. John Young, architect there. 35 William Pirnie, architect in Edinburgh.
James Bryce, painter there. John Hay, banker there. Samuel Anderson, banker
there. James M'Leish, bookseller there. 40 Robert Burus, architect there.
Macduff Heart, shoemaker there. James Fowler, stationer there. John White,
merchant there. Adam Dalmahoy, merchant there. 45 William M'Lean, merchant
there.
ROBERT M'QUEEN. ALEXANDER MURRAY. DAVID RAE.


TRIAL, etc.
MR. MARGAROT. Clerk of the Court, where is the Lord Justice General of
Scotland? I don't see him in his place.


Clerk. I don't know where he is.


Mr. Margarot. I hold that this Court is not competent to try me. My Lords, I
am cited before the Lord Justice General of Scotland, the Lord Justice Clerk,
and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary. Now we know this is the highest court in
Scotland: we know there is no higher office in Scotland, than that of Lord
Justice General, and we know, that if it was an unnecessary post, it would not
have L.2,000 a year salary, annexed to it, and we know that the indictment
would have run before our Lord Justice General, or Lord Justice Clerk, because
we know that the Public Prosecutor will in this case and in every other,
trumpet up much the constitution; and as the constitution of Great Britain is
founded upon Laws, and those Laws can only be delivered in words, so the least
variation of words in a Law, is a total objection to an indictment. My Lords,
it may be said there is precedent for it; but it is a fundamental principle,
that no man is to hold out his own laches. Why is he not here to do his duty?
If this innovation is suffered, perhaps the attendance of the Lord Justice
Clerk will be dispensed with, and the attendance of the other Judges; and at
last, perhaps, the Clerk of the Court, or even the Macers, will form the high
Court of Justiciary, so that by one deviation and another, even the forms of
justice will be done away; and, my Lords, we cannot say that there has not been
a precedent, where the Lord Justice General has appeared in his place, though
perhaps that was not to the honor of Scotland, where the Duke of Argyle sat as
Lord Justice General, for the purpose of trying a man, one James Stewart, for
the murder of a man of the name of Campbell, and the whole jury were Campbells
except two; and that was the only instance where the Scotch have enjoyed the
privilege of having the Lord Justice General sit in their Court. I deny even
the competency of this Court to argue upon, or maintain their own competency,
because it is the servant pretending to dictate to the master. As well may it
be said, we don't want a King, as for the Lord Justice Clerk to say, we don't
want a Lord Justice General.

I have met the laws, and I beg this may be taken under your serious
consideration, for what I say this day will not be confined within these walls,
it shall spread far and wide, and will undergo a revision of both Houses of
Parliament in England. You already know that there is an impeachment hanging
over your heads -- you know it is shortly promised to be brought forward. And,
my Lords, I object upon another ground, in the criminality of which you are all
implicated, for there is this difference between the lieges and the judges,
that a man is always presumed innocent till he is found guilty; but the moment
there is the slightest imputation upon a judge, he is presumed to be criminal
till his innocence is clearly proved. A judge ought to be like Caesar's wife,
nor only spotless but even unsuspected: that is not the case with you, my
Lords. We have the promise of many men in England of great respectability who
will bring it forward, and you may, though you are now sitting upon that bench,
be brought to atone upon your knees, perhaps with your lives, for any
infraction of the Laws you may be guilty of. My Lords, we well know that
Cambyses ordered an unjust judge to be flayed, and the skin of that judge
covered the seat of his successor. We also know, that in the reign of Alfred
(and I hold my authority in my hand, and the history of England will furnish it
to every one) that in one year, forty-four judges were hanged -- and you well
know the fate of Jefferys, who, though the slow hand of the law could not
overtake him, was torn in pieces by the people. I don't mean to say that you
are guilty -- that remains for a higher decision than mine, at that tribunal
where you must soon appear, to answer for those actions which you have
committed; but you will remember, that there will be at that day a mixture of
guilt and innocence -- may the innocence appear predominant -- I don't wish to
be one of your accusers on that day.

My Lords, the objection that I have stated, it is impossible to get over, for
that man is remarkably accurate, I mean the public Prosecutor, and if it was
not necessary, he would not have inserted it. I expect no mercy from him,
neither shall I expect any thing like mercy from the court, in the situation in
which I stand, if what I have heard be true.

My Lords, there is another objection also -- I need Lord Justice Clerk and
Lord Henderland's testimonies, as exculpatory evidences: I wanted to bring them
upon their oaths to the bar, but though it is the privilege of an Englishman --
of a Briton I mean, for I wish the name of Englishman to be annihilated in that
of Briton -- it is a privilege granted to us by that Constitution (which is so
loudly trumpeted up upon every occasion), that a panel at the bar, shall have
the same compulsory method of bringing his witnesses that his prosecutor has,
and that has been denied me. The man whose business it is to cite witnesses
said, he would attend in court, and give his reasons why he did not dare to
serve those judges with a citation. It is true, I mentioned only the Lord
Justice Clerk to him, and I charged him to tell the Lord Justice Clerk that I
wanted his evidence, and I apprehend that you are not competent to determine
upon this objection. I have obeyed the laws. This is not the high Court of
Justiciary, inasamuch as it lacks the center stone -- inasmuch as it lacks the
principal officer of the court, and the man who here should represent the King,
and consequently the wording of the indictment is loose, and renders it null
and void. I have done my duty, and I demand to be discharged from your bar
simpliciter.


Lord Justice Clerk. What do your Lordships say to this objection?


Lord Henderland. My Lords, the objection as I understand it, is, that the Lord
Justice General does not attend this court, and it is even said, that we are
not competent to judge of the force and validity of that objection. Why, my
Lord, with respect to that, if we are not competent to judge of it, who is to
judge of it? It is from the necessity of things that we must judge of it -- no
other person can judge of it, and therefore I hold that objection to be null
and void. With respect to the attendance of the Lord Justice General -- by Act
of Parliament it is declared, that any three of this court shall be a quorum to
try any criminal; consequently, though my Lord Justice General is absent, and
even if your Lordships and I were absent, any other members of the court
provided there are three, is a legal quorum sufficient for the trial; therefore
I am of opinion that the objection should be repelled.


Lord Justice Clerk. Does any of your Lordships think otherwise? -- I dare say
not. Repel the objection.

(The objection repelled.)
Lord Justice Clerk. You will attend to the criminal libel that is to be read
against you.


Mr. Margarot. Before that is read, my Lords, I claim another privilege, which
is, that of having my witnesses called over, and if there are any who do not
attend, I insist -- I demand -- I don't ask it as a favor -- I demand it --
you are on the seat of justice, and take heed how you administer that justice
-- I demand it as my right, that a caption be granted against the absentees.


Lord Eskgrove. With respect to what Mr. Margarot has said of his witnesses, I
dare say your Lordships would not hesitate at sending a messenger to serve even
your Lordships, or any man in the kingdom with a citation. I hope it is not
true, that the officer refused to cite your Lordships, it was his duty, and he
ought to have done it.


Lord Justice Clerk Mr. Margarot, stand up and hear the criminal libel read
against you.

The indictment read.
Lord Justice Clerk. What do you say to this? Are you guilty of the charges
contained in it, or not guilty.


Mr. Margarot. My Lord, guilt does not stand at your bar at present.


Lord Justice Clerk. Are you guilty or not guilty? You must answer that
question.


Mr. Margarot. I am not guilty! but I don't understand what is done with the
objection I have already made.


Lord Justice Clerk. It is repelled.


Mr. Margarot. Oh; it is repelled, is it; according to custom? then I must make
an open declaration of my intention, to enter a protest against the proceedings
of this court.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any thing to offer as to the relevancy of the
libel?


Mr. Margarot. With regard to the libel, if any exactness is necessary in a
criminal libel, it certainly is not relevant, and here is one thing, that alone
is sufficient to quash it. But, my Lord, I desired that my witnesses might be
called over, in order that I might have a fair and free trial, that if any of
them did not attend, I might have a caption granted by the court; and that is
an objection which is not to be done away so easily. I have not heard the
answer of the court to that.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any arguments to offer as to the relevancy of the
indictment? if you have, you must mention them now.


Mr. Margarot. If your Lordships will give me leave to state the objection
about the witnesses afterward, then I say, this libel states, that by the Laws
of this Realm, Sedition is a crime of a heinous nature. I beseech your
Lordship, to point out the Law which makes Sedition a crime, and also, that
which shows the punishment that is due to it. I understand that some people
think Sedition so well understood, as not to need explanation. I differ from
them -- I say it is not merely the authority of a judge that is sufficient --
he must lay his finger upon the Law Book and point it out to the Subjects, that
they may know where to find it when they are not before the judge. Is there any
Law in the British Constitution, which points out Sedition, and affixes the
punishment to it?

My Lords, in page three of the indictment are these words, which I understand
to be taken from the Gazetteer. This is an excellent motion, and the event
which it alludes to, ought to be the tocsin to the friends of liberty to
assemble. In the Gazetteer it is, the friends to liberty -- here it is the
friends of liberty. Therefore, that is a flaw in the indictment, which quashes
it at once.

My Lords, if you go according to justice, these are valid objections; but if
you think proper to repel them -- if it is only to state an objection, and as
soon as stated it is repelled, you may do as you think fit; but, if I have not
impartial justice done me, I will sit down, not make any defense, but desire
you to disband the jury, and pass sentence.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any thing further to say as to the relevancy?


Mr. Margarot. It is irrelevant in toto. Then, my Lords, again, at the
conclusion of this libel I come back with my first objection -- I see at the
beginning and the end, and it is not a mere matter of form -- no Act of
Parliament can do it away, or if an Act of Parliament can do it away, why is
not the Letter, as well as the Spirit of the Act maintained. It says here, all
which, or part thereof, being found proven by the verdict of an assize before
our Lord Justice General, Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords Commissioners of
Justiciary. It says so at the beginning -- it says so at the end. My Lords,
this is an inaccuracy that cannot be overlooked, it must not be overlooked;
and, as you thought proper to repel it in the first instance, I urge it again
in the second; it is a flaw in the indictment. There are three flaws, which I
think sufficient to quash the indictment entirely.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any more objections to make?


Mr. Margarot. No, my Lords, three are as good as three thousand.


Mr. Solicitor General. My Lords, in answer to what has fallen from the Panel,
his objections are so extravagant as hardly to merit an answer. The only
appearance of any thing like a legal objection is this: the gentleman says he
is accused of Sedition, and calls upon us to point out where Sedition is made a
crime, and by what Law, and what is the punishment affixed to it. My answer to
that is, that Sedition was made a crime not by any statute, but by the common
Law of Scotland, and if the gentleman wishes for authority, I refer him to the
book called Regiam Majestatem, where Sedition is expressly stated to be a
crime, and I would tell him, that it is there declared to be punishable as
treason. That is in the oldest book that we have upon the Law of Scotland.
Since that, Sedition has not been punished as treason, but remained upon the
footing of the common Law, punishable by what is called an arbitrary
punishment. As to a definition of Sedition, your Lordship knows there are many
crimes of so complex and so vague a nature, that it is hardly possible to give
a general definition to comprehend them all. If I am called upon to give a
definition of high treason, I don't know any that I could give, except by
enumerating all the different cases of treason; or, suppose I was called upon
to give a definition of falsehood or forgery, there are twenty different kinds
of it; no definition can comprehend the whole. So also, I imagine it stands
with regard to Sedition. At the same time, if a definition is wanted of the
crime charged against that gentleman, I will read him Mr. Erskine's definition
of it in his first Institute: He divides it into two parts, real Sedition and
verbal Sedition: he says, real Sedition is generally committed by convocating
together a considerable number of people without lawful authority, under
pretense of redressing grievances to the destroying of the public peace. Then
he says, general Sedition is inferred from the convocation of a number of
people without lawful authority, tending to disturb the peace of the community.
Is not this the very crime charged against this gentleman? if there was any
lawful authority, the gentleman will tell us what it is. Can there be a doubt,
that if the facts stated in this indictment be true, they not only tended to
disturb the peace of the country, but to subvert the Constitution of Great
Britain. Therefore, taking the charge as it stands, there cannot be a doubt
with any of your Lordships that it does amount to a charge of Sedition, and
that Sedition is a crime punishable by the Law of this country? If there is any
other country in the world, where Sedition is not made a crime by the common
Law, I wish these gentlemen next time they hold British Conventions would meet
in that country, for in Scotland, I will assure them, there is a Law to punish
them.


Mr. Margarot. My Lords, I hold in my hand a definition of Mr. Erskine's, a
little differing from what the gentleman has read; he says, it consists in
raising commotions or disturbances in the state; it is either verbal or real.
Verbal Sedition or Leasing making, is inferred from the uttering of words,
tending to create discord between the king and his people, and I think it is
that gentleman who is guilty of Sedition, inasmuch as he seeks to alienate the
hearts of the subjects from their sovereign. He says, it was formerly punished
by death and the forfeiture of goods, but now either by imprisonent, fine, or
banishment, at the discretion of the judge. Now it seems to me, that that
cannot be the Sedition which this gentleman means, for if I understand rightly,
the Sedition I am charged with, is something like that of Messrs. Muir, Palmer,
and Skirving. Now if their Sedition had been the Sedition that is meant here,
they would have been punished by banishment and not by transportation; and
therefore, there must have been some trifling mistake in that, my Lords. Now it
says here, for preventing riots and tumults it is enacted, that if any persons
to the number of twelve shall assemble, and being required by a magistrate or
constable to disperse, shall nevertheless continue together for an hour after
such command, the persons disobeying shall suffer death. Therefore, that cannot
be the Sedition that I am charged with, for the indictment only pretends to
know, what I am sure the Almighty never commissioned the Lord Advocate to
enquire into, namely, our secret intentions. I did not know before that there
was an inquisition in Scotland, and that he was Grand Inquisitor; for certainly
otherwise, the minds of the people are only to be gathered from their behavior.

My Lords, these meetings I will maintain were legal in the strictest sense of
the word; for the claim of rights entitles the people to petition Parliament;
and it is impossible they could petition Parliament without meeting. The
general will cannot be collected as you gather taxes from door to door. Good
God! what has become of the Constitution that you trumpet up so much, if you
give us the name and take away the essence? if the people are not to meet to
examine their rights, and proceed upon their rights.

My Lords, there is not one so barefaced as to pretend to deny our right to
petition or address the King. The Lord Advocate himself has acknowledged, that
it is our right. He himself is a reformer, and has held seditious meetings as
well as us; but then indeed he brings forward a curious reason: when the Lord
Advocate is out of place, reform is proper; when in place, it is highly
improper; and that is the doctrine of Mr. Pit. Because we are poor, it is
sedition in us; but when your County Meetings are held, it is no longer
sedition; but it is a thing that is authorized. As long as they thought we were
not sufficiently formidable, and that there was no danger of opening the eyes
of the people, so long did Justice nod; and she only awoke when every man,
hearing so much talk of the Constitution, began to examine what that
Constitution was. And, to be sure, it is a curious fiction in law (and you have
a great many) by which our happy constitution has wisely guarded the Prosecutor
for the Crown; by which means the subject may at any time be oppressed and
persecuted by the officer of the Crown, and he can obtain no damages, no
redress whatever. Happy if he gets off; happy if his sentence does not come out
of the pocket of a Minister of State. My Lords, our transactions have been
legal. The illegal actions have been entirely on the part of our prosecutors.
We have experienced the fate of general warrants: we have experienced the fate
of a State Inquisition. Good God! has not a man, living under the British
Constitution, a right to examine that constitution, and to say, I am told, that
it is the finest institution in the world; and yet I feel my pocket emptied
daily with taxes; I feel my liberties taken away one after another; and yet I
must not meet with my neighbors to the number of twelve, to discuss those
injuries that I daily feel, and to enquire after the means of obtaining
redress, but immediately comes a Crown Lawyer, claps the word Sedition upon it,
and I am punished. Then another man is charged with Sedition. My case is
brought forward as a precedent, and therefore he must be punished in the same
way. I say, my Lord, if every article in this libel is proved, it redounds more
to my honor than any thing else: it shows me the friend of my species; it
shows me the friend of my country; it shows that I have done my duty as a good
citizen; that I have endeavored to procure that for every one of my fellow
subjects that it is our right to enjoy; that I don't wish to enjoy a single
thing alone, neither place nor pension; that I don't wish to enjoy any thing
exclusively, but I seek a restitution of our rights, a renovation of our
Constitution, as it is said here, by universal suffrage and annual parliaments.

My Lords, perhaps your memories may fail you, for it is some time back when
Mr. Pit, at the Thatched House Tavern, being a young man making his debut in
Parliament, a young patriot making his entree into the world, insisted upon a
reform. It was then highly constitutional. My Lords, I have in my hand a
resolution entered into at the Thatched House Tavern, on the 16th of May, 1782:
At a numerous and respectable meeting of Members of Parliament, friendly to a
constitutional Reformation, and of members of several Committees of Counties
and Cities. Here, Gentlemen, you see Delegates, here you see a Convention;
though a Convention is nothing new in Scotland; because you have had the
Borough Reform Convention, and the Lord Advocate is himself upon that list. My
Lords, at the Thatched House Tavern were present the Duke of Richmond, Lord
Surrey, Lord Mahon, the Lord Mayor. Here you see amongst them the first
municipal officer in England, the Lord Mayor, Sir Watkin Jews, Mr. Duncomb,
Sir Cecil Wray, Mr. Brand Hollis, Mr. Withers, the Hon. William Pit, whom I
mean to adduce as an exculpatory evidence, if even the forms of justice are
allowed me -- the Reverend Mr. Wyvil, Major Cartwright, Mr. John Horn Took,
Alderman Wilkes, Dr. Jebb, Mr. Churchill, Mr. Frost, etc. etc. all men of
learning, who well knew what the Constitution of this country is, and what it
ought to be -- men who required not to be told what was sedition and what was
not -- men who would not have risked themselves, if they had not known that
they were upon constitutional ground, and they resolve, That the motion of the
Hon. William Pit, on the 7th instant, for the appointment of a Committee of
the House of Commons, to enquire into the state of the representation of the
people of Great Britain, and to report the same to the House; and also what
steps it might be necessary to take having been defeated by a motion for the
order of the day -- which is something similar to your repelling an objection
of the Panel, as soon as it is stated -- having been defeated by a motion for
the order of the day, it is become indispensably necessary that application
should be made to Parliament by petitions from the collective body of the
people in their respective districts. -- They were not to pour into the House
eight millions of petitions, but as many petitions from as many districts as
they could collect together, requesting a substantial reformation of the
Commons House of Parliament.

Resolved unanimously, That this meeting, considering that a general
application, by the collective body of the people, to the House of Commons
cannot be made before the close of the present Session, is of opinion that the
sense of the people should be taken. And how is the sense of the people to be
taken, I would ask the learned gentlemen of the law, if they are not convened?
-- Who is to take the sense of the people, if it is to be done by going round
from man to man? and if twelve form a seditious meeting, it will come, by and
by, perhaps to two or three, and it will be dangerous for one neighbor to
speak to another in the street, or any where else indeed; that the sense of the
people should be taken at such times as may be convenient during this summer,
in order to lay their several petitions before parliament, early in the next
session, with their proposals for a Parliamentary Reformation, -- Observe this,
men of Scotland! -- Observe this, Britons! without which neither the liberty of
the nation can be preserved, nor the permanence of a wise and virtuous
administration can be secure, and I appeal to you all whether there is not
truth and sound doctrine in it? may receive that ample and mature discussion
which so momentous a question demands.

My Lords, it seems to have been in the year 1782 a very laudable and a very
constitutional thing to assemble, to meet to consider of the grievances, and to
plan a method by which they were to be redressed; in the year 1794, when the
very man who planned, who first suggested this, who encouraged the people
thereto, under his reign, I may call it, for he it the guide of the helm -- the
guide in the cabinet, while he is in absolute power, that shall be considered
as Sedition, which he himself first set on foot, in order to procure himself
that birth; and, now he has got it, he has altered his sentiments! -- How
ridiculous for a Crown Lawyer to attempt to impose upon a Court of Justice; or
for any man to support such imposition, that what was constitutional in 1782
should be criminal in 1794. -- Fellow citizens, and I fear not to call you by
that name -- we are fellow citizens of one society. By the word Citizen I mean
a free man; a man enjoying all the rights and all the privileges, and paying
his quota toward all the expense of Society. I say it is an insolent attempt
upon your understandings, to endeavor to persuade you that that which was
constitutional, that that which was right, that that which was justifiable in
1782 should be criminal in 1794. It is true that an English jury has sent to
prison a man for only reprinting those Resolutions. Holt, I think his name is,
the printer of the Newark Journal, for reprinting in his paper, which pays a
daily tax to government, that which the person to whom he pays the tax was the
author of. Thus you see how Crown Lawyers pervert the constitution. With
high-sounding words they disguise the most innocent facts; they sport with the
lives, and with that which ought to be infinitely more dear than their lives --
with the liberties of his Majesty's Subjects. Men who feel wrongs cannot feel
them without some degree of acrimony, and when those wrongs are repeated, this
acrimony must increase; and these wrongs are done them in the King's name; but
it is not the King, it is his servants who make use of his name; his seditious
servants who separate the King from his people. My Lords, I know my doom. I am
a willing and an already devoted victim. I have made objections, those
objections have been repelled. I shall insist presently on the calling over of
my witnesses. I shall then demand a caption against such as do not appear. If
my just, my legal, my constitutional demands are repelled, I will sit down; I
will beg the Gentlemen of the Jury not to give themselves any further trouble;
I will protest against the proceedings of the Court, and beg of them to pass to
sentence; which I know it will be no difficult matter for them to do.


Lord Henderland. My Lords, we are called upon to decide upon the relevancy of
this indictment, which charges in the major proposition, that the crime of
sedition, in this and every other well governed realm, is a crime of a heinous
nature, and severely punishable. And, my Lord, the first part of it (to which
it might be sufficient to confine myself at present) charges that this Society,
calling themselves the British Convention of Delegates of the People, met under
the pretense of Reform; that it was of a dangerous and destructive tendency,
and was with the deliberate and determined intention to disturb the peace of
the community, and to subvert the present constitution of the country; and that
this gentleman, Maurice Margarot, did take an active and distinguishing part in
their deliberations; and consequently, that he took an active and
distinguishing part in the deliberations of a Society, met with a determined
purpose to overturn the Constitution; that is the charge, true or false it is
not our province at present to enquire; that must be left to the Jury. The
criminality does, to be sure, consist in, that they met with a determined
purpose to overturn the Constitution: and the Jury, when they come to decide
upon it, must take into their view the several things charged in this
indictment, relative to this meeting. As to the form that they assumed, how far
that was necessary to obtain a reform in Parliament, it is the province of the
Jury to enquire; and under all the circumstances of the case, to lay their
hands upon their heart, and upon their great oaths to say what was the purpose
of that meeting, according to the facts before them. My Lord, if that is made
out-which is the charge, and in considering the relevancy, I am, bound to hold
the charge as proved, there cannot be a doubt that it amounts to sedition. I
say it approaches to high treason: and I find in the cases tried in England, in
1745, it appears from Judge Foster's Report, the charges laid against the
prisoners were very little different from those contained in the present
indictment. It ran in these terms: Also devising and as much as in them lay
most wickedly and traitorously intending to change and subvert the rule of
government of this kingdom, duly and happily established under our present
Sovereign Lord the King, and also to depose and deprive our said present
Sovereign Lord the King of his title, and so on. Now, my Lord, the charge is,
that the purpose of this meeting was to subvert the Constitution; and if it
was, where can the doubt be, that it does amount to Sedition. My Lord, I leave
it to the sense of every man who hears me, if an intention to subvert the
Constitution of a country is not Sedition. In matters of criminal law you must
go by the understanding and the sense of mankind, and in this instance
particularly the Jury are to determine upon the law as well as the fact.

My Lord, with respect to Sedition it is of various kinds; no doubt its general
tendency is to resist and undermine, or attempting to resist and undermine the
Constitution of the country, and subvert the supreme power of the state. It may
either be of a public or a private nature. When of a private nature, it is
directed against matters of a private life, it may be in direct opposition to
acts of parliament, with respect to enclosures, division of commonalties, turn
pikes, and so on. But of a public nature is the crime which is charged against
this Gentleman: an intention to subvert the Constitution. My Lord, sedition may
be attended with tumult or without: with rising in arms, or without rising in
arms. My Lord, sedition of a public kind, is as various as the ingenuity of
wickedness can suggest. It may be committed by words, by writing, by painting,
by medals, by allegories, by actions, by false insinuation, by false argument,
by tumult and insurrection, by mobs, by cabals, by open and secret meetings; by
conspiracies and by conventions. If the Jury are satisfied in their minds that
the intention of this is to overturn the Constitution; it is Sedition. My Lord,
it was said that there was no law against this. As to that, my Lord, every well
regulated government must make it Sedition; because otherwise society could not
exist. It always has been, and must remain a common law crime, and must be
punishable by common law.

My Lord, having said so much, I think there can be no doubt that the Libel is
relevant. The Panel is at liberty to state what he pleases in his defense. To
insist it was for a partial reform by legal means, and that nothing else was
meant by this extraordinary guise that this convention took upon themselves to
assume; the Jury will, upon the whole, judge whether this defense or whether
the charge is relevant. In the mean time it is my humble opinion that it is
relevant.


Lord Eskgrove. My Lord, as to the crime of Sedition, I cannot read the
Indictment, nor I think any body else, and say that if this man was concerned
in holding these meetings, for the purpose of disturbing the peace of the
community, and subverting the constitution of the country, that that is not the
crime of Sedition. My Lord, it is not the province of such men as these to take
upon themselves the amendment of the Government. The intention of their
meeting, they say, was to obtain universal suffrage; or, in other words, to
establish that every man living in this country is to have a vote to choose a
Representative in Parliament; a thing that never did obtain, and that does not
now obtain, and never can obtain in this country. But, my Lord, it seems that
if an act should take place for the purpose of suppressing such illegal
meetings, that this is to be their tocsin, and their alarm bell for the purpose
of meeting, when, where, or how, is to be kept a deep secret -- it is not to be
divulged even among themselves; but it was to be consined to this gentleman,
and two or three more, who were to call a Convention of Emergency, and they
were to continue to assemble, and not to obey such act if it should pass. My
Lord, if the charges in this Indictment are proved, it is impossible to deny my
assent, that they do infer the crime of Sedition. I am of opinion that this
libel is revelantly laid. I shall be exceedingly happy, if this gentleman is
found innocent; but that lies with the Jury, and not with us.


Lord Swinton. My Lord, the question that is now under our consideration is,
whether this libel is relevant to infer the pains of law. And, my Lord, it has
been so fully discussed, not only at this time, but upon the occasion of a very
late trial, that it is perfectly unnecessary to go over the ground again that
has been already gone over. But, my Lord, in this ease the indictment, states,
that a motion was made, upon which the Panel says, This is an excellent
motion. The event which it alludes to, ought to be the tocsin for the friends
of liberty to assemble. My Lord, this is a very ill chosen word. What is this
tocsin? It is an instrument made use by the people in France to assemble. It is
borrowed from a place from which I would wish to borrow very little. For what
purpose are they to assemble? They say to assert their rights. By what means?
can any man be at a loss to make the answer? By violence and outrage, and no
other interpretation can be given to it. My Lord, afterward a proposal is made
for a sealed letter to be given to the Delegates, which was not to be opened
till a certain period: like an order that is sometimes given to ships when they
sail, that they are not to open their instructions till they come to a certain
latitude; and the meaning is, that those instructions shall not be known, for
fear they should be prevented. There can be no other reason; and yet they
afterward say, we make no secrets of any thing. Then there is a resolution,
that this Convention, considering the calamitous consequence of any act of the
Legislature, which may tend to deprive the people of their undoubted right to
meet, declare before God and the world, that we shall follow the wholesome
example of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate
against the Constitution of our country. Is not this declaring that they will
oppose the Legislature itself? My Lord, it does not require any proof of its
being Sedition. Then, my Lord, among other cases of emergency, on which they
were to meet, it is mentioned, or in case of an invasion. My Lord, for what
purpose were they to meet privately, in case of invasion? The Legislature, the
executive part of government is to look after that. Every man must feel what
they meant: that they should assemble the Delegates altogether at a particular
time, and all at one time they should meet, in case of an invasion. My Lord, I
gave my sentiments very fully this day se'n night upon the same question, and I
have not altered them, but feel them stronger and stronger. I am sorry to see
so many examples brought before us, and I hope there will be but few more; I am
of opinion that the libel is relevant.


Lord Dunsinnan. My Lord, the only question at present for our consideration
is, whether the libel is relevant and is laid properly. My Lord, the major
proposition states the crime of Sedition: the minor proposition specifies a
variety of circumstances, which, if they come up to the crime of Sedition, the
libel is relevant; and, my Lord, I have but one doubt upon this subject; and
that is, whether in some of these particulars it is any thing short of the
crime of high treason; but I think that it amounts to Sedition, there can be no
doubt; and I think that the ordinary interlocutory ought to be pronounced.


Lord Abercrombie. My Lord, in this case, as to the objections to the relevancy
it is the province of the Jury to enquire into the facts charged; and if those
facts are brought home to this Panel; particularly the resolutions, if they
are brought home to him, I think the necessary conclusion is, that he is guilty
of the highest species of Sedition that can be possibly committed. I am of
opinion that the libel ought to be found relevant.


Lord Justice Clerk. My Lords, I think it very unnecessary to add any thing to
what your Lordships have said; but I think any man who knows any thing of the
law of Scotland; or that has the least understanding, must think that the one
half of what is charged here, if true, does amount to Sedition; and therefore I
have no doubt in pronouncing the ordinary interlocutory, that the libel if
found proven to the knowledge of an Assize is relevant, to infer the pains of
law, which, the Jury will attend, is only an arbitrary punishment, and allowing
the Panel to prove all facts and circumstances that may tend to exculpate or
alleviate his guilt.


Mr. Margarot. My Lords, I may now put in my former claim, of having my
witnesses called over.


Lord Justice Clerk. Surely both Prosecutor and Panel ought to see that their
witnesses are all here. Let the Macer go now and see that they are here.


Mr. Margarot. And likewise that the Court and the people at large may be
informed the reason why I have not the privilege of having you as an
exculpatory evidence, in consequence of the fear of the Messenger to deliver
such a summons to you; that is a thing proper to be known.


Lord Justice Clerk. If you have any thing that it is necessary for me to
prove, you shall have the benefit of my testimony, and you shall not want it
neither.


Lord Abercrombie. I am sure if the Messenger has refused to cite your
Lordship, he has behaved most improperly.


Mr. Margarot. I think his name is Hotcheson; he said he would be ready in
Court to give a reason why he refused to do it.

(The interlocutory of the Court read.)
Mr. Margarot. There is likewise another thing: you did not take notice of the
two objections to the wording of the indictment, which are material flaws. Your
Lordships have not said a word to that.


Lord Justice Clerk. The court have considered all you have said, and they are
of opinion, upon the whole, that the libel is relevant.


Mr. Margarot. Here is the list of my witnesses, my Lord.

(The Messenger was called but did not appear)
Mr. Margarot. You will be informed, that some of my witnesses live in England,
that I have had the exculpatory letters served there, with what is called a
subpoena in England and the affidavit at the back of the exculpatory letters,
now in the hand of the Clerk of the Court, shows that they have been cited in a
legal manner, and therefore, as they are material witnesses, I wish the list of
them to be called over.

(The list being called (...), the following persons were absent)
Duke of Richmond Henry Dundas William Pit John M'Intire John Wright.



Lord Justice Clerk. As to the three that reside in England, this Court cannot
go beyond their jurisdiction: they cannot compel any witness living in England
to appear here; and therefore a caption against witnesses residing in England,
is a thing altogether incompetent and unheard of.


Mr. Margarot. Your Lordship's objection is not valid, as will appear to
yourself upon reflection, inasmuch as if you are not competent to give a second
citation, you was not competent to the first. On the contrary, it appears that
the letters of exculpation found no difficulty in being backed by a Judge in
England, and the subpoena was served upon them according to the laws of
England; and therefore, by a second diligence, they will be pursued in the same
manner; and that will be backed by a Judge, and the same compulsion will be
excercised upon them in England as would be in Scotland, if they resided here.
-- And, my Lord, I will not permit this to be passed over easily, they are very
material evidences -- they are men of high station in the state -- they are men
of great responsibility -- they are men whose actions are public, and the
questions that (...) are of a very important nature. -- There is again another
thing -- it seems you overlook somethings and pry very closely into others --
it seems you are not competent to enforce the attendance of a witness from
England, but it appears, by the libel, that you are competent to try offenses
committed in England. My Lord, mete with an equal measure -- let my objection
be attended to in a proper manner. It is a legal objection, founded in justice;
and justice cannot deny it. -- Grant me a caption for my absent witnesses. I
demand it.


Lord Henderland. My Lords, if witnesses resided in Scotland within our
jurisdiction, and did not attend, a caption might be granted; but my doubt is,
whether it is competent to the Court to grant a second diligence, because in
this case it must be altogether nugatory.


Lord Eskgrove. My Lords, I don't know an instance existing, either in the
civil or criminal courts, of a warrant being granted to bring a witness from
England, to apprehend him by Habeas Corpus: that is the only jurisdiction we
can exercise. My Lords, I understand in England it is not an easy matter to
obtain witnesses, before their own courts; but of that I profess myself
ignorant: but I know of no instance in which this court have taken cognizance
of the non-attendance of witnesses, resident in a foreign country; for England,
with respect to the law, is as much a foreign country, as Germany, Italy, or
any other country. --


Lord Swinton. By our laws we cannot grant a caption against a witness from a
foreign country, and we cannot go beyond our power. It is clear to me, that it
was not our fault that they did not attend -- as to those that are lawfully
summoned here, we can lay a fine upon them.


Lord Dunsinnan. My Lords, this Court ought not to be treated with contempt,
and therefore your Lordships would be careful to issue no warrant that you
cannot enforce. The authority of this Court cannot go beyond their
jurisdiction, which is confined to Scotland.


Lord Abercrombie. By the laws of this country we have no authority over
persons residing in any other country. --


Lord Justice Clerk. We cannot possibly differ upon this matter; -- it is a
downright absurdity, to issue a second diligence against witnesses residing in
another country. -- I am sorry for it; but he has got affair trial by the laws
of this country. -- As to what dropped from the Panel just now, he must be
very much mistaken, if he thinks he is tried for a crime committed in England:
that is by no means the ease; he is tried for what he did after he came to this
country; but it was very proper, in order to show the intention with which he
came here, to state the fact, that he came as a delegate from a Convention of
the same kind in England; but it is for the crime that he committed in this
country alone, that he now stands at the bar.


Mr. Margarot. My Lords, I don't require the forms of justice, I require the
essence of justice -- It seems that a Panel is entitled to the same compulsory
method of adducing witnesses in his favor, as the prosecutor has to adduce
evidence against him. -- Now general warrants have been issued to adduce
evidence against me: -- general warrants, I say it, have been issued to adduce
evidence against me. -- Now I demand nothing more than the regular forms of the
Court, that your caption may be granted, and see whether they will obey the
laws of their country or not. -- And I am sorry to hear it come from the Bench,
that it would be nugatory; which implies, that there are men in England above
the law. -- Look to it, my friends -- where is your boasted Constitution? -- If
the first man in England is not as amenable to the laws of the country as the
meanest of you, you are slaves.


Lord Justice Clerk. You come here to speak to the Court, and not to harangue
the mob.


Mr. Margarot. Do you call this audience a mob, my Lord?


Lord Justice Clerk. You are not to harangue the multitude.


Mr. Margarot. I understand that the Judges have harangued the multitude too,
and they have gone into a series of accusation against me, which I did not know
was a part of the duty of a Judge who ought jus dicere, not jus facere. It has
been said too, that England is as much a foreign country as Germany or Italy;
-- that I don't understand -- if this country is as foreign as Germany -- don't
talk, for God's sake, of the English Constitution; it does not belong to you --
It is your duty, my Lords, to grant me in whole what you offer me in part. --
As to those that reside in Scotland, you say we can punish them, but not those
in England; and yet you could cite those that were in England: and it was
backed by a Judge in England; and if you grant a second diligence, the same
form will be gone through again; and if, after a certain time, for I do not
wish to avoid a trial -- no, I wish to come before my country, as every good
citizen ought, to obey the laws of his country; and I do it with a conscious
heart that I am totally innocent, and that I deserve praise instead of blame or
punishment; -- therefore, I say I will concede to you a part of the justice
that I demand. -- I have exculpatory witnesses of great importance, living in
England, cited by your authority; in consequence of that authority it has been
supported by the English Judges -- the English Judges will support your
authority in a second instance. -- Let them be cited; -- let a proper time be
given me, and if they don't appear at the second citing, I will consent to go
to trial without them. But, my Lords, let justice take place; -- remember you
have, in the course of this trial, to praise the Constitution, it will be told
the people how happily they live under it -- how free and happy every man is
living under his own vine and his own fig tree. Let it be proved; let it be
proved that a Court of Justice does every thing in favor of the Panel, as
much as in favor of the Prosecutor. The objections that I made have been
repelled; but they will be noticed in a superior Court. -- There is a Court
superior to yours, and there must be, in every well regulated government, an
appeal to a superior Court, from whence the abuses of the servants of the Crown
may be rectified.


Lord Justice Clerk. I think you seem to be unacquainted with the laws of any
well governed state, and if you were not a foreigner and a stranger, we would
not have suffered you to have said one half of what you have said.


Mr. Margarot. I demand a caption.


Lord Justice Clerk. The court have repelled it.


Mr. Margarot. Oh! very well, my Lords. -- however permit me one question, and
I will put it to the generosity of the public prosecutor to answer it. My Lord
Advocate, is it in your power or not to bring a witness on the part of the
prosecution from England, upon your honor answer me?


Lord Advocate. No more than you can.


Mr. Margarot. Does not an outlawry extend to England?


Mr. Solicitor General. For a crime it certainly does, but not as to a witness.
-- Supposing a Scotchman to be tried before a Court in England, and in place of
seeking the assistance of some English Counsel, as he ought to do, he were to
utter things of the same kind that this Panel has done, I doubt whether he
would be heard with the same patience with which your Lordship has heard him.


Lord Justice Clerk. Do you wish a caption against those two witnesses who
reside in Scotland?


Mr. Margarot. No, my Lords, -- I don't wish to punish two poor men, and let
three rich men go unpunished. -- There is another thing which I believe takes
place before the impannelling of the Jury, which respects the opening of the
doors of this place. In looking over the claim of rights, in the 27th chapter,
I find it is said, that in criminal trials, which are of so great import, the
doors of the Court shall be thrown open. -- I demand therefore that the doors
of this place may be opened, in order that the people may partake of what
passes.


Lord Justice Clerk. It would be a very pretty opening, I think.


Mr. Margarot. The doors are shut, and I understand it is the custom of the
door-keepers to take money, which is contrary to the laws of the land.


Lord Justice Clerk. That you have no business with.

JURY.
James Gordon, Brewer in Edinburgh. Thomas Hotclikis, Brewer. Samuel Gilmour,
Ropemaker. James Clark, Farrier. James Mill, Tanner.



Lord Justice Clerk. Do you object to any of these Gentlemen?


Mr. Margarot. I have no personal objection, but I must beg to know by what law
you have the picking of the Jury, and that you alone have the picking of them.


Lord Abercrombie. His Lordship is not picking but naming the Jury, according
to the established law and the established Constitution of the country; and the
gentleman at the bar has no right to put such a question.

William Smith, stabler. Charles Robertson, painter. John Balfour, merchant.
John Wilson, coachmaker. William Ainslie, sadler. William Pirnie, architect.
Samuel Anderson, banker. Robert Burns, architect. Macduff Heart, shoemaker. John
White, merchant.


Evidence for the Crown. (William Scott, called in.)
Lord Henderland. Have you any objection to this witness?


Mr. Margarot. According to the method in which you proceed, it appears to me
very needless to make objections; otherwise, undoubtedly, my Lord, under the
British Constitution, acting up to the spirit of it, that witness is not
competent; he is a dependant, or hanger on upon the public prosecutor, and in
fact, acts as deputy public prosecutor; you may repel it or not as you please.


Lord Justice Clerk. I dare say, your Lordships will please to repel that
objection.

(The witness sworn.)
Q. Do you recollect on the evening of the 5th of December last, going to
apprehend the Panel for examination? -- A. I do.


Q. Was you present when he was brought up for examination?


A. I employed Lion, the messenger, to apprehend him, and was present at the
Sheriff Clerk's office, when he was examined.


Q. Did he upon that occasion make a declaration? -- A. He did.


Q. Did he appear to be sober and of sound mind, at the time he emitted that
declaration? -- A. Yes.


Q. Freely, and without compulsion? -- A. Yes.


Q. Did you subscribe your witness to that declaration?


A. I did.


Q. Look if that is your subscription.


A. That is the declaration.


Q. Were any papers at that time produced, claimed by the Panel?


A. The officer who executed the warrant reported to me, that he sound Mr.
Margarot and Mr. Gerald in the same room, that he had taken into his possession
several papers, part of them he described to be Mr. Gerald's, part of them to
be Mr. Margarot's; they were put into a trunk together, this trunk was brought
to the office, and after he was examined, he was desired to give the key, that
it might be opened; he declined to do so, upon which we applied for a warrant
to have the trunk opened, which was carried into execution; it was inspected in
the presence of Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerald. He was brought to the office upon
a second warrant, and Mr. Gerald also attended, he refused then to give it up
without force, and he held it in his hand and said, I will not give it up, but
you may take it; he said, he would not witness the trunk being opened, and
turned round and looked out of the window. Upon the trunk being opened, there
were some articles that did not relate to the business in hand, particularly a
pocketbook of Mr. Margarot's, and something of Mr. Gerald's, which were
restored; and those that were considered relative to the business were entered
into an inventory.


Q. Did you subscribe that inventory? -- A. I did.


Q. Do you know that to be the same (showing him the inventory)?


A. This is the same, it is signed by Mr. Gerald and me on every page, but Mr.
Margarot declined signing it.


Q. Did you at that time identify the papers that you found?


A. I did.


Q. Will you take the trouble of looking over these papers, and see if they are
the same, and go through them accurately?


A. The first is a paper containing two letters signed William Skirving.


Q. These are the papers Mr. Margarot claimed as his?


A. Yes.

The second is a manuscript of a plan for supporting the Gazetteer, submitted
to the consideration of the friends of the people, which is signed in the same
manner.

The third, is a bundle of papers tied up, and labelled papers for the
Committee of Union.

The fourth, is a letter dated the 15th November, 1793, signed Thomas Hardy,
secretary, addressed to Citizen Margarot and Citizen Gerald, delegates.

The fifth, is a letter from ditto to ditto, 22d November, addressed Citizen
Margarot and Citizen Gerald.

The sixth, is another letter, the 29th of November, addressed to Maurice
Margarot and Joseph Gerald, delegates.

The seventh, is another letter from Thomas Hardy, dated the 28th November,
addressed to Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerald, delegates from London.

The eighth, two pages of manuscript, beginning, organization of primary
assemblies, assembled for the purpose of electing representatives.

The ninth, a manuscript entitled the constitution, and in it were found other
papers relative to the regulations to be adopted in the Convention.


Q. Have you now gone through the articles claimed by Mr. Margarot? -- A. Yes.


Q. Were there several articles claimed by Mr. Gerald?


A. Yes.


Q. Were they identified in the same manner?


A. They were.


Q. In the declaration you heard emitted by the Panel, of the 5th of December,
did he refer to any motion?


A. If your Lordship will cause the declaration to be read, I shall be better
able to tell you.

(The declaration handed to the witness, who reads it.)
Q. Was there any reference to a motion? -- A. Yes.


Q. Was any paper found in the Pannel's possession?


A. There was a paper found when Mr. Skirving was apprehended; then amongst
other papers this motion was found, and when this gentleman was examined, this
paper was shown to him, and the question stated in the declaration put to him;
it was found in the possession of Mr. Skirving, the secretary to the
Convention, upon the same morning that Mr. Margarot was taken up.


Q. Did you put any mark upon that paper, by which you should know it again?


A. Yes, I put my initials upon it; it is a motion signed by Mr. Margarot and
seconded by John Wardlaw.


Q. At the time the secretary's papers came to be inspected in your presence,
was there a paper discovered amongst them, bearing to be the minutes of the
Convention? -- A. There was.


Q. Did you put any mark or subscription upon that at the time, so that you
should know it again? -- A. I did.


Q. Did you look through it? -- A. I did read the whole of it.


Q. How were these papers of the secretary brought before you?


A. By a warrant. The papers were found sealed in the secretary's house, and
were brought in that situation to the Sheriff Clerk's office, and they were
there with the rest.


Q. Did you attend the magistrates of this city on the evening of the 5th of
December, when they went to disperse this convention?


A. No, I did on the 6th, the Convention had assembled; the Provost went along
with the sheriff's substitute, Mr. Davidson, and the magistrates, and I
accompanied them upon that occasion. I found Mr. Margarot standing by a table,
and the chair was standing empty. The first thing that I heard was, Mr.
Margarot said, they were met for a constitutional purpose; they were going to
petition either the King or Parliament, I cannot say which; and it was said by
somebody, that they could not proceed to business till the chair was taken: Mr.
Margarot was called upon to take the chair, which he accordingly did. Mr.
Davidson asked, if it was the British Convention? upon being told it was, he
told them that they came for the purpose of dismissing them, and that they
should not proceed to any business; the answer was, that they would not till
force was used, and partiticularly the Panel said, that he would not leave the
chair, as he was then discharging his duty, till force was used; to that Mr.
Davidson said, he supposed any thing that had that appearance would be
satisfactory, and took Mr. Margarot by the hand, upon which he left the chair:
upon his leaving the chair, there was a call for Mr. Gerald to take the chair,
which he accordingly did, and the same form was used with regard to him: Mr.
Davidson took him by the hand, and it was then called out that they never
dismissed without prayer, and Mr. Gerald prayed and then came out of the chair;
it was then said by somebody, that though they were now dismissed, they would
remember that they were permanent, that they had voted themselves permanent the
night before.


Q. Did this happen the day after the Panel had been examined before the
Sheriff, and liberated upon his finding bail?


A. Yes.


Q. Was it on account of a charge of seditious practices of the same nature
that he was brought before the Sheriff?


A. It was for being a member of that Convention.

(William Scott cross examined by Mr. Margarot.)
Q. By virtue of what authority did you employ Lion, the messenger, to arrest
me?


A. By virtue of a warrant which I had obtained from the Sheriff of Edinburgh,
as Procurator-Fiscal.


Q. Was that warrant granted at your requisition?


A. It was.


Q. Now answer me seriously one question: from whom did you receive the order
to apply for that requisition?


A. That certainly has not any connection with the present business; and I
think I am not bound to answer that question.


Q. It has, Sir! and you must answer it, as you appear before God at the great
day. (The witness hesitated).


Mr. Margarot. My Lord, I must have the protection of the Court.


Lord Justice Clerk. I don't think it proper he should tell who gave the
information.


Lord Abercrombie. I am of the same opinion.


Lord Eskgrove. He acted as Procurator-Fiscal of Edinburgh, and therefore he is
no more liable, or bound to say, who was his private informer, than my Lord
Advocate is.


Lord Dunsinnan. It is entering into an investigation which the Panel has no
right to make.


Lord Swinton. I am of the same opinion.


Mr. Margarot. My Lords, I hope I have not put an improper question: I know it
is customary at Venice; they have a lion's mouth to receive all private secret
information, but I did not know that it was so here; I thought that justice was
open.


Lord Abercrombie. I am sorry to observe, that from the beginning of this
trial, the Panel has betrayed the grossest ignorance of the laws of this
country; and I must regret that he has not had the advice of those who know
better; but if he is to object to things in this way, I trust he will do it,
for his own sake, in a decent manner.


Mr. Margarot. Then I am to understand that the reception of secret
information, is a part of the laws of the country. The officer found Mr. Gerald
and me in the same room?


A. I was told so; but that is only from report.


Q. Where was that room; at the Black Bull?


A. Yes; I was told so.


Q. At a public inn? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was the door locked? --


A. I cannot say.


Q. How do you ascertain that those papers were mine which you have just now
produced?


A. I have told all that I can; it was from Mr. Gerald's and your own pointing
them out.


Q. I understand you have said that I emitted a declaration: a declaration, if
I understand it rightly, is a certain verbal acknowledgment?


A. A declaration may be negative, and it is still a declaration.


Lord Justice Clerk. You may make a declaration that you are innocent as well
as that you are guilty.


Mr. Margarot. It would have much the same effect. What reason did I allege for
refusing to emit a declaration?


A. I don't recollect.


Q. In the course of your practice do you know any law which enforces a private
interrogatory?


Mr. Solicitor General. If the gentleman is an attorney, as I am told, I should
like to know whether he would be suffered to go on in this way in the courts of
Westminster Hall?


Lord Justice Clerk. It is certainly not a question sit for the witness to
answer.


Mr. Margarot. Have you any mode of distinguishing those papers found in my
trunk from those that belonged to Mr. Gerald in the same trunk? --


A. I cannot say.


Q. Then it may happen that you may have intermixed a paper of Mr. Gerald's and
a paper of mine?


A. No; they were taken down distinctly, and marked with your own initials in
your own presence.


Q. Who arranged the papers?


A. I arranged them in your presence; I took them out at least.


Lord Justice Clerk. Did you not say, the Panel picked out his papers and Mr.
Gerald his?


A. Yes; there was a paper put in, and all below that belonged to the Panel.


Q. Did I not observe to you at the time, that being in an inn, we could not be
answerable for what papers were found in our room? --


A. I dare say you did.


Q. Did I not say, that even the messenger might bring that paper, if he
thought proper, and hustle them into the trunk at once? --


A. So you did.


Q. By what means are you certain, that the papers which you found in Mr.
Skirving's possession were minutes of the convention?


A. From various circumstances; but I submit again to the court, whether it is
proper to answer that?


Lord Justice Clerk. Yes; you must give answers to legal questions.


A. The minutes were established to be minutes of the Convention, by some of
the members.


Q. You accompanied the Sheriff to Mr. Laing's room.


A. Yes.


Q. Did I say any thing to you at the time?


A. Yes; you was the first person that called to me, handed me a motion, and
desired I would read it; I told him I had nothing to do with it: it was a
motion to petition the King, or something of that kind.


Q. Do you recollect the Sheriff Substitute saying, that he acted by orders?


A. I cannot say; but he certainly told you, he came for the express purpose of
dismissing that meeting, and that you must do no business as a British
Convention.


Q. Did I not speak to you; and you afterward answered me, that you was doing
your duty?


A. Yes; by attending the Sheriffs.


Q. You say that the meeting ended with prayer; can you recollect that prayer?
--


A. I cannot.


Q. Does beginning and closing a meeting, for obtaining a reform in Parliament,
with prayer, apply to the word Sedition?


Lord Justice Clerk. That is a very improper question.


Q. Did the petition for the warrant state, that I had met with others in
Laing's workshop, that I had been forced from the chair, that we had said that
we were assembled for petitioning a reform of parliament, and closed with
prayer? Was that warrant which took me up then the same as before?


A. The warrant could not mention it, because the petition was two days before
the warrant was obtained; it could not mention that which did not take place
for two days afterward.

(Harry Davidson sworn.)
Q. Do you recollect the Panel being brought before you the 5th of December
for examination? --


A. I do.


Q. Did he at that time emit a declaration in your presence?


A. He did.


Q. Did he do it voluntarily, and without compulsion?


A. Yes.


Q. Was he sober, and of sound mind? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you subscribe that declaration? --


A. I did.


Q. Look and see if that is it. -- It is the same.


Q. Is there any reference in that declaration to a motion?


A. Yes.


Q. Was there a paper found in the secretary's possession which appeared to be
that motion? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you put any mark upon the paper so as to know it again? --


A. Yes; this is it.


Q. Do you recollect any other papers having been produced at that examination
or afterward?


A. There were no papers produced that day; the next day there were papers
taken from a trunk of his, of which an inventory was made, which I identified.


Q. Was that trunk brought along with him? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was he asked for the key of that trunk?


A. Yes; and he declined giving it up.


Q. Was there any seal put upon it?


A. Not in my presence; I understand there was.


Q. When it was opened the following day, was any inventory made of the
contents? --


A. Yes.


Q. Were there any papers other than those claimed by the Panel? --


A. Yes; papers belonging to Mr. Gerald.


Q. Were those claimed by the Panel separated from those claimed by Mr. Gerald?


A. Yes; and an inventory was made of both, and they acquiesced in both.


Q. And was it done in their presence? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you subscribe that inventory? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you likewise put any mark upon the articles which it contains? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you compare those articles which have your superscription with the
articles which are in the inventory?


A. Yes; it was only those that were relating to the business in hand that were
put in the inventory. (Examines and compares them.) They are all marked by me.


Q. Do you recollect why Mr. Margarot was liberated?


A. Upon finding bail.


Q. What was the nature of the charge against him for which he was brought
before you for examination?


A. For seditious practices, as being a member of the meeting calling
themselves the British Convention of the Delegates of the Friends of the people.


Q. Do you recollect to have gone in the execution of your duty to a wright's
shop on the south side of the town, the 6th of December, with a view of
dispersing this meeting? --


A. I did.


Q. Be so obliging to mention to the Court and Jury what passed when you so
went to that meeting.


A. It was on Friday evening, the 6th of December, I went and attended the Lord
Provost, with the magistrates of the city; a great number of people were
assembled in a wright's shop, and I went immediately up to the table, where I
saw some people whose faces I recognized; Mr. Skirving, Mr. Brown, Mr.
Margarot, and several others; I asked what the meeting was? I did not get a
direct answer; I asked if it was the British Convention? One of the members,
and I think it was Mr. Margarot, said that it was; I told him that I was
Sheriff Substitute for the county, and that I came there to disperse that
meeting, which was an illegal one, upon this some conversation took place; and
I think Mr. Margarot was the man who spoke most on account of the Convention;
he said, they were met peaceably, that it was a legal Constitutional Meeting,
and that they were then met for a petition to Parliament. I told him, that my
resolution had been taken before I came there; that I came with a determination
to disperse that meeting; that no words were necessary, no argument that they
could use could alter my determination: some more conversation took place. Mr.
Margarot, finding I was determined upon it, said that he would take the chair,
with the approbation of the meeting, which was then empty; accordingly upon
this, he was unanimously called to the chair: I think before he took the chair,
he said, the meeting would not disperse without force was used; I told him, I
hoped it would be unnecessary to use force, but if it was necessary, I should
certainly make use of it. He took the chair, and finding they would not
disperse without some force, I took him by the arm, which he considered as
force, and he came out of the chair; immediately upon his doing so, Mr. Gerald,
another of the gentlemen present, took the chair; I told him I really thought
that it was improper that another person should do the same thing, if they were
all to take the chair one after another; I hoped they would not think that
necessary; however I took the same method of forcing Mr. Gerald from the chair
that I did Mr. Margarot: Mr. Gerald then made an extempore prayer, and left the
chair. Mr. Margarot, amongst other things that he mentioned, said, the meeting
of the Convention had declared themselves permament. I told him it might be so,
but I was determined they should not meet within the county where I had a
jurisdiction. I think they called out for the gentlemen to disperse, and by
degrees they dispersed; and I saw the last person out, and saw the door locked,
and took the key.


Q. You said you recognized several persons; among others, the Panel at the
bar, and Mr. Gerald; how came you to recognize the Panel particularly?


A. Because he had been before me the night before, and had been examined upon
the charge I have already mentioned.


Q. You had granted bail?


A. Yes.

(Harry Davidson cross examined by Mr. Margarot.)
Q. How are you sure that the motion which you found in the possession of Mr.
Skirving is in my handwriting, as you have declared it to be?


A. I did not assert that it was your handwriting, at least I did not mean to
say so.


Q. Did I not give one uniform reason for declining to emit a declaration, for
refusing to give up the key of my trunk, and for asserting the right of the
Convention to meet; did I not say, that the proceedings against them were
illegal? --


A. You certainly did.


Q. Did I not ask you, why you would interrupt us in our legal proceedings? and
did you not answer me, that you acted according to order? Remember, Sir, that
you are upon your oath.


A. I cannot say that I recollect, whether I said by order; as Sheriff
substitute of the County, I acted by my own authority; I do not recollect the
precise words I may have used, but I was certainly acting as Sheriff of the
County.


Q. What could induce you to think that a meeting like that was illegal?


Lord Justice Clerk. That is not a proper question.


Mr. Margarot. It only hinges upon another. Did you see at the time of your
entrance there, any confusion, riot, or disorder?


A. I did not.


Q. Did you on the contrary, perceive the business of the evening carried on
with regularity?


A. There was but little business going on after I came in, Mr. Gerald was upon
his legs speaking, and I certainly interrupted him.


Q. Was prayer called for?


A. It was, I do not know whether it was not you that said it was not usual
that the meeting should depart without prayer; and I believe I gave consent
that prayer should be made.


Q. O, you did consent to that? Do you recollect the subject of the debate?


A. I think you, or some other person, put into my hand a small piece of paper,
upon which was wrote a petition to Parliament, which you said was the subject
of the --


Mr. Margarot. Of the order of the day.


A. That the purpose of their meeting was to petition Parliament.


Q. I hope the order of the day is not an offense, because I believe it is made
use of sometimes in the House of Commons.


Counsel for the Crown. The witness has spoke of the motion referred to in the
declaration. Was there any paper sound in Mr. Skirving's possession, which was
entitled Minutes of the Convention.


A. There were a number of things found in Mr. Skirving's possession; amongst
which, a scroll of the Minutes of the Convention.


Q. Should you know it again? --


A. Yes.


Q. Look at that and see if that is it? --


A. It is.


Mr. Margarot. How are you certain that these are the minutes of the British
Convention.


A. I can only say, that these are papers which were found in Mr. Skirving's
possession, and they were acknowledged to be so by various people, who were
examined before me; that is the only reason I have: I did not see them in the
Convention.


Q. There is another question which I hope your Lordships will not think
improper. In your office as Sheriff, have you to the best of your judgment
acted according to the laws of your country, or have you acted by superior
orders?


A. I certainly would execute no orders, unless I was certain they were
according to the laws of my country.


Q. Am I to infer from hence, that you received orders?


Lord Justice Clerk. It is not a proper subject of evidence.


Mr. Margarot. I put myself under your correction at the time I started the
question; however, it may not be amiss that the question was started, though it
is not answered.

Joseph Mack sworn.


Q. Do you recollect being present when Mr. Skirving, the late Secretary of the
Convention of the Friends of the People, was brought before the sheriff for
examination? --


A. Yes.


Q. Were there certain bags of papers brought along with him for inspection? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was you present when those bags were opened?


A. I was, when they were put into the inventory, which was very soon after or
immediately after they were opened.


Q. Was Skirving present? --


A. Yes.


Q. Do you recollect among other papers found in this bag, one being found,
entitled the Scroll of the Minutes of the Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was it in your hand, that you had an opportunity of observing it at that
time?


A. I both saw it then, and at Mr. Skirving's house; they were carried in a bag
from his house to the sheriff clerk's office, and there entered into an
inventory -- that is the paper.


Q. And you now recognize it as the same?


A. (Looks over it) Yes, it is the same.

Joseph Mack cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. You act as notary, do you not? --


A. No, I do not


Q. Or as clerk to the sheriff?


A. Yes, writing clerk to the sheriff.


Q. Did you hear me protest against the illegality of all the proceedings which
had taken place?


A. You offered to make a protest, but it was refused to you.


Q. You are certain that I offered to make one? --


A. Yes.


Q. A written one?


A. I do not recollect whether it was written or not: I think it is probable it
was, but I cannot say -- I was not a notary.

James Lion called.
Mr. Margarot. I have objections to that witness, on account of certain
expressions of his, and I have a witness now attending to prove those words. I
don't know whether that witness should be brought in at present to prove this,
or whether it should be kept back till the witnesses for the prosecution are
gone through.


Lord Justice Clerk. What do you propose to prove?


Mr. Margarot. That he considered himself as my enemy; these are nearly the
words, I look upon myself to be your enemy; or something to that effect.


Q. Can you condescend upon any reason, why he should have any enmity to you?


Mr. Margarot. I have not the skill of other people; I cannot dive into men's
hearts; I find him a very officious time-serving man.


Lord Justice Clerk. He must answer that question upon oath, whether he has any
malice or ill will.

(Sworn.)


Lord Justice Clerk. Look upon the panel at the bar; have you any malice or
ill will against that person?


A. None at all.


Q. Did you ever say that you were his enemy? --


A. Never.


Lord Justice Clerk. You may ask him the question again, Mr. Margarot.


Mr. Margarot. I would wish to have my witness produced in court; it is not my
asking him the question merely, Do you not recollect saying one day that you
considered yourself as my enemy? --


A. Not at all.


Lord Abercrombie. The court have uniformly laid this down as a rule, that no
general charge of a witness making use of an expression of that nature shall be
sufficient to invalidate his testimony, and for this reason, that it would put
it in the power of cry witness whatever, if he wished to favor the panel, to
disqualify himself by uttering some vague expression of ill will.


Lord Eskgrove. What are you? --


A. A messenger.


Lord Advocate. Did you execute a warrant against the panel?


A. Yes.


Lord Advocate. And against any body else?


A. Yes; Mr. Gerald.

Q Where was you informed these persons resided?


A. At the Black Bull.


Q. Were you to take into your custody any papers that you found? --


A. Yes.


Q. At what time in the morning was it?


A. To the best of my knowledge about seven o'clock.


Q. Tell the court and jury what passed.


A. I asked for such gentlemen, I asked for their rooms; the waiter declined
showing me, but told me the number of their rooms; I went into the room where
Mr. Gerald and Mr. Margarot were; they were each in separate beds in the same
room.

Q Did you tell them you had a warrant against them?


A. Yes; then I went to Mr. Sinclair's room, and locked up all Mr. Margarot's
papers, and Mr. Gerald's and Mr. Sinclair's also; Mr. Margarot said he would
put his papers into a little trunk, which I did not object to.


Q. Did he accordingly do so?


A. He asked Mr. Gerald if he would put his in, upon which he agreed to it, and
the papers were put in; and when I was away and came back for them, he said he
would not give them me; I said I would take them; he said I might take them at
my peril, and I said I should not make any scruple about it.


Q. Did the key remain in his possession after the paper was taken away?


A. Yes, the trunk was locked and he kept the key.


Q. Did you take the trunk and him with you to the sheriff's?


A. Yes, and Mr. Gerald.


Q. Was you present when the trunk was opened and the contents examined? --


A. I was.


Q. Did the panel agree to open the trunk himself, or was it opened?


A. The next day when he was before the sheriff, he held the key in his hand;
he said he would not give it up, but we might take it from him; upon which the
sheriff substitute desired me to take it from him, which I did; the trunk was
then opened and inspected.


Q. Were those belonging to the panel distinguished from those belonging to
Mr. Gerald?


A. Each of them claimed separately what belonged to himself.


Q. Was there any inventory made of those papers?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you put any mark upon those papers? -- A. I did.


Q. Look at those papers deliberately, and see if they are the same?


A. (Examines and compares them with the inventory.) Yes, they are the same;
they have my initial.


Q. When you went to the Black Bull had you any assistants with you?


A. Yes, John M'Donald and Neil M'Glashan were both in the room along with me.

James Lion cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. You found us in bed? -- A. Yes.


Q. Did we show any disposition of resistance, or rather testify the greatest
alacrity to go with you?


A. You showed no disposition to make any resistance; you did not refuse to
come along with us.


Q. Did we make you wait long in dressing? -- A. No.


Q. Did you show us the warrants?


A. No, nor you did ask it.


Q. Did we never ask you to see the warrant? -- A. No.


Q. Where did you find the papers in the room?


A. I found some upon the top of the drawers' head, some in the drawers, and
some out in a trunk.


Q. Were the drawers locked? -- A. No.


Q. Was the door of the room locked?


A. No, I knocked at the door, and you desired me to come in, and of course I
opened the door.


Q. Were the papers in a state of arrangement when you took them off the
drawers, and out of the drawers?


A. No, by no means.


Q. Were they not rather confused?


A. Yes; they were a little confused.


Q. Were there some in one place, and others in others?


A. Yes, some I got out of the trunk, and some in the drawers, and some off the
drawers.


Q. Were there papers in more than one drawer?


A. I believe there were; I cannot say.


Q. But the drawers were not locked?


A. I believe not; at least I broke none of them open.

John Macdonald sworn.
Q. Did you go along with Mr. Lion, the messenger, to assist him to execute a
warrant against the Panel at the bar, on the 5th December last? --


A. Yes.


Q. Where did you go?


A. To the Black Bull, at the head of Leith Walk.


Q. Tell us, as far as you recollect, what passed upon that occasion?


A. I went into the house, and stood there till the door was opened; Mr. Lion
went in; he went up the stair, and this gentleman and another were in the
bed-room, but had not got their clothes on, and we stood at the door till they
were ready; and Mr. Lion took what papers he could find, and they were put into
a trunk; the trunk was locked, and he put the key in his pocket, and there was
a coach at the door; and I took down the trunk, and put in the chaise, and he
came along with us, and I got at the back of the chaise, and went to the
Sheriff Clerk's Office, and left the trunk at the office.


Q. You have mentioned what passed in the room, and the manner in which the
papers were put in the trunk; now, did the Panel himself put any of the papers
in?


A. Yes, he was helping.


Q. Did Mr. Gerald likewise assist to put the papers in the trunk?


A. Yes; Mr. Gerald's papers were put in first, and then Mr. Margarot's, and
then the trunk was locked and carried to the Sheriff Clerk's Office.

John Macdonald, cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. Could you at that time discriminate which were my papers and which were
those of Mr. Gerald?


A. I can neither tell which were yours, nor which were his; but, it is my
opinion, yours were put in first.


Q. Were the drawers locked? --


A. No.


Q. You did not see a key in those drawers? --


A. No.


Q. Was the room door locked?


A. No, it was open when I came in; you was apprehended, I dare say, before I
came in.


Q. Were the papers put into the trunk tied up in parcels or loosely?


A. Some were tied up, and some were loose.


Q. Did we tie up any of them before you


A. I did not see any string tied on them.


Q. Who took them out of the drawers?


A. Mr. Lion took them out.


Q. Do you recollect the reason why Mr. Lion would not show me the warrant?


A. You did not insist upon showing it much.


Q. Did he show it? and remember you are upon your oath.


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. You well recollect that I asked him to produce it?


A. Yes.


Q. And you are not certain that he did show it? --


A. No.


Q. But you perfectly recollect that I asked him to show it?


A. Yes.

Thomas Coburn called.
Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any objection to this witness?


Mr. Margarot. No, my Lord, he looks honest. (Sworn).


Q. Are you a member of any of the Societies of Friends of the People? --


A. I was.


Q. Was you a Delegate from that society to the British Convention?


A. Yes, I was a member of both.


Q. Did you attend regularly their meeting?


A. My business did not allow me a regular attendance, but I attended as often
as I could.


Q. Do you recollect, during your attendance at those meetings, whether there
was any subdivision, any smaller meetings that the Convention was divided into?
--


A. Yes.


Q. What were they called?


A. The first name they got, was Divisions; but they were afterward called
Sections.


Q. What terms did the members of the Convention generally address each other
by?


A. The terms were different; but the general term was, Citizen.


Q. Do you recollect that you had different Committees appointed in that
Convention for the forwarding of business?


A. I don't recollect several Committees.


Q. But some?


A. I have heard some mentioned.


Q. And what were they called?


A. That that I recollect most, at present, was the Committee of Union.


Q. Did you ever hear of a Committee of Secrecy? --


A. Yes.


Q. A Convention of Emergency?


A. I don't recollect the hearing of that.


Q. Do you recollect hearing the term organization mentioned? --


A. I don't remember.


Q. Had you primary assemblies to refer to?


A. I cannot say.


Q. How were your meetings called?


A. It was generally called the British Convention.


Q. But when you met on a particular night, and talked about it the next day,
what name did you give it?


A. The British Convention.


Q. Did you ever use the name of sittings?


A. Yes, frequently.


Q. You say you attended as often as your business permitted?


A. Yes.


Q. Have you had occasion to see the panel there?


A. Yes, frequently.


Q. Did you ever see him act as Preses or Chairman at these meetings? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you ever hear him move any resolutions at these meetings, of any kind?


A. I have very frequently heard Mr. Margarot speak; but unless some particular
resolution be mentioned, I cannot say.


Q. Do you recollect at any time, any motion or proposal for a Committee of
Union?


A. No; I was not present then.


Q. Do you recollect his having delivered a speech, at any of the meetings you
have attended, that had any relation to a Convention Bill? --


A. I don't recollect.


Q. With any reference to such a bill as had passed in Ireland?


A. No:


Mr. Solicitor General. Do you remember a motion being made by Mr. Calendar? --


A. Yes.


Q. Do you remember any thing what it was about?


A. I remember one of the motions, about the people meeting in defense of their
liberties, in case of any bill being brought into Parliament, similar to a
Convention Bill in Ireland against the Constitution of the country.


Q. What did Mr. Calendar propose that your Convention should do in that case?


A. I recollect a motion of that import being introduced, and that Mr. Calendar
acknowledged the motion as his; but as to any thing relative to that motion, I
do not know.


Q. Was you present when the motion was made?


A. There was a rule in the Convention, that no motion should be discussed the
same night on which it was made; I was present when it was brought in by Mr.
Calendar.


Q. What was it that Mr. Calendar proposed should be done in case such a bill
should be brought into the British Parliament?


Mr. Margarot. I object to that question, as it respects Mr. Calendar, and not
me.


Mr. Solicitor General. It is charged in the indictment against this very
panel; and, therefore, I will repeat the question. What was it that Mr.
Calendar proposed should be done, in case it should be brought into the British
Parliament?


A. That the people should meet to assert their right, so far as I recollect.


Q. Was there any debate upon it that night?


A. It is a rule that there shall be no debate when a question is proposed.


Q. Was you present when it was discussed?


A. Not when it was discussed in that shape in which Mr. Callendar introduced
it; but I was when it was amended: so far as I recollect, the spirit of Mr.
Calendar's motion was retained; but it was very much extended: there was a
proposal of what, in certain events, should take place. I don't clearly
remember the circumstances about it; but it was a motion for a Secret
Committee, in case those events should take place.


Q. Was it proposed that the Convention should assemble in certain events?


A. Yes, it was, that they should meet in a certain place, in certain events.


Q. Now, be so good as tell us what those events were, as far as you remember
them?


A. The one already named, was that of a bill being brought into Parliament
similar to the Convention Bill in Ireland; as to the other, I cannot remember.


Q. Was any thing said about the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act? --


A. I think there was.


Q. Was there any thing said about the repeal of the Scotch Act, 1701, of
wrongous imprisonment?


A. I don't recollect that.


Q. Was any thing said in case of an invasion of foreign troops?


A. I think I remember that.


Q. Was any place fixed upon for the meetings? how was that determined upon?


A. There was a motion that a place should be fixed upon by a Secret Committee;
they were to find out a way of letting the Delegates know of it.

Q Was it not to be published? --


A. No.


Q. Was it to be told them immediately, or only told them when that emergency
should happen?


A. There was a mention of a sealed letter to be given to each Delegate.


Q. Who made this motion with respect to the place of meeting? --


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. Read that paper.

The witness reads it. "Citizen Margarot proposed the following motion: That a
Secret Committee of three, with the Secretary, be appointed to determine the
place where such Convention of Emergency shall meet; and such place shall
remain a secret with them, and with the Secretary of this Convention; and, that
the Delegates shall, at the breaking up of the present session, be entrusted
with a sealed letter, containing the name of the place of meeting. This letter
shall be delivered unopened to their constituents; the receipt of which shall
be acknowledged by a letter to the Secretary, preserved in the same state,
until the period shall arive at which it shall be deemed necessary for the
Delegates to set off. This motion was seconded by Citizen Moffat."


Q. Is that the motion?


A. To the best of my recollection there was a motion of a similar import to
that.


Q. Do you know who were the Members of this Secret Committee?


A. I recollect some of them.


Q. Was Mr. Margarot one of them?


A. To the best of my recollection, he was one of them.


Q. Do you remember Mr. Margarot making any speech to the Convention before he
had made his motion? --


A. I do not.


Q. Do you remember his saying any thing at all about its being a tocsin? --


A. I do not.


Q. You remember that the case of the Convention Bill was one of the cases of
emergency? --


A. Yes.


Q. And of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act?


A. I heard that mentioned.


Q. You also recollect something about an invasion being mentioned? --


A. I think I do.


Q. Did you hear any proposal during the time you attended this meeting, that
this Convention should act in case they should be dispersed? --


A. Yes.


Q. Who made that motion?


A. I do not recollect at present.


Q. Do you think Mr. Margarot made a motion of that kind?


A. It runs in my mind that he did; but I cannot swear that it was him.


Q. Did you hear Mr. Margarot make any speech that had a reference to that case?


A. I think I recollect something of Mr. Margarot speaking as to the propriety
of such a thing.


Q. Are you sure?


A. I cannot be particular; but there is a conceit in my mind that he did.


Q. Do you remember Mr. Sinclair making a motion of that kind? --


A. I think I do.


Q. Do you remember any thing particular about the passing of that?


A. So far as my recollection serves me, we were pretty unanimous.


Q. Do you recollect all the Convention standing up at the time they passed it?
--


A. Yes; I think I do.


Q. Did it contain any particular expressions of their declaring before God and
the world that they would do so and so? Do you recollect that that made a part
of the motion?


A. Certainly these words were mentioned, but I am not certain whether it was
the decided resolution of the Convention or not.


Q. Do you remember whether this motion, or the resolution of the Convention,
bore any thing that they declared before God and the world that we should
follow the wholesome example of former times?


A. I cannot say; I don't remember it.


Q. Did it say any thing about paying no attention to a Convention Bill if it
should be passed?


A. I think there was a mention of something similar to this, but whether it
was made a part of the final resolution of the Committee, I cannot tell: there
was a great deal of loose expressions made use of.


Q. Did you hear any thing said in the Convention about burning that resolution
of Sinclair's?


A. No, I heard nothing of that.


Q. Did you hear any thing said about burning any of the other motions?


A. I don't recollect; they seemed, to be confident of what they were doing,
and were not acting, under the apprehension of fear.


Q. Was there any thing said about destroying or not inserting it in the
minutes? --


A. I don't recollect.


Q. At the time this Secret Committee was appointed, was there any opposition
made to it? --


A. I don't recollect.

Thomas Coburn cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. It seems you are a member of the British Convention?


A. I was.


Q. What is your profession?


A. My profession is partly a manufacturer in the weaving line, and partly a
merchant.

Q Do you pay any taxes? -- I do.


Q. Do you find these taxes heavy?


A. I have very often thought them very heavy.


Q. You are a member of the Friends of the People? --


A. Yes.


Q. What was your reason for joining the Friends of the People?


A. The reason was, a thorough conviction of the necessity of a Reform in the
British House of Commons.


Q. What was your reason of accepting the office of delegate in the British
Convention?


Q. It was to help forward that great and grand object that so forcibly struck
my mind.


Q. Did you mean to help it forward by legal means or force of arms?


A. Force of arms was never mentioned in the Convention, and it is the last
thing that I should wish, to see a drop of blood spilt in the cause.


Q. In the British Convention did you ever see any tendency to have recourse to
open force?


A. It was diametrically opposite to my views to have the least recourse to
open force, nor was it the subject of discussion in the Convention.


Q. Have you heard of a committee of Union? --


A. Yes.


Q. What was to be the purport of that Committee of Union?


A. So far as I recollect, the design of that Committee was to draw up
regulations, by which the people of England and Scotland, of the same
sentiments, might join in their endeavors to obtain that object.


Q. You have heard of a Convention of Secrecy likewise?


A. Of a Committee of Secrecy I have.


Q. Have you ever seen it customary in any Clubs, if you ever belonged to any,
that there should be a certain degree of trust reposed in a small number of
confidential men, who should form a Committee and retain some secrets to
themselves, not to be divulged to the world? Have you ever witnessed any such
thing, or does it strike you as an unprecedented thing?


A. So far from striking me as an unprecedented thing, that it strikes me upon
many occasions as a necessary thing, prudentially to keep secrets of every
society when it is necessary for their interest.


Q. Have you ever heard of a Committee of Organization in the Convention? --


A. Yes, I think I have.


Q. What was the drift of that Committee of Organization?


A. What I conceive to be the direct design of the Committee was to form rules,
by which the Convention might regulate themselves in their present and in their
subsequent meetings, if they should see occasion for any.


Q. Do you think that the Committee of Organization did not likewise refer to
the internal regulation of the Convention?


A. As I meant to express in my last answer, I considered the committee of
Organization to refer chiefly to the internal affairs of the Convention, and
with respect to future Conventions, if there should be such.


Q. It seems that you have heard that meetings of the Convention were at times
called sittings; do you imagine that that expression was adopted as borrowed
from a neighboring country, or that is was an expression which followed of
course, and to which we are thoroughly accustomed in the English language?


A. However the reading of newspapers might lead us to make use of terms, I
cannot say; but it was certainly a word that it was very natural to make use of.


Q. You have seen me act as Preses? --


A. Yes.


Q. That word is Latin, is it not?


A. I am very little acquainted with Latin* I meant President.


Q. You are sufficiently acquainted with it to know that at present Rome is the
seat of the Pope, are you not?


A. We have no doubt of that.


Q. Consequently if there is any criminality in adopting a French word, do you
think there is not an equal criminality in using a Latin one*


A. These things appeared to me to be so trifling, that I did not think it
worth my while to make any objection to them: some were of French origin, and
some of British, and some of Latin; but I did not think it worth while to make
any objection to it.


Q. You have heard of a motion proposed by Mr. Callender; you were present when
it was originally moved, that the people should meet to assert their rights in
the Convention?


A. Assert their rights, were the words, to the best of my recollection.


Q. What do you understand by a Convention?


A. What I understand by a Convention is a meeting of men for any purpose that
they propose.


Q. Are the men who meet in Convention supposed to be delegated by a larger
body of men?


A. I cannot pretend a particular disquisition of these points, but it strikes
me so.


Q. By the word Convention, and meeting in Convention, did you understand a
peaceable assembly of men assembled to deliberate, or did you understand by it,
an assembly of men going to adopt violent measures, and to carry them into
execution themselves?


A. What I understand by Convention was, that they met with a sincere and
hearty design to promote the good of the country, by a thorough reform in the
British House of Commons, and that they meant to do this by peaceable means.


Q. Do you imagine there are sufficient abuses at present in the legislature of
this kingdom, to legalize our attempting to address them by petition, or any
form that might be legal and constitutional?


A. I have already said that I am deeply impressed with the idea of the
necessity of it: I see the most glaring abuses in it.


Q. Do you imagine that if a Convention Bill was to be passed, or was even to
be brought into the House of Commons, that it would not show a disposition in
the House of Commons to extend their privileges, and to encroach upon our
rights?


A. Such a Bill has always struck me as sapping the very foundations of Civil
Liberty; and, indeed going beyond the power of the legislators themselves, to
deprive the people of their natural rights.


Q. You say it is your opinion that there are already sufficient grounds for
the good people of this country to demand a Reform in Parliament; do you think
those grounds would not be increased by two such events as the bringing in of a
Convention Bill, or a motion for suspending the Habeas Corpus act, which is one
of the greatest privileges a subject of Britain enjoys, or the Bill for
preventing wrongous imprisonment; do you think that would not make a very
considerable addition to our complaints?


A. I am satisfied in my own mind, that it would increase the grievances of the
people, and be like a grave stone to their liberties.


Q. In what light did you look upon the members of the British Convention? Did
you look upon them as a turbulent set of vagabonds, or did you look upon them
as a body of men delegated by some of their fellow subjects for a certain
purpose, and that these men so delegated were industrious, peaceable,
creditable men?


A. Their design, I have to reason no call in question, was the good of their
country: as to characters, there is always a mixture in all assemblies; but I
believe, taking the whole together, there was a great degree of respectability
with respect to characters.


Q. Then they did not appear to you to come under the description of swine,
rabble, or wretches?


A. As the friends of their country, I believe not.


Q. When is the properest time for men to assemble and deliberate? It in time
of danger, or prosperity? It appears that the Convention was to assemble in
this manner, in the moment that an invasion of foreign troops should take place
in Great Britain. Do you conceive that to be a time of danger, and calling for
the attention of all Britons throughout the island; or do you think it a time
for them to sit idle and suffer themselves to be enslaved by a foreign power?


A. I think it is high time that a Reform had taken place, as it ought to have
done long since.


Q. When you have any thing that interests you very much, do you publish it all
through your house, and different parts of your family, or sometimes keep a
secret to yourself in your private affairs?


A. Yes, no doubt; and every person endued with any degree of prudence will
find occasion to keep their secrets.


Q. If you had a particular piece of business to do, and that you was
apprehensive that a superior power, inimical to your design and to your
welfare, would prevent you from doing that particular business at such a place,
would you inform that inimical power where you was to meet to do that business?


A. I should certainly do every thing in my power, from common prudence, to
keep it from him.


Q. When you send a letter by the post to a friend do you ever attach any
degree of criminality to sealing that letter till he gets into the country,
especially if you wish the contents not to be known to him till a certain
period?


A. No.


Q. Can you discover any thing of a seditious nature in a Convention standing
up to pass a resolution?


A. No.


Q. I find here something which I don't know, whether it is thoroughly assented
to by you, that there was a declaration before God and the world, that they
would follow the wholesome example of their forefathers; what is the
characteristic of Britons?


A. That they are strongly attached to the cause of liberty.


Q. How came we by the Revolution? was it by any exertion of our forefathers?


A. It no doubt was.

Q How came we by the Magna Charta?


A. So far as I understand the subject, it was entirely by the same means.


Q. Did your forefathers do wrong in so exerting themselves?


A. My opinion is that they did not do enough.


Q. Do you think it impossible for a House of Commons to do an unconstitutional
act?


A. There has been many things done in the House of Commons which I sincerely
regret.


Q. We had originally Parliaments, or some time back, Parliaments of three
years; now by an Act of Parliament they are lengthened to seven years; suppose
another Act should make them during life, and a third Act should make them
hereditary, do you imagine that would be an unconstitutional act?


A. It has always struck me as a thing beyond their power to alter or destroy
the fundamental rights of the people, or any thing that would extend their own
power.


Q. Do you imagine that the power originates with the people?


A. I do so.


Q. Do you imagine it to be either in the Bill of Rights, or the claim of
rights, expressed, that the people should be at liberty to meet to communicate
to each other their grievances, and plan methods for obtaining redress?


A. I have often wished to see the Bill of Rights, the Habeas Corpus Act, and
all those things; but I have never had it in my power; but in my opinion, the
object of all government is the good of the people, and that the liberties of
the people ought to be carefully guarded by them.


Q. It appears by what has passed here, that the Convention had some notion of
a God: did they ever pray in their meetings?


A. They did.


Q. Did you ever see any disorderly behavior there? were they riotous or
tumultuous?


A. Considering their numbers, they were free of that beyond many meetings that
I have seen of the same number: I saw no riotous meetings: there were sometimes
disputes, but no riots.


Q. As to the burning of the motion, you said they were not acting under the
apprehension of fear: did you suppose they could justify their proceedings?


A. I always considered, that in the Convention the Members that had occasion
to speak, always spoke freely, believing that they had nothing essentially
secret to keep to themselves, but that their great object was the good of their
country.


Q. Did you ever discover in the Convention or in the members of it, either in
or out of the Convention, any propensity to sedition, treason, or rebellion?


A. I have always said, that as far as I could discover the design of the
Convention, it was to obtain a thorough Reform in the British House of Commons,
by peaceable and legal means.


Mr. Alexander Aitcheson sworn.


Lord Henderland. Have you any malice or ill will against the panel at the bar?


A. It is impossible I should, my Lord: on the contrary, I esteem him a second
Sydney. -- I am very much obliged to the public prosecutor, on account of my
family, otherwise, I would much sooner appear here as the panel at your
Lordships' bar, than as a witness.


Counsel for the Crown. Were you a Member of the British Convention?


A. Yes; of all the three Conventions I had the honor to be a Delegate from
the Canongate Society; the Delegates, considering themselves as Delegates for
six months, adjourned their meeting; but upon account of the coming down of the
English Delegates, they resumed it again.


Q. That was in November last. --


A. Yes.


Q. Who were the English Delegates?


A. There were four or five of them; there was Citizen Margarot, Citizen
Sinclair, Citizen Gerald from London, and Citizen Brown from Sheffield.


Q. Now did you act as secretary or assistant secretary?


A. Yes; assistant secretary.


Q. Were there a scroll of minutes drawn up? --


A. Yes.


Q. Look at that, and see if any part of it is your handwriting?


A. Yes; a very great part of it; but there were some others who wrote.


Q. Who were they?


A. George Ross, and afterward the Convention appointed three assistants daily.


Q. Who is George Ross?


A. Clerk in the Gazetteer Office.


Q. This scroll of minutes, did they contain, to far as you could judge, a fair
and distinct account of what happened in the Convention?


A. To the best of my knowledge and belief they did; I should have been guilty
of palming falsehood upon the public and the Convention if they did not: but
there may have been mistakes.


Q. Were they corrected the day after they were made out?


A. By no means: they were postponed till a future day, till a committee should
be appointed to revise them.


Q. Was Mr. Margarot present at these meetings commonly?


A. As far as I observed he was a regular attendant.


Q. Was he sometimes Chairman at the meetings?


A. Once he certainly was.


Q. Look at that: whose handwriting is it?


A. It is mine (reads it). Citizen Margarot moved that a Committtee be
appointed to consider of the means, and draw up the outlines of a proper plan
for a general union between the two nations, as before proposed.


Q. Did Mr. Margarot make that motion?


A. He certainly did, or I should not have minuted it down: a simple fact like
that I cannot be mistaken in; but in a speech, viva voce, I might have made a
mistake (reads it again); and give me leave to add, I expected from Mr.
Margarot's abilities and the spirit of the times, a more perfect system than
was made up by a sycophant faction in the reign of queen Anne.


Q. Look at that.


A. (Reads.) Citizen A. Callendar moved, That in case the Minister bring into
the Commons' House a motion for a Convention Bill, it shall be noticed
immediately to the Delegates. The words shall be noticed immediately to the
Delegates, are in my handwriting.


Q. Do you remember any discussion in the Convention upon that motion;
particularly, did Mr. Margarot speak upon the occasion?


Q. Indeed my memory is so treacherous that I cannot recollect any thing,
especially when I am taking notes: if I don't write at all, I remember
tolerably well the chief facts, but if I do write, I recollect nothing.


Q. Was there any thing said about that event being a tocsin to the friends of
liberty?


A. I never heard the word tocsin mentioned in the Convention.


Q. Do you remember any amendment or alteration upon Mr. Callendar's motion, or
if it gave rise to any other motion in the Convention?


A. Such things may have happened, but I cannot recollect.


Q. Do you know of a motion being-made by Mr. Sinclair in consequence of, and
following up Mr. Callendar's motion?


A. I was absent a variety of nights, when I wished to be present, but
particular business kept me away.


Q. But did you hear Mr. Margarot make any motion in consequence of Mr.
Callendar's?


A. It Is impossible that I can say.


Q. Did Mr. Sinclair make any motion about the Convention meeting on certain
events?


A. Yes; there was a motion made, at least I understood so. I came in one
evening pretty late, and Mr. Sinclair, or some person, had made a motion, and
as soon as I had taken my seat, Mr. Sinclair made a motion, that something that
had passed before should be burned, and I was surprised, and got up and opposed
it, and was seconded -- upon the ground, that as every thing we had done before
was open to the public, we should do nothing secret, and therefore the motion
was not carried.


Q. Did that motion relate to the Delegates' meeting?


A. I was surprised and alarmed at any thing being secret; but when I
understood that nothing more was meant by it than merely concealing the place
where they were to meet, I thought there was nothing at all in it.


Lord Justice Clerk. Did you hear any thing of a Committee of Secrecy?


A. I enquired next day, and was told the nature of it, that it was merely to
conceal the intended place of meeting, in case of opposition, and in case of
necessity.


Q. Did you hear any thing about the Convention of Emergency at all in the
meeting?


A. Yes; at the sections and among our friends.


Q. Read that.


A. (Reads from the minutes.) Citizen Margarot read and proposed the following
motion: That a Secret Committee of three, and the Secretary, be appointed to
determine the place where such Convention of Emergency shall meet; and such
place shall remain a secret with them and the Secretary of this Convention, and
that each Delegate shall, at the breaking up of the present session, be
entrusted with a sealed letter, containing the name of the place of the
meeting; this letter shall be delivered unopened to his constituents, the
receipt of which shall be acknowledged by a letter to the Secretary, preserved
in the same state, until the period shall arrive at which it shall be deemed
necessary for the Delegates to set off; this motion was seconded by Citizen
Moffat: the greater part of that is my own handwriting.


Q. You see mention is there made of a Convention of Emergency: now I want to
know, as far as you recollect, the cases in which they were to meet?


A. As far as I recollect, they were to meet in case a motion was made in
Parliament to bring in a bill similar to that passed in Ireland, to prevent our
having any meetings.


Q. Was one of the cases the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act?


A. I don't recollect.


Q. Was the case of an invasion of foreign troops mentioned?


A. Yes.


Q. Do you recollect any other case of Emergency in which the Convention were
to meet?


A. I don't recollect any other.


Q. Was there another case, if any attempt should be made to disperse the
Convention? was that a case in which they were to meet?


A. I cannot say that I recollect that.


Q. Was you in the Convention the evening before the apprehension of Mr.
Margarot and Skirving, and the other persons?


A. I might, very possibly; but I don't recollect I was present that evening
after they had been apprehended in the morning.


Q. But do you recollect whether you was in the Convention the preceding
evening?


A. I cannot charge my memory with it.


Q. Look at that?


A. The whole of that is written by another person (reads from the Minutes).
Citizen Margarot begs leave to bring in a motion, to the effect, that the
moment of any illegal dispersion of the present Convention shall be considered
as a summons to the Delegates to repair to the place of meeting appointed for
the Convention of Emergency by the Secret Committee; that the Secret Committee
is instructed to proceed, without delay, to fix the place of meeting; and that
the same motion be considered next evening; which was accordingly granted. My
Lords, I observe, from the whole of this being written by another person, that
I was not present at all that evening.


Lord Advocate. Look at the first of these papers, Number 3. of the general
inventory, and tell me if you ever saw it before?


A. (Reads from the Minutes a motion for a union between the two kingdoms, to
demand the restoration of their rights.) I think it is a most excellent motion,
my Lord, and am very sorry it was not followed up.


Lord Advocate. I did not ask you for your opinion, Sir.


A. My Lords, I beg to say, this persecution, and all of them, are for
opinions; and I must, before God, in justice to my country, declare, that it is
for opinions as well as facts.

Gentlemen of the Jury, It Is a prosecution for opinions.


Q. Look at that paper which has your mark upon it.


A. It has, but it is not my writing.


Q. Where did you receive it?


A. From the Convention; I remember reading it from the beginning to the end.


Q. Who is James Gartley?


A. He was Delegate from Glasgow.


Q. Is it your handwriting upon the back of it?


A. Yes; it is.


Q. Had you an opportunity of seeing the newspapers in which the proceedings of
the Convention were published to the world?


A. I had an opportunity; but was so extremely hurried at that time with my own
business, and that of the Convention, that I could not read them, but laid them
by to be a treasure of entertainment at some future time; for four weeks, at
that time, I did not read a single article in the Gazetteer.


Q. Have you read them since?


A. Only in the Sheriff Clerk's Chamber; and that seemed to contain a very
accurate account.


Q. And corresponded with the Minutes you yourself had taken? --


A. Yes.

Alexander Aitcheson cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. You was a member of the British Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was you, prior to that, a Member of the Friends of the People? --


A. Yes, long prior.


Q. What was your motive for associating with the Friends of the People?


A. The public good, which I hope I will always have at heart.


Q. What do you understand by the public good.


A. I understand, by the public good, that grievances should be redressed, and
every man made as happy as possible.


Q. Had you any specific plan?


A. Yes, we had just two objects; these two objects were, a shorter duration of
Parliaments, and a more frequent election of Representatives; because we
considered the length of parliaments, and the slow return of elections, to be
the two great and fundamental causes of all the grievances which the nation
labors under.


Q. What sort of men were these with whom you associated, the Friends of the
People? I don't particularly mean what class, high or low, rich or poor; but
what morals, what temper, what behavior; in short, what opinion do you form of
them in general?


A. I considered them to be a good, moral, respectable set of people; not
respectable in point of riches, but in that respect which will be looked at by
the all-seeing-eye of the Almighty; respectable in point of morals.


Q. Did they ever show any disposition to treason, sedition, or felony? --


A. Not that I ever saw.


Q. Was you delegated by a Society of the Friends of the People to the
Convention?


A. I was some time.


Q. Did the other Members of the Convention represent a number of men from
here? -- A Yes.


Q. Did it appear to you, that the Convention adhered to the spirit of reform
which was set on foot by the Friends of the People?


A. They certainly did, to the best of my ideas; and even when they followed up
the primary idea of shorter duration of Parliaments, and more frequent
elections, and adopted the idea of universal suffrage and annual Parliaments,
they went certainly no further than the Duke of Richmond and Mr. Pit had gone
before.


Q. You must take care not to mention the word primary, because it may
inculpate me further; for that is one word that is charged against me.


A. I consider all words in our Dictionary lawful to be used; and it is a
dreadful crisis that we are come to, if a man is to be criminated for a word.


Q. You spoke of the English Delegates; you don't mean that they represented
the people of England?


A. Certainly, only those who sent them; I understood that Mr. Margarot and Mr.
Sinclair represented about 5000 people, and Mr. Brown about 5000 from Sheffield.


Q. You have not positivey sworn to the entire scroll of Minutes shown to you;
some part of it you don't acknowledge.


A. I can only swear to that that was wrote by myself; and so far as my ideas
led me to think, I was right in writing them.


Q. Though the name of Minutes is given to them, are they, in fact, the Minutes
of the Convention till they have received the revisal of the Committee?


A. Certainly not; to correct and to expunge all errors whatever.


Q. Were they ever offered, or sent forth to the world by way of publication?


A. Not that I know of.


Q. Were they ever corrected by authority of the Convention?

A I never heard of it.


Q. Are there any erasures, any interlineations in them?


A. Several emendations were made upon the motions of one or two Members; but
when several emendation were proposed, it was said, you may leave that to the
Committee.


Q. To the best of your recollection (I made a motion about the union of the
two kingdoms), did it appear to you that that motion had a seditious tendency?


A. On the contrary, I conceive it would be for the good of mankind, and the
salvation of these kingdoms.


Q. Do you look upon tocsin to be a French word?


A. I suppose so: but I cannot say that it is: I never heard it made use of in
the Convention.


Q. Are you sure that it is not instead of one French word, two Chinese words?


A. I cannot say; I know nothing about the Chinese.


Q. I have a notion it is; then, all the knowledge you gained of a Secret
Committee, was the next day among the Sections, and among the Friends?


A. That reminds me of a mistake I made before; for I find that I have recorded
that very motion which Mr. Sinclair moved to be burnt, and which was afterward
agreed not to be burnt; and I heard further of the business next day.


Q. There was a motion made for a Convention of Emergency; did the Convention
ever fix upon or delineate the plan by which they were to act, or did that
Convention ever take place?


A. Not that I know of.


Q. In joining the Friends of the People, and in joining the British
Convention, for the purpose of obtaining a reform, did you think yourselves
warranted by the Constitution to endeavor to obtain a redress of grievances?


A. Perfectly; and I would think so still, if I were to be sent to Botany Bay
for it.


Q. Are those grievances done away?


A. By no means; and I am sorry for it.


Q. Are you of opinion, that if a Convention Bill was passed in the British
Parliament, it would tend to lessen those grievances.


A. It would extend them tenfold.


Q. What would be the consequence of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act,
and of the Act for preventing wrongous imprisonment?


A. It would be certainly a great encroachment upon the privilege of Britons.


Q. Might not every peaceable inhabitant of these realms run great danger, in
case of a foreign invasion, of losing his property, by the enemies plundering
him of it, if they were successful? --


A. I have no doubt of that.


Q. Do you think it would be more constitutional in Englishmen, more
constitutional in Scotchmen, more constitutional in Britons, to sit idle and
look at a foreign invasion, or attend a Convention of Emergency.


A. I dare say the whole Court, and all the audience will agree, that to meet
upon such an occasion, would be a work of necessity.


Q. Was foreign invasion the expression that was made use of, or was a French
invasion ever mentioned?


A. As far as I recollect, French invasion was mentioned in some person's
motion; but I cannot say in whose motion, or whether it was in doors, or out of
doors; or in the Convention, or out of the Convention, I cannot say.


Q. Then you mean to say, that an Invasion from France was uppermost in the
minds of the Convention?


A. I cannot say what was uppermost; but I know I have heard that expression,
but I believe it was out of the Convention.


Q. Was it customary for the motions to be handed to the table, which were not
passed in the Convention?


A. Many such were handed in, and many not passed, and not taken notice of at
all.


Q. Are you certain, that the two motions shown you just now, and which were
indorsed by you, and, I presume, were given into you in that manner, are you
sure they were ever read in the Convention?


A. Be so good as show me them again (looks at them). One of these motions is
certainly new to me since I came before the Court: a person might say to me,
there is a question concerning union, and I might indorse it so without ever
reading it.


Q. What was the mode of proceeding in opening and closing the business of the
day?


A. As the business of all Christian people should be, it was begun and ended
by prayer.


Q. Did you ever observe any thing of a seditious or riotous appearance in the
Convention? --


A. Not in the least.

Did you ever hear any thing mentioned, or whispered in the Convention, that
might tend to overturn the Constitution?


A. Never.


Q. Did you ever hear any thing mentioned there against the King? --


A. Never.


Q. Did you ever hear any thing mentioned there against place-men and
pensioners? --


A. Often.


Q. That, I suppose, is the Sedition that is meant to be charged.

George Ross sworn, examined.
Witness. I thought it very hard that the Lord Advocate, when I was here
before, should charge me with falsehood. I hope he will not do so now.


Q. What profession are you of?


A. Clerk in the Gazetteer office.


Q. How long have you been in that profession?


A. Seven or eight years.


Q. Was you a Member of the meeting of the Friends of the People? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was you a Member of the British Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Delegate from what society?


A. From the Canongate Society.


Q. Did you act in any particular office in the Convention?


A. I sometimes acted as Assistant Secretary?


Q. Who else assisted the Secretary? --


A. Several persons.


Q. Were there any persons who wrote shorthand and took down the debates? --


A. Yes, my brother.


Q. Look at these Minutes, and see if you can find your own handwriting? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you take down, to the best of your abilities, what did really pass in
the Convention?


A. I certainly would take nothing down that I thought improper.


Q. And you would take down nothing but what passed?


A. No.


Q. Do you recollect, if it was the practice at the commencement of the
meeting, to read over the scroll of the Minutes?


A. I have seen it done sometimes, and sometimes not.


Q. Do you recollect whether it was ever usual to correct them upon reading
them over?


A. I think, I recollect one night, there were some corrections.


Q. Are you acquainted with that Gentleman?


A. I have had the honor to see Mr. Margarot many times, and been in his
company.


Q. Was he a Member of the Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Have you heard him speak?


A. Yes, I have heard him propose motions.


Q. Did you ever see him act as Chairman?


A. I cannot recollect to a certainty, whether he was or not.


Q. Do you recollect any motion in the Convention with respect to a union
between England and Scotland?


A. I recollect the union with the Societies of the Friends of the People in
England.


Q. Read that?


A. (Reads). Margarot moved, that a committee be appointed to consider.


A. I don't recollect that.


Q. Whose handwriting is it?


A. I believe it is Mr. Aitcheson's.


Q. You recollect there was such a motion?


A. Yes, that there was a union to take place between the English societies and
the Scotch.


Q. Do you remember any motion being made of a Convention of Emergency? --


A. Yes.


Q. Do you remember any thing about the purpose of that Convention; of the
events in which they were to meet?


A. To remonstrate to Parliament against a Bill, such as a Convention Bill.


Q. Were there any particular persons who made a motion respecting it? --


A. I believe it was made by Mr. Callendar.

(Reads Mr. Callendar's motion).
Q. Do you recollect that that motion was made?


A. A. Yes it is my handwriting.


Q. Do you remember the events that were to happen.


A. That, in case of a Convention Bill, they were to meet in order to draw up a
remonstrance to Parliament.


Q. Was any other event mentioned? any thing about the Habeas Corpus Act? --


A. I don't at present recollect.


Q. Do you recollect any thing about a foreign invasion, or any thing about
foreign troops?


A. Yes, about the Hessians and Hanoverians being brought over.


Q. You spoke about Mr. Callendar's motion: when was it taken up? the next day?
--


A. I cannot say.


Q. Was the Convention used to take notice of the motions at the time they were
made, or did they lie over?


A. They generally laid over.


Q. Was that motion of Mr. Callendar's taken up afterward?


A. I cannot say.


Q. Was there any debate about Mr. Callendar's motion respecting the Convention
Bill? and recollect yourself before you give an answer? --


A. I cannot be particular.


Q. Were there any amendments proposed to that motion?


A. I believe there were.


Q. What resolution was come to in consequence of the amendment? --


A. I don't know particularly; I don't recollect.


Q. Is that your writing?


A. Yes, (reads). Citizen Sinclair read the amendments upon Citizen Callendar's
motion; and then there comes some other person's writing; and, it was agreed,
that the house should resolve itself into a Committee, to consider of the
amendments proposed; the Convention being resumed, and the amendments being
read over, the members stood upon their legs, and solemnly and unanimously
passed the following resolution.


Q. Now recollect yourself, and tell us what passed at that time. Was it a
resolution upon Citizen Callendar's motion?


A. Yes.


Q. Now recollect what that motion was?


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. Look if it is mentioned there?


A. No, there is a blank page follows it. The resolution then passed, was
reserved to be entered 'till the end of the Minutes.


Lord Advocate. It is very material that the Jury should take down these words;
for it is that upon which I shall found a very material part of what I shall
have to say to them. Repeat it again.


A. I think the Resolution that was then passed, was left to be entered at the
last part of the Minutes.


Q. Look, and see if you find any more blanks?


A. I believe there are not (looks over the Minutes). Yes, here is a blank of
four lines.


Q. Do you remember any proposal being made about burning any part of the
written evidence, or destroying any motion or resolution the Convention had
come to?


A. No, I don't recollect.


Q. Do you know Mr. Aitcheson?


A. Yes.


Q. Do you recollect any objection being made by him to burning or destroying
any resolution that they might have come to?


A. No, I do not.


Q. Do you recollect any other person, a Member of that Convention, objecting
to that measure?


A. I do not recollect any such thing.


Mr. Burnet. Do you remember a motion being made for a Secret Committee? --


A. Yes.


Mr. Solicitor General. Who was it that proposed that motion, which passed
solemnly and unanimously? --


A. I cannot say.


Q. Did the members all stand up when that motion passed so solemnly?


A. I don't recollect; but I should suppose so, from what is written here.


Q. Do you remember any thing about declaring before God and the world, any
thing? --


A. I cannot say.


Q. Do you remember any thing that was said about calamitous circumstances?


A. No; there was a resolution in case of a Convention Bill.


Q. Do you remember any thing about paying no regard to such an act if it
passed? --


A. I never would agree to that.


Q. Do you remember any speech or motion being made as to what the Convention
were to do, upon the meeting being dispersed?


A. If they were dispered they were to meet in another place.


Q. Who was it that spoke with regard to that; did Mr. Margarot say any thing,
or make a speech upon that subject? recollect yourself? --


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. Was is debated? Was there any difference of opinion upon that subject?


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. Do you remember any motion being made with regard to it?


A. I believe there was.


Q. Was it Mr. Margarot that made the motion?


A. I am not very certain whether he did or not, but I rather suspect he did.


Q. Look at that paper (a motion for appointing a place of meeting). Did you
ever see that paper before?


A. Yes in the Court.


Q. Do you recollect such a motion being made, and if Mr. Margarot was the
person that made it? --


A. Yes.


Q. You said sometime ago that you acted as Clerk in the Gazetteer Office, and
that your brother took notes in shorthand of the debates in the Convention?
now, were they printed?

A, My brother took the notes.


Q. Did you read them?


A. Yes, after they were printed.


Q. So far as yourself read, were they accurate?


A. They were pretty exact.


Q. Was any thing said, so far as you remember, in the printed paper which had
not passed in the Convention?


A. I cannot say.


Q. Was the statement given in the Gazetteer accurate of those motions and
resolutions which you yourself heard?


A. I believe they were.


Q. Do you recollect any speech by Mr. Margarot, or any body else, in which
spies were mentioned? --


A. No, I do not.


Q. Who is the manager of the Gazetteer? --


A. Mr. Scott.


Q. This is a paper which is printed in the Gazetteer Office, I suppose? -- It
looks like it.


Q. Is it a copy of the Gazetteer? --


A. Yes.

George Ross cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. Are you a judge of sedition


A. I don't know what sedition is.


Q. Have you any idea of treason? --


A. Yes, I have.

Q What is your opinion of loyalty?


A. Loyalty is certainly to be true to the constitution of the country.


Q. Have you ever seen any thing in my behavior of a seditious tendency?


A. I don't know what sedition is; if you will tell me what sedition is, I will
tell you.


Q. That is a difficult thing; it seems nobody is agreed upon that here. Have
you ever seen me behave in an outrageous indecent manner?


A. No; you expressed a wish to have grievances redressed.


Q. Did I ever express a wish to overturn the constitution, or bring it back to
its original purity?


A. To bring it back to its original purity.


Q. Did I ever express wish to throw every thing into confusion, or to obtain a
reform in parliament?


A. That was what you always wished, to petition for a reform.


Q. Was my behavior consonant to my professions in that respect? --


A. Yes.


Q. Have you ever seen me drunk? --


A. Never.


Q. Have you ever seen me in a passion? --


A. I never did.


Q. Have I ever had any revising of what has here been called the Minutes of
the Convention, in the Office of the Gazetteer?


A. Never that I know of.


Q. Among your ideas of the Convention of Emergency, did you imagine that the
convention was to proceed to open force, or rather that it was to meet to
deliberate?


A. To meet and petition parliament for a redress of grievances.


Q. You heard me, it seems, mention spies; did I ever express any fear of them?


A. No, I don't recollect hearing you mention spies.


Q. I understood that you said so? --


A. No.


Q. Did you ever see any thing in the Convention but what was perfectly
peaceable and orderly?


A. I never saw any member behave disorderly or unpeaceably.


Q. Were there not some regulations drawn up for the more orderly regulation of
the Committee? Was not that the business which we first set about?


A. I don't recollect exactly; but I think there was a Committee of Regulation.


Q. The question I am going to put, will require your recollection, and the
attention of the Jury. Have you ever heard any man declare himself my enemy?


A. I have heard several people declare themselves enemies to us, as the
British Convention; but I cannot condescend to recollect any particular person.


Q. Was you in the Sheriff's Office the same day that I was?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you hear me converse with any of the messengers there?


A. I recollect being in the Sheriff's Chamber when there were some messengers
there; one of them and you had some words.


Q. What did he say?


A. I don't recollect the particular word he said, but I know he said something
which I thought improper at the time; I think it was one Lion, if I recollect
aright.


Q. You cannot recollect what that man said. --


A. No.


Q. What was the subject of the dispute; you say there were words between us.


A. I believe the substance of it was his manner of seizing you; that he would
not show you the warrant he had to take you up, or something of that


Q. And have you entirely forgot his expression? --


A. Yes.


Q. You have been asked about burning or destroying a motion. Did you ever hear
me say any thing to that purpose?


A. No.


Q. Did you say I was chosen a member of the Secret Committee? --


A. I cannot say.


Q. Did that Secret Committee ever act to your knowledge?


A. Not that I know of.


Q. Have you ever seen me act as preses or chairman?


A. I am not very certain.


Q. What is the business of a President of the Convention?


A. To keep order.


Q. Is he merely to regulate the speech or the behavior of the Convention?


A. Merely to regulate the behavior of the Convention.


Q. His powers go no further. --


A. No.


Q. It appears that the blank that is left in the Minutes, that the writing
just before it is your handwriting?


A. No; that was another blank for four lines.

William Ross sworn.
Mr. Burnett. What profession are you of?


A. Clerk in the Gazetteer Office.


Q. Was you a member of the meeting of the Friends of the People? -- A Yes.


Q. Was you a member of their society when it got the name of the British
Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was Mr. Margarot a member?


A. He was there, and I understand him to be a Member.


Q. Do you know who acted as Secretary to the Committee?


A. Mr. Skirving.


Q. Had Mr. Skirving any assistance?


A. I have seen my brother taking notes.


Q. Did you ever take notes?


A. Never as assistant to the Secretary.


Q. And what was your reason for taking notes?


A. For my own amusement, and for publication.


Q. Do you write shorthand? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you take them in short hand upon the occasion?


A. Yes.


Q. Recollect, if what you took down was an accurate statement, as far as your
abilities went, of what passed in the Convention?


A. I don't know whether it was an accurate statement; I did not make it
wilfully inaccurate: I was taken with a cold, and did not hear well.


Lord Justice Clerk. You wished to make it accurate?


A. I did not wish to make it inaccurate.


Q. Were they afterward published in the Gazetteer?


A. Yes, from the notes that I took, I drew out an account, which was published
in the Gazetteer.


Q. Does it consist with your knowledge, that the minutes were read over to the
Convention, the next day after?


A. No.


Q. Had you occasion to revise your notes in the Gazetteer after they were
thrown off? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did it appear to be an accurate statement of what had passed in the
Convention? --


A. Exactly, as far as I recollect.


Q. Have you ever had occasion to see the scroll of the Minutes of the
Convention? should you know them again if you should see them? --


A. I have seen them lying there.


Q. Should you know your brother's handwriting. --


A. Yes.


Q. Was Mr. Callendar a member of the Convention?


A. He used to attend there.


Q. Did you ever hear any thing of a motion made by him respecting the
Convention Bill?


A. I recollect such a motion being made in the Convention.


Q. Who was it made by? --


A. I am not certain.


Q. Do you remember hearing a debate on the motion respecting the Convention
Bill?


A. I recollect there was a debate upon that motion, but I don't recollect the
particulars.


Q. Do you remember any thing mentioned in that debate respecting a Convention
of Emergency?


A. I think it was at the same time that the Convention of Emergency was
mentioned?


Q. Do you remember any other event in which case it was to take place? --


A. I don't recollect.


Q. Do you remember any thing having been said about a foreign invasion in that
debate?


A. I believe there was something said about a foreign invasion.


Q. Are you sure nothing was said as to a French invasion?


A. No.


Q. Was any thing said about Hessians and Hanoverians?


A. I don't recollect that; it was, in general, troops, and foreign invasion.


Q. Was any thing said of foreign troops landing in this country?


A. I believe there was, but I cannot say I heard mention made of both.


Q. Did you hear of the Habeas Corpus Act?


A. Yes; on the same occasion.


Q. Do you remember any motion, or any speech having been made with respect to
the dispersion of the meeting, and what was to be done in thot event?


A. I recollect something being said about the dispersion of the Meeting; that
if they were illegally dismissed, the Convention should meet.


Lord Justice Clerk. Do you mean the Convention of Emergency?


A. I suppose it meant the members then present.


Q. Do you recollect who it was that spoke with regard to the dispersion of the
meeting?


A. A number of persons spoke, but I cannot recollect who it was.


Q. Did Mr. Margarot make a speech upon that subject?


A. I think he did.


Q. Did you hear of any motion being made with regard to a Secret Committee? --


A. Yes.


Q. How many did it consist of?


A. I don't recollect the number.


Q. Do you remember who made the motion with regard to it? --


A. I don't recollect.


Q. Was Mr. Margarot a Member of the Secret Committee?


A. I don't recollect whether he was or not.


Q. Look at that paper; did you see it in the Convention at any time? --


A. I never did.


Q. Did you hear that motion made for a Convention of Emergency?


A. I recollect a motion to that purpose having been made.


Q. Do you remember any thing of a Secret Committee being appointed? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was Mr. Margarot a member of it?


A. I do not recollect.


Q. (Shows him three Gazetteers). Look if they were published at your Office?
--


A. Yes.


Lord Justice Clerk. Were these publications known to the Convention? --


A. They were to individuals in the Convention.


Q. Was it never mentioned in the Convention that it was to be published?


A. It was mentioned that an account of the proceedings of the Convention were
to be published; but I don't recollect that that was in the Convention.


Lord Eskgrove. Was there no resolution in the Convention to support that paper?


A. There was some motion to that purpose, but I don't recollect any resolution
being come to upon it.

William Ross cross examine by Mr. Margarot.
Q. You took notes for the purpose of publishing them in the Gazetteer. Did you
ever submit these notes to me before they were published?


A. I never did.


Q. You say you was as accurate as possible?


A. I don't know that I was inaccurate.


Q. Are you hard of hearing?


A. I was at that time, and still do continue a little so.


Q. Was there ever any talk in the Convention of our Convention of Emergency
being for the purpose of assisting the French if they invaded this country?


A. I never heard of such a thing.


Q. Did such a thing ever enter your head? --


A. No.


Q. Nor any body else, in their senses, I believe. You have heard of a Secret
Committee. Do you know whether that Secret Committee ever did any thing?


A. I never heard of their doing any thing.


Q. What was the mode of appointing Committees?


A. The general mode was, that they were appointed by the Sections.


Q. Was there not among the regulations of the Convention, one which expressly
enjoined on such Members, as should be chosen to any office, to accept of the
same; that is to say, that it barred them a refusal?


A. I think I have a recollection of that, but I am not positive.


Q. You say I made that motion for the Convention of Emergency. Did I propose
to repair to that Convention armed?


A. I did not hear any thing of that sort.


Q. Did I propose carrying on, by that means, any correspondence with any
foreign enemy, from whom an invasion was to be expected? --


A. No.


Q. Was the Gazetteer submitted to the Convention before it was published? --


A. That was impossible.


Q. Then they did not superintend the publishing of the Gazetteer? --


A. Surely not.


Q. Did they ever order the printing of the Gazetteer?


A. No.


Q. At whose expense was it carried on?


A. At the expense of the publisher, Mr. Scott.


Q. The Convention never furnished any thing toward the expense of the
Printing?


A. Never a farthing.


Q. Then it was carried on totally independent of the Convention? --


A. I understand it to be so.


Q. It seems that you recognize the scroll of what is here denominated the
Minutes of the Convention; could you swear to it?


A. No, because I never saw it till I saw it in the Sheriff's Chamber. I have
seen a scroll of Minutes lying upon the table, but I never perused them.


Q. Does there appear to be any alterations, or interlineations on that
pretended scroll?


A. I have seen the pen drawn through some words.


Q. It appears then, that you know nothing at all about that scroll?


A. No, I never perused any of it till I saw it in the Sheriff's Chamber.


Q. When the illegal dispersion of the Convention was spoke of in the
Convention, did you thereby understand a dispersion of the Convention in a
constitutional manner, according to the laws of the land, or did you understand
a dispersing of it by force, unaided by the laws?


A. I understood the dispersing of it without law.


Lord Advocate. Did you understand, that, by the words illegal dispersion, was
meant any dispersion by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, or the Sheriff of the
county?


A. I understood it meant a dispersion without any law.


Mr. Margarot. What is your opinion of magistrates? are they to act according
to law, or do you apprehend there is a code of laws in this country which is to
be the rule of their conduct?


A. I understand that the magistrates were to act according to law; and that if
they did disperse the Convention, it would be without law.

John Wardlaw was sworn, but appearing to be intoxicated, was ordered to
withdraw.
Lord Advocate. If we may judge from the appearance of this man, he is in a
state of intoxication, and certainly very unsit to be examined in a court of
justice, as a witness; I should therefore, were his evidence never so material,
avoid examining him; but before I give him up, I wish to be satisfied whether
it is the real state of the man, at this moment, or whether, which is possible,
it may be a mere pretense, and an appearance put on by himself, on purpose to
avoid being examined; if your Lordship will allow him to be called back again,
and put such questions to him as may be deemed proper, that the Jury and your
Lordships may be satisfied whether he is so or not.


Lord Henderland, to the Macer. Did you observe any thing particular in the
appearance of this witness in the morning?


A. He appeared to be the same in the morning that he is now.

The witness called in again.
Lord Advocate. Was you enclosed this morning, at the same time, with the other
witnesses? --


A. Yes.


Q. Have you got any provision since you went into that room? --


A. Yes.


Q. Have you got any liquor? --


A. Yes.


Q. Any considerable quantity? --


A. None at all.


Lord Advocate. He says he is not in liquor, therefore, we may proceed to
examine him.


Q. Was you a Member of the British Convention?


A. Yes, I had the honor to be a Delegate.


Q. Did you frequently attend the meetings of that Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you ever assist as Secretary there, upon any occasion?


A. Never.


Q. Did you write any minutes of the meeting at that time?


A. When I was called upon to do so, I did.


Q. Did it happen at any time? --


A. Yes, once.


Q. Have you seen the panel at any of those meetings?


A. Yes.


Q. Did you ever see him act as Preses, or Chairman at this meeting? --


A. No.


Q. Look at that, and see whose handwriting it is?


A. I believe it is my writing.


Q. Who gave you that motion? -- I wrote it myself.


Q. Who proposed it to you? --


A. I proposed it myself.


Q. Did you write it by desire of any body? --


A. No.


Q. What is your profession? --


A. A writer.


Lord Advocate. Are you in any writing-chamber?


A. I am a writer, and that is enough.


Lord Eskgrove. In whose chamber do you write?


A. That is not the question, my Lord; you don't speak to the point; you must
speak to the point, my Lord.


Lord Advocate. Did you second the motion?


A. Yes, I counted it a laudable and proper motion.


Q. Who desired you to second it?


A. I did it myself, of my own free will.


Q. Did Mr. Margarot report that motion?


A. I believe he did; because it was his motion; and I wrote it, and seconded
it.


Q. Did you see Mr. Margarot sign it?


A. I don't recollect his signing it; I don't recollect whether he wrote it or
not. Mr. Margarot is a man of courage, and a man of honor, and a man of
virtue; and a man that would not deny his word -- by God.


Lord Justice Clerk. What is that you say?


A. I said he would not deny his word.


Lord Justice Clerk. But you said something else.


A. I said by God.


Lord Justice Clerk. He is either drunk, or affecting to be drunk. My own
opinion is, that he is affecting to be drunk; and, supposing he is not
affecting drunkenness, he ought not to get drunk, knowing he was to be called
here as a witness.


Lord Henderland. I move that he be committed to prison for a month.

He was committed. Samuel Paterson sworn.
Mr. Solicitor General. Are you a Member of the British Convention?


A. Yes, of the Convention that sat on the 19th of November.


Q. Was it called the British Convention?


A. It got that name afterward.


Q. You was acquainted with Mr. Callendar, who was also a Member of that
Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. Was you (...) present in the Convention, when a motion was made by (...)


A. I cannot recollect.


Q. Do you remember a motion being made of what the Convention were to do in
case of a bill being brought into parliament like the Convention Bill that
passed in Ireland?


A. I was not there when that motion was discussed.


Q. Was you ever present when any motion of a similar nature was discussed? --


A. No.


Q. Were you ever present at any time when the motion was made respecting the
illegal dispersion?


A. No.


Q. Is that paper your handwriting?


A. Yes; it is not only signed by me, but the body of it was drawn up by the
section to which I belonged, and was by me transmitted to the Convention.

Samuel Paterson cross examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. This motion or paper, or whatever it is, was drawn up in your class and
brought to the Convention. Was it ever read in the Convention?


A. All that I can say for this paper is, that it was drawn up by the class to
which I belonged, and was informed that it was delivered to the Preses for the
time being, and I was not there that night; I was there only four nights
altogether, and perhaps once or twice only (reads the minutes).


Lord Justice Clerk. Did you give it in yourself?


A. I am not certain; there was always a return made every day of a new Preses
for the succeeding day?


Mr. Margarot. And you cannot tell to whom it was delivered?


A. It was delivered to the secretary, I suppose.


Q. How are you certain it was delivered, if you was not present at the time of
the delivery?


A. I am not certain of it.


Q. Gentlemen, pray attend to this: By what authority did the classes or the
sections, or whatever they may be thought proper to be called; by what
authority did they draw up any motion or paper? Was it by any express command
of the Convention, or was it an authority they assumed of themselves, as
meaning to send their intentions, their opinions, to the Convention, there to
be discussed?


A. It was generally by the authority of the minutes from the Convention the
preceding night; but that paper was, as far as I recollect, drawn up without
any minutes having been sent by the Convention.


Q. You say this was drawn up by the class without any interference of the
Convention?


A. As far as my memory will charge me, that was the case.


Q. You was originally a member of the Friends of the People, and then a
Delegate to the British Convention, and I understand you have seceded fron them?


A. Yes.


Q. I must beg to ask one question. Does a reform in Parliament appear less
necessary to you at present than it did then?


A. I must appeal to the Court whether that is a proper question or not.


Lord Justice Clerk. We have given full scope to the Panel, because he is a
foreigner; but when a witness refuses to answer a question that is not proper,
we are bound to say he need not, unless he chooses.


Mr. Margarot. I will not press upon a sore place. Do you know that that was
read in the Convention?


A. I do not know; I was not there that night when the question was debated.


Lord Advocate. With the declaration of the Panel, we shall now close the
evidence on the part of the prosecution.

The Declaration of the Panel read. Maurice Margarot, merchant in
Mary-le-bone, No. 10, High Street, London; being examined and interrogated,
whether he was a member of the British Convention of the Delegates of the
People, associated to obtain universal suffrage and annual parliaments,
assembled in Edinburgh; declares, that he does not acknowledge the legality of
a private examination, and declines answering the question; and being
interrogated from what place or district he is Delegate to the said Convention,
declares he declines to answer the question, for the reason above specified;
and being interrogated whether he made any motions in said Convention, and of
what nature, he declares he must decline answering the question, for the reason
above specified. And being shown the paper, signed Maurice Margarot and John
Wardlaw, of the tenor following: That the moment of any illegal dispersion of
the present Convention shall be considered as a summons to the Delegates to
repair to the place of meeting, appointed for the Convention of Emergency by
the Secret Committee, and that the secret Committee is instructed to proceed
without delay to fix the place of meeting.

(Signed,) MAURICE MARGAROT. JOHN WARDLAW.


And being asked, if he made any motion in the Convention last night, or any
other time, must decline answering the question, for the reason
abovementioned. And being interrogated if he came to Scotland at the
invitation of any person or persons in this country, declares he must decline
answering this or any other questions, for the reasons above specified; and
this he declares to be truth.

This declaration was made and read over to him, in the presence of William
Scott, of Harry Davidson, and Joseph Pringle.

(Signed,) WILLIAM SCOTT. HARRY DAVIDSON. JOSEPH PRINCLE.



Lord Justice Clerk. Now is your time, Mr. Margarot, to bring forward your
exculpatory proof.


Mr. Margarot. How can I bring forward my exculpatory witnesses, when they are
not present, and I am not granted a caption for them?


Lord Justice Clerk. Are there none of them here?


Mr. Margarot. Yes; my Lord, I will first call the Sheriff Substitute.

Evidence for the Panel. Harry Davidson sworn, examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. When I was apprehended and brought before you, did nor I make objections
with regard to the legality of the proceedings?


A. You did.


Q. Did I not complain of the treatment I had received in having been taken out
of my bed at seven o'clock in the morning, and kept in a room where there was
not even a chair to sit upon until five in the afternoon, as though I had been
a criminal and a felon?


A. You mentioned these circumstances; and I think my answer was, that I was
exceedingly sorry for it, but that they had not been communicated to me, or I
should have taken care that you should be better accommodated.


Q. Did I not state to you the illegality, as I apprehended, of arresting a man
without even showing him the warrant?


A. You mentioned that circumstance.


Q. Did I not promise you that I would enter a protest against those
proceedings?


A. Yes.


Q. Have I been as good as my word? have you been served with a protest?


A. Yes; I have.

Right Hon. Thomas Elder, Lord Provost, sworn.
Q. All I mean to ask you, my Lord, is, whether you could discern any
confusion, tumult, or riot, at the meeting at Laing's workshop on the 6th of
December, at your entrance?


A. There was no other riot, that I know of, than what was occasioned by the
magistrates interfering.


Q. Then it was the magistrates caused the riot? -- very well, my Lord. Was you
acquainted with the business that the Convention were upon that night?


A. No, I know nothing farther than it was a Convention for illegal purposes.


Q. Do you apprehend, my Lord, that petitioning Parliament is illegal?


A. Does your Lordship think I need answer that?


Lord Justice Clerk. I think not.


Mr. Margarot. Were you not told that the intention of the meeting was to
consider of an address for a reform in Parliament, by petition to the King or
to that Parliament?


A. I certainly heard some such thing.


Q. Whether, upon the preceding night, when I was absent, when you interrupted
the Convention, you was not likewise told that the business they were going to
proceed upon was, whether it would be best to petition the King or the
Parliament for a Reform? --


A. That I was told by Mr. Skirving.


Mr. Margarot. Now, my Lord, comes a very delicate matter indeed. I mean to
call upon my Lord Justice Clerk, and I hope that the questions and the answers
will be given in the most solemn manner. I have received a piece of information
which I shall lay before the Court, in the course of my questions: first, my
Lord, are you upon oath?


Lord Justice Clerk. State your questions, and I will tell you whether I will
answer them or not; if they are proper questions, I will answer them.


Q. Did you dine at Mr. Rochead's, at Inverleith, in the course of last week?


Lord Justice Clerk. And what have you to do with that, Sir?


Q. Did any conversation take place with regard to my trial?


Lord Justice Clerk. Go on, Sir.


Q. Did you use these words: What should you think of giving him an hundred
lashes, together with Botany Bay? or words to that purpose?


Lord Justice Clerk. Go on; put your questions, if you have any more.


Q. Did any person, did a lady say to you that the mob would not allow you to
whip him? and, my Lord, did you not say that the mob would be the better for
losing a little blood? These are the questions, my Lord, that I wish to put to
you at present, in the presence of the Court: deny them or acknowledge them.


Lord Justice Clerk. Do you think I should answer questions of that sort, Lord
Henderland?


Lord Henderland. No, my Lord, they do not relate to this trial: questions as
to facts, which are at all material to the charges contained in this
indictment, my Lord Justice Clerk is obliged to answer, but not otherwise.


Lord Eskgrove. What may have been said in a private company cannot in any way
affect this case as to the Panel at the bar: it certainly cannot throw any
light upon the subject: my Lord, I have concurred in allowing this gentleman,
who is a stranger from London, to put such questions as I never before heard of
in a Court of Justice, where, my Lord, every subject of this country, the
meanest and the poorest that stands at that bar, may have the assistance of
counsel learned in the law. If his situation was such that he could not afford
it, he might have got it by the authority of this Court, which would have
prevented many things that were stated upon the relevancy. My Lord, there has
not been a question put to your Lordship that could at all avail Mr. Margarot
as to his innocence in this trial, and your Lordship very properly waved
answering them. I am of opinion that you ought not to answer questions of that
sort, which cannot involve the fate of the trial; I therefore think that it is
not consistent with the dignity of this Court, and cannot be beneficial to the
Panel.


Lord Swinton. Any thing that may tend to exculpate him, or alleviate the crime
charged against him, had he proposed questions of that sort, not only my Lord
Justice Clerk, but every one of us must have answered them by the laws of the
country; but the answer to none of these questions can either tend to exculpate
him or alleviate the offense of which he is accused. My Lord, not one of them
are proper, not one of them are competent, and ought not to be allowed to be
put; and were he not a stranger to this country, I should look upon it as an
insult offered to this Court.


Lord Dunsinnan. The Panel is allowed to adduce what exculpatory witnesses he
thinks proper; your Lordship well knows that by the constant rule of this
Court, before the Panel proceeds with his exculpatory proof, he is called upon
to state the nature of that proof: he has put questions to your Lordship, and
it appears to me that no answer to those questions could in any degree tend to
exculpate or alleviate the charges against him.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any other witnesses?


A. It is needless, my Lord, when I am told that the answers to such questions
would neither exculpate me nor alleviate the charges against me, but it would
have gone to show the Jury that I was pre-judged before my trial came on; and I
did mean indeed to have followed it up by another question, had you been on
your oath; but as you are not, I will not put it.


Lord Justice Clerk. Have you any other witnesses to adduce?


A. Yes, my Lord.

Charles Steward, called.
Lord Advocate. For what purpose do you call him?


Mr. Margarot. To ask him a question concerning something that appeared in one
of these papers, The Edinburgh Herald.


Lord Abercrombie. That is not a paper libelled upon.


Mr. Margarot. No, but it libels me and the friends of a Reform in Parliament;
it is a comparison between the Friends of a Reform in this country, and the
Anarchists in France, and I want, but I don't see why I need tell my wants,
unless he is to be called; I want to know from whom it was that he received the
original of this letter; that is a fair question that I have a right to ask in
any court of Justice, and it is a question that ought to be answered: it is a
paper that has thrown an odium upon the Friends of Reform.


Lord Dunsinnan. This would lead into a very extensive field, if the Panel be
allowed to go into an investigation of all the writings that have been
published, that have thrown, as he says, an odium upon the Friends of Reform,
and there is nothing founded upon it against the Panel.


Lord Henderland. This paper is no part of the evidence produced against Mr.
Margarot, otherwise he might be entitled to enquire by whom it was put in; but
to go into a question of every thing that has been said for and against the
Friends of the People in the newspapers, is totally irrelevant to this trial;
for if Mr. Margarot has been injured in that respect, the law is open to him,
not on this trial, but on another occasion, and it can have nothing to do with
this trial.


Lord Swinton. By an act of 1748, it is the prisoner's duty by that Act of
Parliament, to give in, the night before the trial, or sometime before the
trial, the facts upon which he is to found his defense, and he shall be allowed
to prove nothing in his defense, but what is contained in that list of facts;
but if what he has now stated would be material to his defense, I am sure the
Lord Advocate would allow him to prove it; but there is nothing here that could
tend either to exculpate or alleviate; it would lead us into every thing that
has been wrote, pro and con. upon the subject, and who it was that gave the
foundation for it, and therefore I conceive it not regular.


Lord Eskgrove. I am of the same opinion; I think it can be of no avail to him
upon the face of the earth.


Lord Justice Clerk. It is very true, my Lord, that there is a statute of the
late King, and I think it was a very proper rule that was adopted by that
statute, and I am sorry that it is no more attended to than it is, and I should
be sorry to deny this Panel any thing that could avail him in his defense, and
he might have had the advice of Scots lawyers or agents, and therefore I am of
opinion, that it would not tend to criminate other people who are not here, or
are not put upon their defense.


Mr. Margarot. Then it is needless saying any further upon that; it would only
have tended to clear up the minds of the Jury, who might have received
unfavourable impressions, and which might have been done away by some questions
put to the printer; but which; perhaps, some people would wish to see
encouraged.

James Calder sworn.
Lord Henderland. What business are you?


A. A friend of the people.


Q. Do you live upon that?


A. I live upon my father, Donald Calder, merchant in Cromartie.


Q. What are you?


A. (After some hesitation) I am a student, and attend the university here.

Examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. Were you ever present at any of the meetings of the General Convention of
Friends of the People in 1792, and the beginning of 1793?


A. Not in 1792, but I was a member of the Convention of April 1793.


Q What is your opinion upon the views of those Conventions?


A. I consider them to be perfectly legal.


Q. What was the purpose of their assembling?


A. To obtain a reform in parliament.


Q. Were you ever interrupted in those meetings by the Civil Magistrates?


A. No; as far as I know, I never was.


Q. Did you ever hear, in the course of your communications with other people,
that the magistrates deemed those meetings seditious and illegal?


A. No, I never did.


Q. You don't know of any members of those Conventions ever having been
apprehended, in consequence of their being members of those Conventions.


A. No; I never did.


Q. Was you ever present at any of the meetings of the last British Convention?


A. Yes, I was occasionally.


Q. Was there any material difference in their proceedings?


A. I certainly know of no difference; there might be some difference in their
mode of expression, as to the objects they had in view.


Q. Was the mode of proceeding in these objects nearly the same?


A. They were, as far as I know.


Q. Were the one and the other equally void of violence, tumult, or sedition?
--


A. I never saw any thing of the kind.


Q. Were any seditious doctrines ever held or authorized in the British
Convention?


A. Nothing that I should call seditious myself, or that I ever thought
seditious.


Q. Did you imagine it to be a part of the people's right to meet in that
manner, to petition parliament or obtain a reform?


A. I always understood so.


Q. Was you present when I was said to have made the motion with respect to the
union between Scotland and England?


A. I don't recollect the time the motion was made; but I think I remember a
motion of that description.


Q. What was the intention of that motion, if you can recollect any thing of
it; as far as you could infer from the words that it was expressed in, was
there any thing in it of an evil tendecy with regard to the king and government
of Britain?


A. As far as I recollect, it was a general sort of a plan of operations
between the societies in England and Scotland.


Q. To produce what end?


A. To establish a correspondence between the societies of England and
Scotland, upon a constitutional mode of proceeding to petition the legislature.


Q. Was you present when (as he is called here) Citizen Callendar made a motion
respecting a Convention bill?


A. I don't recollect it; I don't think I was present at the time that motion
was made.


Q. But you understood the nature of that motion to have respect to the time
when a Convention Bill should be brought into the House of Commons: did you
understand that the Convention of Emergency, which was to take place on the
introduction of such bill, or rather whether the Delegates of the Convention of
Emergency were to assemble, immediately upon the introduction of such Bill, or
wait till it had passed in the House of Commons?


A. They were to assemble, as far as I recollect, upon the introduction of such
a Bill.


Q. I suppose that you thought that this Convention was to oppose that bill? --


A. Yes.


Q. In what way.


A. In a legal and constitutional manner; by petitioning Parliament, or by
counsel.


Q. Had you any apprehension that these Delegates meant to employ open violence?


A. I never heard any thing of that kind.


Q. Were there any warlike preparations for that purpose?


A. No.


Q. Was there any sum subscribed for that Convention?


A. No.


Q. Were any extraordinary measures taken to give strength to that Convention,
which the British Convention did not then enjoy? --


A. No.


Q. Were you present at the meeting at Laing's?


A. Yes, I was.


Q. What did you hear the Sheriff Substitute say?


A. I heard him desire them to disperse.


Q. What reason did he give for the dispersion?


A. He said he had orders to disperse them; that it was an illegal and
unconstitutional meeting.


Q. You are certain that he said he had orders?


A. Yes, I am very sure of that.


Q. Was he not informed of the constitutional manner in which we were
proceeding to debate on the question respecting an address to the King, or
petition to Parliament, for a Reform?


A. As far as I recollect he was, though I cannot say by whom, but I believe it
was Mr. Skirving.


Q. Was you there the preceding night, when the Lord Provost came to disperse
that meeting?


A. I came in about the time that he came.


Q. Were they peaceable before the Lord Provost came?


A. I was not there long before.


Q. Was you there when he came in? -- A: Yes.


Q. Was there any confusion after he came? --


A. No.


Q. Did you hear it explained to the Sheriff Substitute when he dispersed them
at Laing's, what was the nature of the business of the evening? --


A. Yes, I answered that question before.


Q. When force was said to be necessary to disperse us, after the token of
force given by the Sheriff to the Chairman, was any further force necessary?


A. No; after Mr. Margarot came out of the chair, somebody called Mr. Gerald to
it, and he took the chair, and we did not disperse till he went to prayer, and
then we went away.


Q. Was it actual force that dispersed us, or an ideal force, a submission to
orders that we did not resist?


A. A submission to orders; but I looked upon the order of the Magistrates to
be force.


Q. But the members of the British Convention, when so dispersed retired
peaceably, did they not? --


A. Yes.

John Clark sworn, examined by Mr. Margarot.
Q. What are you? --


A. A Mason in Edinburgh.


Q. You was a member of the British Convention? --


A. Yes.


Q. With what view did you join that Convention?


A. I joined it with a view to obtain a Reform in the representation of the
people.


Q. Was you convinced in your own mind that the attempt to obtain a Reform was
legal and constitutional?


A. I thought so, or I would not have been a member of it.


Q. You are on your oath, and I desire you to answer this fairly; if you had
found that the Members of the British Convention had departed from that
constitutional line in which they sat out, and in which they were acting when
you joined them, would you have abandoned them?


A. If I had thought that they had deviated from that constitutional line, I
certainly would have abandoned them, no doubt of it; but I have not found it.


Q. You have not then abandoned them yet?


A. No, not so long as they are constitutional.


Q. What was the tenor of the behavior of the Convention? was it peaceable
behavior and orderly, or riotous and tumultuous?


A. Peaceable and orderly.


Q Was any seditious doctrine encouraged or promulgated there?


A. I am at a loss to know what seditious doctrine is now, and I cannot answer
that question; I did not understand it to be seditious.


Q. Was any step proposed at any time that you might think unconstitutional,
from your knowledge of the constitution, of the Bill of Rights, and of the
Claim of Rights?


A. No not any thing.


Q. What was the motive of the Convention, for endeavoring to promote a union
between Scotland and England?


A. I understood it was to promote a union between those societies that wished
for Reform, that they might unite in adopting the Constitutional means to
obtain it.


Q. You never harbored any idea that it was for a sinister purpose, did you?
--


A. No.


Q. Did you ever understand that if the French landed in England the Convention
were to meet them?


A. Quite the reverse.


Q. Do you know of any member of the British Convention having any
correspondence whatever with France, directly or indirectly? --


A. None.


Q. Was you present when the Lord Provost dispersed the Convention on the 5th
December? --


A. No.


Q. Was you present at the time the Sheriff Substitute dispersed them on the
6th December? --


A. I was.


Q. Before the Sheriff Substitute came in, how was the Convention with regard
to order, peace, and decorum?


A. It was perfectly orderly, but I was a very short time in before the Sheriff
Substitute came.


Q. What did you understand to be the subject of the debate that night?


A. There was a motion about another petition to Parliament.


Q. What was said to the Sheriff when he attempted to disperse us?


A. I believe he was told that it was a peaceable constitutional meeting, and
that his dispersing us was illegal; we were met for the purpose of petitioning
Parliament, and were entitled to do so by the constitution.


Q. What was his reply?


A. That he behoved to obey his orders; that he did not come to argue, but to
obey his orders, to disperse the meeting.


Q. You are certain he mentioned the words, his orders?


A. I think I am pretty certain of that.


Q. Did I as Chairman require some sign of force from him?


A. You did.


Q. What sign of force did he make use of?


A. He touched you by the hand, and said, come out, and you said, no, it must
be a little more than that, and then he took you by the arm and gently pulled
you out, as I would a friend, and then you came out; then Mr. Gerald took the
chair, and it was moved, that we should dissolve in the ordinary way, with
(...); upon which Mr. Gerald went to prayer, and we came away.


Q. Do you apprehend there was any idea of resistance, or any attempt to
resist, or that any individual showed a wish to resist?


A. None that I know of; it is distant from my idea.


Q. Do you apprehend that the general apprehension was at that time, that the
Sheriff was acting unlawfully?


A. I presume it was; but I cannot say what they thought.


Q. However, they retired peaceably. --


A. Yes.


Q. And no riot ensued? -- No.


Q. No drunken bout ensued that night, of the Friends of the People? -- None to
my knowledge.

John Clark cross examined by Mr. Solicitor General.
Q. You have been talking about the Bill of Rights, and the Claim of Rights,
where have you read them? in what book is it to be found? --


A. I do not recollect.


Q. Can an you tell any thing about this Claim of Rights, any of the articles
of it? -- I cannot tell the whole.


Q. You have upon your oath told us, there was nothing done in this Convention
contrary to the Bill of Rights, or the Claim of Rights; is the right of
petitioning Parliament one of the articles? --


A. Yes.


Q. Did you ever read any thing about illegal associations called by private
authority, either in the Bill of Rights, or Claim of Rights? -- I cannot
recollect at present.


Lord Abercrombie. Did you ever act as Preses in the British Convention?


A. When I was there as President I was keeping order.


Q. How often was that? -- Only once.


Lord Advocate. You was a Member of the Secret Committee?


A. I was.


Q. Who were the other Members?


A. Mr. Margarot, Mr. Brown, myself, and the Secretary.


Mr. Margarot. Did that Secret Committee ever act?


A. Not that I know of.


Mr. Margarot. I will, with the leave of the Court, lend you the Claim of
Rights to read.


Lord Advocate. Did you ever read the Habeas Corpus Act?


A. No.


Q. Did you ever read the Act of 1701, on Wrongous Imprisonment? --


A. No.


Mr. Solicitor General. Is it a Scotch or an English Act?


A. An English Act.


Mr. Solicitor General. So that is your knowledge of the Act of 1791?


A. Stop, I believe I am wrong; for the Union took place in 1706.


Lord Advocate. Gentlemen of the Jury, you are called upon in the common and
usual routine of your duty to decide upon the truth of the indictment, which I
have felt it my duty to prefer against the Panel at the bar, who is styled,
and calls himself in the paper which is termed a Declaration, emitted by
himself, before a proper officer, to be a merchant, residing in Marybon in
London; you are therefore his equals, and his proper and competent Jury to
decide upon his guilt.

Gentlemen, I must say, and again repeat, that you sit this night in the common
course and routine of your duty, although, if I charge my memory right, or I
can trust to the Note which I took at the time the Panel in that speech, or
rather succession of speeches which came from him, not in my opinion with much
judgment, not in my apprehension with much prudence; said something of Packed
Juries, and (which he has a right to say) of my endeavoring to impose upon
your understandings: I trust you will feel this moment, as I hope and trust the
country at large will feel, that it is not in the power of the highest subject
of this country, be his situation what it may, to pack a Jury either here or in
our sister-kingdom, or to prevent the meanest criminal from getting what the
law and the constitution of his country gives him; a just, a fair, and an
impartial trial. I trust you will feel at this moment, what I do in my
situation as Prosecutor, a complete and perfect independence; a desire to do my
duty to my country at large; a determination to follow the dictates of my own
conscience, and when I exercise that to the best of my judgment and the best of
my understanding, as I know and I trust you will do this evening, I care not
what is said either by a criminal in the moment of intemperance, or by persons
without doors, endeavoring to shake the confidence which the people of the
country have of the inestimable privilege of trial by Jury, I deny that Juries
are packed, or that any instance has existed, or can possibly exist in this
country, of so foul and so gross an aspersion being just.

Gentlemen, I am not without some apprehensions, in consequence of an
indisposition which I have labored under since I last addressed a Jury of this
country upon a trial of a similar nature. I am not yet perfectly without my
apprehensions, that I may not be able at this late hour of the night, and in a
Court so crowded as this, to do what is on all occasions my bounden duty, and
which the peculiar situation of this country, at present, more particularly
demands, to state the nature of the evidence lying upon the table, joined to
that which was read at the foot of it to day; that I may not be able to bring
it in so conspicuous a point of view, or discriminate with that accuracy in the
volume of Factious, Seditious, and Treasonable matter, which lies upon your
table, that which you ought to dwell upon, and that which you ought not; but I
trust in some degree to the goodness of my cause; I trust more to the
understanding of the Jury, and I trust something to that feeling of regard to
my Country, and that spirit which a good and loyal subject ought to feel and to
entertain, that I shall yet be able to make out such a case from the evidence
before you, which will impose upon you the severe, but the just, task of
returning a verdict of guilty, against the person at your bar, upon the most
solid, convincing, and conclusive proof that it is possible.

Gentlemen, the Panel at your bar stands charged with Sedition. Upon that
subject we have today had much discussion; we have had a great deal of
ignorance professed, by men who surely ought to have been the last to make that
profession, who hold themselves out to their fellow subjects as Members of a
Convention which is to teach reform to Parliament, which is to substitute
something better, in place of what we enjoy, who have audaciously pretended to
assume to themselves that important task, and that important character, of
setting aside or of improving that inheritance which they enjoy from those who
have gone before them, and, who I sincerely hope and wish attended with that
propriety, and that degree of attention which was necessary to the importance
of that task before they entered upon it, or before they pretended to be
ignorant of what Sedition was.

Gentlemen, to refer to Law Books is perfectly unnecessary; the Counsel who
opened this Case today upon the part of the prosecution, traced his authority
back to the earliest book which we know, or which the Law of Scotland
acknowledges, the book of Regiam Majestatem; and if the Panel at the Bar, or
those Members of the British Convention who have professed today such
ignorance of what Sedition is, if they had turned up, I am sorry to say, the
only criminal book of the Law which we Lawyers acknowledge to be of authority,
I mean, the book of Sir George Mackenzie, they would have found a separate and
distinct treatise, defining expressly the crime of Sedition, giving it its
technical definition as clearly as the definition of murder, falsehood,
forgery, rape, or any other crime which occurs in the common course of criminal
jurisprudence. If any set of men let their ostensive purpose be a redress of
grievances, as in this case, till it assumed the appellation of the British
Convention of the Delegates of the People, associated to obtain universal
suffrage and annual Parliaments, as was the case I say, of the former
Convention, of which the boy Calder told us just now he had been a Member, if
their purpose was reform; yet, if that purpose is not to address the King or
the Legislature of the Country, in a constitutional way, by petition to the
King; but if on the contrary, they are aping and imitating the example of a
neighboring Country with which we are at war, or if it goes the length of
convocating thousands of persons who may form these Societies, not to apply to
King, Lords, and Commons, in a proper, legal, and constitutional way for
redress; but if it does assume the power of forming itself into a separate
body, or Convention altogether; if it goes the length of what I will show you,
upon a fair review of the evidence, it did in this case, overawing Parliament
in the execution of its duty; that in the event of an invasion, or some such
similar circumstance, they were not only to control and overawe the proceedings
of Parliament, but were, in the construction of common sense and reason, to
join, in place of resisting the Invaders, for that is the conclusion which I
shall draw from the evidence on the table, in spite of all the declarations and
professions which came from the Associates of the Panel this day at the bar:
if it goes that length, it is clearly and distinctly the crime of Sedition, as
clear and unequivocal as ever occured in the practice of any civilized country.
The evidence, therefore, Gentlemen, is now before you -- I state that to be my
view of the case; that is the opinion which I form upon the review of it; my
opinion is not binding upon you; but you will consider those parts of it, which
it is now my duty to state and comment upon: you will give to it your best
attention, and lay your hands upon your hearts, and consider, whether it is not
the only, the plain, and the necessary deduction and inference, which arises
not from any particular expression, circumstance, motion, or paper; but from a
general complex view of the whole, tallying and comparing it at the same time
with the parole testimony laid before you this day.

Gentlemen, the evidence is of two kinds, written and parole: the principal and
chief part of it (and I say so, because it is the most certain and the most
unerring), is the written evidence arising from the minutes of this
self-constituted Convention; from the papers found upon Mr. Margarot, contained
and referred to in the general inventory upon the table, and from three numbers
of the Gazetteer, which in the sequel I shall show you to be completely brought
home to this Convention.

Gentlemen, the first question which you are to consider is, whether or not
this meeting, from the 19th of November (for I go no farther back) till the 4th
of December last, where the Minutes stop, because we all know, and it is proved
today, that the Magistracy of this City, did, early on the morning of the 5th,
apprehend these persons and seize their papers. The first question which you
are to ask is this: Was it or not a meeting of a seditious nature? for if you
are of opinion, that it was not a meeting of a seditious nature; if you should
consider it in a different point of view, to what I humbly presume to do; that
it was an innocent, fair, legal, and constitutional measure, it is in vain,
superfluous, and unnecessary for you to enquire, whether the Panel is a
Principal Actor in that Meeting; because no man can be found guilty of the
proceedings of a Meeting which a jury shall be of opinion, is within the pale
of the law, and such as the laws of this Country entitle any man to call
together.

Gentlemen, something was said to day, in the course of this debate (if I may
so term it), that was personal against myself as a Member of another
Convention; something was said with regard to the astonishing circumstance, of
not bringing the Borough reformers to trial in this court, something was said
also with apparent marks of exultation on the part of the panel, that though
three Conventions of the Friends of the People had taken place in this city, in
the course of eighteen months past, no notice whatever was taken by the Public
Prosecutor of any of those Conventions, till, as Margarot, I think, stated, we
took alarm; because we saw, that he and his friends were in danger of opening
the eyes of the people; that it was not till we were alarmed, and the eyes of
the people were about to be opened, to the existence of those abuses, which it
was their object to correct; that I (negligent in my duty before) brought this
man and others his associates to answer for the offense.

Gentlemen, my answer is this: I desire not to enter into the question, how far
Conventions by Delegation are, or not legal. -- It is not the question now
under your consideration; had these Gentlemen confined themselves to what was
the Law of their Country, or adhered to what they professed to be the case, I
should not have felt it my duty to have brought them to trial, for being
assembled in a Convention, or any thing of that kind, which had for its object
either the correction of the County Laws, of the Borough Laws, or any other
correction which the wildest or most unreasonable speculatist might think it
worth his while to aim at.

Gentlemen, I never thought of bringing before you the Convention of 1791, the
Convention of April 1793, or the subsequent Convention in October last; nor did
I think of bringing the persons now charged before you with Sedition, till the
very name they assumed, every advertisement they inserted in the papers, every
thing verbal or written, demonstrated to my mind, demonstrated to Scotland,
demonstrated to England, and to the empire at large, that they were a set of
French Conventionists. -- I give them that name; persons who, as far as they
durst, and their audacity I believe was matter of astonishment to the country
at large, who durst take possession of this metropolis, who dared within its
walls to hold out the example of a French model, holding out their example as
the principle upon which they acted, as the objects and point to which their
deliberations tended.

Gentlemen, something was said of orders being given to Mr. Davidson, the
Sheriff Substitute, that he acted by orders: whether he acted by order or not,
whether he acted by the orders of the respectable Gentleman who was Sheriff
Depute of the County, but who has since received a distinguishing mark of his
Sovereign's favor, whether he went by my orders, or by the orders of any body
else, is nothing to the purpose; I did consult with that Gentleman; I did
consult with your chief magistrate; I desired them to attend to their duty; if
any desire of mine was necessary; we acted in concert together; had we done
less, we had been guilty of a breach of office; we had been guilty of
neglecting the most important interests of mankind.

Gentlemen, were I to run over every single paper contained in that Inventory,
were I to address you upon every motion which appears in that scroll of Minutes
before you, I should detain you this evening to a very late hour indeed; but I
shall select a few of the most pointed and distinct motions, and evidence
therein contained.

Gentlemen, it is an important duty in which you are now engaged; the Panel
either is, or professes himself to be, an Englishman; he is in some respects a
foreigner to this Country; but you will not consider when you are to decide
either upon the life, the reputation or the guilt, or innocence of a fellow
creature, whether he is of Scotland, or whether he is of England.

Gentlemen, I will say hardly a word in support of the written evidence which
is now upon your table -- it appears that the papers libelled upon, which I
have just described to you, are traced home in the most complete and
satisfactory manner possible -- there is not a tittle of written evidence --
there is not a document now before you which is not proved beyond a possibility
of dispute -- I refer in general to the testimonies of Mr. Davidson; of Mr.
Scott, the Fiscal; Lion, and I think Mack. -- These four, I believe, distinctly
trace them from the room in which Margarot and Gerald slept into the sheriff
clerk's office, and having traced them there they are brought into court, and
it is impossible to enquire further. Indeed some question was put by the Panel
at the bar (who displayed I must admit a considerable degree of ingenuity and
acuteness in his own defense), as if it might have happened from the manner
these papers were found, that others might have been carried in even by Lion,
the messenger -- that other papers might have been carried in, as they were
residing at a public inn in this city, by other persons, and that they were not
necessarily the papers of Gerald, and of Margarot -- In every case where
written evidence is libelled upon, in support of any crime, I ask yourselves if
it is possible to give better evidence of the identity of papers than was done
in the present case -- or if you suppose, contrary to evidence and contrary to
fact, that Lion, the messenger, was entrusted by Mr. Davidson. or Mr. Pringle,
or me, or the Lord Provost, with papers of a seditious nature, which he carried
into that room where they were sleeping, in order to ground a false accusation
against them -- if you can suppose that possible then to be sure any thing that
I have said, or have hereafter to say in support of the charge against this
man, certainly will not be worth attending to -- Gentlemen, on the contrary,
these papers were found in the room where they slept, were put into a trunk,
which trunk was returned back to Margarot and Gerald, and you have it in
evidence, that when it was examined in their presence, Gerald selected his --
Margarot claimed the rest, or at least allowed them to be inventoried without
denying them, and those which did not relate to this business, were returned to
them both.

Gentlemen. -- I trust that quibbling defense, for it does not deserve any
other name, will satisfy your minds, that the gentleman does know that the
import of these papers bears hard against him, and that he wishes to shelter
himself from the inference which your minds will drew, by stating a
possibility, which cannot exist, that they might have been carried there by
other people, in order to ground an accusation against him.

Gentlemen, holding that to be clear, I shall beg your attention in the first
place, to the minutes of the convention, for it is the ground work, and the
basis of the charge against him; it was a paper which I was very anxious if
possible to obtain, because I know that it would have been impossible to have
asked a Jury to have given a verdict against any man upon suspicious, however
strong those suspicious might have been, and you will be satisfied from what we
saw this day, from the manner in which we saw the witnesses give their
testimony, Citizen Ross particularly, who has spoke out; and I am sure it gives
me pleasure to applaud the conduct of a witness. I have great satisfaction and
high pleasure in giving this tribute of praise to Citizen Ross, and the same
with respect to Coborn, who, I think, from the whole of his testimony, though a
friend and associate of the Panel at the bar, has given a fair, a true, and a
decisive evidence.

Gentlemen, the first thing I shall beg your attention to are the steps
previous to and accompanying that which is stated in pages fifth and sixth of
the indictment. In page fifth you will observe stated a motion respecting a
Convention of Emergency, and the cases in which they were to meet are proved in
the first place by the negative evidence of their minutes, and confirmed by the
testimonies of Coborn and of George Ross.

Gentlemen, that motion appears to have been first made by a gentleman of the
name of Callendar, to whom this day was exclusively appropriated for meeting
the justice of his country, but who it seems has not chosen to stand trial, and
the first notice given of this motion, I will read from the minutes -- 6th
day's sitting, 25th November 1793. Citizen Callendar moved, that in case the
Minister bring into the Commons House a motion for a convention bill, it should
be noticed immediately to the delegates. This is the first appearance of this
motion in the minutes, and as it was told us by several of the witnesses to
day, the forms of this house, as it is called, or of this Convention, did not
admit of a motion made one day being deliberated upon till the next -- the
motion lies over accordingly till the ensuing day, when you will find the
meeting again resumed, and Callendar's motion being then taken under
consideration, amendments were proposed by several persons, and it was moved by
Mr. Margarot, that a committee consisting of the mover, seconder, and those
that had moved for amendments, be appointed to draw up a motion that may meet
the idea of all, among whom was Mr. Calder, the young gentleman whose actual
attendance upon the University may perhaps better qualify him to discuss
questions as to the reform (or as I call it the alteration) of the
constitution, than the learned Mr. John Clark, or Mr. Wardlaw, or Mr.
Aitcheson, or any of those gentlemen who have so well weighed and considered
the ancient institutions of the laws and constitution of their country, before
they assumed to themselves the important office which they have taken upon
them. Citizen John Gartley moves, that the sense of the house be taken upon the
spirit of the motion, upon the words of the motion, and afterward upon Mr.
Margarot's motion. Upon the first motion it was carried unanimously to adopt
the motion as to its spirit; secondly, by a great majority not to adopt the
words of it; and, thirdly, that the amendments be referred to a committee as
above -- And at a subsequent diet, I mean a subsequent sitting of the
Convention, the minutes tells us, that Citizen Sinclair read the amendments
upon Citizen Callendar's motion, as agreed upon by the committee, and it was
agreed, upon the motion of Citizen Blank, that the house should resolve itself
into a committee for its mature consideration. In the course of the
conversation, Citizen Brown gave a history of the habeas corpus act. After an
excellent discussion of the question, pertinent remarks and amendments, the
convention was resumed, and the whole as amended, being read over, the members
stood upon their feet, and solemnly and unanimously passed the resolution as
follows -- Then follows a blank in the paper, and immediately afterward the
minutes proceed, at the distance of a page, and somewhat more, that Citizen
Gerald in a very energetic, and animated address, expressed his happiness at
the motion passed, and Citizen Brown, followed him in a manly speech, and
proved the influence of the executive government over the Parliament. Citizen
Margarot then read and proposed the following motion: That a secret committee
of three, and the secretary, (it is proved afterward that Clark, Margarot,
Skirving, and Brown, were the four who actually composed this committee) be
appointed to determine the place where such Convention of Emergency should
meet, that such place should remain a secret with them, and with the secretary
of the Convention, and that each delegate shall, at the breaking up of the
present session, be entrusted with a sealed letter, containing the name of the
place of meeting; this letter shall be delivered unopened to his constituents,
the receipt of which shall be acknowledged by a letter to the secretary,
preserved in the same state, until the period shall arrive at which it shall be
deemed necessary for the delegate to set off. -- This motion was seconded by
Citizen Moffatt, and carried unanimously.

Gentlemen, you have in the first place this proved completely by the minutes,
that Citizen Callendar in his first motion, which was adopted as to its spirit,
but rejected as to its words, had neither more nor less than this object in
view, that as soon as parliament should think it necessary or proper, if they
ever thought it necessary or proper, to bring in a similar bill, to that which
passed in Ireland, that this should be the signal, or notification for calling
the Convention of Emergency together, and that of itself without going to other
cases of Emergency, was just this, that they were to act as a control upon
parliament, and to endeavor to overawe (you will consider whether in a legal
or in an illegal way) the free exercise of the right of the legislature -- Can
you suppose that if their purpose was legal, if they had not wished to overawe,
and intimidate the parliament from doing their duty, would you have found them
alarmed or afraid of their conduct? Had their purpose been only to petition
parliament, and to state their remonstrances against such a motion (a right,
which every freeman of this country possesses) what explanation is to be given
of that secrecy in which this measure is wrapped up, if their purpose was
honest, but is it so? you find in this paper an account of a resolution which
they came to, in a most solemn and most unanimous manner, but which resolution
does not appear in the face of the minutes -- if it was a resolution merely of
the quiet and loyal nature just now stated, do you suppose that motion would
have been left out, or do you believe what Aitcheson tells you, and in which he
is confirmed by the minutes in Ross's hand writing, for Ross's hand writing
ends immediately before the blank, and Aitcheson's comes immediately after the
blank -- is it not clearly proved that what they were about was a thing which
they durst not put into this paper, which they postponed to some other
occasion, which Sinclair, as Aitcheson tells you, proposed should be burnt, but
which he resisted successfully, and prevented it from being burned? burning an
innocent paper is not the characteristic of men of virtue -- of men of
character -- of men conscious they were only doing what was legal, and what was
just.

Gentlemen, let us then see what the parole testimony makes out, and whether it
does not precisely confirm the conclusion, and inferences. I am now drawing not
only from what is proved by the minutes, but also from what is not proved by
the minutes, I mean the insertion of this extraordinary blank, to which there
is nothing similar, except a blank of four lines, in all the 94 pages of
minutes upon your table.

Gentlemen, Coburn, I think, tells you, that besides this convention bill,
there were a variety of other cases in which this Convention of Emergency were
to meet: He told us that they all agreed that the introduction of a convention
bill was to be one great object when the people should meet, and I wish you
would look at your notes when the people should meet to assert their rights --
I am not to descend to criticisms upon a word, but I may at least beg to know
whether, if it was merely drawing up a respectful petition to the King or to
the parliament, it was necessary to put so strong a declaration as this to
which Coburn swears, or was it not better to speak out the truth, that they
meant, in such an event, to remonstrate against the measure, or petition
Parliament against its passing into a law? but you have, on the contrary, an
expression which favors more of resistance than any thing else -- that they
were to meet in this unknown place, which was to be concealed even from the
delegates themselves, and of course from they eye of the executive power --
that in that event they were to meet and assert their rights, but as to the
manner in which they were to be asserted, whether in a peaceable or tumultuous
way, whether the mild influence of reason was to be exercised upon the British
Parliament, or whether by drawing out numbers of deluded men to do it by force,
is your business now to decide, and your province alone to determine.

Gentlemen -- The question was this day put to me, was I an inquisitor of the
private feelings of men's minds? Had I a right to dive into the secrets of the
human breast, or to discover what it was their intention to conceal? -- That is
the province of the Jury -- it is their business, however careful men involved
in seditious practices may be to gild them over with general expressions, such
as assembling to assert their rights; it is the province of the Jury, when they
find persons engaged in these practices, not to take their professions, not to
take what they declare to be the ostensible purpose in view, but looking to
their actions, looking to their words, looking to their proceedings, whether
they are secret, or whether they are public, to form your impartial
determination on which side the scale of evidence preponderates, whether it is
on the side of innocence, or whether it does not tally with guilt alone;
whether it does not artfully and insidiously leave it open either to one
construction or the other; for if they had said that they would have asserted
their rights by open force, if they had durst to have said the British
Parliament shall defend the Habeas Corpus Act, or we will defend it by force of
arms, if in case of a French invasion, their purpose was not to resist but to
cooperate with such an invasion, and had they expressed that upon their
minutes, I would not have brought Mr. Margarot to trial, I should have held him
a lunatic in every sense of the word. -- If I had brought him to trial before
you, I am positive you would have thought I had brought a madman to your bar;
you might have pronounced a verdict of lunacy against him, but certainly would
not have thought him a proper object of punishment. But, Gentlemen, we have in
this country a powerful Executive Government; -- we have laws which control
that power, and we have a Jury which can check it in its progress in a moment;
but we are to expect, while that Executive Government exists (which I trust
will exist to all eternity to check every attempt of this kind) that seditious
words will be ambiguous and doubtful upon the face of them; and when you find
that Mr. Margarot, the Panel, is a man of considerable ability, that he is a
man aware of what he is about, that he is the ringleader of these persons, --
of that poor unfortunate set of creatures who came this day to your bar -- of
boys -- of persons intoxicated, as you have seen -- that he professes himself
to be a merchant; that the trade in which he is engaged permits him, from
motives of pure disinterestedness, public spiritedness, and wishing to extend
blessings to Scotland, which he thinks we do not possess, for six weeks to
dedicate his whole time and abilities to those objects which he has held forth
to you as not only fair but justifiable; that he is the former of these
minutes, the maker of these motions, the ringleader of these deluded people,
who are ignorant of the commonest principles of the constitution, and who know
at this moment as little of it as if they had never been members of a British
Convention -- I say when you recollect this, you will not expect any thing else
but such an artful, insidious, and ambiguous mode of expression, as may admit
with perfect safety either the one or the other construction, but which I shall
show you in the sequel can be construed alone into guilt, and establishes only
this, that Mr. Margarot knew what he was about, that they eye of the Executive
Government of this country was over him, he professed, and he insidiously and
artfully, along with Mr. Sinclair, in this abominable committee to which the
matter was referred, did give it that general ambiguous expression, because he
durst not do otherwise, and because, which is clear from the evidence of the
minutes, and from the evidence of Coburn, it was such a paper as they durst not
blot their minutes with; it was such a paper as they durst not hold their face
to; it was such a paper as was to give rise to a committee of secrecy, where,
if the thing was right, secrecy was inconsistent; but where, if it was wrong,
it was prudent, it was necessary, it was proper.

Gentlemen, the next thing I shall observe upon is those numbers of the
Gazetteer which are now upon the table. Citizens of Edinburgh, I use the word
Citizen, I hope and I know in a fair and in a legal sense, you cannot be
ignorant of the Edinburgh Gazetteer. Sure I am I have the honor to be most
intimately acquainted with it, and it has done me the honor to be most
intimately acquainted with me.

Gentlemen, let us look to that paper, and though some slur may perhaps for a
moment arise either in your minds, or in the minds of those who hear me, as to
the authenticity of a newspaper as matter of evidence, I will show you, from
the evidence of the minutes upon the table, that it is, what it was meant to
be, an authentic account, and that as far as it goes it states nothing but what
really and truly was the substance of what passed in the Convention. I should
not suppose that the Jury would think me absurd enough to call them to idle
paragraphs in a newspaper, if it had not some degree of authenticity. I refer
you to the evidence of the Rosses, who tell you that the minutes were taken
down in shorthand for the purpose.

Gentlemen, as to that of which Mr. Margarot complains, being apprehended so
early in the morning, I should have no objection to take upon myself the blame;
it was done for the purpose of getting at Mr. Skirving and him, and all of
them, at a moment when they were not looking for us, otherwise they might
destroy that evidence which I knew existed of their proceedings, and from that
providential circumstance, these minutes were seized in Mr. Skirving's
possession, which were a complete evidence against him. I am entitled to say
so, because the Jury have said so, which is a material circumstance against the
Panel, or against any person who either is or shall be tried for his accession
to the proceedings of those meetings. It was proved that after waiting some
time for the four deputies, the representatives, as I thought at first, of all
England, but I find they are only the representatives of many thousands in
London, many thousands in Norwich, and many thousands in Sheffield and
different parts of the country, and these four gentlemen, the English
delegates, came down here, it was thought so important an occasion, that the
Convention, which had been adjourned for some days, again resumed itself; and,
gentlemen, they told us that they supported the Gazetteer, not as a Convention,
not in their corporate capacity, which I was surprised to hear stated, and it
cannot be stated by Mr. Margarot, I have a different opinion of his abilities,
it cannot be stated by him that he is not liable for the proceedings of the
Convention; it is clear, from other parts of the evidence, that the Gazetteer
is so far an authentic account of their proceedings, that they supported it as
individuals, and wished it well, as I believe they do with all their hearts and
with all their souls.

Now, Gentlemen, let us look to this Gazetteer, and let us see how far it
supplies any blank which may arise upon the perusal of the minutes regarding
this extraordinary Convention, and you will see that it effectually does so,
for you will find that the resolution which Mr. Aitcheson did not wish to have
burnt, because he thought their conduct was open and avowed, and what the world
had a right to know; you find that the Panel at the bar was wisely and
prudently of an opposite opinion; for it says, after stating the proceedings of
the Wednesday, on which Citizen Mealmaker is in the chair, and where Mr.
Callendar's motion is rejected as to words, but approved of as to the spirit of
it; and the next day, when the resolution comes to be new (...), it says
Citizen Sinclair, Citizen President, your committee appointed to attend Citizen
Callendar's motion sat this forenoon, and I shall now, if agreeable to the
Convention, submit to their consideration the report of that committee. Fellow
Citizens, you will feel this report to be of the last importance; it claims
your most serious attention, and is to be decided by your united wisdom, and
supported by your united integrity. The house resolved itself into a grand
committee to consider of the report, which underwent a long discussion, and
reviewed several amendments in the committee, and when the Convention was
resumed, it passed unanimously in the form of a declaration and resolution: the
minutes proved that resolution was come to* but being ordered to stand the last
article in the record of the proceedings of the Convention, we cannot insert it
till the termination of the present session.

That is the account in the Gazetteer, the mystery of the blank is so far
cleared up, if Mr. Aitcheson is to be believed, that this was what Mr. Sinclair
wished to bu(...)n, you have it in a faithful account of the proceedings in the
Gazetteer, that it was to be left out till the termination of the present
session. You will consider if the hand of the magistrate had not been raised to
stop their proceedings in the very middle of their career, whether it is
possible that such a resolution as this would even at the end of the
proceedings have ever made its appearance. But Ross tells you, he concurs
exactly in the same thing, that this resolution ought to have been in the blank
in the minutes, and therefore you have this distinctly proved, that resolutions
of a certain nature were come to in a solemn and deliberate manner, unanimously
and solemnly in this Convention, which one man says Mr. Sinclair moved should
be destroyed, and which another says, and the Gazetteer confirms, was to be
postponed to the end of the session, and which have never made their
appearance, and therefore the blank is completely explained; but you have
better evidence yet, you have the evidence of Coborn and Ross, to almost every
thing stated in page five of the indictment. I desire, when you read that
indictment, that you will lay out of your view altogether every thing but what
is proved; every thing but what is sufficient evidence -- You are to look at
the testimony of Coborn, you are to look at the testimony of Ross, you are to
look at the Gazetteer, and to a speech which I shall read this moment, and
which tally so far as they go with the minutes, and if you are of opinion that
that resolution, so far as it is proved, is one of a lawful nature, if you are
of opinion that it is not of a direct seditious, nay of a treasonable tendency,
for if it had been followed by one single act, in consequence of it, if under
that resolution it had been proved that this Convention of Emergency had met,
if it had been proved that they assembled under these circumstances of secrecy,
in any of the cases which I shall just now show you are proved, the persons who
met would have been guilty of on overt act of high treason, under the statute
of Edward III. which by the act of the 7th Queen Ann, is now the treason law of
Scotland.

Gentlemen, I beg your attention to the words in the indictment: it states that
the Convention, considering the calamitous consequences of any act of the
Legislature which may tend to deprive the whole or any part of the people of
their undoubted right to meet either by themselves, or by delegation, to
discuss any matter relative to their common interest, whether of a public or
private nature; and holding the same to be totally inconsistent with the first
principles and safety of society, and also subversive of our known and
acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby declare, before God and the
world, that we shall follow the wholesome example of former times, by paying no
regard to any act which may militate against the constitution of our country;
and shall continue to assemble and consider of the best means by which we can
accomplish a real representation of the people and annual election, until
compelled to desist by superior force. -- This is not proved in words; but in a
certain extent it is completely proved by the testimony of Coburn, by the
testimony of Ross, by the minutes and by the Gazetteer; for Mr. Coburn tells
you, he remembers Mr. Callendar moving, that in case of a Bill being brought
into Parliament similar to the Irish Convention Bill, that the people should
meet and assert their rights: afterward the spirit of the motion was retained,
but extending to certain other events, in which the Convention should likewise
meet in case of the suspension of the habeas corpus act, in case of an
invasion, and in case of landing foreign troops. A motion was made for a
committee to appoint a place where the Convention of Emergency were to meet,
which was to be a secret with them and the Secretary. He remembers Mr.
Sinclair's motion being come to with peculiar solemnity, and that the words
before God and the world were used either in the motion or in the decisive
resolution; he is certain it was in one or the other. He recollects he said
they would pay no regard to any such Bill, if it passed, or words to that
purpose. I have the testimony of Coburn, of whose respectability I leave you to
judge, deponing to the material parts of the indictment, that they were to meet
to assert their rights, that they would pay no regard any such Bill, if passed;
and if they were to pay no regard to the Act, if passed, were they not guilty
of an act of rebellion against the state, when they tell you, that if the
British Legislature consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, should pass such an
Act, if, in the plenitude of their wisdom, they should think it right to do
what Ireland has before thought it necessary to do; and God forbid that,
without any declaratory statute, there should not be law in Scotland to find
men guilty of daring to put into a paper words of the import that Coburn has
sworn to, that they would pay no regard to any such Act; the inference follows
necessarily and unavoidably, though not proved, until compelled by superior
force. Will you permit this, Gentlemen, let their conduct in life be ever so
unimpeached; I impeach none of them. God forbid I should look down upon the
shoemaker, or the mechanic, or consider him as less entitled to respect in his
walk of life, than the proudest peer that lives in this country. I wish that
they, be they of what rank they may, would dwell with a little attention, and
consider with care and accuracy the nature of the Constitution which they
enjoy, ere they rashly attempt either to invade its authority, as they have
done here, or attempt to substitute their own crude ideas, and prefer one of
their own idle imaginations. Whatever be the case with Mr. Margarot, I don't
think he has that knowledge of the Constitution; sure I am, he has not that
knowledge of law, after what I have heard today. I know nothing of him; but
sure I am, from what I did see of him, I cannot think, and I should be sorry
that the fifteen men I now address should think, that the Constitution was
safely confided to such men in the line of life in which these men are; they
cannot be fit for that duty which the History of the World shows has been with
difficulty discharged by legislators of the highest characters, and of the
first abilities. Go back to ages past, you will read of men who formed a state,
and gave rules for its legislation, were raised to the rank of heathen gods;
you will read of men who, by forming a constitution, and regulating its
proceedings, obtained characters and names as eternal as the world itself, will
these men be entitled to come forward, like Calder, who is placed in the
university? Will these men be entitled to state themselves as persons holding
out to such poor deluded creatures that they are fitted to enter on subjects of
that nature? That this country, consisting of ten millions of people, is to
delegate the task of legislation to such a set of ignorant uninformed people --
ignorant of the common principles of law and justice, talking of books they
never read, and declaiming upon subjects they know nothing of? It may indeed
tend, and here I am speaking directly to the point of criminating this Panel,
if he was an attorney, which I don't know that he was, he has made an ill-use
of his profession; his criminality is without excuse; his guilt is indeed of a
more atrocious nature. What is sedition but this; a convocating of ignorant,
weak, and deluded people, under the pretext of redressing grievances of any
kind, and inflaming them against the Constitution and the established authority
of their country. But this is the direct fact proved against Mr. Margarot, it
is the point distinctly brought home to him; and under such circumstances of
resistance, inculcated upon the part of these ringleaders, which in my mind,
and I trust in yours, will satisfy you that guilt was in his mind when he did
so, and will entitle you to lay your hands upon your hearts and say, that he is
guilty of endeavoring to spread the contagion wide among people who knew not
what they were about; which if they had followed his advice, if they had rose
into tumult and disorder, might have brought them to an untimely end; and
perhaps these three days past may afford some idea of what might be the purpose
of assembling such persons together, if they had been assembled by Mr. Margarot
as a Convention of Emergency; if they had been told by him, now is the time to
assert your rights. I assume, that these three days past within this city will
show us what was the nature of that object which Mr. Margarot had in view, and
what the purposes, and what the manner in which in such an event they might
have carried their schemes into execution.

Gentlemen, I have now gone through every thing upon this part of the
indictment; and certainly in arguing, and being obliged to quote considerably
from papers, I must have gone longer into the case than I had any idea of; but
I trust I shall, before I sit down, in a few words, go through what remains,
and prove to your satisfaction, that every part of the libel is clearly and
distinctly proved.

Gentlemen, Coburn tells you, that he thought the Irish Bill sapped the very
vitals of the Constitution of the Country; and he says it was to be kept a
secret. If any illegal power interrupted their meeting, that is the reason he
gives for the secrecy; that is to say, that if either the magistracy of this
city, or Parliament itself, or any such inimical power, they being clearly the
persons to whom he alludes, are the cause of the secrecy; and it is all I ask
from him. You will consider whether it is not just the thing I am stating as
the point in their view, that they were keeping it secret from those whose duty
it was to check it, and prevent the consequence that might arise from it.

Gentlemen, the case of an invasion I have already stated to you was one of the
cases under which the Convention was to meet, and I shall not repeat what I
have said upon that subject; but I trust that you will think with me, that the
only and the necessary conclusion is that which I have already stated to you.

Gentlemen, having done with that part of the case, I come to the next, which I
observed in the course of my examination, and which I also observed in the
course of the Pannel's speech upon the subject, seemed to be treated with very
considerable contempt; and Mr. Aitcheson, a determined and bold-faced
gentleman, told you his opinions in very strong, forcible terms. He expressed
his idea, that the law of the country was come to a sad pass. Indeed he did not
understand sedition neither. And he was a man, from what I have seen of his
abilities, I should have expected he would have known a little more upon the
subject than Wardlaw or Clarke knew upon the subject. But he did not know what
sedition was; but he tells you, that the law of the country was come to a sad
pass indeed, when the word citizen, which he gloried in, was to constitute a
man criminal. And he told you, that the principles of this Convention were
carried on in the same way, or very little different, from those which marked
the proceedings and conduct of the former Convention. If they were, all I can
say is this, that these former Conventions kept their proceedings very much a
secret; for if I had known that they had done so, or come to any resolutions
similar to those proved to day against this man, the members of that Convention
should before now have stood before the Jury of their countrymen. If they did
so, then all that I have to say is, that they were more cautious, or they
perhaps did not think that the time was quite ripe to express what they have
since expressed. To be sure, the term citizen, taken by itself, is an innocent
and a proper term; I have used it tonight: we are all fellow-citizens here
tonight. And the word tocsin, whether it comes from France, or whether it
comes from China, or any where else, I feel nothing criminal in that term taken
by itself; nor in the first year of British liberty; nor indeed the decades,
which by the by I find in one of the plans for the support of the Gazetteer,
that it shall be divided into decades, and that each decade shall take so many
copies of the Gazetteer, that is a Latin word; nor the first sitting; in the
same way all the other expressions, which I will not run over, taken by
themselves, are surely and unquestionably innocent; we all may use them in an
innocent sense, without the smallest apprehension, or the smallest blame. But
here is the point, Gentlemen, upon which I found the charge of criminality;
it is for this purpose that I collect these expressions, occurring in the
proceedings of these minutes; and I collect them as links in the chain of
evidence, to show that this man has been guilty of apeing and imitating the
French Convention, as acting upon that model and that principle, as in the same
way was done last year in Ireland, and was the cause of the Irish Parliament
passing that act; it is a prooof of the animus and the intent of the persons
concerned in that meeting, that they took for themselves the model and example
of the present Convention of France, imitating it in every way in their power;
and the conclusion is irresistible, that if they durst have gone forward, or if
an invasion had taken place, we might have found these men joining that band of
invaders, whom we find them imitating and accommodating all their forms to, you
will consider with yourselves, laying your hands upon your hearts, can you,
when you find in making it a case or emergency, under which they were to meet
in a place secret to all the world, which might be here, or might be in
England, the rallying point where the Executive Power of the country could not
discover them; can you hesitate one moment in thinking as I think, and as I
believe, that if such an event had taken place, that men who form themselves
upon that model, and assumed as far as in them lay, and, as far as they durst
the expressions of the French Convention, with which we are at present at war,
and by whom we are threatened with that invasion, would have gone against the
persons who were their own objects of imitation? or should we have found them
endeavoring to establish that which they have so successfully established in
that country, universal suffrage, one of the great objects for which this
Convention was established?

Gentlemen, you cannot expect written evidence of what passed in their minds,
until the evil is gone to such an height, until the invasion has taken place,
till the tumult or the insurrection has happened, which these men have
endeavored to foment. Sedition then would no longer be the crime: treason
would be the shape it would then assume: it would then be the duty of every
free and loyal subject to join hand in hand against these invaders, whom we
have found in the moment of that invasion assembling in a secret place, as the
delegates of thousands, and whom we find proving themselves by every act by
which it was possible to prove themselves, to be the supporters and imitators
of the French Convention. I call them French Conventionists: It is the essence
of the charge against them: it is the point upon which I desire your attention.
If they were the mere innocent Convention, or Assembly, or Association, or
Society for Reform in Parliament, be their reform never so absurd, or the
instruments of their meeting never so ineffectual for the object, I say God
forbid you should find them guilty to the extent of the most trifling
punishment which you can fix upon them; but if you find them directly avowing
in equivocal and doubtful terms, that an invasion shall be one of the cases in
which they shall assemble, not to say that which would be the glory of a loyal
subject, to sacrifice their live and fortunes to resist the invaders; but if we
find them, instead of that, showing their predilection for French forms, and I
trust in God all they can be able to do, it is your duty and your province to
dive into the recesses of the human mind, to consider the influence which
arises from such proceedings, to consider, if you will not lay the hand of
criminal justice upon them, to quell the conspiracy before it bursts into
light; or if the deluded people, I speak of the inhabitants of this city, I
speak of the inhabitants of Scotland at large, and of what has passed within
these three or four days, are so much in the power of these strangers who have
lately come amongst us, are to come in an unusual mode to a court of criminal
justice either to overawe that court, the prosecutor, or the jurymen; if they
are to be indulging in unfair and scandalous aspersions, as that of packed
juries, as that of imposing upon your understandings, it is for you to
interfere and check the evil in its bud; now is the time, this is the moment
for you to mark the disapprobation of their proceedings, and stop them, while
it remains with a feature of sedition marked upon it verging upon treason, with
such a trifling distinction, that it is almost impossible for a lawyer to find
the difference. It so little, that when the indictment was preferred against
Mr. Margarot, had it not been for the speed with which it was necessary to
bring him before you, I should have laid the case before the King's counsel in
England, as to the appointment of a secret committee, which was subsequent to
the resolution of calling the Convention together, whether that per se was not
sufficient to ground the charge of high treason. Sure I am, but for the act of
the 7th of Queen Anne, that the Gentlemen were far within the case of Scotch
treasons; and in that case Mr. Margarot would have stood at your bar tried for
his life.

Gentlemen, before I sit down, let me return again to the evidence. Mr. Ross, I
think George tells you, that he had heard of a Convention Bill, and of a number
of Hessians and Hanoverians to be landed in this country, that also was a case
when it was proper for the Convention to meet at the secret place of meeting,
that is to say, and it is the case at this moment, I believe, that a body of
Hessians are passing toward France. If Parliament should choose to allow them
to land upon this island, this was an objection of legislation; not that we
could confide to the wisdom of King, Lords, and Commons, but the British
Convention for universal suffrage was to decide alone what was to be done; a
case much of the same kind with the other, even in the way that Mr. Ross
himself states it. But I will not wound the feelings of that worthy citizen
(and I trust that he hears me), by saying, that he concealed the truth, I will
not say that; but he has forgot that mighty event which his brother and Coburn
swore to, which must have struck the mind and ears of every man who heard it;
but his memory is a frail one, and with that observation I leave him.

Gentlemen, we are now coming near to a close. You will find a variety of other
evidence, much of the same nature in number three of the inventory. You will
find one of the documents material to be attended to in considering this
question, Whether the Convention is a seditious or a fair Convention? for that
is the gist of the question which you are to try, and upon which you are to
make up your mind. Now these papers are traced home to the possession of Mr.
Margarot. Mr. Aitcheson, in his character of Assistant Secretary to the
Convention, identifies a paper to which he tells you in this Convention he put
his subscription 'Hints on the question of union;' and in the inside are three
or four different papers, which the witnesses who made the search swear were
enclosed in it, and all relate to the selfsame subject; and the only other odd
circumstance which was thought of so much consequence in this case was, in that
solemn way the appointment of that committee of union, of which Mr. Margarot
was the chairman.

He appears to be the leader of this committee of union between England and
Scotland; a union which these Gentlemen, it seems, had authority to make; a
union which we unfortunately have been deceived, as well as our fathers, in
dreaming that we possessed a union that we thought we had enjoyed since the
year 1707, which Mr. Aitcheson told us was nothing like the union brought about
by this convention, with so much solemnity; a wild sycophant union, I think, he
called it; and Mr. Margarot is the person who takes the active part in this
committee. Let us see what it amounts to. I shall take the paper itself which
Paterson, a man who, much to his credit, has seceded from that meeting: he, as
the head of his section, admits that the paper was drawn up in his section, and
was by him sent in a letter to the Convention. Mr. Margarot desired to know,
How are you certain that paper was in the Convention? I will tell Mr. Margarot
how I am certain of it. Mr. Aitcheson subscribes it at the back, "Hints
respecting the Union;" and says, it must be put upon that paper in its
reception; where Mr. Paterson tells you, he sent it in the common form from his
section, which met in the morning, to the Convention, which met in the evening,
and of which Mr. Aitcheson was Assistant Secretary; and there is no reason to
suppose that it did not reach the place of its destination, the Masons' Lodge,
at the foot of the Black Friars Wynd. And what is it; "Hints upon the question
of Union." First, That the people of Great Britain, disclaiming any distinction
of Scotch and English do now and for ever unite themselves into one mass and
indissoluble union. Then it goes on, Make known to all concerned, in exclusive
terms, that this shall be the motto: -- Restoration of Rights. What rights?
Universal suffrage and annual parliaments; a thing that never did, and that
never can, exist. Let them go back to the History of England; let them go back
to the deepest antiquity, it never did exist. Those people, of whom Mr.
Margarot seems to be the ghostly father, had not heard of the Bill of Rights,
nor the claim of rights; and knew not what rights they had lost.

And, Gentlemen, I have been taught by every writer of the laws of foreign
countries; I have been taught by every enlightened foreigner who writes upon
the subject; I have been taught by every Briton who ever stated an opinion with
regard to it, that since the revolution, this country, originally free,
resisted every invader, till gradually matured through centuries, by the slow
mellowing hand of time, not by associations of such people as we have seen
today, but it was clear that at that time, and till within these two years, we
were the freest nation upon the face of the earth; but if it be necessary to
constitute freedom that universal suffrage, or annual parliaments -- that
universal suffrage was a kind of proof of being free, we never have been free
from all eternity, and are not free at this present moment. I hope in God, in
that sense we never shall, because that never can take place, for the best of
all possible reasons, as I believe the late Soame Jenyns says. It is the best
plan of the whole, says he, for the best of all possible reasons, because it is
impracticable (goes on reading the paper) that all occurrences may be known
from one end of the kingdom to the other, to instruct every individual of this
one great but indivisible mass, in this way greeting together the inhabitants
of this free country, France, to reject that mighty combination formed against
them. Still they run upon the French expressions in every part of their
minutes, in every speech in their Gazetteer, continually recurring to French
words, French terms, and French expressions. In another motion, by James
Gartlay, which Aitcheson volunteered in telling me was not evidence against Mr.
Margarot, but it proves being found upon his person, it proves the nature of
that convention, of which he was not only a member, but an active leading
instrument, it is also marked upon the back by Aitcheson, and this motion is
that the delegation signed John Gartley, who is the town drummer of Arniston
near Glasgow, that the Convention took into their serious consideration the
necessity of dividing the country into departments, in order that the friends
of the people may have an opportunity of meeting in the particular department
to which they belong, and thus form a sort of Provincial Convention, that they
may become more particularly acquainted with each other. In the names of the
delegates, James Gartley.

Gentlemen, the honor of the sitting appears to be given by the French
Convention, to persons they wish to favor, so we find in the minutes, among
other insignia of the honors of the British Convention, Secretary Skirving
stated, that he had just now received five shillings from an unknown hand, for
the use of the Convention. Honorable mention in the minutes was ordered to be
made of this patriotic gift. Upon my word I never was in the French Convention,
and I hope I never shall, but I should have supposed, from what I read in the
newspapers, that I was reading of the French Convention in Paris. Citizen
Calendar moved, that no person be allowed the honor of the sitting, without
the recommendation of two persons; it is a favor not to be bestowed rashly or
lightly; which, with amendments, passed unanimously. Afterward it was moved
that captain Johnstone, and I am extremely sorry to find him here, if he is the
individual to whom I allude at present, because it may perhaps compel other
proceedings against him: but when he read an account in the newspaper of the
sentence of Holt, the printer, of Newark, for re-printing the duke of
Richmond's and Mr. Pitt's resolutions upon parliamentary reform, it was moved,
that Captain Johnstone be admitted to the honors of the sitting.

Gentlemen, there is one other circumstance that I cannot help just in passing
to take notice of, and it is that of a compulsory attendance enforced upon
those persons who might have the misfortune to be deluded in a rash unthinking
moment, into a participation of their proceedings, to shame them from doing, as
Mr. Paterson, much to his honor did, return back to his duty. In this manner
you will find, that no delegate is to leave his post, or is to get permission
of absence from it, till he obtains a new delegation, a substitute in his place
to act for him; we saw too much of this I think pointed at today. Mr. Margarot
said, he would not touch upon the sore heel of Paterson, in the question
proposed to the witness, which he refused to answer, and which the justice of
the Court would not enforce for this highly favored Panel, who has been
favored more than any Scotchman would have been. He said, he would not touch
the sore heel of Paterson, for having done that which I am sure you will join
with me in thinking was to his honor; and God knows, when we look at those we
saw here this morning, what this Panel will have to answer for; but I trust
what has been done this day will make them study the law and constitution of
the country, before they give an opinion upon it, and before they trust again
to such leaders as Mr. Margarot and Mr. Skirving. In one of the papers, Citizen
Wilson, and another, requested leave of absence to be granted them; and it was
moved that all the delegates should have letters to return immediately, and
remain at their posts till the important business daily introduced in the
Convention, shall be properly discussed; and in page 100 of the minutes,
Citizen Scott moved, that before any delegate from the country shall leave his
post, he shall write to his constituents to send another in his room. Agreed
to, nem. con.

Gentlemen, the two instances which I have given are perfectly sufficient to
show, that in this respect also, as in their declaring themselves permanent,
which is proved by many witnesses, and which is proved by the Gazetteer, that
they, in every paper the most minute, imitate in every respect the proceedings
of the French Convention. In one word, I leave this point for your
consideration; repeating again, that those words taken of themselves, or in any
different circumstances, would have themselves been idle, and that which you
could have grounded no verdict upon; but taking them in conjunction with the
evidence of the Gazetteer, and the parole evidence this day upon your table,
certainly do go to the point. Is it a seditious meeting or not, in as much as
it is proved it was a meeting calculated for the purpose of overawing
Parliament, and resisting any act which might pass until compelled to desist by
superior force; and that conduct followed by their adopting every form of that
country to which I am so often alluding, if you are of that opinion, you will
find a verdict in my favor, for with regard to his being a ringleader in this
business and being a man who conducted these Committees the evidence upon that
point is so clear, it is involved in every word I have now read; the moment you
have come to a determination upon the one point, it shows, that he is a
principal in the guilt of being a Member of that Convention, and a ringleader
in it, as such, he is more responsible than the poor creatures whom you have
seen to day, and who were under his guidance.

Gentlemen, I am afraid I trespass more upon your time, much more than I had
any intention of doing, when I rose; but I cannot help taking notice of one
thing which dropped from the gentleman at the bar, in the commencement of this
day's trial he told us, that he had cited several persons, who were not
evidences, this day upon the trial: men bearing the highest offices in the
state, and at present discharging the duties of those important offices in
England. And he brought evidence which I dare say is the case, that, under the
letters of exculpation, which issue of course, and in which he can fill up any
name that he pleases, that he subpoenaed them in London by the forms of the law
of England; in the course of something which was not a very proper argument
upon the subject Mr. Margarot chose to refer; and if I am not mistaken, I thank
him for the expression; he referred to myself and to my own candor, if the
public Prosecutor had not higher powers in bringing witnesses to this court
than what he possessed. I have no difficulty, at all times and seasons, to give
my opinion to a Panel, whether I am bound to do it or not, and I was
ill-prepared then to give him an answer; but I said I had no more power of
compelling witnesses to come into this court, than the meanest criminal at the
bar. Our rights, in that respect, and our powers are the same. I will give him
an instance of it: A noted instance occurred twelve years ago, when one of your
Lordships filled the office of Solicitor General of Scotland. A man of the name
of M'Gee, a carrier of letters, was brought under an accusation of having
embezzled letters and stolen money entrusted to his charge. The principal
evidence was a woman, a relation of his own, and who, immediately after the
fact was discovered, reitred to England. The Solicitor General brought his
indictment against him. I at that time appeared as counsel for the panel. The
trial was adjourned from week to week, and from day to day; because this
material evidence, the woman, would not come, for obvious reasons, within the
jurisdiction of the courts of law, to give her testimony against the panel.
And now did she at last come? Having been concerned with him, she came at last
because means were round to notify to her, that if she did not come to her duty
as the witness against the panel, she herself would be tried in England, as an
approver of the crime; and therefore she came to save and redeem her own life,
and gave evidence, as she was bound to do; and which she would have been
compelled to do, if she had been in this country; and I hope that instance will
satisfy him, that even the powers of the public Prosecutor are just exactly
what his are: that he must take his chance of bringing witnesses from a foreign
country, as we do; and if he is not successful there is no help for it.

But, gentlemen, if it is meant by saying that these men have not obeyed the
citation, if it is meant to found any plea of favor upon it, I leave the
Panel in full possession of any benefit he may derive from it; but if you were
to give weight to such an objection as that, seeing the reason of it at
present, there is not a panel who would not be entitled to the same benefit,
be his crime what it may, who will not tell you he has witnesses in Germany, in
France, in America, or in the Indies, and you must always take the pannel's
word for it; and you will consider if there is any possibility of doing duty to
yourselves or your country, if you receive excuses of that kind.

Gentlemen, before I sit down, I must observe it was said, that in all their
pretensions they were not afraid of what they were about. I omitted to mention
one very material paper, which I trust will satisfy you that the Gentlemen were
perfectly aware of the danger of what they were about; in a letter from Mr.
Hardy, who is the secretary of the London Corresponding Society, which was
found in the possession of Mr. Hardy, after a long account of what was going
on, and telling him, that they had sent draughts, and complaining of the short
coming in of the funds which were subscribed, it seems, for the carrying Mr.
Gerald down to this country; which, he says, had fallen lamentably short of
their expectations; and at last concludes thus: I have to inform you of the
wish of the Society, that you would favor them with the number of delegates in
the Convention from England; also and how the civil and military power relishes
your meeting. Upon the 8th of November, 1793, a few days after Mr. Margarot and
Mr. Gerald arrived in this city, upon an object which they are not ashamed or
afraid to avow, an object of the public good, and of Scotland in particular, it
is something extraordinary that it should come into the head of the secretary
of the meeting, by which they were appointed, to ask the question, how the
civil and military power relished their meeting. The military power has never
interfered: it cannot interfere to check such meetings as these though the
consequences of such meetings, I hope and trust, never will be such as to
render the civil power compelled to adopt that last and necessary measure;
though, were I to look at the speech of Mr. Gerald, stated in the Gazetteer,
mentioned in the minutes, and which he gave immediately after that solemn
resolution was come to, I will not at this hour trouble you with quoting it, it
would be clear to demonstration, that Mr. Gerald at that moment shows, in
strict terms, what is his meaning, that this resolution was come to, with the
purpose of resisting lawful authority by force, as Coborn tells you, paying no
regard whatever to it, though passed by the Legislature; in that speech
referred to in the minutes, and in the Gazetteer, he says, I rise to
congratulate the Convention on the adoption of this resolution, not only on the
propriety of the measure itself, but on that unanimity and solemnity with which
it is passed: then goes on a long story, with regard to the Irish bill. But the
conclusion is this, though I could not get a copy of this bill, the heads which
I have read are sufficiently explanatory of its detestable principles, which
was a bill passed for the express purpose of preventing the meeting of a
Convention formed upon French models, and imitating French politics. I read the
other day a speech of one of the ablest men in the Irish Parliament upon that
subject. The object of that bill was to check a society of united Irishmen; a
society also with whom I have the honor to be acquainted; a society which sent
some papers to this country of so seditious a nature, that even the first
convention refused to receive it, as being a treasonable paper, for which the
unhappy mover is now suffering the punishment that the law has awarded. He goes
on: I hope the motion, which has passed this night, will convince the minister,
that we are determined to guard against every attempt that may be made to
deprive us of our rights; and, though by some it may be thought a bold, by
others a daring measure; yet it will be found the best for securing the peace
of the country: for if such a law were suffered to pass, if men were not
allowed to utter their complaints, a number of rancorous passions would arise,
and we should seek to appeal to that last terrible decision, the event of which
is uncertain; but which God and nature allow. If the servility of the people
had been less, if they had dared to meet, and in place of murmuring, had told
the rulers, that there was danger in seeking to deprive them of their
liberties, we need not have had that resolution to have recurred to tonight;
but when I saw the calm deliberate countenance of every one present, and the
solemn manner in which it was passed, I was convinced that it was not only a
resolution of words, but a rule of action. This is the commentary which Mr.
Gerald gives to that resolution, which I have already stated as being composed
in artful ambiguous terms, and to which I have affixed so criminal and so
guilty a conclusion. It appears to me, and I trust will appear to you, that the
purport of that resolution ambiguously worded, and come to with such awful
solemnity, was a resolution that, in any of those emergencies, if they had
happened, was not to be a resolution of words, but a rule of action; you are to
consider whether that is to be suffered; and I know, because it is the common
law of the country, that your powers, as Jurymen, are sufficient to check such
conventions. If such men are to meet to consider what are their rights, and
what ought to entitle them to that last and terrible decision, the event of
which is uncertain; but which God and nature allows. If you permit that to be
allowed, where is the security of your laws, your lives, or your liberties?
Where is the protection which this government gives to all, high or low, rich
or poor, if these men's opinions, be they ever so learned, are to be set up in
opposition to the British Parliament; or if they are to judge in what point
they are to recur to that last and terrible decision, which comes to that which
we see in a neighboring country, where blood and devastation are the certain
consequences.

Gentlemen, before I conclude, something was said, and I hope I vindicated you;
in the commencement of my argument; something was said about the Juries of this
country, something was said against myself and the other servants of the Crown.
If he means the servants of the Crown in this country, I unquestionably stand
amongst them. It is said that we are the persons guilty of Sedition; that we
sowed sedition between our master and our fellow subjects; and that we are the
proper persons to stand at that bar; that to us are to be imputed the offenses
with which I have charged him. Upon that point you must determine, and I feel
not the least difficulty in thinking that upon that charge I shall meet with a
complete acquittal: all that I now say, that standing in the situation which I
do, and ably assisted as I am, I have never brought any indictment against any
man for any offense, I never opened in my life a bundle of papers which were
laid before me, containing the case of a proposed criminal, without an awful
feeling upon my mind of the delicacy and the extent of that duty which depended
upon the exercise of my understanding, and consulting my conscience upon the
subject. If you differ with me upon this occasion, I should at least hope, if
it is possible we can differ upon the subject, that you will not think that I
have brought any improper or oppressive prosecution before you; at least, if I
am guilty of seditiously perverting the duties of my office to any purpose, I
shall look back with some consolation that hitherto I have received the best
support, which comes home to a man's conscience, the unanimous opinions of a
jury of my country. Something was said of being a place-man and a pensioner. I
am a place-man, it is true; I have been ten years in two high situations; and I
have and am unquestionably liable to that unfashionable imputation of the
British Convention; that even the boy they called exulted that he was not a
pensioner. I plead guilty to the charge of being a place-man; as to a pensioner
I am not, I should feel myself mean indeed in my own eyes, if, by accepting the
situation I now hold, my independence was injured in the smallest respect. I
have been, by accidental circumstances, early brought forward to those
situations, if I found them militating against the dictates of my own mind, I
trust, with all the emolument of it, nothing should tempt me to retain it, or
prevent me from throwing it up. I feel that I have done nothing but brought the
guilty to justice; and as to what they may say, I care not for it. They have my
full approbation: they have a better thing, they have a right to attack me upon
that score; as to a pension I have none, nor am I liable to such an imputation.
I have, from the earliest period of my life, born in this place, from the
moment I came to that bar, I have supported myself; and, were I to be turned
out tomorrow, I should retire behind that bar, and my friends round me, as free
of the public money, as poor and as independent a man as I was in 1784, when I
was first introduced within in. I beg pardon for having deviated from that
strict line of my duty; but having been attacked, and probably shall again be
attacked as a placeman and a pensioner, which is the cant phrase of these
gentlemen of the British Convention, I thought proper to say so much before I
sat down, and before I call upon you, which, I hope and trust will be the case,
to return that verdict which I think is founded upon the evidence, that this
man is guilty of the crime of Sedition with which I have charged him.


Mr. Margarot. Gentlemen of the Jury, -- I shall come undoubtedly with great
disadvantage, after the florid oratory of the public Prosecutor; however, he
fortunately for me has been so very profuse in many points, that it reminds me
of Shakespeare's proverb.

"Two grains of wheat in a bushel of chaff." I address myself at present to my
country, and through the medium of a Jury. -- You are the representatives of
that country; -- great is the trust reposed in you, you are men, I make no
doubt, of untainted, -- of unspotted characters, and I hope you will prove
yourselves such. -- High sounding words I hope will yield to plain sense.

Gentlemen, I am not an attorney, thank God; -- neither am I a Member of
Parliament, -- thank God likewise. -- It is the public Accuser's business to
set forth, in the most lively colors, every crime, or imputed crime, which he
states at the Bar of this Court. -- I do not blame him for so doing. I do not
find fault with him for making the most of his talents, or doing the most for
the money he receives. -- He has however tried to prejudice you in the first
instance against me. He has thrown out that I have asserted you are a packed
Jury. -- It is a falsehood. -- Forgive me, Gentlemen of the Jury, -- forgive
me, my country, if I speak a bold but plain language. -- I cannot give you (for
I am not a sycophant) high sounding words, but that which you will understand.
I did not say you were a packed Jury -- I objected to not one of you, but
objected to the unconstitutional way in which I said the Jury were chosen out
of the Assize; because it is in the breast of Lord Justice Clerk to pick out
such as he thinks proper; and therefore though you are not a packed Jury, when
he chooses to exert his skill and penetration that way, you may become a picked
Jury. However at present the cause is of great consequence; it is not merely a
criminal at the Bar that you see in me; -- it is not the crimes of an
individual; it is not the efforts of one single person that are attacked; --
no, it is at present your own rights which are attacked, as it is the rights of
your country, and your country look to you to do those rights justice, and to
sustain them. -- Gentlemen, the public Prosecutor has found means to blend
trials, crimes, criminals, various persons and various articles of accusation
altogether, in order to make a sum total of such a size, as shall seize upon
your imagination, and make you behold a mountain of guilt, where, in fact,
there is not even a mole hill of imprudence -- In me at present, I am sorry for
it, and it will appear perhaps a kind of pride; but it is the truth, that in me
the cause of Parliamentary Reform is this day attacked -- it is not the
individual me -- I should have escaped notice; but it is the dangers impending
from abroad, and the dangers impending at home, on the heads of those who now
occupy some of the highest stations in the state; -- of those who, entrusted by
the Crown with the greatest powers, may perhaps have made a worse use of them
than they think they could answer for before a Parliament, fairly and freely
chosen by the whole people of this country; and yet that very cause of
Parliamentary Reform was espoused by these very men before they were in place.
--

Gentlemen, the public Prosecutor has said, that I attempted, both in doors and
out, to shake the confidence of the people, with regard to a Jury; and he
afterward with truth added, that a Jury was the brightest privilege of
Englishman. -- So it is, where a Jury is faithful to its trust -- it is the
greatest privilege the English Constitution knows of; because, Gentlemen of the
Jury, when you are honest, you stand not between the law and the accused, but
between those in power and the accused; -- you see the due execution of the
laws: -- you stand between the accuser and the man who is perhaps weaker than
the accuser, either in tongue or in knowledge; and as he has thought proper to
avail himself of that superority and to carry it sorth, I will undoubtedly
yield to him in regard to talents and eloquence, but for the soundness of my
doctrine I will not yield to him. -- Gentlemen, I never attempted to prejudice
the people against a Jury. I ever will lift up my voice against any act of
iniquity, in impannelling a Jury, -- against every act of iniquity, in trying
to mislead a Jury, or in trying to influence a Jury, even if the man on the
Bench tries to influence a Jury, I shall try to stop him, I shall withhold him,
and tell him, it is not his duty, though he sits there as Judge, and I stand
here as criminal, it is my right as a Briton, to keep him within the bounds of
his duty, to keep him close to the execution of the laws, if he attempts to
depart from them in any one instance. -- With the same spirit of inflammation,
the public Prosecutor has swelled out the treasonable matter which he says lies
on the table; and he is obliged in the end, to tell you, that if it appears to
you that the British Convention really had no seditious motives, if they were
only, bona fide, seeking a Reform in Parliament, whether it was to be by annual
Parliaments, or whether it was to be attended with unversal suffrage, or in
whatever way it may take place, yet that Convention must be innocent; but says
he, you must concur with me, that the parole and written evidence are more than
sufficient to prove me guilty; and adds a very curious reasoning: -- he says,
if you wait till you have positive proof, it will be too late; therefore, make
haste, avail yourselves of the presumptive proof that I give you, and condemn
him, which is to say, sport with the lives, -- sport with the liberties of
Englishmen, for fear of accidents befalling you hereafter. -- Is that the
language of mercy? -- Is that the language of the Constitution? -- Is it the
language of the Laws? -- He calls his proofs in the first instance solid and
convincing; although, at last, he is obliged to have recourse to that
subterfuge: he says it amounts to more than sedition, and arraigns the
ignorance of the Members of that Convention at the same time that he arraigns
their wickedness, that they pretend to be ignorant of what really is sedition;
and yet he does not deign to inform them. -- He says, it is as strictly defined
as murder, but he does not give you that definition; he only says, we are
guilty of Sedition. -- Now sedition must be some act; it cannot be a concealed
operation of the mind, it must be an overt act: and yet he wants you to judge
not of our overt acts, but of our intentions; which, all the witnesses have
agreed in saying, were peaceful, orderly, and seemingly legal. I say seemingly,
because, as there is that idea of our appearance being different from our real
intention, I put the word seeming into their mouths; but I profess to you that
our intentions perfectly coincided with our operations. -- He acknowledges the
right of the subject to address the king or petition the Parliament; and it is
well that he acknowledges it. -- The affront upon your understandings; I repeat
it, the affront upon your understandings would be too gross, were he not to
acknowledge that freemen have a right to petition for redress, when they think
themselves abused.

You are not to judge (a curious reasoning) Gentlemen you are not judge upon
any particular fact; -- you are not to judge merely upon the evidence brought
against me; -- you are not to judge upon those trivial matters brought forth to
night, which apply entirely to me; but you are to judge from the contexture of
the whole. You are to judge from papers that are to criminate Skirving, Brown,
Sinclair, Callendar; and, as I understand there are a great number more against
whom indictments are making out, these papers are to criminate all; and the
contexture is to criminate all. He has wandered far from the indictment; he
asserts of his authority, however, it is but just that, while he allows you the
talent of prying into the hearts of men, it is but right, he should retain some
share of the same penetration; and therefore with that sagacity which he
claims, he says that our intentions were positively to join the invaders of
Britain, let them be who they would, he does not name them, and then he desires
you, in a most pathetic manner, to lay your hands upon your hearts, and see if
such men ought not to be pronounced traitors to their country. Undoubtedly men
doing so would be traitors to their country; but how does he prove that was our
intention? He brings you forward far more convincing proof than writtten
evidence; he brings you forward a blank to grove our guilt. He acknowledges
that no notice has been taken of three prior Conventions; and yet it will
appear to you, gentlemen, by those who have attended these prior Conventions,
that this Convention acted exactly upon the same plan; therefore the laws of
the land were either asleep at that time, or they are over vigilant at this. He
calls us a set of French Conventionists. I do not believe there were five men
in the Convention that can speak French. I do not believe that there were five
men who had an adequate idea of France; and it does not appear, from the
evidence that has been brought before you, that any single member of the
Convention has any intercourse whatever with France; but yet it is criminal in
us to adopt certain terms. Those terms, taken by themselves, he tells you, are
not criminal; but take them, at this present crisis, altogether, form a mass of
guilt which it really hurts him to mention, he is so tender. However, to
support this allegation, he does not bring any proof; he gives it merely as an
assertion; and which is as legal an authority, as be undoubtedly held those
orders which he gave to Mr. Davidson, the Sheriff Substitute; and which, by the
bye, he acknowledges. He reflects upon me as being, or pretending to be, an
Englishman. Dare he doubt it, or dare he dispute it -- I have been, I
acknowledge it, obnoxious to his uncle or father, or whoever he is, in London
and several other Members of the Administration. Those who profit by the spoils
of the nation, those who once were friendly to a Reform in Parliament, but now
they have got into the enjoyment of the good things of the treasury, seek no
more that reform. Had I been a foreigner I should have been long ere now sent
abroad under the Alien Act.

Gentlemen, he alleges against me, as an article of accusation, a motion said
to be made by me; and he then reverts to the testimony of Ross and Coburn, and
supports it by other charges of certain forms which Mr. Callender (who, it
seems, has run from his bail in a most disgraceful manner) wished to introduce
into the Convention -- A Reform of Parliament, he will not admit -- he calls it
(but it remains for the nation to determine, whether he calls it rightly or
not) a change of the Constitution. A Reform undoubtedly would make a change,
but it would not be in the Constitution; though, to be sure, a change from
sickness to health is so far a change in the Constitution; but it is possible
that you may recover your pristine health, and make no alteration in your
former Constitution? you only do away your disease; and that is the way in
which a Reform is meant to operate. He pleads much against universal Suffrage,
and annual Parliaments. Indeed annual parliaments he touches more tenderly
upon. However, the same power that made them from annual to triennal, and from
triennial to septennial, may very likely go on to make them for life, or even
hereditary.

But to show that universal Suffrage has taken place, I will give you a
quotation from a Scotch Author. The Lord Advocate has said, it could not take
place for the best of all possible reasons, (and I have heard that twice in
this Court) because it is impracticable. A Lord, learned in the law, and whose
authority none here will deny, Lord Kaims, says, that, with regard to this
matter one thing is certain, that the Regiam Majestatem was compiled in the
days of one of our David's. The author, whoever he be, declares that he was
commanded by King David to compile this work with the counsel and advice of his
whole realm. There, Gentleman, you see it is not the advice of representatives;
not the advice of individuals; but it was the advice of his whole realm. The
same Lord Kaims does not fix a Government, or a Constitution to any one
particular point. He does not tell you that the Constitution of Great Britain
is the very best that ever existed from all eternity, as our learned Lord does;
or that it will endure to all eternity, but he says, Government is one of the
arts which necessity has suggested, which time and experience have ripened, and
which is susceptible of improvements without end. It must also be the privilege
of every Society to improve upon its government.. There you see, Gentlemen,
there you see, people of this country, that it admits of improvements without
end; and therefore that which is good to day may be better tomorrow. Lord
Kaims says, it is the privilege of every Society to improve upon its
government; and what signifies the privilege, if we are not to have the
enjoyment of it. I will warrant the learned Lord, that whatever privileges he
enjoys, in his situation, he would not think them privileges, if he was
debarred from the enjoyment of them -- Then, why should a nation be deprived of
that which would be a loss to an individual, whose interest it is that the
government should be good. Is it the interest of the few, or the interest of
the many? -- Undoubtedly it is the interest of the many. It is the concern of
the many, and consequently the interest of the many. He continues, -- It must
also be the privilege of every society to improve upon its government, as well
as its manufactures, husbandry or other art invented for their good -- Here you
see if an improvement is admissible in an art, it is so in government. No
particular form therefore can be essential, as no particular form is preferable
to another. This is a Scotch Lord who speaks, unless by having a greater
tendency to promote its end -- the good of the society. Therefore, how
excellent soever our Constitution may be in its present form of three estates,
and in the present most excellent most immaculate ways of electing Members of
Parliament; yet, if there is a better mode of electing Members of Parliament, it
is not only our right, but our duty to do it; yet meetings for that purpose are
deemed seditious, although there is no overt act of Sedition, but merely the
construction of the public Accuser, for the doctrine that he has pleaded is,
that before a man is guilty you shall hang him, that he may not become a rogue.

Gentlemen, another great point is the committee of secrecy; that galls him
sorely. Undoubtedly we ought to have told him what we were about. We said we
had no secrets, and immediately after appointed a committee of secrecy. It is
true, and there is no inconsistency in it. We had no secrets to go upon; our
plan was perfectly constitutional, and must operate for the common good; but,
at the same time, feeling ourselves under the arm of power; feeling ourselves
to be militating against abuse all powerful, it was prudent in us for the
present not to expose ourselves more than necessary: it was prudent to secure
to ourselves a safe place of meeting. He has said, it would be rebellion, and
an overt act of treason. As to that I do not see how a secret meeting can be an
overt act of treason. We should have been able to repair to the place of
meeting secretly, because we knew every stretch of power would be made use of
against us, and there is more reason to suspect that the present war with
France is not directed solely against France, but against the reform in
England. It was meant by that war to divert the attention of the public from
that cause, under the pretext of that ancient prejudice, that that country was
always our natural enemy; the numerous failures that are daily taking place;
the numerous losses that we have experienced, both, I am sorry to say it, both
by sea and land, teach us that that war is far from being a profitable one;
teach us, that we are farther off gaining our end now, than we were at the
beginning of that war; for we are at this day less able to treat, or to treat
on such advantageous terms with that nation we have so much despised as we were
at the beginning of the war. Ruin stares us in the face in every part of the
kingdom; every manufacturing town is laboring under the greatest misery.
London shows no less than 8000 Spitalfields manufacturers who are starving.
Norwich, another great trading town (from which I have appeared in the
Convention as a Delegate) is in so dismal a situation, that the poor rates,
which were at first, two years ago I think, or 18 months ago, but 3 s. 6 d. in
the pound, now amount to the enormous sum of 17 s. 6 d.; and, by Lady Day next,
they will be 20 s. in the pound, owing to the present war.

Gentlemen, I hope you will not think it impertinent in me to follow the
example that has been set me, of reading from a newspaper. It is not altogether
so pleasing a fact to me, as that which the Prosecutor stated from the
Gazetteer was to him. It gave him satisfaction that it criminated me -- it
gives me pain that I am obliged to criminate those that are in office. I will
read to you a letter from a clergyman who visited the Spitalfields' weavers,
and made a report of that visit. You will by this see part of the distress in
which they are now plunged, owing to the war: it is a letter addressed to the
Reverend mr: T --. ( Reads it from the Morning Chronicle. See Appendix, No. 1.)

Gentlemen, I will also read you a paragraph uncontradicted by authority, from
the Morning Chronicle, of 1st January, 1793. The Editor says, -- "In one short
month (December 1792)" -- ( See Appendix, No. 2.)

What is that but saying that our constitution is greatly impaired within these
twelve months, if we do not look to it, we shall have nothing but an Italian or
a Spanish constitution left to us. How therefore are we to restore that
constitution but by a timely reform! and how are we to obtain that reform, but
by pursuing it with vigor? and how are we to pursue it, if we are not to meet,
and if an English Jury will permit to public prosecutor (and believe every word
he says) to throw an odium upon them; and say, that though their meaning may be
good now, it may in future be bad; and therefore you must condemn them as
seditious. As a further proof, however, of the constitutionality of these
meetings, and the right we have to revert to our original constitution, and to
do away the existing defects of that which is termed the present constitution;
I will read to you a letter from Lord Bathurst to Dean Swift; although in his
time the house of Commons was corrupt; since that time no great effort has been
made to amend it; and we all know that human institutions, however good they
may be in their first setting out, go naturally to decay, unless repaired. It
has moreover been asserted, that one of the glories of our constitution is,
that it is of such a nature, that it will admit of repair without being thrown
out of order, and will always be advantaged by it; and that repair must come
from the people; but hear what Lord Bathurst says: I am convinced that our
constitution is already gone:" luckily for the public prosecutor he has found
it tonight, "and we are idly struggling to maintain what in truth has been long
lost; like some old fools here, with gout and palsies, at fourscore years old
drinking the waters," he was then at Bath, "in hopes of health again. If this
was not our case, and that the people are already in effect slaves, would it
have been possible for the minister, who projected the excise scheme (before
the heats which it had occasioned in the nation were well laid) to have chosen
a new parliament again exactly to his mind? and though perhaps not altogether
so strong in numbers, yet as well disposed in general to his purposes as he
could wish. His master, I doubt, is not so well beloved as I could wish he was.
You see that even in the time of Lord Bathurst there were no greater enemies to
the King than bad servants; for none alienate the affections of a people from a
King so much as bad servants of the Crown. -- His master, I doubt, is not so
well beloved as I could wish he was: the minister, I am sure, is as much hated
and detested as ever man was; whether that applies to the present time or not,
I leave the people of England and Scotland to discover, and yet I say a new
parliament was chosen of the stamp that was desired, after having failed in the
most odious scheme that ever was projected. After this, what hopes can there
possibly be of success? Unless it be from confusion, which God forbid I should
live to see. In short, the whole nation is so abandoned and corrupt, that the
Crown can never fail of a majority in both houses of parliament. He makes them
all in one house, and he chooses above half in the other, four and twenty
bishops," very upright men, "and sixteen Scotch Lords is a terrible weight in
one; forty-five from one country, besides all the West of England, and all the
government boroughs, is a dreadful number in the other. Were his majesty
inclined tomorrow to declare his body coachman his first minister, it would do
just as well, and the wheels of government would move as easily as they do with
the sagacious driver, who now sits on the box. Parts and abilities are not in
the least wanting to conduct affairs: the coachman knows how to feed his
cattle, and the other feeds the beasts in his service; and this is all the
skill that is necessary in either case. Are not these sufficient difficulties
and discouragements, if there were no others, and would any man struggle
against corruption, when he knows that if he is ever near defeating it, those
who make use of it only double the dose, and carry all their points further,
and with a higher hand than perhaps they at first intended. Therefore the poor
Reformer generally comes off the worst; as perhaps will be the case with those
now at your bar. Gentlemen, since the days of Lord Bathurst the disorders of
the state have gone on increasing, and we are now loaded with such an immense
debt, that it is incomprehensible how the nation supports itself under it; and
there are now forty millions more to add to it, for the sake of preventing a
reform in parliament. A foreign war was entered into with that view, while the
Crown Lawyers have been busy at home: words have been raked up of as far date
back as a twelve month; spies set in private families; servants interrogated;
the man has been set against his master, and the child against its parent.
Every art has been used to bring forth criminal prosecutions, in order that
reform may be discouraged in every shape; and that those, who had been the
foremost in attempting any thing like reform, should be stigmatized as
seditious, -- treasonable, -- as ring leaders. -- These words you have
vociferated again and again, until they must have tired your patience.

Gentlemen, here is a statement of the national debt, which perfectly applies
to the case in point. The national debt began with our happy revolution, which
we are all bound to praise; and would to God the constitution was as sound now
as it was then. The national debt was a scheme devised by William and Mary, to
secure their footing in England. At first it amounted, I believe, to seven
millions; but during that reign it increased to sixteen millions, and the wars
of Queen Anne increased it to fifty-four millions -- the amount of the debt at
the end of the war of 1748 was 78,250,000 l.; the amount of the debt at the
commencement of the war in 1775 was seventy-five millions; after that there was
a diminution took place of about four millions, which were paid off. At the end
of Lord Chatham's war, the national debt amounted to one hundred and forty-six
millions; it diminished by the peace to one hundred and thirty-six millions, so
that a peace which lasted till 1775 diminished it ten millions, and in the war
from 1775 to 1783, the infamous American war, where you will recollect the
Americans were first treated as rebels, exactly in the same manner that the
French are now treated; they were deemed rebels; they were deemed a set of
villains; they were deemed the worst creatures upon the face of the earth; and
whenever they were spoken of, it was one Handcock, one Adams, one this, one
that, and one the other, till we found, at the end of ten years war, and an
expense of one hundred and thirty-four millions, besides one hundred thousand
lives lost in the war: we were obliged to give up the war, and accept of an
Ambassador from them: and, at the time of Mr. Pitt's accession to the treasury
bench it amounted to two hundred and seventy millions. At this present day it
is upwards of three hundred millions; and if we go on thus, year after year, we
shall soon make it four hundred millions. But the remarks in this paper are
more apposite.

So immense a debt as two hundred and seventy millions, bearing an interest of
about nine millions and a half, was an alarming circumstance to the public,
after the loss of half the British dominions abroad; and something must be done
to divert the attention of the people from any serious enquiry into the
corruption and abuses which had involved the nation in such ruin.

Mr. Fox was for probing this ulcerated wound to the bottom, and meting our
situation in an open and manly manner, but the secret junto in the Cabinet, --
and that junto, Gentlemen of the Jury, I will tell you originated in Scotland.
I know not at present whether it continues its root there or not; I am much
inclined to think it does; but the secret junto -- foresaw, that such a measure
would lead to impeachments, refunding and confiscation of property. He was
therefore turned out of office, and Mr. Pit seduced from his friends and party
to become the tool of those who began to be alarmed for fear an investigation
should take place. Here then Mr. Pit is only the ostensible minister, while in
fact he is ruled by a secret junto. A bubble was invented to amuse the people,
and stop the mouths of the monied men, the weakest that ever was formed, and
the most ruinous and wicked one that ever succeeded. The understrappers in
office, in England, gentlemen, we have understrappers in office as well as in
Scotland, and treasury runners, were incessantly employed in blacking Mr. Fox,
and circulating in every company, that Mr. Pit was to pay off the National
Debt. The measures he adopted for that purpose were cried up as a master piece
of wisdom: and this was again rung in the ears of the credulous people in every
corner of the kingdom by the prostituted prints in the Minister's pay. By such
means, this extraordinary-bubble was blown up to an enormous size, and the
troubles in Holland and France, as long as we kept in peace with the last
mentioned nation, were favorable to these measures. The prodigious demand for
our manufactures, the increase of trade.

I was in France, gentlemen, between three and four years ago upon a mercantile
expedition. I had an opportunity of viewing all the great warehouses in France,
from the northernmost extremity to that very southernmost point of Toulon,
which we have lately abandoned; and I will tell you, that in one small town not
so large as Leith, there was at that time English goods bespoke, and in a great
measure paid for, to the amount of three millions sterling; that kept our
manufactures afloat, that gave prosperity to the Nation, and that was in
consequence of the commercial Treaty which was entered into between the two
countries about five years back, and in which I am not ashamed to say that I
lent my humble assistance, not officially to the Minister here, but
unofficially to the Minister in France, because I knew the commercial
connection of two nations was the way to enrich both, and because I knew that
to do away that idea, that they were natural enemies, and should go to war upon
every trivial occasion, was the only way to keep us in peace and prevent the
shedding of blood, which I am always sorry for in any case whatever. I wish I
could say so of our Governors, the influx of money from France, Holland, and
the convulsed parts of Europe, gave Ministers an opportunity of levying
enormous new taxes, even in time of peace, while we were pretending to pay off
the National Debt, every year brought us new taxes; why? because a majority in
the House of Commons was to be secured. Mr. Pit took every advantage that all
those favorable opportunities gave him, and loaded the People with such heavy,
partial, and grievous taxes, as no Minister ever before attempted, even in
times of war. I doubt not, people of Scotland, but you labor under grievous
taxes, as well as we in England; there is one I will give you an idea of, the
Salt Tax, which slies in the face of common sense; but it is kept up for a
reason which I will tell you by and bye; the collection annually amounts from
19 to 20,000 l. but the expense of collecting it amounts to 30,000 l. People
who are unthinking may say, why does not the Minister sell it when he loses so
much by it; it gives the Ministry at the trifling expense of 11,000 l. per
annum, it gives them a patronage of 30,000 l. Mr. Pitt's Shop Tax, Fustian Tax,
his Tax on the Poor Servant Maids, the extension of Excise Laws, his
Commutation Tax, and others equally obnoxious, are witnesses of the truth of
what I now advance; with all his low cunning, artifice, exertions, spies,
informers.

Gentlemen, the Convention is reproached with adopting French words and French
manners; it is now about six years ago that the Commercial Treaty was, I must
not say on the tapis, but was pending in the case I mentioned before, in which
my humble efforts were used; I had access to some of the dependents of the
French Ministry, and I there found that in Pitt's cabinet there was a system of
Police; I made use of that word, which is adopted in Ireland, in a great
measure in London, and very likely will be soon introduced into Scotland, if
not already; the French Police, Pit applied to Bretagne, and from them
obtained every article of the French Police, Spies, and Informers and every
thing except the Bastile; they had but one, and they could not spare that one:
however we have made shift without it, having converted Newgate, and the
Counter, and other prisons to that purpose, until a proper one shall be built;
there is one building in the neighborhood of London, and I think I have seen
something like one building in the neighborhood of Edinburgh; he has imported
Spies and Informers, who have exerted themselves, and every one of them has
been well paid for it; Spies and Informers, French things as well as French
words. And I believe the Nation, at that time, though much degenerated, I have
reason to believe, that at the first outset of Spies and Informers, the Police
of England were at a loss to find Englishmen willing to undertake those odious
tasks; sorry I am to say, that that repugnance is now nearly done away, that
there is not a public company without a Spy in it, and even the servants of the
Crown glory in their having Spies; some are more diligent than others; I saw
one here tonight, who, though he keeps six Spies daily, it is no uncommon
thing for them to regret, at the end of the week, that they have brought him no
intelligence; backed with the most extensive commerce ever known, our
manufactures and internal trade, pushed by industry, private credit, and paper
currency, to a pitch never before heard of; and, in short, the whole credit of
the merchants, traders, and manufacturers, exerted to the utmost, to keep every
hand usefully employed, was not sufficient to raise taxes to pay the interest
of so immense a sum as two hundred and seventy Millions of National Debt,
defray the expenses of Government, which, together with the interest, amounted
to the enormous sum of about seventeen Millions in time of Peace, without
reckoning the Millions to be annually provided to support this bubble; all
this, notwithstanding the flourishing state which peace and the unexampled
industry of the people to revive our trade and commerce, could not be annually
drawn from their labors, nor raised by any of the oppressive means adopted,
without borrowing new loans; on one hand, as stock was purchased with the
public money, on the other, that is to say, in paying the National Debt, you
took the money out of one pocket, and paid it into the other; but while you did
that, some of it always fell to the ground, which you never will see again:
that money is employed in keeping up the price of Stocks; some thousands go
weekly that way; a Reform in Parliament would do away that abuse. The Bank,
that sacred, public, and private repository for wealth, was squeezed out of
half a Million. This drew on them creditors for the unclaimed dividends to a
much larger amount, and other means, equally unjust, were pursued to supply the
deficiency. But all this would not do; the bubble must sooner or later burst,
and with a dreadful explosion, unless speedily prevented by a more skilful
financier than Mr. Pit. This bubble does not only threaten this Empire with
the most terrible convulsions, but to spread mischief into other countries. We
have been told, that the Bank of Amsterdam is intimately connected with our
own; if that fails, ours will, and that was given as the reason for our going
to war; and very likely our going to war, will be a reason for our Bank
failing: it is formed on such ruinous principles, that it is impossible all the
energy and industry of a brave, hardy, and loyal people, when strained to the
utmost pitch, can support it; it was setting the Public to roll a heavy stone
up a steep mountain, which grows steeper and steeper as the summit is
approached. To attempt to pay off the National Debt by purchasing Stock, is one
of the most barefaced robberies. Here is language! this in Edinburgh would be
Sedition; it would go near to be Treason -- the attempt to pay off the National
Debt by purchasing up Stock, is one of the most barefaced robberies committed
on the People, that ever was attempted in any civilized nation. Here you see
Mr. Pit is called a robber, and the most barefaced and impudent robber that
ever was, loading the People with unbearable Taxes, to enrich who? the
Stockholders, the Monied-men, and Gamblers, in the Alley; these were sure to
assist the ministerial runners in blowing up this bubble, which brought so much
grist to their mill; by their united arts and unwearied efforts, they actually
raised the price of Stock to such a pitch, as to make the Public pay more than
20 l. sterling more than the intrinsic value, upon every 100 l. And as long as
the industry of the People could bear such burdens as were heaped upon them,
there is every reason to believe they would rise higher and higher; so that the
more the Public purchased, the more they would have to pay for the remainder,
providing this bubble was suffered to continue. Mr. Pit, instead of paying off
any part of the National Debt, in time of peace, by his plan, had added many
Millions; and if we are to go on in this ruinous plan, the increased price of
the stock will lead us with more than 150 Millions more than was ever owed or
pretended to have been borrowed.

There, Gentlemen, in consequence of this system, the Nation will find itself
debtor 150 Millions more than ever was pretended had been lent to it; an
immense sum of itself, but which the Nation would have been barefacedly robbed
of -- 150 Million sterling which we never borrowed. It will easily be seen, by
examining the History of the Revenue, or this brief statement, that every war
which this Country has been engaged in has nearly doubled the former Debt and
Taxes, let them amount to what they might; and yet the Nation has been plunged
into a war, with this heavy millstone of two hundred and seventy Millions about
its neck. The effect of this rash measure has been suddenly and severely felt;
almost a total stagnation in trade and commerce, the Revenue decreasing in the
most alarming manner, all private credit destroyed: the neighborhood of
Edinburgh will witness that: look at Paisley, look at Glasgow, and their Banks,
even which will all convince you that there is truth in this assertion; no one
dare trust his neighbor, bankruptcies innumerable, the industrious poor thrown
out of employment. Do we not see that even in Edinburgh, the poor are ready and
willing to work if they could get it? Are they not the same at Paisley? are
they not the same at Glasgow? I have already instanced to you in England;
Norwich, Sheffield, and Manchester, where the poor are out of number; but here
is an addition, provisions, and even hay, sent out of the kingdom, to supply
the German armies, not to supply our own troops, but forsooth, we must take
other troops into pay, while our poor are starving at home in consequence of
it, which keeps up the price of meat to a height never remembered at this
season of the year; coals, candles, soap, sugar, and many other articles in
common use, are raised or kept up, in consequence of the war.

Here is an article to which I would turn your attention, the article of coals,
the City of London yearly, consumes about forty-thousand chaldron of coals;
every chaldron of coals pays one shilling, to whom? To a man who did not think
proper, when cited by the laws of his Country, to appear before you; and pays
it to him, why? Because he is the descendant of a natural son of Charles II. If
he had been a poor man, and it had been necessary to keep up an appearance of
respectability in his station; there would have been some excuse; but he has
another sinecure which amounts to more than he spends; this is one of the
abuses of a corrupt Parliament. -- Our money shipped off to pay the troops, and
supply the beggarly German Princes on the Continent. The parochial taxes
prodigiously increased, by the numerous poor thrown out of employment; or borne
down by the heavy load of taxes Mr. Pit has thrown upon them; and threatened,
notwithstanding all that is said to the contrary, with the ruin of another
American war. In such a state, is it possible to expect that the public can
bear to double the present National Debt and Taxes, without bursting Mr. Pitt's
bubble, formed for plundering the poor to add to the rich. This man speaks very
plain English, and I am sorry to say, he speaks as truly, as he does plainly;
it has been a decided plan with those in power, to plunder the poor to give to
the rich; and will continue so, while useless places, while useless pensions,
are suffered to exist, while a Lord Justice General of Scotland, who never
attends his place, though justice is the most sacred duty a man can acquit
himself of; the duty of a Judge is the most sacred duty that a man can
undertake, since it is the representive of God himself: that he should accept
of 2000 l. a year and never attend in his place, to distribute that justice for
which he is so amply paid; that is another proof of sinecure places, and a
proof that we want a Reform in Parliament; you have now been a hundred years,
except one instance, without the appearance of a Lord Justice General; 200,000
l. therefore has been carried out of Scotland and spent in England; therefore
you annually lose 2000 l, for which you derive no advantage whatever. The
crisis draws near, when every inferior consideration must give way for public
good, and Mr. Fox's open and manly abilities must be called forth, to form an
honest, just, permanent, and upright Ministry, to save the King and People from
one common ruin.

I did not read this to you, Gentlemen, with a view to trumpet up Mr. Fox: no
man can have a greater respect for his abilities than I have, but I am far from
thinking that no man in the kingdom can save us but him; I would not make any
man a God; let us not trust them; let us not give them implicit faith; let us
trust to none of our rulers; let us trust only to our Laws; and while we give
implicit faith to them, and see that our rulers act according to those laws, we
shall be happy: the moment we do otherwise, we shall be slaves. Apostates have
raised false alarms of treason, sedition, rebellion, and every thing that can
rouse up a generous People, to revenge the insults and injuries heaped upon
them; but the People are loyal, love their King, respect mild laws, and bear an
utter hatred to all who attempt to impose upon them, by apostasy, fraud, or
treachery, and are sworn enemies to all sorts of persecutions. Would not you
think that the writer of this letter had some of the persecutions which have
lately taken place, in his eye? You will see then, Gentlemen, that it is not
merely in Scotland alone -- that the People in Scotland are not the only People
who see their true interests; that the People of England, likewise, begin to
discern that they are imposed upon, that those who are in office deceive them:
open your eyes, therefore, Gentlemen, and be not deceived; let not the words of
office, let not the high sounding language of a Crown Lawyer trepan you into a
perjury, for if you suffer yourselves to be deceived, though not a wilful
perjury, it still remains a perjury, unless you give a verdict according to the
dictates of your own conscience; and the dictates of that conscience cannot
take place, till you have made a fair and candid examination of the matter
before you.

His postcript says, Two hundred and seventy Million is a sum the human mind
can hardly form an idea of: to give some assistance in forming a notion of it,
were it to be laid down in guineas in a line, it would extend 4300 miles: if in
shillings, it would extend three and a half times round the globe; and if paid
in solid silver, would require more than 60,000 horses to draw it, at the rate
of 1,500 weight to a horse; and yet the good people of this country are, by
their labors, to pay off the interest of this debt, and are with the
assistance of Pitt's calculations, to pay off the capital also. The number of
inhabitants of Great Britain has been mistated, as well as many other things,
by the public prosecutor; he has stated them to be ten millions; they perhaps,
do not go much beyond seven millions; but we will say eight millions, and among
them you cannot say there are more than two million of men: and, therefore two
million of people are to pay the interest of this debt, which, if laid out in
guineas, in a line, would extend upwards of 4,300 miles. Good God! when shall
we get to end of such a journey; and yet we are daily increasing in it by a
war; and, what is the consequence of that war? not only expenses abroad, but it
increases salaries and pensions: we bought: Toulon with gold; we left it for
nothing: it is true, we adopted again the French measures; we named
Commissioners: one Commissioner set out, with a service of plate, to do honor
to the name of an Englishman, which cost 8,000 l. and yet there are 8000
Spitalfields weavers in a state, of actual starvation; and yet, to one man, is
presented a service of plate, of that immense value, previous to his going as
Commissioner to Toulon: he comes back again, and is now out of office, but has
retired upon half pay: this is the way the public money is squandered; this is
the way the public money will be squandered till we obtain a Reform in
Parliament; therefore, no man, not the public prosecutor himself, can love the
Constitution better than I do; but no man can detest the abuses that are
engrafted on that constitution more than I do; for, I have seen so much misery,
in the course of my tours through Great Britain, which is the garden of Europe,
where there is not a man, who would exert his industry, but might earn a
comfortable livelihood, if our Constitution was returned to that point at which
it was settled at the Revolution; but it is all done away; I will give you
proof that it is done away; and I have taken care to give you that proof, or,
at least that each of you may be furnished with a (...) of it when you retire
to debate upon the matter that is brought before you: it is in a speech of Mr.
Wharton's, in the House of Commons: I will read it to you; and I am sorry, that
the public prosecutor has retired; I would have attacked him personally; he was
a Member of the Senate; and, I believe, he was there at the time he bore, he
suffered this worthy man, an honest Member in the present British House of
Commons; he suffered him to assert, that every part of our Constitution was
done away; he did not rise to contradict him; though here vociferous to the
utmost, there he was silent; I am seditious in seeking a Reform; but, when a
man tells them, every iota of the Constitution is done away, the whole he could
do, was to vote silently against him; and the motion was lost, because the
majority did not think proper to stake their future fortune, reputation, or
property, upon the revisal of the Constitution. May a friend be permitted to
read it for me?


Lord Justice Clerk. No, you mun read it yourself.


Mr. Margarot. Gentlemen, you are entrusted now by your country, to give a
verdict, to examine seriously the cause that is now before you. I have already
told you, I am a willing and a devoted victim; I will give you a proof of it;
and you shall have that proof home with you, in a letter, that I wrote to
Dundas, a twelvemonth ago, when prosecutions were hanging over the heads of the
people: I offered myself for prosecution; I desired him to spare them, and let
his vengeance fall upon me: I escaped it in London; I hope I shall not find it
in Scotland; I hope the honesty of any Jury will prevent its having the effect
it was meant to have. This is the speech of Mr. Wharton, in the House of
Commons. Mr. Wharton rose to make his proposed motion. "We heard," he said, on
every side, of the glorious Revolution, in 1668, and of the Constitution, as
settled at the glorious Revolution; it was a note which he had always listened
to with pleasure, and he repeated it himself with rapture. But, what was the
rational foundation of our satisfaction, at the recollection of the glorious
Revolution? It assuredly was not that the possession of the throne, and the
regular hereditary succession to it, were, at that time disturbed and
interrupted. It was not that we expelled one king, and one family, and
appointed another king, and another family, in their room. The necessity of
such changes was, at all times, to be deplored; and, the events, themselves,
could only be justified by the necessity. The only rational foundation of our
approbation of that Revolution, must be, at that time, such principles were
confirmed, and such wise and wholesome provisions made for our constitutional
security and happiness, as might prevent all future necessity for a similar
Revolution. Whoever approved of that Revolution, declared, at the same time,
that the constitutional provisions then obtained, were wise and wholesome
provisions; that they were worthy objects of a national struggle; that they not
only justified resistance, but made it meritorious. And yet, this is one of the
articles of crimination against me. Gentlemen, it is said that the Convention
meant to assert their rights: now, assertion may be made in various ways; it
may be made, vi et armis; it may be made by argument; by reason; and, there is
no direct proof, that we meant to assert them by force of arms; and, from our
paucity, it is most likely we should do it by argument. He says, they not only
justified resistance, but made it meritorious; and that they were cheaply
purchased, at the price of all the blood that was shed upon the occasion, as
well as the dethronement of a guilty king, and the extirpation of his guiltless
family. But an approbation of that Revolution went still farther. It declared,
that if, by any means, by force, or by fraud, by violence, or by corruption.
Jurymen, I request your utmost attention to this; it is of the greatest
consequence. But an approbation of that Revolution (1688), went still farther.
It declared, that if, by any means, by force, or by fraud, by violence, or by
corruption, if these wholesome and necessary constitutional provisions should,
by any means, be taken away, or frustrated, the same objects would again
justify the same national struggle; and, the same extremities, unless they
could be recovered, and, re-obtained by more gentle, more peaceful, and,
therefore, more happy means. We at present feel, that force or fraud violence
and corruption, have taken away many of our privileges: we wish to regain them;
not by force, but by those more peaceful, and, therefore, more happy means,
which is a peaceable and rational application to the King, or to the
Parliament, by an assertion of our rights, made in such a respectable manner,
that they shall not be refused; for, it is idle to talk of the omnipotence of
Parliament; the servant can never be greater than its master; the three Estates
together, are not equal in value to the whole nation: without them, the nation
could be a nation; but, without the nation they would become poor individuals.
He asserted (and said he risked nothing by the assertion, for no man could be
hardy enough to deny it, and, he pledged himself to prove it in a Committee of
the House), that all that was valuable to the people of this country, all the
provisions which were stipulated to secure the peace and prosperity, the
individual liberty, and the general property of the people of this land, had,
all been, since the Revolution, taken away -- All!

He asserts, in the House of Commons, and pledges himself to prove, that all
the security of the subject, all the privileges of the subject, in the
Constitution, which is trumpeted up by venal hirelings, has been taken away,
and he pledges himself to prove all this; and, to this, not a single man rises
to give an answer. He must entreat the attention of the House, for a few
moments, whilst he very briefly brought back to their recollection, what this
country established by the Revolution. First, To avoid all future mistakes;
and, that the contract between Prince and People might be clearly understood,
the Revolutionists began by altering the oaths of the contracting parties. Here
again I will interrupt myself, to show you that the King holds his Crown, not
by a divine right, but by a contract between him and the people, which implies
a mutual binding; and, should either of the contracting parties fail, it will
become void: Men in business, you must know it; and, from business to politics,
is a very easy transition; the principle is the same. They altered the
Coronation oath for all future Sovereigns in this realm; and they altered the
oath of allegiance for themselves, and for all future subjects. They cut up, by
the roots, the damnable doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance:
doctrines sedulously endeavored to be inculcated into you tonight; that
non-resistance and passive obedience, though couched in other words, were the
duty of the subject. I say it is no such thing; and here is an honest man
declaring this in Parliament, and nobody desiring to confute him. He says, they
cut up, by the roots, the damnable doctrine of passive obedience and
non-resistance, by emphatically specifying and ordaining the following words of
their former oath, 1 William and Mary, chapter viii. I declare, that it is not
lawful, upon any pretense whatever, to take up arms against the King, etc. etc.
should not, from thenceforth, be required or enjoined. Therefore, you see,
Gentlemen, that it is no longer required of the subject to take an oath; that
he will not, in any circumstance whatever, take up arms against the King;
because, as this King comes to the throne, not by divine right, but by a
contract between the King and the people, it was thought, if he neglected his
contract on the one part, the people were not bound by that contract on the
other, and, he hereby establishes the doctrine of resistance to oppression: in
fact, self-preservation is the first law of nature with an individual; and,
what is the case with an individual is much more so with a society. It was not
so much to relieve the conscience of the subjects, that these words of their
former oath were selected, recited, and abolished; for no oath of slavery ever
did, or ever will, or ever ought to bind a nation, or an individual; it was
something worse than perjury, or sacrilege, to keep an oath of slavery. Here is
the true spirit of freedom, breathing in these words: it was something worse
than perjury, or sacrilege, to keep an oath of slavery. No; man was not born to
slavery. This alteration was made to prevent the future Sovereigns of this
country from being missed, as the four preceding Sovereigns had been, to trust
to a senseless superstition about Royalty, which though many persons for their
interests have professed, no man of common sense ever entertained. Many of
these doctrines are professed at this day: men profess doctrines very different
from what their hearts feel; but while blinding the eyes of the Public, they
are the most conscientious men living. Their next care was to provide for the
due administration of the Executive Power, and the responsibility of its
confidential advisers. They therefore enacted, 12th William III. chap. ii. that
all matters and things relating to the well-governing of this kingdom which are
cognizable in the Privy Council, by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, shall
be transacted there, and all Resolutions taken thereupon shall be signed by
such of the Privy Council as shall advise and consent to the same. Here you
see, Gentlemen, that the government of a large country, like Great Britain, is
of so public a nature as not to admit of secrets; it is of such a nature that a
responsibility must be affixed somewhere, and therefore those persons who
adopted measures in the Privy Council were to sign the same, in order that the
public might know where the blame or the praise lay; this has been done away,
and you have heard tonight, when a question was put relative to orders, those
orders were deemed proper to be kept a secret; thus we imitate the practices of
those in higher stations, and inferiors will naturally catch at the defects
sooner than at the beauties of their masters' behavior. Thereby guarding, as
far as Laws could guard, against that accursed engine of despotism, a Cabinet
Council, which the paper I just now read, calls a Secret Junto, or that more
accursed instrument, an Interior Cabinet, from which we have not been free for
25 years.

Their attention was next directed to the double representation of the People,
the only possible security for all their other provisions. There is undoubtedly
no provision, no security, for the liberty, for the property of the Subject, if
he is not properly represented in Parliament: we are too numerous to make Laws
for ourselves; we must therefore be represented; we must send Delegates or
Commissioners to a Parliament, where a convenient number of them may meet and
transact the business of the Nation; if that business is not done faithfully;
if the men sent to do that business are liable to be bought and sold, we shall
in our turns pay both Purchaser and Purchased -- "The House of Commons and
Juries." This is the double representation in England; we were the only Nation
who enjoyed it.

A neighboring Nation, though much run down, have lately arrived at the
possession of it. Juries consist of twelve or fifteen men, according to the
country in which they act. They are not to stand in fear of the Judge, or in
fear of the King; for, if they act according to their conscience, no Judge dare
say any thing to an honest Jury; they have a double duty; the first to God, and
the next to their country; but they both of them form a moral duty, and are one
and the same thing. Jurymen are absolute; they have a right to ask questions,
they have a right, where the least doubt hangs over the mind, to enquire of the
Panel; they have a right to enquire of the Counsel, and they have a right to
call forth all the wisdom of the Judges; while in office they possess the most
unlimited power that we know of in England. He says, Our Ancestors passed over
untouched, and left them as they found them the Nobility and the Church; they
were considering the solid and substantial parts of the Constitutional Edifice,
and did not much concern themselves about the gilding and the varnish. They
therefore proceeded to establish the principle of a fair and free and frequent
election of the Representatives of the Commons in Parliament, as might be seen
by a reference to the acts passed in the first and second and third years of
William and Mary. You see here, a term which at first appears to be a kind of
sneer or joke, but it is founded in truth, and leads you to a much deeper
reflection. He says, Our Ancestors did not much concern themselves about the
Gilding and the Varnish, meaning the Nobility and the Church; and it is not
merely a jeer or a playing upon words, but arises from the principle already
laid down, that the Nation, and the Nation alone, is the principal part: it is
the People that are of consequence, and nothing but the People. And having
thus, as they imagined, provided for the real election of the Representative
body in Parliament, they secured the independence and integrity of that body
after its election, by enacting, that no Person who has an office or place of
profit under the King, or receives a pension from the Crown, shall be capable
of serving as a Member of the House of Commons. Now, if this took place with
regard to the National Assembly, where Laws are only made; undoubtedly a
similar restriction was understood to be in full force in that Assembly, where
the Laws are carried into execution, I mean in Juries; for if men enjoying
places of profit under the Crown are deemed incapable of making Laws, they
should by a much stronger reason be deemed incapable of carrying them into
execution, especially when there is no appeal from their Verdict; or at least,
an appeal attended with such difficulties and such expense, as to put it out of
the power of nine tenths of those who are tried to make use of the remedy.
Having thus secured the purity and independence of the people's representatives
in Parliament, they proceeded to the other important branch of their
representation by Jury, and they decreed that Juries should be fairly taken
without partiality, and should act freely without influence. Observe that,
Gentlemen; I don't impute it to the case of today, but when I say it is
possible to pack a Jury, I can show my authority, when it has been asserted in
the House of Commons, and has not been denied. They also decreed, that
excessive bail should not be required, that excessive fines should not be
imposed, and that illegal and cruel punishments should not be inflicted; and to
secure these objects, they ordained that thenceforward the Judges commissions
should be made quamdiu se been gesserint; and that their salaries should be
ascertained and established, in order to make the Judges independent of the
Crown. The duty of a Judge is, not to influence you, not to say any thing that
has the least tendency to influence you; he is to explain the Law in any
difficult point to you, but by no means to give you his opinion upon the case;
he is merely to state the Law, and say always, hypothetically, if the man is
guilty of the offense, such and such punishment is due to it; but he is never
to say, let me beg of you to say so and so; it is illegal, it is the highest
pitch of wickedness in a Judge so to do. Now, all these provisions (the objects
and consequences of the glorious Revolution) would have no value, they would be
nugatory and worthless; they would be a mockery unless they were effectually to
obtain and secure to the People of this Land these three important points,
First, An honest and responsible exercise of the Executive Authority. Secondly,
Real independent and faithful Representatives of the Commons in Parliament.
Thirdly, A fair and impartial administration of Justice in the Courts of Law.
We who had no predilection for any family whatever (except as connected with
these objects) in the words of our Ancestors at the time of the Revolution, did
now again claim, demand, and insist, upon all those as our undoubted Rights,
the true, ancient, and indubitable rights and liberties of this kingdom, 1st
William and Mary, chap ii. If then by various means it had happened, as he
asserted, and undertook to prove (in a Committee of this House,) that this
provisional responsibility of the Privy Council no longer remains; that the
election of the House of Commons is neither, fair, nor free, nor frequent; that
this provisional independence of its Members is gone, and that the House, at
present, swarms with Persons having offices and places of profit under the
King, and receiving pensions from the Crown; that Juries are not fairly and
impartially taken; that they do not act freely and without influence; that
excessive bail may be, and has been, required; that excessive fines may be, and
have been, imposed; that illegal and cruel punishments, may be, and have been,
inflicted; that the Judges are not independent of the Crown; that pensions may,
and have been, conferred, upon others, by which means it cannot be said that
their salaries are ascertained and established. If these facts were so, he held
it to be the duty of all those who, without hypocrisy, praised the Revolution.
--

Most men, perhaps all men, praise the Revolution, but they do it with various
intentions; but he speaks here only of those who praise it without hypocrisy.
He says, he held it to be the duty of all those who, without hypocrisy, praised
the Revolution, to endeavor to return us again to our constitutional situation
at that period, and to recover those lost or neglected provisions, that so we
might effectually secure to ourselves and to our posterity, what our Ancestors
endeavored at the Revolution to secure to themselves and to us. I hope that
single passage will be sufficient to do away all the criminality of the word
assert, in the Indictment. It may be done in two ways, by force, or by
argument; in either case, it would be justified by the present glorious
Constitution, taken not ironically; not insidiously, as it is taken by some,
but literally, according to the truth. Our glorious constitution permits us to
assert our rights, and even permits us to resist oppression: however, from the
tenor of the proceedings of the Convention, you will see that arms were the
last things we should have thought of; being little inured to arms, and being a
small number to the bulk of the nation, I mean the associated men, who have
sent their Delegates to the British Convention; and from what has happened
today, you will see that the public mind is panting for Reform; and I hope,
Gentlemen, if your countenances deceive me not, that you all, or the greater
part of you, wish for Reform; an amendment can be attended with no ill
consequences. Mr. Wharton concluded with moving, That a Committee be appointed
to enquire whether any, and which of the provisions made by Parliament in the
reign of William and Mary, and in the reign of William III. for securing the
responsible exercise of the Executive authority; for securing a real,
independent, and faithful representation of the Commons in Parliament; and for
securing a fair and impartial administration of justice in the Courts of Law,
whether any, and which, of these have by any means been invalidated or taken
away; and to consider whether any, and which, of those lost or invalidated
provisions may be fit to be re-enacted and restored, in order that the people
of this land may recover that situation and security in which they were placed
by the glorious Revolution in 1688. This motion, I have already told you, was
lost, and it was lost by a majority of 71 silent men, against 11 honest men who
supported it; but the 71 did not utter a single syllable, though I firmly
believe the Lord Advocate was in the House at the time: if he was not there,
his master, his father, his uncle were there, and not a word was said; they put
it to the silent vote, and numbers carried it, which shows you what chance we
have of obtaining, by an humble submissive petition to the House of Commons,
any redress; it shows you, that if we want to obtain redress, we had much
better go to the fountain of redress, and apply, in the first instance, to the
King; but that is a thing that is matter of opinion; however, it requires
consideration; and when the matter of reform comes to be more public, which I
hope it will, it will then bear ample discussion.

Gentlemen, I have, I believe, in the former part of my defense, mentioned to
you, that the Lord Advocate not being able to substantiate his charges against
me upon written evidence, was forced to draw in a more powerful aid; namely, a
blank, as a proof of criminality; he has laid great stress upon it; he has
turned about in it like a horse in a mill, and though he went back from it once
or twice in the course of his speech, he was sure to return to it again. He has
likewise sought to attach a great degree of criminality to the words Convention
of Emergency, which is a simple English word, signifies a case of great moment,
a case that requires speed, that requires immediate attention, that requires
all the exertions we can possibly bestow upon it; therefore strip it of the
epithete, seditious, malicious, felonious, and all these high sounding words,
and you find nothing in it unjustifiable whatever. He has also sought to
criminate me, with charging that my friend Brown gave a history of the Habeas
Corpus Act; and he has wished to attach, more than sedition, a kind of treason,
to the bare mention in the Convention of the wrongous imprisonment Act; surely,
if such an Act exists, it is competent to every subject of the realm to see
that it is secured to them; that it was (as I presume all Acts are) made for
the benefit of the Public, and therefore it is natural that men should be
anxious that those benefits should be retained to them; yet it should seem that
the bare mention of such a thing is Treason in Scotland. It galls those in
power, to think that they have got a power above them; that they are not
entirely above control; but I have already said that there is not a man in the
kingdom above control; even the King holds his Crown by a contract, and
therefore is not above control; he is not above the Laws; he is not, indeed,
responsible; the fiction of law says, he can do no wrong, because his contract
holds no longer than he abides by the Constitution of the kingdom; the moment
he would attempt, as a James, or a Charles I. to break the contract between him
and the People, the moment he had broken that contract, he would then no longer
be unaccountable to the People. On the contrary, it is most likely, the People
would call him to an account, as they have done in other cases before, when
they have ventured to ride paramount over the Laws. The Laws are made for the
weal of the Nation, and are of more importance than any individual, in whatever
rank society may have placed him; they are of more importance than any
individual, for without Laws there is no Society; and without any individual
whatever, the Society may still remain a Society.

Gentlemen, I will come now to the mere points of the Indictment; for the
speech of the Public Prosecutor has wandered greatly from the mere facts stated
in the Indictment: however, I was obliged to follow him, inasmuch as he did me
the honor on Monday last, of trying me before another Jury; for it was me more
than Skirving that he tried; it was me he had continually in his mouth; and, to
me, that a great part of his speech then applied. He taxes us with holding
delusive Republican principles, and he builds his crimination upon our having
adopted certain words, which he seems to think were never in use in England,
before the Revolution took place in France; he is however much mistaken, for
there is not a schollboy but can tell him that section was as much in vogue,
and made use of, in England 20 years back, as it is now; there is not a Writ
for the return of a Member of Parliament, but has the word Citizen in it: the
word Citizen is in all the Students cards; and even the Pin-makers of London,
are obliged to have the word Citizen in their cards; therefore it is not an
adoption of any thing new: as to regulations and orders, if they are founded
upon French principles, for God's sake, give me French principles; and that we
were regularly and orderly, I will take the liberty to prove to you. By the
regulations that I will read to you, you will see that we were far from having
any seditious or disorderly principles about us; but that we were organizing
ourselves into the most regular body in the world, and, I believe, even
Freemasons themselves, who have regulations and secrets, and, I believe, some
of their committees are pretty secret; meet together, and therefore are guilty
of all the crimes I am charged with; and I don't know that there is so much
regularity even in their proceedings, as there was in our's. The Convention
shall henceforth be called, The British Convention of the Delegates of the
People, associated to obtain Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments. The
Delegates of this Convention shall be elected annually, on the (...) and shall
meet where the Secretary and intermediate committee shall think most advisable
for the general interest. You see it is for the good of the generality; not for
the good of one description of men; not for the good of the opposition, who are
endeavoring to oust the Ministry in hopes of getting into their places. No,
let us oust the abuses, and restore the Constitution to the state in which it
was in 1688. The Secretary, and Intermediate Committee, may, at any time, call
a Convention of the Delegates, on 14 days notice; but they shall be responsible
for a proper exercise of their authority. The Convention after electing a
President by show of hands. Here we call him a President; that is not a French
word; I fancy that is a word that has been used in England for these 50 years
back, and I cannot attach any degree of criminality to it, because we did not
put it in the power of a man, to say he was sent by a certain number of people,
unless he was entrusted with the confidence of those men, for the purpose of a
Parliamentary Reform, as I will show you by the instructions that I brought
from London, which I have in my pocket, and which escaped the Inqusition. The
Convention, after electing a President by show of hands, shall proceed to the
verification of power, and then to the division of the Convention into
Sections, in such manner as shall hereafter be provided. Here follows the head
of Office Bearers. The public prosecutor told you he could not tell what this
Preses meant; this will explain it. There shall be a President or Preses, three
Assistants, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and Doorkeepers. The three Assistants and
the Secretary shall form a Council, to be denominated the Council of the Table.
The office of the Preses is to maintain order, to take the sense of the
Convention on all questions to be determined therein, and to declare on which
side the question is carried, to call on the Committees for reports, etc. and
to sign all Public Acts. You see there is nothing seditious in the office of
Preses; unfortunately that night there was no Public Act passed; I kept order,
or endeavored to do it, as well as I could. I took the sense of the
Convention, and declared on which side the questions were carried: an
explanation of that you will see by and bye, under a separate head. The office
of the Council of the table, is to keep order in the business of the
Convention, as particularly specified under the head Council. The office of the
Secretary is to take charge of all writings and papers belonging to the
Convention; to issue summonses, write and dispatch letters, etc. etc. according
to the orders of the Convention, and the request of any Committee, during the
time of their sitting; and shall have access, on all occasions, to every
Committee during its sitting. This was made a crime in Skirving, when you see
it was the duty of his office, to attend as many committees as he could spare
time for. The office of Treasurer shall be to receive and pay all moneys
subject to the regulations to be at any time adopted by the Convention or
Committee of Finance. The office of Door-keepers, is to prevent the admission
of any persons not Members except by special leave of the Council of the Table.
This was to prevent improper company; I do not mean spies, for on the contrary,
when they were known they were preferably admitted though with the contempt
they deserved, and which no class in Society can deserve more than themselves,
unless it be the men who employ them. And now follows the head of Committees.
No Committee shall be composed of more than thirteen, or less than three
persons; and the number of each Committee shall be decided by a show of hands
in the Convention. All Committees shall be chosen, unless otherwise ordered, at
the time of their appointment; and they shall be authorized to invite the
assistance of such Members of the Convention as they may think beneficial to
the business entrusted to their charge. All Committees shall be elected from
the Leet of the Sections, unless found necessary for some immediate purpose, in
which case they shall be appointed by the Convention, one by one, by a show of
hands; and they shall sit and report progress, day by day, until their business
is completed. The first meeting of every Committee to be fixed by the
Convention; every subsequent meeting according to their own adjournment. Now
comes the head of Council of the Table. There shall be three Assistants,
elected from a Leet given in by the Sections, one to be renewed, and the senior
to go out of office daily. Those who had the greatest number of votes were
elected, and in consequence of that, the Convention was likely to be best
served, for they neither bought their electors nor sold them when they had
bought them. The Secretary and Assistants shall form the Council of the Table;
they shall prepare a state of the business, for each day shall arrange the
order in which the different subjects shall be taken into consideration, which
arrangement shall be adhered to, unless the Convention should alter the same by
a vote; they shall permit a Member from each Section to take copies of all
motions, etc. to be submitted to the consideration of the Sections, and shall
assist all Members who request their aid, in the wording of any motion they may
wish to lay upon the table. This brings me back again, to a motion that has
been introduced against me as written evidence, and which Wardlaw was called to
prove: he said, and it was not less to the disgrace of those who brought him
forward, than to the Friends of the People, of whom he was a member, that he
came in a state of inebriety: he said he had written out that motion; it is a
motion drawn up not by me, but by the Council of the Table, and it is stated in
the indictment. To do this your Committee suggests a resolution to the
following effect, but which I shall leave to be drawn up by the Council of the
Table, The spirit of the motion was that which the Committee, of which I was
the Reporter, had to report, and which motion was to be drawn up by the Council
of the Table. The Council shall have the power to interrupt any debate, for the
purpose of proposing to the Convention any other business which they may think
more urgent; but the President shall take the sense of the Convention by a show
of hands, whether the debate shall be interrupted or not. Here you see this is
the greater part of their duty, to judge of such motions as were laid before
them; if they were nugatory they were to inform the person who brought them of
it; if otherwise, they were to endorse them on the back, they were to hand the
motion to the President, he was to read it to the Convention, and then the vote
of the Convention was to determine whether the business was of sufficient
consequence to depart from the order of the day. Then follows an article which
gives great umbrage to those who are frightened at every thing that looks like
French: It is the head of Sections: we had the name of divisions, and of
classes; but, no name which was agreed to by every body at last; Section was
agreed to by a great majority; and we thought no more of the French Convention
at that time, than we did of our new ally the Grand Turk.

To explain to you then what is meant by Sections, and the cause of adopting
that word, which was more from accident than any thing else, it goes on. All
the members of the Convention shall be divided by lot, into Sections of 15
persons each. And why divided into Sections of 15 persons each? It was not with
a view to overturn the government; it was not with a view of being seditious,
or riotous, or any thing of the like, but with a view of their meeting, as we
had many country Delegates who had much leisure on their hands, for the purpose
of giving them useful employments: in the morning they used to meet and discuss
the news of the day, and little political topics, and thereby came better
prepared in the evening; and in the course of one week we already found a great
difference in their political information; they had already learned to connect
their ideas, and form a more accurate judgment of the business they were about.
They were also to pick out the men who were most proper for the nomination of
President for she next night, or for the Committees. These were the felonious
and seditious employments of the Sections in the morning. The Members who may
not be able to attend at the first division into Sections, shall be divided by
lot among the Sections formed; but, if any Section shall have two more than its
proper number, no new Member shall draw for that Section until the numbers are
again equal. Every Section shall be furnished with a complete printed list of
the Convention, containing the name, surname, and the society, which each
individual represents. And you see, Gentlemen, here is great regularity; and
where men use such regularity, they cannot be called a riotous tumultuous
assembly. The Sections shall be renewed on every Monday during the sitting of
Convention. Now, I maintain, that there is no principle in our British
Constitution, which prevents mutual communication from one man to another, but
will encourage that intercourse; for union alone can make us strong, as has
been said, though in a different sense, from the Bench. The Sections shall meet
every forenoon, at eleven o'clock, each in a separate place; and shall daily
choose a Chairman for the Section, who shall report their leets of election,
etc.; and, if these reports are not delivered into the Council of the Table,
immediately on the Chair being taken, they shall be deemed null; each Section
shall daily furnish itself with a note of all the business, and with copies of
all motions and reports to be taken into consideration that evening. The
Sections shall daily discuss the business of the Convention; they shall prepare
lists of such persons as they may think most proper for Offices. Committees,
etc.; but the Sections cannot finally decide any matter; nor, in their
collective capacity, give an opinion, or make a proposal to the Convention. No
Member in the Sections shall be allowed to vote by proxy. We did not, you see,
entrench on the privileges of the House of Lords, where they vote by proxy; and
we thought, that as every man was equally interested in the business, that he
should attend as often as he could; and, if he did not, it should be his own
loss, by losing his vote. The members of one Section shall not be received into
any other Section, during its sitting; and, no person not a member of the
Convention, can, on any consideration, be admitted. And, I am sure, there is
not a man here, who would wish to be intruded upon by strangers, in the social
hour, over the bottle, but the servant comes up with his name, before he is
admitted. (Here Mr. Margarot drank a glass of wine). I beg pardon, Gentlemen,
for this interruption; I should not have done it, if the example had not been
set me; we have no such thing in England, Gentlemen, as a Jury eating and
drinking in Court.

Gentlemen, The next head, is that of motions, A great degree of criminality
has been attached to the motions that have been produced; but, notwithstanding
all this written evidence, which is to transport us, and prove us nearly guilty
of high treason, I will show you the innocent manner in which these things were
to be carried on. All motions shall be in writing, signed by the Mover and
Seconder, and transmitted to the Council of the Table, who shall number and
file them, according to the order in which they are given in. At the close of
each day's business, and before the adjournment of the Convention, the
Secretary, or one of the Council, shall read all motions given in, during that
sitting, according to the priority of delivery, in order that they may be
copied, and taken into consideration by the several Sections; and, being so
read, they shall come on for debate the following sitting, in the same order of
arrangement, made by the Council, unless the Convention shall think proper to
prefer any one of them, as containing matter of greater importance, or more
urgent necessity. A motion once rejected, cannot be brought forward again in
the same Session of the Convention, unless requested in writing by 20 members.
This was thought proper to be introduced, in order to save us trouble, as there
were some men who could speak better than they could write; and who, perhaps,
might wish to be busy; for we already began to suspect that we had got spies
among us, and that motions of a dangerous tendency might be brought in; and,
therefore, we endeavored to prevent being led into a trap; for, we found that,
in general, it is the most honest men that become the dupes of knaves. In case
of two or more motions being on the table, which relate to the same object, and
tend to the same end, the Council, and the respective movers, shall use their
best endeavors to consolidate them all into one before they are discussed:
but, in case the Council and the respective movers cannot agree in such
measure, then the same shall be finally determined by the Convention.
Notwithstanding the above regulations, any Member may submit a motion, at any
time, to the consideration of the Convention, which he deems to be of greater
importance, or more urgent necessity than any of those which stand in the order
of the day; and, if from the reasons advanced by such Member, a majority of the
Convention shall coincide, in opinion, with him, such motion shall be
immediately brought forward, and determined.

Now, here is that which was drawn up with more care than any other part. We
know debates often lead to warmth; and, that when disputants wax warm, they
generally grow tumultuous and irregular. We have seen these tumults, and this
riotous manner of debating, even in the House of Commons: we sought to avoid
it; and therefore, we ordered, that no person shall speak in the ordinary
sittings of the Convention, more than once on the same subject, unless it be to
explain, or by special leave of the Convention; but when all who wish to speak
to the question have done so, any Member may be heard again; and, every Member
who opens a debate, shall have the privilege of being heard, the last, in
reply, before the discussion be finally closed. If it shall appear to the
mover, or seconder of any motion, or to any other member, that the matter
contained therein requires the most ample discussion, on motion, for that
purpose, made and agreed to, the Preses shall leave the Chair, for the purpose
of the Convention resolving itself into a General Committee, in which, a
Chairman being first appointed, every Member shall be at liberty to speak as
often as the Committee may think proper to hear him, till the question shall be
called for by an apparent majority. As soon as the question shall be called
for, and the discussion closed, the President shall resume his seat, and the
question shall be determined in Convention. The Council shall require the
President or Chairman; or either of these may, of his own accord, put a vote
for closing the debate. When it appears to any of them to be the general wish
of the Convention, or general Committee, there shall, however, be a vote taken;
and two to one for closing the discussion, before it actually takes place. Here
we sought, not only to avoid the heat of debate, but we sought to avoid
partiality, and we sought to avoid any prejudice that any man might have
against another, or in favor of another, The question of closing the debate
may, itself, be debated; but, it must be strictly attended to, that no Member,
under pretense of giving reasons for or against closing the debate, shall go
into the discussion of the main question.

The next head is, that of Order; a term not borrowed from France, but from the
House of Commons of England; for, in the House of Commons, the order of the day
is a common phrase. The Convention shall meet daily, at five o'clock in the
afternoon, and shall proceed, First, To receive and verify the powers of any
new members. Secondly, To receive, without reading, the Lists of Candidates
from the Sections, Thirdly, To read communications addressed to the convention.
Fourthly, To elect, from the lists of candidates, the Committees, if any have
been ordered, the new Assistant, and the Preses. Fifthly, To hear from the
Council, what is the whole business standing for discussion; and what is that
particularly appointed for the day, with the order of priority, proposed by the
Council; which priority may there be debated, and fixed. Sixthly, To read over
the minutes of the preceding day, and any former days, not finally settled, and
direct corrections of the same, if need be. Seventhly, To receive reports from
the different committees.

In going through the business of the day, the order of priority, fixed as
above, shall be adhered to, unless altered by a vote of the Convention, which
must, at any time, be put, if desired by the Council; or, if required in
writing, by any five members. Any point, once discussed and determined, can
neither be rescinded nor brought forward again on the same day; nor at all, but
by a motion regularly made; and, for the bringing in of which, leave shall have
been obtained the preceding day. The Reporter of any Committee shall always
have a preference to the ordinary business of the day, to deliver his report to
the Convention, so as not to break in upon any debate which may be before it.
Members shall speak in the order in which they rise for that purpose; and, if
more than one rise at the same time, the Preses shall decide who is entitled to
priority.

The president alone shall have the power of interrupting any speaker who
wanders from the question: but any individual shall have the right to suggest
his opinion, by writing the word order, and handing it to him.

No member is to be allowed to speak to any subject after a show of hands has
taken place on it.

You will see by this, that we were not only far from seditiously inclined, but
we did not give our tongues a loose: we were obliged to speak in order, and
methodically take our turns, and say nothing further than what we were entitled
to. You will from that gather, that a society so well regulated, could not be
for the purpose of overturning the Constitution, which, in its original state,
is regularity itself: we were proceeding in a way that directly led to a
reform: these are the heads; and there remained five more to be finished, when
we were apprehended by general warrants, and the meeting dispersed by the power
of the Sheriff, and of the Lord Provost; therefore, if we are not in order, it
is not our fault, but the fault of those who interrupted us; yet, you will see,
that we were not altogether so illiterate as some men, and men of shining,
perhaps more shining than solid, abilities have thought proper to represent us.
We knew what we were about; and all this was done openly: we have had fifty
visitors of a night: any person sending in his name to the Council of the
Table, was his admission ticket; and, as I observed to you, we sought nothing
but the public good: we sought a Parliamentary Reform; we seek it still; and, I
trust, we shall to the end of our lives; and a renovation, not a destruction,
but a renovation of our Constitution. Gentlemen, I will now come to the plain
facts stated in the indictment, and then, I will make a few remarks upon the
evidence that has been given; and, Gentlemen, I am sorry to detain you so long;
but, it is my duty to be as explicit as possible, in this matter, as well as
yours to listen to it: was it my own individual business, I would meet your
verdict this instant; but I have already told you, that I consider myself as
the least concerned in this matter; it is the cause of Reform.

The indictment, Gentlemen, accuses me of having been made a Delegate by an
Association of seditious people, calling themselves the Corresponding Society
of London.

Now, Gentlemen, either the charge is true or false; if it is false, it is
malicious; if it is true, then I am the seditious person I am represented. The
London Corresponding Society is not a seditious society; it is a society
established upon as regular and as systematical a plan as that of the
Convention. We are proceeding to increase, to diffuse political knowledge, to
make every man acquainted with his political rights: we are formed into
division, because, we well know, that large companies introduce disorder and
confusion; therefore, we never suffer, except when general meetings take place:
we never suffer above a certain number to assemble together: we assemble in
private houses; neither eat nor drink; but calmly and coolly discuss the
political subjects before us: we instruct the ignorant, and receive instruction
from those that know more than we do; and, therefore, the charge that this is
an association of seditious people, is a falsehood; and, the Public Prosecutor
backed it with another falsehood, on the night he did me the honor to try me,
instead of Mr. Skirving: he asserted, that this seditious society had held a
meeting for the purpose of choosing Delegates; and, that they were so detested
by the mob, that the magistrates were obliged to protect them. I was not at
liberty to answer him that night; nor should I do it now, especially in his
absence, but that impressions unfavourable may have gone forth. It is said,
that the magistrates, an odd doctrine for a crown lawyer to advance, were
obliged to take under their protection the seditious London Society, in
electing Delegates to send to Edinburgh. If the Corresponding Society was
seditious, why did not the magistrates quell us? they were present; and they
came with a design to disperse us; but the laws are paid a greater regard to in
the metropolis than they are at some distance from it; and, when they found we
were acting upon constitutional principles, they dared not molest us: there
were 500 constables; and, out of these 500, I will, to be sure, say, there
were, at least, 300 out of them, who maintained the same principles that we
did, that a reform was necessary; that it might be imprudent if the magistrates
had acted otherwise than they did. If any illegal open act of violence had
taken place, it must have been occasioned by them; but they did not commit any
act of violence: on the contrary, we placed ourselves under the care of the
high constable, and his posse; and they attended; but, as in the testimony of
the Lord Provost, if any riot was occasioned that day, it was from the
magistrates, and their attendants, for our Society, being so numerous, were
obliged to meet in an open field; or, at least, a field enclosed with palings:
it was in the neighborhood of Spitalfields; and the people in the
neighborhood, led by curiosity, and not kept at home by work, being out of
employ, and might as well dine upon the fresh air as the stagnate air of
Spitalfields itself, they attended our meeting to the amount of thousands, and
behaved as orderly as those men you saw today come up the streets; they
behaved with the utmost decency; and the Police Magistrates, from the Police
Office, with their police runners, attended, but did not dare to molest us more
than that we invited them to attend our meeting, inasmuch as it was
constitutional; knowing that they should displease certain persons in power,
who shall be nameless, they declined accepting the invitation of attending;
but, after I was nominated, I returned them thanks for the polite attention
they had paid us: they asked us whether we were to choose Members of
Parliament; I replied, No; that our object, at Edinburgh, was to communicate
with our brethren here, who were like ourselves, pursuing a Reform in
Parliament; that would be our business in Edinburgh. I told them, if they had
any commands, I would execute them: they politely bid me a good day, and drew
off their Constables; and found themselves to be very happy in being protected
by us: it is true, Sir, the High Constable came to me, and begged of me, as a
means of dispersing the mob, that I would desire the Members of our Society to
disperse quietly, forasmuch as there might be some riot, some tumult. I told
him, if that was the case, we would to a man turn out and assist the civil
officer: that as Reform was our aim, so was order; and, that we would, on every
occasion, protect the civil officer; and, at the same time, that we assisted
him in his duty, we would take care that he did it. And, Gentlemen, my
behavior has been perfectly regular; I have been always ready to come forward,
and face my country, against any charges, except, at the first instance, when I
was assailed by six blackguards, or messengers; or, whatever they were, I told
them, Take my word, that when ever they required my presence, I would be
forthcoming: the same was the case in this Court; yet, I did not hesitate to
appear; I never will fly from justice; I will always abide by it; besides,
Gentlemen, if the London Society was seditious, but it is not, it is sanctioned
by a letter, a copy shall be given to each of you, to peruse at your leisure:
you will see, that it was a Society founded upon our constitutional principles;
that none of the Ministers dared offend us: it is true, last year, several
associations were formed all over the kingdom; and, it is they who sounded the
tocsin; and, where did they originate? they originated in about eleven
placemen; the President, the Chairman of that Society, possesses only five
places; he was a clerk, or understrapper, of Lord Hawkesbury, his name is
Reeves: at the same time, to prove to you the further constitutionality of our
proceedings, we did, in the month of April, hold an assembly, at the Crown and
Anchor, in the room above this very man, who was for protecting property
against republicans and levellers: this very man, obliged to bite his nails, in
the room underneath, dared not show his teeth; but he can write; and he is
assisted; I will not say by the treasury, but he has pecuniary assistance, and
has laid the public under contributions; and, here I apply to an observation of
the Public Prosecutor, that we drew money from the deluded, the poor, and the
weak. Would to God, no man drew more from the poor, the deluded, and the weak!
If no man enjoyed more sinecure places than we do, every family would have
bread; which is not now the case; while those who draw money from the poor, the
weak, the deluded, and, I may add, the oppressed, are revelling in riot and
luxury, and all manner of profligacy: while they sell themselves, while they
sell others, and their crimes, they cut a figure; but let them remember, that
every guinea that they possess, consists of a certain number of drops of the
blood of the poor. He says, being named a Delegate by an association of
seditious people, calling themselves the Corresponding Society of London, did
repair to Edinburgh, with the wicked and felonious purpose of joining and
cooperating with an illegal association of evil disposed and seditious
persons, who originally designed themselves the General Convention of the
Friends of the People. Now, it seems, that the original Friends of the People,
were an illegal association; were an association of evil disposed and seditious
persons. In the indictment, it says so; but, in the pleading of the Prosecutor
for the Crown, he says otherwise; he says, that they were harmless, that they
were allowed; and, indeed, the behavior of the Magistrates toward them, seems
to prove the legality of their institution: he goes on, and charges us with
holding various illegal and seditious meetings: how came they to be illegal? If
the Friends of the People were in the first instance legal, how came they to be
illegal and seditious? or where are the proofs that he brings of it? He
likewise says, they met under a presence of procuring a reform.

Gentlemen, you are not to be caught by words: you are men of sense, and sense
alone is to operate upon you; reason and sound sense: how is he to tell? how is
he to prove? in what manner has he proved that these were only pretenses? On
the contrary, what I have already showed you betrays a great system of
regularity and order; and order will never be introduced for the sake of
forwarding confusion; and yet, he says, they were evidently of a dangerous and
destructive tendency; though I startle at the words, evidently of a dangerous
and destructive tendency; yet, if you allow me to add a few words to that
sentence, I will show they are strictly true; for, if you apply these words to
the abuses which have crept into the Constitution, you will make English, you
will make sense, and you will make truth of it. He says, we imitated, in the
form and tenor of our proceedings, that Convention of people, the avowed
enemies of this country: these people, the avowed enemies of this country,
fight with guns, bayonets, and cannon: we do the same; and, yet I don't suppose
that we are guilty of opposing, arm to arm: the House of Commons, whom we are
seeking to reform, and wish to new model, if possible, upon the plan of a more
frequent renovation, uses the same regulations that we do; but order can never
be criminal. Gentlemen of the Jury, he says, likewise, that I did act as Preses
or Chairman of their meetings: this, likewise, he has failed to prove: he has
proved that I acted once as Chairman; and, therefore, cannot be guilty of
acting as Chairman at their meetings; at least, he is inaccurate in his
language; but, in England, such an inaccuracy would be fatal to the indictment.

Although it has been said that I was an Attorney by one; and, by another, that
I know nothing of law, I hope to prove, that I know something of the
Constitution; and, that if I am no Attorney, I have as much honesty as any
Attorney, or any Gentleman of the gown. It goes on, that various inflammatory
votes and resolutions were passed. Of this, I trust, the Public Prosecutor has
failed to produce an evidence: there is no vote, no resolution of an
inflammatory nature, inasmuch as to understand the word inflammatory; it means,
not merely, that which will inflame itself, but that which will inflame others:
now, the word introduced, as inflammatory, had no manner of connection with the
Convention at large, and was ordered by it, to have been burnt: there, indeed
he is right; it might have been inflammatory; when burning, it was
inflammatory; but that inflammatory nature was no way seditious. Continuing
then, in the swollen and delusive language of the indictment, he states, that
the said Maurice Margarot, did also, "when attending in his capacity of
Delegate, at the illegal meetings of the said Association, utter, and make
various seditious and inflammatory speeches, tending to vilify our present
happy Constitution, and to withdraw therefrom, the confidence and attachment of
our subjects." I have already proved, that the only end of our meeting, was to
revert to our Constitution; but, it seems, that there is a terrible confusion
of ideas. He accuses me with having, while attending my duty, as Delegate, in
these meetings of the Convention, with having made several inflammatory
speeches, tending to vilify our present happy Constitution; and, to withdraw,
therefrom, the confidence and attachment of our subjects: That that is a wrong
statement, will be evident, at first sight: by what you have already been told,
you must have discovered, that men, seeking a Reform, cannot wish to do injury
to that very Constitution which will procure to them that Reform; for, we are
not so blind as not to see, that our original Constitution, if we revert to its
original principles, does give us the Reform we want; but his way of proving
the inflammatory speech is very curious. And, particularly, the said "Maurice
Margarot did, at a meeting of said Convention, held on Tuesday, 19th November
last, 1793, or on some other day of that month, in a Mason Lodge, or room in
Blackfriars Wynd; in the city of Edinburgh, wickedly and feloniously make the
following motion, or one of a similar import." This, you will recollect, is to
be the vilifying of our present happy Constitution, and our withdrawing
therefrom the attachment of our subjects. Now, you will see what that motion
is, which he adduces in support of that proof: That, previous to publishing an
Address to the Public, a Committee be forthwith appointed to consider the
means, and draw up the outlines of a plan of general union and corporation
between the two nations, in their constitutional pursuit of a thorough
Parliamentary Reform. He brings you forth a motion, as written evidence; and,
he tells you, this is done for the purpose of subverting our present happy
Constitution, and withdrawing therefrom the attachment of our subjects: you
certainly will not take it amiss, if I recall to your mind what I said before,
that it was an attempt to impose upon your understandings; for there is not one
of you fifteen that has a servant about your house, so imbecile, as to suppose
that a plan of union would tend to vilify our present happy Constitution, and
withdraw, therefrom, the confidence and attachment of our subjects: it might,
very well, when helped forward with all the brilliancy of gesture, of language,
of action, which he is possessed of; but, when you come to look into it, it is
a direct falsehood: let us call things by their proper name: it is a direct
falsehood; it does not support itself then further, that motion having passed
unanimously; and, which motion, clearly demonstrated a wish and intention on
the part of the said Maurice Margarot, of propagating the seditious tenets of
that Association over the whole kingdom; and, of exciting our subjects in
England, in contempt of legal authority, to adopt the same unconstitutional
conduct with the said Maurice Margarot, and his associates, had presumed to
follow. Gentlemen, I have been told, that in Scotland, I am as much a stranger
as if I had come from Germany, from Italy, from America; and yet, a Court which
cannot bring witnesses from England, can try me for what was charged to be done
in England: in short, it is a farrago of nonsense. Were I better acquainted
with the Public Prosecutor, I should have thought he meant to have set forth my
poor services in the Convention; and, therefore, brought me forward to explain
the nature of it, the contempt of legal authority. Where has it been shown? No
where: on the contrary, we had the auction of legal authority; Pit and Dundas
both knew we were coming down: the Magistrates of Edinburgh knew we were
assembling for that purpose; unless the contempt was, that we did not go and
ask them leave: perhaps, had we been strolling players, we might; for, I am
told, that a town hall, not far from Edinburgh, was refused to the Friends of
the People; and, the next night, permitted to a company of strolling players:
probably the strolling players are the most beneficial members of society.
Gentlemen, you see what hardships I labor under, no being able to get at my
exculpating witnesses and papers, the witnesses being above the laws of the
country. The Lord Advocate, when he says it was in contempt of legal authority,
utters a falsehood: not even your Lord Chief Justice Laing, who goes about
knocking people down in the street, his legal authority had not shown itself;
and, therefore it was not in contempt of any legal authority whatever. We took
our own room; burnt our own candles; and nobody had any thing to do with it but
ourselves: there was no contempt of any legal authority; and, therefore, that
part must be expunged; as also, that which relates to England; over which, you
say, you have no jurisdiction. Again, I find among my high crimes and
misdemeanors, the word tocsin; and, a learned Judge has said, that we took it
from the French: another person has said, taking up, I suppose, what had
dropped from the learned Judge, that it was a French word: unfortunately it
happens to be borrowed even by them: it is a Chinese word, signifying a shrill
sound; a bell that is rung when danger is near; and, you know, the greater
part, or all the words of the Chinese language, mean one and the same thing;
and, therefore they are obliged to couple a member of them, in order to convey
what they mean, especially when it carries a complicate idea with it.

Again, a motion is deemed very seditious; for, having appointed a Committee
for the particular purpose of watching every act which may militate against the
rights of the people; it is first false, that such a Committee has been
appointed; but, if it had been appointed, we should, in the French term, have
deserved well of our country, for our vigilance; for, let me call to your mind,
in all the high offices of trust, you find very few people willing to step
forward, and serve you for nothing; and that would have been the case, if we
had appointed this Committee: we should have been laboring for you, at our own
expense; being your sentinels, watching, that none of your rights might be
encroached, while you slept; but it may be proper here to animadvert likewise
upon the blank that was produced as criminal, and more criminal than the
written evidence: it was said, that the resolution which ought to fill the
blank, was of such a nature, that it must not appear till the end of the
Resolutions. I will explain that to the satisfaction of the Jury; but, it must
be by reading to them the whole discourse. Here is a motion, supposed to be
made by Mr. Callendar, That in case the Minister, of any other Member, bring
into the House of Commons, a motion for a Convention Bill, as passed in
Ireland, for preventing the people from meeting, according to their just
rights, by the Revolution, the same motion shall be noticed to the Delegates of
the respective Societies immediately, to meet in Convention, to assert their
rights; and, then they make me say, this is an excellent motion; and the event
which it alludes to, ought to be the tocsin to the Friends of Liberty to
assemble: it seems, however, to be imperfect; it does not mention any place of
meeting: neither does it specify the time when the Delegates are to assemble;
for the word immediately is indefinite, and will not convey the same meaning to
persons residing in different parts of the country: by those who live near to
the place of meeting, it will be understood, that they are to repair there next
day; by those at a greater distance within a few days; and by those still
farther off, within a week after such information is received. Gentlemen, you
will remember, I have read to you eight chapters, the produce of the Committee
of Regulations; you will see what spirit actuated them, when they draw up those
regulations; and that there was nothing seditious in their tendency. Here, I am
then made to say, that this motion comes properly under the chapter of
regulations; I wish it were referred to that Committee; I therefore move, that
the report be read, that the Convention may judge, whether the article I allude
to, sufficiently provides for the intention of the motion now before the
Convention. Here you see, first, my dissent to that motion of Mr. Callendar's:
the one which the Committee of Regulations had drawn up, was in a different
style, and would have come in extremely well at the end of the regulations;
instead of which, the Convention spliced the one with the other; they adopted
the motion of Mr. Callendar, and proposed to bring it in as amended by Mr.
Sinclair, and others; and, the next day, they proposed to bring it in at the
end of the proceedings; that the only mystery that has given so much uneasiness
to the Public Accuser; while, at the same time, he might have done away a great
deal of your suspense, and, likewise, have made himself much easier; for, I
believe, he is in possession of that motion, but did not think proper to
produce it, because it would not have answered his end of criminating me;
however, I will invalidate it entirely, for the Public Accuser is bound to
bring forward the best evidence he can adduce: he has not brought that evidence
forward: he has told you, that he has got it, but has not produced it;
therefore, you are not to believe him on his word; and, I believe, that is not
the only falsehood pointed out, that will engage you to disbelieve any thing he
may assert. I will read a passage from the Gazetteer, which will show, that
other men have been the victims of his falsehood, as well as myself. Gazetteer,
7th January, signed by a man of great respectability, both as to truth and
fortune; a man still more respectable by education, and by his virtue; he is a
man possessed of 6000 l. a year, and upwards; lays the chief part of that money
out, not in luxury, or in profligate living, but in relieving the necessities
of the poor; I mean Mr. Archibald Hamilton Rowan, who has been called one of
the wretches of Ireland.

The Lord Advocate of Scotland, Robert Dundas, having asserted, on the trial of
Thomas Muir, Esquire that an Address from the United Irishmen of Dublin, to the
Delegates, for Reform in Scotland, to which my name was fixed as Secretary, was
penned by these infamous wretches, who, like himself, have fled from the
punishment that awaited him; and, an explanation having been avoided, under the
pretext of official duty, I find it now necessary to declare, that such
assertion of the Lord Advocate is a falsehood.

ARCHIBALD HAMILTON ROWAN.
Dominic-street, Dublin, Dec. 17, 1793.
This is what they call in plain vulgar English, giving a man the lie; and when
the name is affixed to it, this man is of an equally high character, and his
intrinsic character makes him rank at least with the official character of the
public prosecutor. I dare say he is not a man, who would fix his name to a
falsehood; and if he had, his falsehood would have been contradicted; and it
seems that here the public prosecutor is very full of spirit, and therefore
would have resented this injury. He has silently acknowledged the truth of it,
and the man who will tell a falsehood in one instance, will tell it in general;
therefore be wary how you trust merely to his assertion, especially with an
object like this in view, the extirpation of abuses upon which he and his
relatives fatten; for his uncle reaps upwards of 20,000 l. a year of the public
money as Secretary of State. Were abuses to be rectified, these salaries would
be diminished; were these abuses to be rectified, it is possible his conduct
would be enquired into as most likely it will speedily. You see by this,
Gentlemen, that where any thing tending to exculpate me could be adduced, he
has kept it back; but he has not done it simply and fairly, but aggravated it;
I have greater proof of this man's guilt, but I will not produce it; whereas,
it is an extenuation of guilt. Here is another act of criminality in this
motion; by the by, it seems very inconvenient in the practice of the law of
Scotland, that one crime may affect many persons, if it is only by holding
finger to finger, art and part as it is called here; and here, Gentlemen, it
may be as well to revert to the opinion of the Solicitor General of King
William upon that subject. Sir John Hawles says, As Juries have ever been
vested with such powers by law, so to exclude them from, or disseise them of
the same, were utterly to defeat the end of their institution; for then if a
person should be indicted for doing any common innocent act, if it be but
clothed and disguised in the indictment with the name of treason: So that you
see, even in King William's time, there were frivolous persecutions as well as
at present; I meant to call them prosecutions, I beg pardon; and that if the
Jury did not step in between the crown lawyer and the subject, the subject
having no redress, was incarcerated, fined, banished, or otherwise ill used,
and all for things, which in themselves were perfectly innocent; but being
clothed in tremendous language, appear heinous crimes, such as I was mentioning
just now, and is reported here; If any person should be indicted for doing any
common innocent act, if it be but clothed and disguised in the indictment with
the name of treason, or some other high crime, and proved by witnesses to have
been done by him, the Jury, though satisfied in conscience that the fact is not
any such offense as it is called, yet because (according to this fond opinion)
they have no power to judge of law, and the fact charged is fully proved, they
shall at this rate be bound to find him guilty. -- Thus you will if you find me
guilty, refer me to the mercy of the court -- I shall not detain you much
longer; you have attended me with singular patience, Gentlemen of the Jury, and
I thank you for it -- you are doing your country good. Distinguish then the
true friends of your country from its foes. You have seen that the testimony of
every witness adduced on the part of the Crown is one weaker than another; that
it all turns upon the point of the meeting being Seditious; whereas, in verity,
as the law term is, the meeting was founded upon the claim of rights -- that it
is the privilege of the subject to seek redress; and I must take the liberty of
quoting to you something from De Foe, which will prove to you, that the people
have a right -- that the original power rests with them, and that they have a
right to control that power, and keep on it a continual check; for as I said
before, the servant is not greater than the master, and the King is but the
chief servant of the nation. It is true we do not exercise our authority over
him, or if we do, it is but once in two or three centuries; and I hope it will
be centuries before we shall have occasion to exercise it again. But there are
those who exercise the regal power in his name, and the sooner they are brought
to condign punishment, the sooner it will prevent others from pursuing the same
dastardly pursuits. This is a chapter of De Foe; he is treating of the original
power of the collective body of the people of England. -- To the King. Sir, it
is not the least of the extraordinaries of your Majesty's character, that as
you are King of your people, so you are the people's King. This title, as it is
the most glorious, so it is the most indisputable in the world. God himself
appointed, the prophet proclaimed, but the people's assent was the finishing,
the royal authority of the first King of Israel. Your Majesty, among all the
blessings of your reign, has restored this as the best of all our enjoyments,
the full liberty of our original right in its actings and exercise. --

This was published in the year 1705, soon after the revolution. Former reigns
have invaded it, and the last thought it totally suppressed; but as liberty
revived under your Majesty's just authority, this was the first flower she
brought forth; that is to say, the acting and exercise of our liberties and
original rights, which are those which you have seen in Mr. Wharton's speech,
of petitioning and obtaining redress; of keeping a constant check upon every
servant of the Crown, in whatever situation he may be placed; and of obtaining
a fair and equal representation.

He says in another place, -- I have observed, when interest obliges any person
or party to defend the cause they have espoused, they please themselves with
fancying they conceal their private designs, like a late Act of Parliament,
which in the preamble calls itself an Act for the relief of Creditors; but
which in its effect, was an act for the relief of Debtors. This is like men who
cry up the Constitution, and live upon its defects. Thus some Gentlemen place
fine specious titles on their books; as Jura Populi Anglicani; -- A Vindication
of the Rights of the Commons of England, and a Vindication of the Rights of the
Lords; and with large and high encomiums upon the excellency of our
Constitution, treat the levity of some people's judgments with fine notions;
whereas, the true end and design is defending the interest and party they have
espoused.

Gentlemen, call to mind whether it may not be the case with one of us two, the
Panel or the Public Prosecutor, whether we may not be trumpeting up or
sounding the praise of the constitution, and at the same time have interested
and private views; and as it has been said you cannot penetrate into the minds
of men, you can only judge from the tenor of their conduct; hitherto he has
acknowledged himself to be a placeman, though not a pensioner. Gentlemen, I
take my God to witness, that were I to be offered one of the most profitable
places under Government, my conscience would not permit me to accept the
emoluments of it, when I know that it has been drawn from the blood and the
sweat of the poor: that there has been more blood spilt within this last
twelvemonth, for the purpose of gratifying Ministry, and keeping the public
mind from reform, than would completely fill the largest ship now in the
British navy, and I speak within compass, The defense of the rights of the
representative body of the people, understood by the name of the Common of
England in Parliament, is a great point, and so plain are their rights, that it
is no extraordinary task to defend them; but for any man to advance, that they
are so august an assembly, that no objection ought to be made to their actions,
nor to reflect upon their conduct, though the fact be true; and that it is not
to be examined, whether the thing said be true, but what authority the person
speaking has to say, it is a doctrine wholly new.

You see, Gentlemen, it was a doctrine new a hundred years ago, in the time of
De Foe, but it is a doctrine renewed now to serve these state prosecutions; it
is highly seditious, and of a very evil tendency in the public at present to
examine into the conduct of the House of Commons, and yet at that time it was
constitutional; why, because we have brought in the present family, and that
they had entered into a contract with the people; they would not suffer their
servants to deviate from it at first; at present, through lapse of time that is
grown obsolete, and their servants' servants tell you, you are not even to
examine into it; praise the Constitution, and think yourselves happy, whether
you are so or not. It is doctrine wholly new, and seems to me to be a badge of
more slavery to our own representatives, than ever the people of England owes
them, or than ever they themselves expected. This therefore, together with some
invasions of the people's rights, made public by several modern authors; You
see the rights of the people were begun already, then to be invaded, are the
reasons why I have adventured (being wholly disinterested and unconcerned
either for persons or parties) to make a short essay at declaring the rights of
the people of England, not representatively, but collectively considered. And
with due deference to the representative body of the nation, I hope I may say
it can be no diminution of their rights, to assert the rights of that body from
whom they derived the powers and privileges of their House, and which are the
very foundation of their being.

This refers to what I said to you just now, the servant cannot be higher than
the master; if they derive their powers from us, we entertain powers superior
to theirs; it is therefore our duty to see that they acquit themselves of the
task reposed in them, and consequently all the meetings of the people for those
purposes are constitutional, and not seditious and inflammatory, as sounded by
the Public Accuser. For if the original right of the people be overthrown, the
power of the Representative, which is subsequent and subordinate, must die of
itself, and because I have to do rather with reason and the nature of the
thing, than with laws and precedents. I am happy to find that De Foe stood in
the situation I now do. I have, Gentlemen, to do before you with reason and the
nature of the thing: I have to deal with your reason: I like that much better
than law or precedents; reason is an emanation of the divine Being; laws are
but the formation of that emanation, and the farther the rays diverge from the
center, the weaker they grow.

Gentlemen, you will find that the plain doctrine that I am laying down, has
been the language of all times and all ages, is the doctrine of truth itself;
and that I am acting for the public advantage, and not for private or personal
emolument; and because I have to do rather with reason and the nature of the
thing, than with law and precedents. The Crown Lawyers can confuse and confound
a man not bred to the law: They can confound a juryman with the dust from the
old musty law books, and lull his reasoning to sleep with words conveying a
very different meaning to what ought to be attached to them. To come directly
to what I design in the following papers, it is necessary to lay down some
maxims other than what a late author has furnished us with; salus populi
suprema lex. This will not be controverted by any body, the welfare of the
people is the first of all laws; and remember this, Gentlemen, all government,
and consequently our whole Constitution, was originally designed and is
maintained for the support of the people's property, who are the governed. It
is for the support of the people, not for the support of the governor, that all
the members of Government, whether Kings, Lords, or Commons, if they invert the
great design of their institution, the public good, cease to be in the same
public capacity. You see, De Foe absolutely suspends them from their function,
the moment they cease to devote their talents to the public good. How many of
our placemen and pensioners would be suspended, if that law was still put in
execution! And power retreats to its original, that no collective or
representative body of men whatsoever, in matters of politics any more than
religion, are or ever have been infallible. Here is the axe at the root of the
omnipotence of Parliament, That reason is the test and touchstone of laws, and
that all law or power that is contradictory to reason, is ipso facto void in
itself, and ought not to be obeyed. Some other maxims less general, are the
consequence of these: as First, that such laws as are agreeable to reason and
justice, being once made, are binding both to King, Lords, and Commons, either
separately or conjunctively, till actually repealed in due form. Thus much, I
differ from many great men in the law at present; who say, that a bad law when
once found to be a bad law, ought to be disobeyed in order to get it broken. On
the contrary I am for obeying, and every good citizen is for obeying and paying
respect to the laws, and to nothing but the laws; and while a law is in force,
let it be never so bad, I will obey it; I will point out if I can the errors of
the law, but I will obey it while it is in existence; from that confession of
faith, you may easily suppose that another article of accusation will fall to
the ground, which is that our Convention was to assemble and militate against
the Parliament, in case of the introduction of a Convention Bill: We were to
overawe in the language of the public Prosecutor; to overawe the Parliament; to
check them in their proceedings: so we were: but how? as a body of men we could
do nothing till we had a majority of the nation on our side. When once the
majority of the Society is of one way of thinking, it is proper that the
minority should yield to it, and that is the first law of Society; and as the
general good is to be paramount to every thing, so the will of the few is to
submit to the will of the many; and therefore, the object of our institution
was first to diffuse political knowledge; and secondly, to gather the general
will. If we found that general will, to be for a reform in Parliament, a Reform
in Parliament we should obtain; if we are to be slaves, it is our duty then to
sit down silent, and if not satisfied, we may as a noble Lord has said, take
our pack on our back, and be trudging. My Lord, at another season I might not
talk improfitably, but at the present late hour of the night, I think in my
mind that I have said sufficiently to acquit myself of all the charges laid
against me, if you will be kind enough to divest yourselves of any prejudice
which public papers, public rumors, or public prejudices, may have inspired
against me; to examine not merely the man; I am myself, a willing and a devoted
victim to my country.

I know if I am left to the mercy of the court, how that mercy will display
itself; but if it can profit the cause that I should be a victim, I am willing
it should be so: I have faced death before now: I am not afraid of it now, you
see that I am not agitated. I am as cool as yourselves; I have studied this
affair well: I undertook it not sanctioned by a Pit, a Richmond, or a Dundas:
I adopted it upon reason and justice, and I will quit it only with life.
Gentlemen, you represent you country: your situation is awful; you are now to
guard its liberties; you are now to encourage the plant of reform; a mild and
peaceful reform, according to the temper of men's minds, now may be easily
effected; but beware of persecution carried on with too much rigor. We know,
and history shows us, that at a certain pitch of oppression the people will
bear it no longer, and an uninformed multitude, is what every well-studied
government, every well conducted government should fear to incense. It has been
the policy of Europe, and it is a popish policy, and I am sorry to say, we now
number two among our Allies who make much use of that policy; I mean those who
encourage the inquisition and the bow-string, the Pope and the Turk, who have
both now ambassadors at our Court. It is their policy that the people should be
ignorant; it has been the policy of the priesthood, it has been the policy of
false politicians; but I hope the time is coming, when men will open their eyes
to their true interest, and that season when riches are no longer to be poured
upon one man without measure, while a thousand others are starving. It is
necessary that there should be a distinction of ranks, and it will take place,
but let merit be the way to public offices; study that, and you will find
yourselves better served, not as the present custom is, the cousin of one Lord,
and the son of another is to be the proprietor of a borough; these are things
much wanted to be reformed.

Gentlemen, you have seen how slight the charges against me are; you have had
intimation of what the mercy will be that I shall experience. A further
intimation that orders have been issued, though the part from whence those
orders came, have not been developed to you; yet let me recur to your claim of
rights; it is contrary to the laws of Scotland, that any Magistrate of Scotland
should act according to any order whatever, except it is according to the laws
of Scotland, but not according to the orders of any stranger. You are in this
case, without an appeal in Scotland. You are the representatives of the people;
they have entrusted you with their rights and privileges; you are to pronounce
on me, whether I am guilty or not. I have appeared here to answer to my
country. I hope I have done it to the satisfaction of my country, and I hope
you will do it honor by your verdict; though the sophistry of the public
Prosecutor has appeared in all its defects, I hope that sound sense and reason
are at work in your minds, and I hope there is not one among you fifteen, but
what is possessed of an honest heart. Consider; I tell you consider not me --
consider your country. Consider the cause, and consider the futility of the
charge that is brought against me. I am sorry to have detained you so long, but
it is a serious affair, and your verdict will not be confined within these
walls; the eyes of Britain are now upon you fifteen men, whom I don't even know
by name, and who perhaps never saw me before, nor I you; then examine me well,
see if there is any thing seditious in my appearance or behavior; see if there
is any thing illegal in what I have done, though not versed in the quirks of
the law; and I am glad of it, for I believe the laws, and the perversion of the
laws by the practice, have made many an honest man a knave. You will see
whether I am guilty of the charge laid against me, what proportion of guilt is
attached to me; whether any part is proved home to me; whether any part is
legal proof, and whether I was not serving my country; and I cannot hesitate a
moment to think but that your verdict will do honor to your country, and
justice to me. -- Gentlemen, I take my leave of you. --

Give me leave now to call to your Lordships attention, your particular duty.
--


Lord Justice Clerk. I will not receive any instructions from you, Sir.


Mr. Margarot. I shall take the liberty of checking your Lordships, if you do
not go on properly.


Lord Justice Clerk. You have gone on for four hours, and I would not allow you
to be interrupted; if you had not been a stranger, I would not have heard one
third of what you have said in four hours, which was all sedition from
beginning to end.


SUMMING UP.
Lord Justice Clerk. Gentlemen of the Jury, I dare say every man in Court is
fatigued, as I own I am; and after hearing it will not be necessary to detain
you much longer; but I shall make a few general observations, which I apprehend
may be of some use in forming a judgment upon this case. The crime here charged
is the crime of Sedition; and although it is not founded upon any statute law,
it is a crime very well known in the common law of Scotland, and indeed is
coeval with the very justice of society. When mankind are in a state of nature,
every man is a law to himself; but as soon as society is formed, every member
of that society be under obligations to one another; to that society of which
they are members, to maintain the law and constitution of that society; and
every attempt to encroach upon the constitution of that society, is a very
heinous crime, and very severely punishable. Gentlemen, it is a crime which
affords different degrees of aggravation; according to the nature of it, it may
be applied to private matters, and may be less criminal in that case, according
to the circumstances. But whenever Sedition has a tendency to overturn the
established Constitution of the kingdom, it becomes a crime of the most heinous
nature, and of the most dangerous tendency, and it borders indeed upon the
crime of high treason. Gentlemen, the libel here lays the crime charged in the
major proposition, as Sedition; and the public Prosecutor has stated a variety
of facts and circumstances, from which he infers the crime of Sedition, and the
conclusion of the libel is, that all or a part thereof being proven, then he is
to be punished with the pains of law; which pains of law in this case, is an
arbitrary punishment, and which the Court will make more or less, according as
they think the circumstances of the case deserve it.

Gentlemen, although the Prosecutor has detailed a variety of facts and
circumstances, all of which I shall shortly state to you, yet it is not
necessary that every fact and circumstance should be proved, in order to obtain
a verdict of guilty; because, if you are of opinion that such facts and
circumstances are proved, as are sufficient to establish against the Panel an
accusation of the crime of Sedition, it founds you in a verdict of guilty. If
upon examination of the whole circumstances of the case, you should be of
opinion, that nothing is proved to establish the crime of Sedition against him,
you will find him not guilty, or the libel not proven. And, Gentlemen, the
first thing to be attended to is this, whether the Society who call themselves
the British Convention of Delegates, from what you see of them, can be reckoned
a seditious society or not; -- that is the first thing you will investigate.
And, Gentlemen, it is a very material circumstance, which you will have under
your observation in forming your judgment; and it is this that that Society
stands upon, the record of this Court not above six or seven days old, to be a
seditious society; when a person, a secretary to that society, acting in that
capacity, and a member of that society, was found guilty of the crime of
sedition, and has been by judgment of this Court condemned to transportation
for fourteen years, that is a pretty strong circumstance to show that this was
not an innocent meeting. If it was a lawful meeting, I am afraid that poor man,
Skirving, has suffered very unjustly. In the first place, there was a unanimous
verdict of a most respectable Jury against him. And, in the second place, the
Court pronouncing judgment upon that verdict. And indeed, Gentlemen,
independent of what was established upon the trial of Skirving, I think you
will be to consider, whether upon taking a complex view of the proceedings of
the society, it has been established this day by parole evidence, but chiefly
by written evidence, which is not so capable of error as the other. I say,
whether upon the whole of the evidence of what has been said before you, that
this was not an innocent meeting, but a meeting of a most seditious nature.

Gentlemen, they say that the meeting was for a lawful purpose, and that at the
same time that they complain of the grievances that the subjects labor under,
nothing more was meant than to obtain a reform in parliament. Gentlemen, that
is the profession of the meeting; but then they are obliged to say, that
because their attempting a reform in another mode was a much more criminal act
if they did not prevail, but you will attend to the facts, and see how far what
is proved in this case, is consistent with the idea of a reform in parliament;
and when you see them holding out that the parliament is guilty of the grossest
irregularities, as having no regard to the laws or the good of the subject, and
in short, that we are at the brink of ruin. When that is the light in which
they pretend to hold forth the parliament, it is impossible to believe but they
must mean something else than a reform in parliament; they could not well
expect to get a redress of their grievances from a parliament whom they have
thought proper to state in such terms. --

Gentlemen, if a Society of so many people, dividing themselves into Sections,
Committees, coming from the Sections, motions made, and upon this a Committee
of Secrecy appointed, and a Convention of Emergency established, and the
sittings declared permanent, and all that -- Was this necessary for a reform in
parliament? I think there could be no occasion for all this secrecy; an
application to parliament seems inconsistent with the idea of it. I am afraid
it must satisfy you -- you will consider the whole of it, whether the evidence
does not show you, that something else than a reform in parliament was
intended. You see, that they have established a Convention of Emergency, in the
case of a Convention Bill being brought into parliament, similar to that
brought into the parliament of Ireland. Another was in the case of that meeting
being dispersed; and the third was in the case of an invasion, or in case of
the landing of foreign troops. Now supposing that they had nothing but fair and
honest intentions in the case of a foreign invasion, they were to join the
government to repel that foreign force, was there any thing there that was an
object of secrecy? I think the more public their resolutions were, when of so
virtuous a nature, calculated so much for the good of the public, the more
public they were, so much the better: and it could not be an object of secrecy.

That therefore taking all these circumstances together, I am afraid that there
is nothing but what is irreconcilable with innocence. But, Gentlemen, in order
to constitute the crime of sedition, it is not necessary that the meeting
should have had in view to overturn the constitution by mobs and by violence,
to overturn the King and Parliament; for I apprehend, in some sense the crime
of sedition consist in poisoning the minds of the lieges, which may naturally
in the end have a tendency to promote violence against the state, and
endeavoring to create a dissatisfaction in the country, which nobody can tell
where it will end; it will end very naturally in overt rebellion; and if it has
that tendency, though not in the view of the parties at the time, yet if they
have been guilty of poisoning the minds of the lieges, I apprehend that will
constitute the crime of sedition to all intents and purposes. Now, Gentlemen,
take a view of the conduct of this meeting, and attend to the time when all
this reform, all this noise and declamation is made against the constitution;
it is at a time when we are at war with a great nation, a cruel ferocious
nation, that requires all our strength, and not only our strength, but the
strength of all our allies to get the better of them; and the greatest
unanimity is necessary. I submit to you, whether a man that wishes well to his
country, would come forward and insist upon a reform, parliamentary or not
parliamentary, at such a crisis; which would create discontent in the minds of
the people, when every good subject would promote unanimity among the lieges to
meet the common enemy. I say, in place of that, to bring forward a great reform
in parliament is a thing totally inconsistent with the constitution of this
country. I say, bringing it forward at that period is a strong proof that they
were not well wishers to the constitution, but enemies to it. I say that no
good member of society would have taken those measures. I appeal to you all,
that you are living under a happy government, in peace and plenty, in perfect
security of your lives and property, the happiest nation upon the face of the
earth; and when that is the situation of this country, I appeal to you whether
I have not given a fair and just description of it; for a set of men in that
situation to raise a faction in the minds of the lower order of the people, and
to create disaffection to the government, and consequently make a division in
that country. I say, these things appear to be from the very conjuncture at
which they are brought forward, sedition of a very high nature. Now, Gentlemen,
you will take into consideration the whole proceedings of this meeting, and
take a view of what stands upon the records of this Court, that that Convention
is already determined to be a meeting of an illegal nature.

The next question is, whether you can pronounce this Gentleman at the bar
innocent. I will lay it down as a principle of law, and not peculiar to this
country; it is the principle of the civil law, and I believe the principle of
every law in every well-governed state, that where a number of people are
concerned in a crime, that each and all of them are guilty; part or part of
acting in different parts in the commission of the crime, as some may have been
more active than others, they are all of them in the eye of the law equally
guilty, and liable to punishment; that is the law of Scotland, and I believe of
every civilized country, and therefore if this is an unlawful society, the man
that is president of that society, is liable for every thing done in that
society; and is amenable to a court of justice, for the crimes there committed.

Now, Gentlemen, the question is, if this be a seditious Society whether you
can pronounce Mr. Margarot innocent. In the first place, you see that the
public Prosecutor has established that he was sent down to that very meeting
from England, as Delegate; he comes down for no other errand under the sun. He
leaves his business of a merchant in London, and attends this meeting in the
character of a Delegate; that I apprehend is taking a strong part in the
proceedings of this seditious illegal Society. You see him at all the meetings
almost, and you see him the most active of all the meeting. He is chairman upon
one occasion, and he is making speeches and harangues upon another: and you
will attend to that motion by which the Convention of Emergency was
established, by which a Committee of Secrecy was established. The Committee of
Secrecy consists of four members, and the Panel is named one of the four, that
is in evidence before you; and if you take all these things together, he comes
down to Scotland, leaves his business in London, and attending these meetings
daily; you see him taking the active part, making motions, and making that very
important motion for a Committee of Secrecy; and he was named one of the
Committee. I leave it to you, Gentlemen, whether you can pronounce him innocent
of the crime of Sedition. Gentlemen, I own at the same time that this Panel
shows a good deal of ingenuity, though I cannot applaud his discretion or
judgment. The crime charged is Sedition: and I think he took up four hours in a
defense, which was sedition from beginning to the end; finding fault with the
Constitution, and I think a speech of a very seditious tendency, and I will not
trouble you with any more of it. I have given you the general idea of the case;
if you are of opinion nothing is proved against this Gentleman, find him not
guilty; on the other hand, if you think the facts and circumstances
sufficiently brought home against him, you will find him guilty.


Tuesday, January 14th, 1794. -- Half past One o'clock.
The names of the Jury having been called over, they brought in the following.

VERDICT.
Edinburgh, Jan. 14th, 1794.
The above assize having enclosed, made choice of the said Samuel Anderson to
be their Chancellor, and the said John Balfour to be their clerk; and having
considered the criminal libel raised and pursued at the instance of his
Majesty's Advocate for his Majesty's interest, against Maurice Margarot,
Panel, the interlocutor of relevancy pronounced thereon by the Court, the
evidence produced in proof of the libel, and the evidence adduced in
exculpation of the Panel, they all in one voice find the Panel, Maurice
Margarot, GUILTY of the crimes libeled; in witness whereof, their said
Chancellor and Clerk have subscribed these presents in their names, and by
their appointment, place and date as above.

(Signed) SAMUEL ANDERSON, Chan. JOHN BALFOUR, Clerk.


Lord Justice Clerk. Gentlemen, you have pronounced a very accurate verdict.
This is a trial of great importance, and the country is obliged to you for the
attention you have paid to the cause. If you have any thing to say, Mr.
Margarot, now is the time.


Mr. Margarot. Undoubtedly I have, my Lord. I did not yesterday start
objections on futile grounds. I objected to the competency of the Court; I
object to it at present; I informed your Lordships, that I meant to bring an
appeal against the whole procedure, in consequence of that incompetency. You
thought proper, at that time, to repel my objection, but I now still sustain
it: it is in consequence of the absence of the Lord Justice General of
Scotland; I was charged to appear before him: he does not appear in his place;
I did my duty, he neglected his, and the Court was not full; and it certainly
was necessary that he should attend, otherwise the Indictment would have run,
the Lord Justice General, the Lord Justice Clerk or the other Lords; instead of
which, it ran, and the other Lords of Justiciary: That implies the absolute
necessity that he should be in his place; or otherwise, the Court was not even
by the Public Prosecutor deemed complete. I likewise mean to bring an
objection, full as forcible, which is that which I experienced in the course of
my trial. I was not able, though I had performed all the necessary legal
ceremonies, I was not able (because some men do not pay that respect to the
laws which they ought to do) to adduce several of my exculpatory witnesses:
your Lordships refused to grant me a caption; your Lordships' refused to grant
me delay; consequently, the most material evidences, that I could have brought
in my own defense, were entirely denied me: but, my Lord, although that denial
was in consequence of an assertion of this Court, that your Jurisdiction did
not extend to England; yet, a part of my Indictment was sounded on crimes said
to be committed in England, and relative to the people of England. It is odd,
that you should take cognizance, in this Court, of crimes relative to the
people of England, when from England you cannot compel the attendance of a
single witness in my favor.

There is, my Lord, an objection again, which is entirely local, which is
confined to Edinburgh itself: I have summoned, three men, as exculpatory
evidences; two of them were attending, the third was not attending; but no
notice was taken of him. These men I wish to call into Court, to examine as
exculpatory evidences for me. The Lord Justice Clerk insisted upon my telling
the nature of the questions I intended to put: I gave him the outlines of them,
upon which he thought proper to refuse the admission of those evidences.

Another charge relates to yourself: I had ordered the messenger to summon your
Lordship upon certain facts, which went to prove, that it was very likely I had
already, before my trial, been prejudged. Your Lordship was not summoned, in
consequence of the fear of this man offending a person in power, but, at the
beginning of the trial, your Lordship told me, and the Public Prosecutor, to
his justice be it said, acknowledged that the legal point should be obviated,
and that you should attend as an exculpatory evidence; but when it came to the
point, you refused to be put upon your oath, and to answer the questions
proposed to you. Those questions went to criminate yourself, my Lord; they
remain unanswered, by the advice of your brother Judges. The consequence was,
that my defense was neither so complete, my exculpatory evidence not so
satisfactory, and I make no doubt but that it is owing to that that the Jury,
of whom I shall take no notice at present; that is the business of their
country, not of me; that the Jury have thought proper to find me guilty. There
is another thing, should these objections be repelled; I have another to bring
forward, that will not so easily be got rid of. It seems to be the custom of
Scotland, that the witnesses are confined to a chamber by themselves, and no
stranger admitted amongst them; that was not the case yesterday; a person, of
the name of James Carlisle, was conversing with them a considerable time in the
outer house. These are great objections for staying judgment. The two first
objections go to cancel the whole proceedings, and the three last at least to
staying of judgment. I have no more say at present.


Lord Justice Clerk. You will not be allowed to speak afterward; and,
therefore, if you have any thing more to say, you must speak out.


Mr. Margarot. I have nothing more. It was said yesterday, I was not versed in
the Laws of Scotland: it is true, I am not; but I have some slight knowledge of
the British Constitution, and I must observe here, that the proceedings of this
Court have been a departure, in toto, from the British Constitution. I will say
no more, I wait your sentence.


Lord Henderland. My Lords, this Panel has stated the very same objections
that he stated yesterday, except one, which states that there were strangers
with the witnesses in the other room; and, if it was so, the officer who had
the charge of them may be culpable and punishable; because it is contrary to
the custom of the Court: but, my Lords, to say that it shall annul a verdict,
or stay judgment, does not appear to me to be at all the practice. It is
impossible for the Court but to proceed upon the verdict, and I must give my
opinion upon this head, that it is not a valid objection.


Lord Eskgrove. My Lords, The Panel now at the Bar had more indulgence than
the Court ever gave a Panel before, because he was a stranger. My Lords, I
cannot help taking notice of an insinuation, on the part of the Panel, to the
Court by threats of impeachment, and threats of being brought upon our knees,
or suffering the pains of death. I am happy the Panel has not thought fit to
renew that language to day; yet I would not fit altogether upon this trial,
without signifying my opinion, that if it had not been, that we held in
contempt insinuations of threats to us, that are illegal; so, on the other
hand, we will submit to every appeal that is competent, if there is any
superior authority, we will readily submit to their decisions. But, my Lords,
it is not for this man, or any man, to think to terrify this Country into a
subversion of justice. Had he been a native of this country, he would not have
been suffered to go on as he did. I approve of his conduct today, which is
more temperate; but, for the sake of others who might be here yesterday, and
some who may hear of it, I will say, that it is not the right of any prisoner
to go out of his defense, and attack the Court, who are able to defend
themselves when the attack is made. I was of opinion, with my Brothers, upon
the objections yesterday, and therefore it is not to be supposed I should not
be of the same opinion today, unless something new had been urged. The
objection as to the Lord Justice General was fully answered yesterday, and does
not deserve any notice; as to the questions put to your Lordship not being
answered, it was not because of your being a Judge in this Court, but because
of their being irrelevant to his defense. As to his objection of a stranger
being admitted with the witnesses, I am sorry that any such thing should
happen. He may have been sent from either party, or he might have no connection
with any party; but it is a strange thing to suppose, that such an accident
should make null and void all the proceedings of this Court against this
Panel; and I am the more surprised at that objection being made, on account of
his being a native of England, where he must well know that it is the general
practice that the witnesses are not at all enclosed, but they are in Court
during the time of the trial. Not but we allow that it is sometimes ordered
otherwise by the Court, and in this case it seems to have been by accident. It
does not appear at all that he was tampering with the witnesses; and therefore
no blame lies upon the Court, and it is needless to seek any redress in the way
in which it has this day been done from this Court.


Lord Swinton. My Lords, The only new objection is, that a person of the name
of Carlisle was admitted among the witnesses; if that was valid, the objection
is now too late; it ought to have been made when they were brought to be
examined. My Lord, every witness, in a most solemn manner, was sworn and asked
upon oath, whether he was instructed or taught as to the evidence he was to
give, and an answer was made by every witness upon oath, that he was not; and
therefore, if there was any thing in the objection, it was done away by that;
and therefore it is my opinion, that it should be repelled.


Lord Dunsinnan. I am of the same opinion, and I don't think it necessary to
enter any further into it.


Lord Abercrombie. I am of the same opinion.


Lord Justice Clerk. I am entirely of the same opinion, and I will tell the
Panel, that if the Court were to sustain the objection, it would not avail him
as an absolutary from the crime with which he is charged; even if it would make
null and void all the proceedings; because he would be liable to be tried over
again. He must be convinced that he has had a fair trial; he went on for four
hours in his defense; he is a stranger in this country, and not having counsel,
we allowed him to go on in a manner in which we would not have permitted a
native of Scotland; he went on for four hours in such a way as was contrary to
the Constitution of the country, and your Lordship will now proceed in giving
your opinion upon what shall be the result of this verdict.


Lord Henderland. My Lords, The Jury having discharged their duty to their
country, by a patient hearing of this trial, after, I am persuaded, a full
consideration of the evidence, it remains for the Court to consider what may be
an adequate punishment of the crime he stands charged with. My Lords, the crime
of which he has been found guilty is sedition, and it is detailed in the minor
proposition, taking an active and distinguished part in the deliberations and
proceedings of a society, whose meetings were held under pretense of procuring
a Reform in Parliament, but which were of a dangerous and destructive tendency,
with a determined intention to disturb the peace of the community, and to
subvert the present Constitution of the Country. My Lords, it is a most
dangerous crime, and most extensive indeed in its consequences. -- It appears
in evidence that this was a Convention, forming themselves into a Society,
calling themselves Citizens, Sections, Committees. In short, assuming the form
of a French Parliament, thereby showing that they wished proceedings to take
place here of a similar nature to those of France. My Lords, I fear not the
sword of the enemy, or the poignard of the assassin, while sitting in my place,
discharging the sacred office of a Judge. I shall give my opinion as it strikes
my feelings; I shall give my sentiments, as they appear to me to be supported
by Law. This charge is that of active Sedition; and the distinction between
this charge, and that of leasing making, is an imperfect one; for it is to
demonstration capable of being proved, that, before the union, there did exist
Sedition, committed by words in false argument, by attacks upon the
Constitution, and upon the legislative bodies of the Constitution. It can be
demonstrated by the records of this Court, that there was a common law
sedition, different from leasing making; and upon which this Court held itself
competent to found a libel; to infer an arbitrary punishment. Therefore, in
whatever point of view I take the charge against this man, (though I think it
amounts to active Sedition), I have no doubt that this Court has power to
punish it, by the highest arbitrary punishment.

My Lords, I doubt not that what I now say will be made public: I observe that
it is falsely set forth, in one edition of a late trial, that I said, it wrung
my heart to mention the crime of Sedition. I am in the judgment of your
Lordships, and every man who heard me, I said no such thing -- I said, it wrung
my heart (and I own that it did) to see a Gentleman, a young Gentleman, who had
received a Gentleman's education and who had discovered abilities not
inconsiderable, should be the object of such punishment.

My Lords, this Gentleman is a stranger, and sorry I am that he should have
come into this country. I regret, as I must do, the consequences it has had,
and the conduct that he has assumed. It now becomes my duty, as a Judge, to say
what sort of punishment this crime deserves; and, my Lords, I know no other way
in which I could discharge my duty to God, to my country, and to my own
conscience, but by proposing to your Lordships, that this man should be
banished forth of this kingdom by transportation; or, in common language,
should be transported to such part of his Majesty's Dominions, as his Majesty,
in Council, shall please to appoint; and there to remain for the space of 14
years, under pain and penalty of death, in case of return. --


Lord Eskgrove. My Lords, the Panel has been found, by the verdict of a Jury
of his country, guilty of the facts charged against him. My Lords, we yesterday
gave our opinions upon the validity of the Indictment, all, in one voice,
finding that Sedition was a high crime, by the laws of Scotland. Your Lordships
were also opinion, that the facts charged and alleged by the Public Prosecutor,
in the minor proposition, amounted to the crime of Sedition. I will not now
repeat, what has been well observed by my Lord Henderland, who has gone before
me, as to the grounds of that opinion. My Lords, as the case at present stands,
I am sorry this Gentleman should have been guilty of such a crime; but a Jury
of his country have found that he is guilty of the charges in this Indictment;
and therefore I in no way differ from your Lordship in thinking, that the Jury
have discharged a duty to their country: but, if I had been of another opinion,
my duty would have been one and the same, which is to pronounce the sentence of
the law upon the person found guilty, by his country, of the crime charged, and
carrying it into execution, by a punishment suitable to the offense. It is
unnecessary to go through the circumstances of this Indictment, upon all of
which the Jury have returned a verdict, finding the Prisoner guilty. My Lords,
it may amount to the finding him guilty of leading, as well as assisting, a
number of people, styling themselves a sort of Parliament in this country, for
the purpose, as I stated yesterday, of subverting the Constitution of the
country; and then there is a more specific enumeration of facts: it sets forth,
that they were to set at defiance the authority of the legislature; that even
if an act was moved for, disagreeable to them, they were to meet in a secret
Convention; they thought fit to be concealed, in order to deliberate upon what
was to be done; they were, likewise to do the same, if there was an invasion:
and what invasion is to be feared at this time, I leave to the judgment of
every one who hears me. Also, in case of the landing of foreign troops, for the
support of the government of the country, that was to be the cause of the
sudden meeting of this Convention: Also, if the Habeas Corpus Act was repealed:
And lastly, if any interruption was given to their meetings this Convention of
Emergency was to sit. What conclusion can be drawn from such language; but that
they meant to subvert the Constitution of the country; that it was meant to be
carried on in a style of defiance and opposition to the legislative authority
of this country? therefore, it is in vain for any person, pretending to know
any thing of the Law of Scotland, to say this is merely leasing making. I shall
only say, that it would have been difficult, if it had not been for the
alteration of the statute law, to know whether it would not have amounted to
the crime of high treason. My Lords, the Jury have found this man guilty: he is
an Englishman. I am sorry that any of that country should ever have interfered
in the peace and tranquillity, either of their own country, or of this which is
a part of the united Kingdoms; but I think we cannot pronounce a less sentence,
in this case, than in the former cases; and if any difference is to be made, I
do not think it is in favor of this Defendant, who, in his own country, might
have lived peaceably and quietly. My Lords, there can be no sort of doubt with
regard to the powers of the Court: By the laws of this country, before the Act
of 1708, Banishment from the realm of Scotland was one thing, and Banishment to
a place beyond the seas was another; and these were as well known at that time
as at this. But, my Lords, is it proper that a person from England being found
guilty of attempts to subvert the Constitution; is it reasonable that we should
return him to England, in order that he may continue his practices there, if so
inclined? If we were not able to do more, we could not help it; but, I say, the
power of banishment, by transportation, has been long recognized in Scotland,
as well as in England. The Court can do no less, than make use of the power
which the law gives them, to send him to a place where he can do no harm. My
Lords, if I had any doubt about it, your judgment in the case of Mr. Muir,
where I was not present, but where the other Judges uniformly gave their
opinion, that this mode of banishment, by transportation, was the proper
punishment for such an offense; that would be sufficient for me to concur in
the same opinion. If that punishment was not too much for Skirving, the
Secretary to this Convention, who appears to be a simple deluded man, it cannot
be too much for this gentleman, who is, so far as I can judge, a man of
abilities, of considerable knowledge, and one who took the lead in this
Convention; and therefore, I concur in the punishment mentioned by your
Lordship.


Lord Swinton. My Lords, I have no difficulty in concurring with your Lordships
in the punishment you have suggested; and, after what has been said by your
Lordships, I shall only take notice of a very few things; My Lords, the crime
of sedition is worse in one respect than most other crimes: many other crimes
are committed from the sudden impulse of passion, or heat; but this crime is
committed with a premeditated, felonious intention, by deliberating upon the
means of overturning our Constitution. They begin with seditious and
inflammatory discourses, endeavoring to draw simple, and perhaps well meaning,
people after them, by pointing out imperfections which will be in every
government whatever, and placing them in a strong light; and, in the next
place, by seditious writings. My Lords, in this case the delegates meet, and
they appoint a Convention of Emergency; and what are these Conventions of
Emergency? first of all, for the purpose of over-awing Parliament; and one of
their resolutions is, to pay no regard to such an act of Parliament if it
should pass: that is, they despise the legislative authority of the country.
Then, in the case of an invasion, and it is easy to see what sort of an
invasion was meant. I decline going through all the other particulars of this
libel, which is found to be a true libel in every point. My Lords, what have
they pretended? They have pretended a reformation in the Constitution. I say,
my Lords, there is no need for it; our Constitution reforms itself. With regard
to trial by Jury, which is the palladium, in my memory three acts have been
brought in for reforming this point: one lately, giving Juries a power to
decide upon the whole matter, in case of libel; and we have no need of such
Reformers as these.

My Lords, if there is any difference between this case and that of others, the
crime of this man is highly aggravated: he is not of this country; he does not
feel any hardships from the government of this country; he comes from England,
for seditious purposes, as stated in this Indictment; and therefore, if there
is any distinction in this case, it is unfavourable to this Panel. I am of
opinion, with your Lordships, that transportation for fourteen years is the
proper punishment.


Lord Dunsinnan. My Lords, after the most patient hearing of this case, by a
Jury, they have come to that determination which sensible, honest men alone
could come to: namely, finding this Panel guilty. There is no doubt but he has
been sent into this country, in order to disseminate sedition; and, it is
evident, that he was very sedulous in the execution of that office. The Jury,
having found a verdict of guilty, it comes to the Court to consider what
punishment this crime deserves; and, my Lords, though it is not pleasant to
pass judgment upon a fellow subject, crimes, dangerous as these, cannot be
overlooked. My Lords, I am of opinion that this man's guilt is aggravated
beyond that of others, who have been in the same circumstances; and that
transportation for fourteen years is the proper punishment.


Lord Abercrombie. My Lords, it has been justly observed, that, during the
course of the trial, the Panel, now at the bar, met with an uncommon share of
indulgence: I believe far beyond what any Court of Justice, either in this or
any other country, ever afforded a Panel. My Lords, I don't feel, and never
shall feel myself disposed to say one word to load any man, who stands in the
unhappy situation that he does; but I am sorry to observe, that from the moment
he appeared at the bar, till the instant he was carried out, his whole conduct
was of the most indecent kind. My Lords, the crime with which he stands
charged, and of which he is found guilty, by the unanimous voice of his
country, upon the most satisfactory evidence, is that of Sedition, and my
Lords, his crime is highly aggravated by one circumstance, which appeared in
the course of the trial, that he has been stirring up Sedition in this country,
and instigating such unhappy men, as you saw here yesterday; for example, one
of the Members of the British Convention, who was so ignorant of the
Constitution of his own country, that he was obliged to admit, that he never so
much as read the Claim of Rights. My Lords, is it to such men as these that we
are to resort, to get a redress of the grievances of this country?

My Lords, if we are to judge of the means he made use of from his speeches in
the minutes of the Convention, and the speech which we heard last night, sure I
am, that his intention was, to stir up a spirit of disaffection and discontent
among the ignorant and the uninformed; and, my Lords, I consider the
circumstance of this Panel being a stranger to this country as an aggravation
of his crime.

My Lords, this Society called themselves originally the friends of the people;
they afterward changed their name, calling themselves the British Convention
of Delegates, associated to obtain universal suffrage and annual Parliaments; a
right which the subjects of this country never did enjoy: such a right would
tend to bring ruin and destruction upon this country. I say my Lords, that to
this man, they owed that change, and that form which they assumed, and of which
we have heard so much.

My Lords, I shall only add, that the punishment proposed is the mildest,
which, under all the circumstances of the case, ought to be pronounced.


Lord Justice Clerk. My Lords, after the full discussion which this crime has
undergone, within these three months, I shall only just observe, that the crime
of which this Panel is accused, and now stands convicted by the verdict of a
most respectable Jury of this Country, is Sedition; endeavoring to overturn
the established government of this Country, which is, of all crimes known
amongst mankind, of the most heinous nature and the most dangerous tendency to
Society, and well merits the highest arbitrary punishment that this Court can
possibly inflict. You have had two trials before you, one within these few
months, in which the Panel was condemned to transportation for 14 years, and
the other you condemned within these few days for the same term. The moment I
heard the verdict I revolved in my own mind the circumstances attending this
case; but it is impossible that we can, agreeable to the justice of the
Country, inflict a less punishment; the only doubt that occurred to me was,
whether we ought not to go further; for I did see a material difference; this
case being attended with circumstances highly aggravated and offensive to the
Laws of this country.

If this Country suffers any grievances, I am sure he felt none of them: he
lives not in Scotland, has no property there, and, as a stranger, he comes into
this Country a man with a great deal of abilities and great elocution, he comes
here for the express purpose of disseminating Sedition among the lower order of
people, in this Country. I cannot consider it as any thing but Sedition highly
aggravated. I did think that this crime deserved a more severe punishment; but
I have always more pleasure in inflicting a mild punishment than a more severe
one: and as your Lordships are all of opinion, that we should inflict the same
punishment as in the case of Skirving and Muir, I concur in the same opinion,
that he shall be transported for the term of 14 years, with the usual
certification.


SENTENCE.
The Lord Justice Clerk and Lords Commissioners of Justiciary having considered
the foregoing Verdict, whereby the Assize all in one voice find the Panel
GUILTY of the crimes libelled: The said Lords, in respect to the said Verdict,
in Terms of an Act passed in the 25th year of his present Majesty, entitled, An
Act for the more effectual Transportion of Felons, and other Offenders, in that
part of Great Britain, called Scotland, ordain and adjudge, that the said,
Maurice Margarot be Transported beyond Seas, to such place as his Majesty, with
the advice of his privy Counsel, shall declare and appoint; and that for the
space of fourteen years from this date; with certification to him, if, after
being so Transported, he shall return to, and be found at large within any part
of Great Britain, during the said fourteen years, without some lawful cause,
and be thereby lawfully convicted, he shall suffer death, as in cases of
felony, without benefit of Clergy, by the law of England: And ordains the said
Maurice Margarot to be carried back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, therein to be
detained till he is delivered over, for being so transported; for which this
shall be, to all concerned, a sufficient warrant.

(Signed) ROBERT M'QUEEN.

Mr. Margarot. My Lords, I thank you.


APPENDIX.
No. 1. To the Rev. Mr. T.
Dear Sir,
YOU desire me to give you my opinion of the present state of want and distress
among the weavers in Spitalfields, being Physician to the London Dispensary,
where between two and 3000 of them annually apply for medical relief, I am
called frequently to visit their wretched habitations, there the first thing
that commonly presents itself to view, is an empty loom, and a starving family.
Some have had only half their usual work, for more than twelvemonths past; and
many no work at all, for the last six months. Some times I find one or two
children sick, and the wretched Parents looking upon them with all the distress
which parental affection, and the utmost degree of poverty, can impress on the
mind. At other times, I find the husband and wife, and not unfrequently both
sick in the same bed, and several helpless and half starved children looking up
to them for bread. Here anxiety and poverty increase the disease if they did
not produce it, which however is often the case. It is impossible for words to
give a perfect idea of the distress which prevails amongst this useful class of
the people. If any doubt the truth of this representation, all I can say is,
come and see. Were they to accompany me in my daily visitations for a short
time, they would be fully convinced, that this is a very imperfect outline of
the general misery amongst this part of the laboring poor, who would gladly
work, if they could be employed; and therefore the more deserving of help. I am
persuaded, Sir, that you need only be acquainted with real distress, to
interest yourself in the means of relieving it in the present instance. Both
you, Sir, and those who second your laudable endeavors and benevolent
purposes, will be doing a good work. I am,

Dear Sir, Your sincere friend, JOHN WHITEHEAD.
OLD BEDLAM, Dec. 17, 1793.
No. 2.
In one short month (December 1792) an innovation was made on the scheme of
British Society; and, in one eventful year, it has changed the character of the
nation, from the happy condition of a people living together like one large
family, under common laws; we were broke into sets, and put under the
inquisition of Clubs. Jealousy and Discord succeeded confidence and Union; the
most honorable connections; the most ancient friendships; the social and
endearing intercourses of neighborhood; nay, the ties of kindred were rudely,
wantonly torn asunder; and the better to secure to us the calamities of a
foreign war, we were involved in the more dreadful horrors of internal feud. In
the short space that we can allot to this article, it is impossible for us to
enter into the painful enumeration of the events of 1792. When the faithful
historian comes to record them after passion and tremor have subsided, it will
be found to be the most disastrous to constitutional liberty, to science, to
morals, and to trade, that England ever knew, since the establishment if its
freedom. What a reverse from the animating and cheering picture of our
prosperity and happiness, which a liberal Correspondent gave to the public,
through the medium of this paper, on this day twelvemonth. The great events of
the year have covered with distress the whole face of the island; the secret
history of the period we neither fully can nor dare develope. It is sufficient
to say, that acts of persecution, unknown to Englishmen, have been practiced
with applause; integrity and friendship have been branded as unbecoming an
exalted mind; and consistency in principles as unsuitable to the times. Opinion
has been hunted into the retirement of families, and he who dared to manifest
his public doctrines, has been assaulted on the side of his profession in life.
The pulpit, the army, the bar, and the press, all furnish the shocking evidence
that Spanish and Italian arts may flourish on an English soil.

FINIS.

