DR. ROBBINS's CENTURY SERMON; PREACHED AT KINGSTON, April 2, 1794.

A CENTURY SERMON, PREACHED AT KINGSTON, In the County of PLYMOUTH, April 2d,
1794: AT THE SPECIAL DESIRE OF MR. EBENEZER COBB, WHO, ON THAT DAY, ARRIVED TO
THE AGE OF ONE HUNDRED YEARS.

BY CHANDLER ROBBINS, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN PLYMOUTH.

Published at the request of Mr. COBB, and others.

"We have a father, an OLD MAN."

Genesis xliv. 20. "The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness."

Prove. xvi. 31. PRINTED AT THE Apollo Press IN BOSTON, BY BELKNAP AND HALL, No.
8, DOCK SQUARE. -- 1794.

(...) by lingering sickness, or by sudden accident; whether at home amongst
our friends, or abroad in distant lands, where none but strangers shall hear
our dying groans. If the LORD be with us: if "the GOD of Jacob be our help,"
all will be well; we may safely close our eyes on all mortal enjoyments, and
leave the world in peace.

We are convened this day, my brethren, on a very singular occasion. Singular,
at least, in the present age of the world. The life of MAN is placed at "three
score years and ten." But we are met to commemorate the goodness of GOD to his
aged servant, here present, whose life has been protracted to the uncommon
period of a HUNDRED YEARS this day. With wonder and with gratitude, we hail
such an unusual ANNIVERSARY. "Our FATHERS, where are they?" Gone to the world
of immortality. But how few of them had arrived at this advanced age, before
they quitted the stage of mortality!

It is the design of the present discourse, without going into a particular
consideration of the connection in which the words stand with the context, to
take them as a distinct sentence, containing a very important truth, and to
endeavor some improving reflections from them, suited to this occasion, and to
the circumstances of the aged person, present; and likewise to deduce such
remarks, as may, by the blessing of GOD, be of general use and benefit to all.

There are TWO principal ideas held up to view, in the passage before us, to
which your attention is invited.

I. The first is, the frailty and mortality of man.

II. The second, that there are certain cases and circumstances in human life,
in which it may justly be said, " There is but a step between us and death."

1. We are naturally led to contemplate the frailty and mortality of man. The
term DEATH, in our text, is full of awful import. Here is the end, not of our
existence: Happy, comparatively happy for the wicked, the finally impenitent
sinner, if it were so! But the end of all worldly joys and woes. Here is the
entrance on a new, an untried state of existence, which will never end. What a
subject this for serious reflection and improvement! A subject equally
interesting to the parent and the child, to the aged and the youth. Why then
should "the living who know they must die, put far away that evil day?" A day,
which they cannot, by all their efforts, ward off, nor by all their tears of
anxiety and distress, avoid. An event, which will not be bribed, by all the
riches of the world, to a moment's delay. For "who," or by what price, can a
man "redeem his brother, or give to GOD a ransom," that shall reprieve him from
death?

When we take a view of the amazing havoc and destruction which that relentless
enemy Death has made in our world, what a distressful reflection does it
afford! It spares no age, sex or character. The prince on the throne and the
beggar in his cottage, are alike subject to his awful power. The father and the
son, the tender mother and the helpless babe, must each feel his fatal shaft,
and bow to death. Nay, this king of terrors shows no more favor to the
virtuous than to the profligate. The righteous and the wicked, the saint and
the sinner, must equally fall before him, and submit to his dreadful scepter.
For "it is appointed to all," all without distinction, "once to die." Happy, my
friends, if but once! For we are informed in the sacred word, of a " second
death." A death, far more terrible than that of the body. It means the death of
the soul; which term, in the language of scripture, is figuratively used to
signify its eternal separation from GOD, and from all happiness; to a state of
endless darkness and misery. But blessed be GOD, the same divine word does also
inform us, that this death may be avoided. For it is written, "Blessed and holy
are they that have part in the first resurrection, for on such the second death
has no power." Who are these privileged ones? it will be natural to inquire.
Who, these happy souls, on whom that dreadful calamity shall never fall? The
sacred word describes them, as the holy "followers of the Lamb." None but the
friends and followers of JESUS, who have chosen him with all their hearts, for
their Savior and their King, will be distinguished with this glorious
privilege of eternal exemption from the second death. For them, the Savior
has "abolished death," and will enable them to triumph over it as a conquered
enemy, in the lively hope of a blessed immortality. But, from the first death,
there is no escape. "There is no discharge in that war." This is an enemy which
has, ever since the apostasy of man, been going on from conquering to conquer;
and will finally subdue the whole of our fallen race.

What a melancholy picture is presented to our minds, if we only take a view of
the awful ravage and desolation this enemy is making at the present day, among
the contending armies in Europe; where the horrid "noise of war and garments
rolled in blood" are the constant theme; the daily objects before their eyes!
Oh! how does humanity shudder at the thought of whole hecatombs of human lives
immolated at the shrine of ambition and the accursed lust of empire! Or
sacrificed to glut the vengeance of despotic tyrants, or to appease the wild,
the unhappy ravings of a temporary enthusiasm! In either view it must be, to
every feeling mind, a distressing reflection! Painful beyond expression, that
there should be such a thoughtless, such an impious waste of human blood, as if
it were of no more value, than that of beasts of slaughter! Oh! what a
tremendous reckoning must the aggressors, the criminal authors of such
destruction and misery, have hereafter! and what an awful account must they
give up, in the great day of dread decision! in that day, when thrones and
sceptres shall no longer protect the tyrant from justice, nor lawless power
shield the murderer from the vengeance of a righteous GOD!

But while we contemplate with horror, these scenes of destruction, in fields
of battle; we are ready to inquire, is it there only, that the enemy death is
making desolation? Alas! no. He comes, with resistless force, into the peaceful
habitations of domestic security and friendship; and often spreads a melancholy
gloom over whole families. A tender husband, an affectionate wife, is snatched
from the embraces of the sorrowful partner. The hapless child is left a
solitary orphan, bereft of the guide of its youth. And how often does the
tender parent mourn the untimely death of his offspring, cut down in the
morning of life! But such is the will of heaven; who says, "Be still and know
that I am GOD." He has righteously ordained that the reign of death should be
universal, and all must, sooner or later, fall before it. The time when, the
place where, or the means by which this event will take place, are exceedingly
various; all, particularly ordered by the wise disposing providence of GOD, and
as wisely kept a secret from mortals, reserved in the breast of infinite wisdom
and goodness. Yet it is an event to which mankind are liable, every moment.
Which leads us to the SECOND thing proposed, viz.

That there are certain circumstances in human life, and in which it may be
truly said, "there is but a step between us death." The inquiry here, naturally
is, when do these cases occur and what are those circumstances, and who the
persons, of whom it can be affirmed with truth, that they are within "a step"
of death? In answer, the following things are observed.

FIRST, The assertion is strictly true, in a sense, of ALL our dying race. They
walk every day, by the brink of the grave, by the very gates of the eternal
world. It is but a breath that separates us from the invisible state. "For what
is our life but a vapor, that appears for a little time and then vanishes
away." Surely "man at his best estate is altogether vanity." "He gives up the
Ghost, and where is he?"

SECONDLY, The truth in our text, may, with special propriety, be applied to
that class of men, "who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in great
waters." Our SEAFARING BRETHREN are an order of citizens, important indeed to
society, and whose calling is both lawful and necessary. But every one knows it
is also an hazardous one. Do they wisely reflect on the dangers that surround
them? Are they sensible on what precarious ground they stand every moment while
pursuing their business on the mighty billows? That "there is but a step," a
plank, "between them and death." How important, how serious is the reflection!
What a solemn argument to convince them of the necessity of religion, of
reconciliation to GOD, and of actual readiness for death; that if it should be
sudden, it may not come unexpected, nor meet them with surprise; which leads us
to observe,

THIRDLY, How many SUDDEN ACCIDENTS, in the daily course of life, verify the
words of our text, and are an awakening proof that "there is but a step between
us and death." An apoplexy, a fall, a blow, a wound, and sometimes a sudden
burst of violent passion, have, in an instant snapped asunder the brittle
thread of life, and swiftly hurried the soul into the eternal world. Such
events are by no means uncommon. How frequently do we read and hear of them?
How often too, do mankind experience narrow, even hairbreadth escapes from
instant death? when, to appearance, a miracle alone could have preserved them.
That such cases do not more frequently prove fatal, and that our lives are not
taken away by innumerable accidents, to which we are daily exposed, is to be
ascribed to nothing but the immediate, constant interposition of GOD, whose
powerful and merciful hand upholds us, each moment of life. I doubt not, that
while I am now speaking, there are numbers here present, who can testify, from
their own experience, to the truth of these observations, who, this moment,
recollect the day, the place, the circumstance, in which they narrowly escaped
being instantly deprived of life, and sent quickly into eternity. But the LORD
was merciful, and has spared you yet a little longer. Let it not be, to fill up
a greater measure of sin; but, O! may your gratitude to GOD be as signal, as
was your deliverance!

FOURTHLY, A SICK BED has often witnessed the truth of our text, that "there is
but a step between us and death." Can none of us affirm this also, from our own
experience? Have we not been, by a violent fever, by excruciating pain, or, by
more slow discase, reduced to the very verge of life; our friends weeping
around us, hourly expecting to see us breathe our last; physicians are of no
avail, the disorder baffles their utmost skill, all hopes of recovery seemed to
be gone, and in our own apprehension, if we had our senses, all the prospect
was, vast, boundless, amazing eternity! When, all on a sudden, by an unexpected
and unaccountable turn of the disease, we were, as if by the immediate voice of
GOD, called back again to life, snatched as from the borders of the pit,
ransomed from the grave, and at a moment, when it might, with truth be said,
"There was but a step between us and death."

Once more, fifthly; with peculiar propriety, may the expression in the text be
applied to those who are far advanced in OLD AGE. We know, indeed, that no age
in life is exempt from the stroke of death. The youth who is now sporting in
all the pleasures and gaieties of juvenile years, may be in his grave, before
the man whom we here behold, bowed under the weight of years. It is not unusual
that the fairest blooms are soonest cropped, by the cold hand of relentless
death. But when a person has arrived at his threescore and ten, there seems to
be a moral certainty of a speedy dissolution. His hoary hairs and enfeebled
limbs daily admonish him that it is but "a step" that divides him from the
congregation of the dead, from "the house appointed for all the living." Every
hour tells him, the sands in his glass are just run out, that his "days are
numbered, and almost finished." O how proper, how important, that those who
have arrived at old age, should set loose from this world and all the
enjoyments, cares, frowns and flatteries of it, view themselves as at the door
of the grave, live in daily expectation of the summons that will call them into
the world of spirits; and give all diligence that they be found in readiness
for their last remove.

Having briefly suggested some observations from the passage before us, in a
doctrinal way, I poceed to the

IMPROVEMENT.
A variety of useful remarks might be drawn from this interesting subject. I
shall confine myself, and ask your attention only to a few of them, at this
time.

1st, It naturally leads us, in the first place, to a humbling reflection on
the weak, miserable state of man, in consequence of his guilty apostasy from
GOD. Here is the baneful source of all our woe. To this fountain, we may trace
all those bitter streams of sorrow, pain, misery and death, which spread such a
dark and gloomy shade over this fallen world. From this source, have proceeded
those rivers of blood which have deluged the earth; by wars, persecutions,
oppressions, tyrannies, by anarchy, fanaticism and superstition; which, at
different periods of time, have so much disgraced humanity and distressed the
world. From the same cause have arisen all those bitter animosities, feuds and
dissentions which have disturbed the happiness of societies, discord and
variance in families, hatred and strife among individuals; in a word, all the
unnumbered calamities that have befallen mankind from generation to generation,
down to this day. They have all taken their rise from man's sinful departure
from his GOD. Nor do the evils terminate here. They are not confined to the
present life. Those endless miseries in the future world, which await the
wicked, and the finally impenitent sinner, are but the just fruit and "wages of
sin." But while we contemplate the dismal effects of sin, both in this and the
coming world, what cause have we,

2dly, To adore the infinite wisdom and goodness of GOD, that there is a
foundation laid in the gospel for hope even in death. That the consideration of
the certainly of death, does not, necessarily land the mind in the region of
hopeless despondency. Blessed be GOD, that although we must die, yet we may
live again, and live a new, a better life, beyond the grave: a life of glorious
immortality and joy; where sorrow and death shall reign no more for ever. For
these hopes and this happiness, we are entirely and exclusively indebted to the
gospel of Christ. This has brought "life and immortality to light." Here we
find that "JESUS is the resurrection and the life;" and that he that "believes
in HIM, though he were dead, yet shall he live."

It is, indeed, a solemn thing to exchange worlds, to go from time into
eternity. The way through death is a dark valley, but JESUS can enlighten this
passage. He has once, himself, passed through it. For he was dead, and behold
he is alive, and lives forevermore, Amen; and has the keys of hell and of
death." It is through this door of death that he has appointed all his friends
shall follow him to glory. He will not therefore, "leave or forsake them," when
they shall come to it. He has, by traveling through the dark valley himself,
sweetened the passage for all his children, who come after him. So that many of
them have cheerfully ventured into it, leaning upon the promise of their GOD
and Savior, and from sweet experience, have been ready to adopt those
comfortable lines, "JESUS can make a dying bed,
Feel soft as downy pillows are,
While on his breast I lean my head,
And breathe my life out sweetly there."


Have you never, my brethren, within your own observation, had occasion to
witness this truth; in the triumphant departure of some, who, in their last
hours have enjoyed unspeakable serenity of mind, if not transported with the
lively hope of glory? Although, perhaps, a little before, or during their
sickness, they were in great darkness and fear, respecting their state. They
wept, they trembled at the awful prospect before them. Yet, through the
goodness of a faithful GOD, before they left the world, the clouds dispersed,
the everlasting mountains appeared; the tear of distress was wiped from their
eyes, by the gentle hand of their compassionate Savior, and the sting of the
dreaded monster, was rendered pointless and easy, by the balmy supports of the
gospel, and the sweet "consolations of CHRIST," in their expiring moments. Are
these the blessed effects of a hope founded on the gospel? O! with what ardour
of gratitude should we join the Apostle, and say, "Thanks be to GOD for this
unspeakable gift."

3dly, The subject teaches us that death, or merely dying is, by no means the
principal thing we have to fear in that solemn hour. There is something
infinitely more dreadful than death, which is SIN. It is this, and this only,
that clothes death with its principal horrors.

There is, indeed, something terrible and abhorrent to nature, in the thoughts
of dying. Nature shrinks from the dissolution, dreads the painful stroke which
separates the soul from the body, and all its tender earthly connexions. But
the apostle tells us, "the sting of death is SIN." It is this that arms it with
terror. When this is taken away by the pardoning mercy of GOD, through the
precious blood of Jesus, death is stripped of its gloom, and becomes the
friendly messenger, sent by the blessed Savior, to call his children home to
those "mansions in his Father's house, which he went, as their forerunner, to
prepare for them." They meet him therefore with courage; sometimes with a
transport of joy, saying, "O death where is thy sting! Thanks be to GOD who
gives me the victory, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST." Which leads me to remark,

4thly. The subject points out the only safe soundation of hope in death, viz.
JESUS CHRIST. This, this is the "chief corner stone," on which you and I, my
hearers, must rest our hope, if ever we expect to meet death with comfort and
safety. "Other foundation can no man lay." The conflict will be inexpressibly
terrible, without the presence of Christ, without the almighty support of his
love and power. Every other foundation will assuredly fail. Where else would
you look for support? Shall you place confidence in your having been educated
in a christian country, and brought up under the light of the gospel? Or will
you build your hopes on your good intentions and resolutions, on your prayers,
tears and religious performances? Or dare you venture your all for eternity, on
your having made a profession of religion and attended the ordinances of the
gospel? In a word, will you trust to your works of righteousness, or your deeds
of charity? These props are too weak to support a dying man, or give comfort to
a soul just launching into eternity, and about to appear before a holy God. Be
assured, that if you have no better foundation than these, your "expectation
will perish;" these will all sink from under you, and prove as mere "refuges of
lies," which will be swept all away by the besom of death, and will leave you
hopeless, wretched and undone forever.

But if on the other hand, your hope rests on this "Rock of ages" JESUS CHRIST
alone, if your confidence is built on the ground of that everlasting
righteousness which he has wrought out, that complete atonement he has made
for sin; "neither life nor death can separate you from the love" and eternal
enjoyment "of God;" nor can "the gates of hell prevail against you."

THE GREAT CONCERN, therefore, the all important inquiry, my hearers, is, have
we, or have we not, built our HOPE on this foundation? The subject before us,
as well as the occasion, render such an examination peculiarly suitable and
important, not to one more than to another; but to all, of whatever age, class,
or condition, of life. Are we not all mortal? Do we know the day of our death,
or the length of time that infinite wisdom has allotted us for our probation
here? Are we certain that the term has not nearly expired? And are we secure
one hour, or moment, from the arrest of death?

It has been observed, and justly, that the words of our text are truly,
applicable to every one; that "There is but a step between us and death." That
"our life is but a vapor," and who can tell when, or how suddenly, that vapor
shall be driven away? Without doubt, it will be much sooner, with many, than
they now expect.

Are any of you, now in the prime of life; in the vigor of youth? Will this
prove a security against the stroke of death? Look to yonder, Golgotha, and see
the graves of many a lovely youth, snatched from their fond parents in the
morning of life; youths, who as little thought of dying as you do this day,
until the fatal summons came.

Are others of you in the meridian of life, involved in the cares of a family,
and busily engaged in worldy schemes and pursuits? And are you sure that your
sun will not set before the evening of old age, or that your present
engagements shall not be interrupted by an unexpected call into the eternal
world? Are you sure that the awful words pronounced by the prophet to
Hannaniah, will not be verified in you, "This year thou shall die!" What
frequent admonitions have we, by the yearly, and daily calls of one and another
from us by death, to "prepare to meet our GOD," "lest coming suddenly, he find
us sleeping."

Let the solemn question then, be brought home to our bosoms. Am I prepared for
that step which will usher my immortal spirit into the immediate presence of my
maker, GOD? Have I, at present, any hope at all, on which I make dependence? If
so, is my hope any thing better than "the spider's web," or the "hope of the
hypocrite, which will perish when GOD takes away my soul." On what ground am I
building for eternity? Is it on the sandy foundation of mere morality, or my
own good works? Is it on an empty profession of godliness? Or upon some
favorite name, party, denomination or distinction among men? Is it upon
transient affections, sudden impulses, or flashes of joy, like those of the
"stony ground hearers?" Are these the foundation on which I am building my
eternal hopes? Or, is it upon that firm, that immovable ROCK, Christ Jesus?
Have I ever deeply felt my perishing need of this foundation? my utter
depravity, guilt and helplessness; the righteousness of that law that condemns
the transgressor of it to eternal punishment, for every instance of violation?
Gal. iii. 10. Have I been convinced of the entire insufficiency of all "works
of rigteousness which I have done," or can do to make the least atonement for
my sins, or procure my pardon and acceptance with a holy and just GOD? And
being divinely enlightened, have, I "fled for refuge" to the perfect and
glorious atonement of CHRIST, as "the only hope set before me?" Have I seen the
safety, the alsufficiency of this foundation, so as cordially to trust in it
for my whole salvation; that I can humbly say, in the language of the prophet,
"in the Lord have I righteousness and strength?"

And is my hope of that kind, that it " purifies me, even as HE is pure?" Am I
become, indeed, a "New creature?" Have "old things passed away?" If I have
experienced a change of heart, is it manifested by a change of life? by a
studious care to "deny all ungodliness and every worldly lust, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in the world?" THESE are the scriptural marks of
a real christian. If these are found in us, my brethren, WE are christians: And
have just ground of "rejoicing in the hope of the glory of GOD." And death, how
soon or suddenly soever it may come, can do us no harm: we shall fall asleep in
Jesus.

But if not, in the name of GOD, it is high time to awake and look to our
standing. For it is, indeed, on "slippery places;" and "there is but a STEP
between us and death." And if "our feet should slide," while in the present
condition, under an insupportable load of guilt, the weight will inevitably
plunge us into a state of remediless woe, of endless ruin. On the other hand,
how joyful, how glorious is the prospect which a good hope in Christ presents
to the dying christian! Cheerfully may he look forward to the departing hour,
and with sweet serenity adopt the sacred triumph of the apostle, "I am more
than a conqueror through him that has loved me."

5thly. But I now close the discourse, by a more particular application of the
subject to that aged, very aged person, on whose account we are convened this
day; and at whose request I stand here on this occasion.

How great, venerable Father! how distinguishing is the goodness of that
merciful GOD, who has upheld you through all the vicissitudes of a long life,
and has lengthened out your days to this remarkable period! What millions of
inhabitants have been swept off from the earth, since you came upon the stage
of life! and how few COEVALS have you in our world! With what wonder and
gratitude have you cause to look back upon the varied scene of life you have
passed through, and upon the revolutions and changes you have seen, since the
days of youth! Changes in the natural world; changes, surprising changes in the
political, and in the moral world. To us, Sir, especially to our rising youth,
the race of life you have run, appears very long indeed. But not so to you, as
you have told me, but a mere span. Upon a retrospective view of it, methinks
you are ready to say, with the aged patriarch, when the curious question was
put to him by Pharaoh, "How old art thou?" In reply, " Few and evil have the
days of the years of my life been." You cannot, however, add, as in the next
words, that "you have not attained to the years of the life of your fathers, in
the days of their pilgrimage;" for you have exceeded them all, and almost all
upon the present stage of action.

A rare sight! my brethren, our eyes behold, this day! A fellow citizen, who
has survived a century! Born when New England was in its childhood; when
America was, comparatively, a wilderness; but about SEVENTY YEARS after the
landing of our forefathers in PLYMOUTH, the place of his birth. May the unusual
sight suitably affect our minds, and excite serious and grateful reflections on
the wonderful power, goodness, patience and tender mercy of GOD to his
creatures!

And while you, AGED FATHER, with good old JACOB, acknowledge, with a grateful
heart, "the GOD that has fed you all your life long," may you not, with
peculiar propriety, now, at the close of a long life, adopt the words of DAVID
in the text, and say, "There is but a step between me and death!" an important
step indeed. You will naturally, on this occasion (as far as the enfeebled
powers of your mind, which are necessarily impaired by age, will permit) be led
to contemplate the great, the interesting change that lies just before you; and
the awful importance of being found in actual readiness for it. You have "heard
and learned" from the gospel, what that foundation is, on which alone, you, and
we all, can with safety build our hopes, and die in peace. And that "other
foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ." The
all-perfect atonement made, and the everlasting righteousness brought in by
HIM, is that Rock, on which you may, with infinite security and satisfaction
depend, when you shall be called to take that last step which will introduce
your unbodied spirit into a world of untried and immortal existence. On this
ground, never did one fail, or come short of heaven. On this foundation then,
fix, immutably fix your faith and hope. Then, may you, with patience and
serenity of soul, "all the days of your appointed time wait, till your change
comes," when, with a gentle stroke, the messenger death shall give you a
peaceful dismission from earth to "a brighter world on high." And in the mean
time, may you, the few intervening days that heaven may allot you, between this
and the parting hour, be enabled to adopt the words of "Paul the aged," and say
"I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand,
henceforth is laid up for me, a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge will give me in that day, and not to me only, but to all them
also that love his appearing."

FINALLY, brethren and friends, all, who have met here this day and on this
occasion, the singular event which has called us together, is adapted to excite
very useful and improving reflections in the minds of both old and young. It is
very improbable we shall ever meet again on a similar, and perhaps never, all
of us, on any occasion. This, be it as it may, is of very small importance,
compared with one of infinitely greater moment. Nor is it material at what age
or period of life, we quit mortality, whether in youth, in manhood, or at the
age of a hundred years. The only important point is, that our peace be made
with God, by virtue of a real, a vital union with the Lord Jesus Christ.
Without this, all our hopes are vain, and will end in fearful disappointment,
at the hour of death. For it is written, "the sinner, though an hundred years
old, shall be accursed." But "precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death
of his saints," and "mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace." To the soul united to Jesus, death will prove the
welcome harbinger of endless joys.

Be it therefore, our great, our only concern, to secure this blessedness. To
this end, let us hearken to, and comply with the calls of the gospel, improve
the fleeting moments of life to the glory of GOD, and in "serving our
generation according to his will;" and then, when life shall close, we shall be
gathered to our fathers in peace. Our bodies shall lie down in that mansion of
silent repose, "where the wicked cease from troubling;" and our souls, through
the merits of our divine Redeemer, shall be received to that eternal "Rest that
remains for the people of GOD."

AMEN.

