THE TRIAL OF JOSEPH GERRALD, DELEGATE FROM THE LONDON CORRESPONDING SOCIETY,
TO THE BRITISH CONVENTION. BEFORE THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY AT EDINBURGH, On
the 3d, 10th, 13th, and 14th of March, 1794. FOR SEDITION.

TAKEN IN SHORTHAND BY MR. RAMSEY.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 124, PEARL-STREET. 1794.

PREFACE.
THE importance of the following trial to the Public at large is too well known
to need any comment on that head from the Editor; nor would he deem it
necessary to say any thing in addition to so valuable a publication, by way of
preface, were it not that the Public expectation has been so greatly alive, and
its impatience in no small degree excited by a seeming delay in bringing it
out. The Editor, in justice to himself, cannot suffer it to appear, without
adding a few words in his own justification, and requesting that the Public
will believe his assurance, that every expedition has been used on his part to
bring it forward earlier; but as it is the custom of the shorthand writer to
leave blanks for the several quotations, it became a matter o^ greater
difficulty to get these filled up, with exactness and precision, than can well
be conceived by those who are not very conversant in these matters; especially
as Mr. Gerrald was removed from Edinburgh so soon, that the editor could not
avail himself of his assistance in this respect, except in a very slight
degree, before his departure; and having had occasion to make the application
to him, from time to time, on that head since his arrival in London, the
unavoidable delays attending communications at such a distance, rendered it
impossible to publish the Trial sooner.

When it is considered that in a matter of so much moment to the rights,
liberties, and privileges of every Briton, as this celebrated trial involves, a
trial which has been advocated in a style so truly brilliant and distinguished,
both by the learned and ingenious counsel on the relevancy of the libel, and by
Mr. Gerrald, the Panel, whose literary fame and splendid talents are as much
admired, as the severity of his sentence is lamented; from these circumstances
it is presumed that no blame can be attached to the Publisher, whose aim has
been to have the Trial impartially stated and accurately laid before the Public.

EDINBURGH, MAY 3, 1794.
THE TRIAL OF JOSEPH GERRALD.
THE Members of the Court of Justiciary assembled precisely at ten o'clock, in
the forenoon. Mr. Gerrald appeared, and placed himself at the bar.

His Majesty's Advocate, for his Majesty's interest, having been, in the usual
form, called against the panel,

Mr. Gerrald said, My lord, I understand I am authorized to demand that a l^st
of my exculpatory witnesses be read out in Court before the Trial proceeds.

Lord Justice Clerk. The criminal libel must be read first -- that is the first
thing to be done.

Lord Advocate. Before your lordships proceed to reading the libel, I feel i^
my duty to tell the panel, that if he means to persevere in an application
which he signified to me yesterday, by letter, the proper period for him to do
it is at this moment, before the indictment is read.

Mr. Gerrald. My lords, as I am totally ignorant of the law of this country,
being a native of England, I applied to several gentlemen of the profession, to
advocate my cause; they unanimously released -- in consequence of which, I
wrote a line to the Lord Advocate, as he has stated, mentioning that I should
certainly make an application to the court to appoint me counsel. Your
lordships very much lamented, that in former cases, counsel had not been
applied for; and, though the Court are bound to act as counsel for the
prisoner, yet the panel, no doubt, wishes to avail himself of every advantage
that he can. I stand peculiarly circumstanced, because, not being a native of
this country, and being ignorant of its laws, without an advocate, I should he
deprived of the benefit of their benignant interpretation, as the public
prosecutor will no doubt state the charge as strongly as he can on the part of
the Crown; I therefore offer it as a suggestion to your lordships consideration.

Lord Justice Clerk. What do you say to this, my Lord Advocate?

Lord Advocate. My lord, I don't see that there is any thing put to me by the
panel; it seems to be an application to the Court: however, I will state, in a
very few words, what occurs to me; and I wish that the panel should hear what
I say, and that the gentlemen of the jury, and of the country at large, should
know what I have to state.

My lord, while this British convention, or what I never shall cease to term
it, a conspiracy against the constitution of this country, assembled for many
days within this city, and when they had proceeded, by my information, to a
length which called upon the officers of public justice to interfere, I had
occasion to direct those steps which appeared necessary for an enquiry into the
subject; and, upon the morning of the 5th of December, the ringleaders of this
convention (and this panel one of them) were apprehended. My lord, the
necessary investigations took some time ere they were completed; but it was my
habit to bring those who appeared to me the most guilty, to a fair trial before
their country, as early as possible. The first person that I brought forward in
the list was the man who appeared to be most guilty, I mean Skirving, who stood
trial, in this Court, upon the 6th of January; and the indictment that I felt
it necessary to bring next in order, was the charge against the panel now at
the bar, which was served upon him in the month of December, and the day fixed
for the 8th of January. The day after the libel was executed upon him, at his
residence in Edinburgh, I received from him a letter in which he appealed to my
humanity as well as justice, that I should consent to a delay of his trial for
a fortnight, that he might return to England, and settle the affairs of a
family dependent upon him. I instantly acceded to his request, and gave him
more than he asked; I gave him till the 27th of January; and it appears, that
upon the evening of Friday the 24th of January, from his own account of the
matter, he left London, which would have brought him into this city, a few
hours, by the utmost possible expedition, a very few hours before his trial was
to commence. By the accidental circumstance of a heavy fall of snow, he was
prevented from reaching it that morning. Your lordships and the jury know what
passed upon that occasion. I then felt it my duty to bring before the Court for
trial, the young man who sits at his right hand, [Mr. Charles Sinclair] and he
did not state any refusal of my brethren to plead; as I trust they will do,
every cause which the highest or the meanest criminal is entitled to state, at
that bar. I cannot therefore perfectly credit that what Mr. Sinclair received
should be denied to Mr. Gerrald. But, if it is so, considering that he sat this
day fortnight, at the side of that person, and I indulged him again at his own
request, telling him, that he need not attend Last Monday, but that this
precise day was the day on which I determined to go to trial with him. A
fortnight afforded him surely opportunity enough to have applied to your
lordship's justice; and every counsel at the bar would, I am sure, have
appeared and stated for him every thing that it was competent for him to state.
But at four o'clock yesterday, I received from him a letter, the purport of
which he has now stated; and I should feel myself acting only in the proper and
due execution of my duty, if I were to argue to your lordships to refuse that
application. But there are circumstances which I know, and which I trust will
enter into your lordships consideration in giving your opinion upon this
application. I hope and trust that the administration of the criminal justice
of this country, however calumniated, however aspersed, is able to stand the
test in competition with the administration of the criminal justice of England,
or of any country upon the face of this earth. And, late as he comes with his
demand, although, perhaps in a few hours, I must leave this country to attend
my public duty in London, that can be no objection; the conduct of the criminal
justice of this country remains in abler hands than mine. I trust your
lordships (without affording a precedent to other pannels to come with an
expectation of being listened to upon so late an application) will accede to
his request, for these reasons; and to satisfy Mr. Gerrald, that if he has come
to this country, a stranger to its laws, and if he has presumed to offend
highly, as I charge that he has, that he has not received that strict
administration of justice, in this country, which he would in his own, but that
he has received that indulgence which calumny itself cannot reach.

Lord Justice Clerk. The panel is certainly very late in his application, at
the same time in the circumstances of this case, I am not for cutting him
short, however late he may be. I think he is right in making application for
the assistance of counsel as a stranger to this country; and I don't see that
he can be supposed to know the laws of this country. I think he is right, and I
am, for my own part, for giving him counsel. What do your lordships say to it?

Lord Henderland. I own it is my opinion that this panel, and every panel,
whatever be the charge against him, should come to your lordships bar prepared
and assisted by counsel. It is very true, that the judges are counsel for the
panel, to a certain degree; but their duty is limited; in the first place upon
the relevancy of the indictment, to see that no charge shall be admitted
against the panel which does not necessarily and logically infer the crime;
the next part of their duty is to take care that no evidence shall be admitted
but what is legal and unexceptionable; the third part of their duty generally
falls upon the presiding judge to address the jury upon the evidence, as by act
of parliament, and to state it to them fairly. If any error is committed, I
dare say the court would interfere: that has never been the case, and I hope
never will, while your lordship sits as judge; but there are cases in which a
counsel may be of great use to a man: arguments may be made use of which might
otherwise have escaped. I think he ought to be assisted by counsel; and
therefore I am extremely willing that he should, though I think this gentleman
has come exceedingly late indeed. I am not ready perhaps to enquire, because I
cannot know what were his motives for being so late in his application; but I
cannot suppose he could be ignorant of the right he had to apply for counsel.
And I must regret too that my Lord Advocate is going to attend his duty in
parliament who has so well and ably conducted the other trials; and in whose
humanity, as well as abilities, I think this country may place great
confidence. I must regret that he is obliged to be absent: yet notwithstanding
that, I agree with your lordship in desiring that this man should be assisted
by counsel, and that he should suggest who are the gentlemen that he wishes to
have. I think that is the proper way; the List of Faculty is open to him, and I
will venture to say, there is not a man in it but what is fit in proportion:
some of them may be in experience more or less able, but there are none of them
but what may be very well entrusted with his defense. However, in order to give
him every indulgence, he shall have his choice; at the same time recommending
to him not wantonly to interfere with the superior avocations of a gentleman at
the bar, whom the Court are not induced to trouble with impositions upon this
head, from a panel.

Lord Justice Clerk. Have you an agent?

Mr. Gerrald. No, my Lord; I have applied to two or three, and they have
refused. I applied to a gentleman to whom I have not had the honor of being
long known, but knows me and my connections extremely well, and who would
undertake my cause, but for reasons which I am not authorized to tell in Court.
Mr. Laing is the only gentleman whose refusal I have authority to mention. The
two gentlemen I would wish to employ, are the Dean of Faculty and Mr. Laing
with your lordship's approbation.

Lord Justice Clerk. If the Dean of Faculty does not object; but if he should,
he is a gentleman whose attendance we cannot compel.

Mr. Gerrald. If the Dean should refuse, I shall prefer Mr. Fletcher.

Lord Justice Clerk. We shall just now name Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Laing.

Lord Eskgrove. I think you had better suggest one or two more, in case of any
accident, that they cannot attend.

Mr. Gerrald. I feel extremely the indelicacy, and would rather be deprived of
the benefit of counsel, than drag any gentleman into an office the duties of
which he would reluctantly fulfill.

Lord Justice Clerk. Even without the interference of the Court, I think no
gentleman ought to refuse to defend a panel, whatever the nature of his crime
might be. Now, name another.

Mr. Gerrald. I have the honor of being known to Mr. Gillies.

Lord Justice Clerk. Will you name a fourth?

Mr. Gerrald. No, my lord; they will be quite sufficient.

Lord Justice Clerk. Now, name an agent.

Mr. Gerrald. I will leave it to your lordships, if you please.

Lord Justice Clerk. No, you must name one yourself. Name two, and you will be
sure of one or other.

Mr. Gerrald. Mr. James Gibson, and Mr. James Campbell.

Lord Justice Clerk. Now I am sure you must be conscious that you have had all
kinds of indulgence; but you must be ready next Monday.

Mr. Gerrald. As to myself I am perfectly ready to go on now with the defense
which I originally intended to have made.

Monday, March 10, 1794.
The Court met agreeable to adjournment, when Mr. Gerrald again placed himself
at the bar. The Assize being called over, and the Lord Justice Clerk having
desired him to listen to his indictment,

Mr. Gerrald said, my Lords, I feel myself under the painful necessity of
objecting to the Lord Justice Clerk sitting upon that bench, upon this plea,
that his lordship has deviated from the strict line of his duty, in prejudging
that cause in which my fortune, and my fame, which is more precious to me than
life, is actually concerned I beg, therefore, that that (holding a paper in his
hand) may be made a minute of this Court. My lords I am totally ignorant of the
mode of conducting the evidence, and therefore shall rely upon your lordships
candor for setting me right when I am wrong; and I understand your lordships
are counsel for the prisoner, equally with those appointed by the Bench.

Lord Henderland. You must read it.

(Mr. Gerrald then read as follows)

"Joseph Gerrald stated, that before proceeding to trial upon the criminal
letters raised against him, he must take the liberty of declining the Lord
Justice Clerk, as having disqualified himself from judging in the present
question, by having prejudged it. In order to show that this objection was not
made at random, Joseph Gerrald offered to prove that the Lord Justice Clerk had
prejudged the cause of every person who had been a member of that Assembly
calling itself THE BRITISH CONVENTION; inasmuch as he had asserted, in the
house of James Rochead, of Inverleith, that the Members of the British
Convention deserved transportation for fourteen years, and even public
whipping; and, that when it was objected by a person present in company, that
the people would not patiently endure the inflicting of that punishment upon
the members of the British Convention, the said Lord Justice Clerk replied,
that the mob would be the better for the spilling of a little blood. I pray
that this may be made a minute of the Court.

(The Lord Justice Clerk then left the Chair, which was taken by Lord
Henderland.)

Lord Henderland. Have you subscribed it?

Mr. Gerrald. No, my lord; I did not know that that was necessary. (Subscribes
it.)

Lord Henderland. Do you wish to be further heard upon it?

Mr. Gerrald. I desire to have the matters alleged substantiated by evidence.

Lord Henderland. Your lordships have heard the minute of the Court, concerning
that respectable judge who has the honor to preside as Vice President, in this
Court, in the absence of the Lord Justice General. My lord, it is a thing
perfectly new in the annals of this Court; nor is there one instance to be
found in our records upon the books of adjournal. My lords, you have heard the
nature of the complaint, which is as extraordinary as it is unprecedented; and
it will become you, my lords, well to weigh what is the import, and what ought
to be the legal effect, of such an objection offered, in such extraordinary
circumstances, and at so early a period as this. You had it in a different form
indeed, in the case of Margarot, but you will consider it in this new form, in
this new guise which it has assumed; you will consider how far it is important
in its nature, or how far it is the same that was offered in the case of
Margarot; you are not prohibited from forming a different judgment upon it now
from what you might have done then; but I thought it necessary to bring these
matters under your lordships view, before you proceed to give your opinion upon
this so unprecedented and extraordinary a minute. It is now submitted to your
consideration.

Lord Eskgrove. My lords, this objection which comes before your lordships is a
novelty in many respects; and I don't think this panel at this bar is well
advised in making it: what could be his motive for it I cannot perceive. He has
the happiness of being tried before one of the ablest judges that ever sat in
this Court; but he is to do as he thinks fit. I am sure he can obtain no
benefit if he gains the end he has in view; and therefore I cannot perceive his
motive, unless it is an inclination, as far as he can, to throw an indignity
upon this Court.

As to the objection, I think there is no validity in it. In a former case, an
attempt was made to start the same objection, by the person then to be tried. I
don't observe that this gentleman says his name was ever mentioned in that
conversation, or that any thing was said of him individually; but he says it
was an expression, in common conversation, importing that honorable judge's
opinion, that the members of the British Convention should be transported for
fourteen years, and even publicly whipped. I do not conceive what interest this
gentleman has in it; he has not yet acknowledged himself a member of that
convention. My lord, one man's conduct may be different from another's in that
assembly. As to the expression, it could only import, hypothetically, that, if
that convention was guilty of the crimes stated against them, of that attempt
to overthrow the constitution of their country, to create rebellion and
insurrection, in the country, then the punishment adapted to such an offense,
was, in his opinion, transportation and public whipping. What is there in that
more than in the opinions given in this Court already, in causes of this kind?
My lords, it has been said by all your lordships, in this Court, that if the
persons who have been convicted had been brought to trial before the alteration
of the treason law by the union, they would not have been tried as persons
liable to arbitrary punishment, but recognizable as high treason; and the
person at the bar under that accusation would have been tried for his life, and
on conviction would have suffered the pains of death and forfeiture. If
therefore by an alteration of the criminal law of the land, this crime, which
goes to destroy the constitution of the country, is made an arbitrary
punishment, that punishment must be the highest arbitrary punishment that can
be inflicted; and therefore I see nothing in that opinion which imports more
than your lordships have all said in this Court. I think it was nothing more
than a general opinion, given upon the nature of the offense, as charged, that
it was a convention of persons meeting to overturn the happy constitution of
this country; and giving his opinion that such an offense merited that
punishment. I am sure that can be no disqualification from sitting in this
Court, where the same opinion has been given by all your lordships. It is
stated here, that it was objected by a person present in company, that the mob
would not patiently endure the infliction of that punishment. I don't know what
could be the motive of any person to make such an observation, if they had any
reason to believe such a thing: for my part, I think it is a most erroneous
observation; for I have a better opinion of the mob, as it is called, the
people of this country, than to think that they are capable of associating for
acts of violence in defiance of the laws. I think better of the people of this
country, than that they would meet together for the purpose of stirring up
insurrection and violence. But, my lord, it is no more than saying this, that a
mob, if they should be so ill-advised as to break out into an insurrection,
with an intention to overthrow the constitution, they would not merit
compassion, in case the magistrates should be reduced to the disagreeable
necessity of resisting force by force; and that is an observation, which, I
dare say, has been made by a thousand people besides his lordship; and it
cannot be supposed that that was to prejudicate the trial of this gentleman,
who will by his lordships and by the Court, be treated as an innocent man, till
he is found guilty. My lord, to say that that is prejudicating him, because he
spoke of punishment with one exception (a corporal punishment) which had been
inflicted upon persons who had before been convicted, is carrying the objection
beyond all degree of reason; and I can ascribe it to nothing but malevolence
and -- desperation.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord, I come here not to be the object of personal abuse, but
to meet the justice of my country: had I been actuated by such motives, I am
sure I should never have returned to this country.

Lord Henderland. I desire you will behave as becomes a man before this High
Court; I will not suffer this Court to be insulted.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord, far be it from me to insult this Court --

Lord Henderland. Be silent, sir.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord --

Lord Henderland. I desire you will be silent, sir.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord, I am sure that my coming to this country shows that I am
actuated by the purest principles of justice.

Lord Eskgrove. If I have said any thing wrong, I will very readily retract
what I have said; but I was making an apology for this objection, that I cannot
ascribe it to a solid objection of counsel, none of whom have stood up to
support it. I meant nothing more by what I was saying; I am very sorry for the
expression I made use of, and ask the gentleman's pardon; but, upon the whole,
I think the objection an irrelevant one.

Lord Swinton. My lord, an objection of this kind, coming from any other man, I
should consider as a very high insult upon the dignity of this Court; but,
coming from him, standing in the peculiar situation in which he now stands at
the bar, charged with a crime of little less than treason, the insolence of his
objection is swallowed up in the atrocity of his crime. He has objected against
a most worthy and respectable judge, that being in a public company at
Inverleigh, he said that the members of the British Convention should be
whipped and transported; and upon a lady saying the mob would not suffer it,
his lordship is said to have answered that in that case they would deserve to
lose a little blood. It appears to me, that there is not the smallest relevancy
in this objection. There is no doubt but there are reasons why a judge may be
declined according to an act of parliament: the law is, that if a judge has any
interest in the cause, that he can either win or lose by it, if there is
capital enmity between a judge and the party, that might be a good reason for
his being declined.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord --

Lord Henderland. Once for all, sir, I must inform you that you are not
entitled to interrupt the judges: if you have any thing to observe, after any
one of them is done, you will be permitted to speak; but I desire you will
behave with that decency which becomes you.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord, I respect the laws of my country, and I should not
respect myself if I did not; which I flatter myself I shall always do: for, I
hope, I never shall do any thing which can constitute a ground for
self-degradation in my own opinion: but I spoke to his lordship, because I
understood his lordship had addressed me, and that was the only reason of my
speaking.

Lord Swinton. My lord, I say there is no relevancy in this objection. If any
judge here shall have enmity against any man whatever, standing at that bar, it
might be a good reason for his being declined; but in this case it would be
absurd. I never heard of this man's name in my life, before he came into this
country, and I dare say his lordship never did; and what interest he can have
except that of compassion for a man in that unfortunate situation. I cannot
tell; and I appeal to the feelings of every man; I say it is impossible. My
lord, there is not the smallest ground to suppose that this man was
prejudicated by that conversation; and therefore I think the objection is
irrelevant.

Lord Dunsinnan. My lords, this objection is new, and not a little
extraordinary; it very much surprised me. I shall enter into no observations
upon his conduct; and I think your lordships ought to pay no attention to it,
either in one shape or another.

Lord Abercrombie. My lords, as to the objection made by this panel -- if a
judge is guilty of a breach of the sacred trust reposed in him, he is
amenadable to the laws of his country, and may be impeached for the offense; he
may be punished for it, and the law of this country has provided against it;
but, my lord, that is not the shape in which this objection comes before you;
it comes in the shape of a disqualification. Now, my lords, I know of no
circumstance whatever which can disqualify a judge from sitting to discharge
his duty, except those in the act of parliament. But, my lord, this objection
applies equally to every judge who sits here. Sure I am, that upon every
occasion when I have had an opportunity of giving my opinion upon the subject,
I have never hesitated to say that I considered the British Convention as a
conspiracy of a most dangerous and of a most criminal nature.

My (...), with regard to the unhappy man at the bar, there is not a doubt that
the presumption of law is in his favor; he is presumed to be innocent of the
charges laid against him, till he is found guilty by a verdict of his country.
But I have no hesitation in saying now, in the presence of that man, in the
presence of his counsel, and in the presence of this audience, and of your
lordships, that if he should be convicted of the crime charged against him in
this indictment, I shall say that even fourteen years transportation is too
slight a punishment for an offense of such magnitude. My lord, in the case of
Margarot I had a doubt, but that doubt was whether fourteen years
transportation was not too slight a punishment for the offense, aggravated as
it was by a variety of circumstances, and in particular, by the very improper
and indecent conduct of that man to the Court in the course of his trial;
which, for his own sake, I hope the panel now at the bar will not do.

Lord Henderland. Your lordships have delivered your opinions so fully, and
placed this question in so many different point of view, and expressed
yourselves in so much better language than I can do, that it would be highly
improper in me to go over the same grounds again; I shall only say that I
perfectly agree in the opinion of the Court, that this objection is not well
founded. My lords, it appears to have been a transient conversation, with
respect to the crime of sedition, and the punishment due to it: but is that to
be the ground of declining a judge? I appeal to he feelings of any man who has
conversed upon the subject; I appeal to every juryman who has tried these
cases; I appeal to every juryman who will try these cases; would he think
himself bound in the smallest degree by such a conversation? would he think the
case prejudged one iota? would he think himself hindered from examining the
evidence, or from weighing the arguments with the greatest firmness, and with
the utmost accuracy? I am sure he would not. To say that these words shall be
held by this Court as a prejudication of any judge or juryman (for I know not
how far the objection may go) might lead to the most extensive and the most
dangerous consequences, for ought I know, I don't say it is so, but it might go
even to the exclusion of all trials. My lords, taking it in this point of view,
the words said to be expressed in the manner in which they were expressed, and
the occasion upon which they were expressed, must all go together; and it is
admitted they are so far fairly told you. It is not said that this was a
judicial opinion given by this learned judge, and therefore was not any thing
like a prejudication of what he might do in this Court; and we are to judge,
whether by fair inference it ought to be held so, whether by consulting the
common sense of all mankind, for that is the test of all criminality. And here,
my lord, a respectable judge, an honor to his profession and abilities, whom I
know to be a man of the highest honor and strictest integrity, is to be tried
before us; for we are his jury, and we are called upon by our great oaths, as
judges, and lying our hands upon our hearts, to say that the respectable judge,
by what is here alleged, is no be rendered i^^^pable of sitting in this chair
-- to be degraded from his office, and held unfit to judge in the most
important trials in this country; where his abilities, steadiness, and
knowledge in law, are most required -- I cannot go such a length -- I think it
is contrary to law; and that therefore the objection is irrelevant.

The objection was repelled.

(Lord Henderland then left the Chair, and Lord Justice Clerk resumed it.)

Lord Justice Clerk. Joseph Gerrald, attend to the criminal libel that is to be
read against you.

(The indictment was then read by the Clerk of the Court, of which the
following is a true copy.)

GEORGE, etc. WHEREAS it is humbly meant and complained to US, by our right
trusty ROBERT DUNDAS Esquire of Arniston, our Advocate for our interest, upon
JOSEPH GERRALD, of Hart-street, Bloomsbury Square, London, and, presently or
lately, residing in the Black Bull Inn, head of Leith Walk, in the parish of
St. Cuthberts and shi^^ of Edinburgh; THAT, by the laws of this, and all other
well governed realms, SEDITION is a crime of an henious nature, and severely
punishable: YET TRUE IT IS, AND OF VERITY, That the said Joseph Gerrald, above
complained upon, has presumed to commit, and is guilty actor, or art and part,
of the foresaid crime; IN SO FAR AS, a number of seditious and ill-disposed
persons having illegally assembled, at Edinburgh, during the months of October,
November, and December, 1793, the said Joseph Gerrald, above complained upon,
did come into this country, for the purpose of joining and assisting these
persons, and became a member of their illegal and seditious association and
meeting; which illegal and seditious association and meeting, at first
assembled under the designation of a "General Convention of the Friends of the
People," but thereafter, presumptuously and seditiously, assumed the name of
The British Convention of the Delegates of the People, associated to obtain
Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments; and did in the whole form and manner
of their procedure, as well as in the principles they avowed and propagated,
clearly and unequivocally demonstrate that their purposes were of the most
dangerous and destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness, and
tending to subvert the constitution of this realm; imitating, in the form and
tenor of their proceedings, the Convention of France, the public and avowed
enemies of this country, and with whom Great Britain then was, and still is, at
war; the members calling each other, at their meetings, by the name of Citizen;
dividing themselves into Sections; receiving reports from said Sections; some
of which bear date, "Liberty Court." "Liberty Stairs" "Liberty Hall," "First
year of the British Convention one and indivisible;" and some of which have
Vive la Convention prefixed to them, and end with ca ira; instituting Primary
Societies, Provincial Assemblies, and Departments; appointing committees of
various kinds, such as, of Organization, of Instructions, of Finance, and of
Secrecy; denominating their meetings Sittings; granting honors of Sittings;
making honorable mention in their minutes of patriotic donations; and
inscribing their minutes, with the first year of the British Convention: AND
MOREOVER, the members of the said seditious association, under the designations
aforesaid, did, at times and place above mentioned, and particularly, in a room
or Masons Lodge in Blackfriar's Wynd, in the city of Edinburgh aforesaid, hold
various seditious and illegal meetings, and did in said meetings, wickedly and
feloniously, make harangues and speeches, as well as motions and resolutions,
of a seditious tendency; the substance of all which was, under their authority,
at least with their knowledge and approbation, not only minuted, but published
in a newspaper, published at Edinburgh, entitled The Edinburgh Gazetteer, and
through that medium circulated among the liege-AND the said Joseph Gerrald not
only approved of and concurred in these wicked and seditious motions and
resolutions, but did wickedly and feloniously make harangues and speeches, and
take an active part in all the illegal proceedings of the said association, was
frequently named, and acted as a member of their committees, and as President
or Chairman of the association. AND PARTICULARLY, upon Thursday the 21st day of
November 1793, or one or other of the days of that month, or of the months
aforesaid, the said Joseph Gerrald, did wickedly and feloniously address the
said illegal and seditious meeting, when assembled and resolved into a
Committee, for the purpose of considering of a Plan of Union, in a speech of
the following, or similar import.

Whatever difference of opinion may arise within these walls, I suppose we have
all one common object in view: we all live under the same form of government,
have the same grievances to complain of, and seek the same redress. It was
justly observed by Citizen Callander, That, soon after the union of the crowns
of England and Scotland, the people of both countries were deprived of some of
their most valuable privileges. It was from that period that the greatest
encroachments began to be made on public liberty; but, if that union has
operated to rob us of our rights, let it be the object of the present one to
regain them. if the event exists for our shame, as it has existed for our
chastisement, let it also exist for our instruction.

Some doubts have been introduced respecting our right to universal suffrage. I
apprehend that we may justly claim it as our inheritance from nature; but we
can with confidence, because we can with truth, appeal to antiquity for our
title to this right; and it will be found to have been exercised by our
ancestors in its fullest extent. It must be confessed, however, that, in the
early periods of our history, there existed a body of men called Slaves:
happily, this distinction does not exist in our days; and, if there are
political slaves, it is time that they should exist no longer.

In establishing the right of universal suffrage, the Convention may perhaps
give offense to the sattelites of despotism; but, while we can establish our
demand on the immutable principles of justice, we may at the same time prove,
that it is perfectly agreeable to the spirit of our constitution.

Under the Saxon Government, the people met frequently in the different
divisions of the country, in assemblies called Folkmotes. There they
deliberated; there every man had a voice in choosing his representatives; the
concurrence of the people was necessary to the administration of government;
and they obeyed the laws which themselves had made. The King of England used to
sit in the Folkmote; and, I believe, it would be more to his own advantage if
he sat there now.

In the progress of time, however, great deviations have been made from the
original purity of the constitution, and the national representation has been
supposed to be sometimes influenced by motives not altogether congenial to the
happiness of the people. Human nature is so constituted, that every man is
inclined to pursue his own individual interest in preference to that of others.
If you appoint a man to act as your agent, and make his situation such that he
has every temptation to betray you without incurring the danger of being called
to an account, the probability is, that he will sacrifice your interests to his
own. It is therefore that a free suffrage of the people is what every man ought
to desire, as that alone can make the interest of the representative and his
constituent the same. The great art of government, I apprehend, is this, that
all should be governed by all; but unhappy is the country where men are called
upon by every interest to act in opposition to their duty.

Much, of late has been said about meetings of mobs. I apprehend that no
meeting of the people can be called a mob, if their deliberations be directed
toward the public good; but if men meet for an opposite purpose, for promoting
the misery or the destruction of the human race, though they should sit with
crowns on their heads and sceptres in their hands, they are truly a mob.

Were all mankind to assemble in public meetings, one of two things must
follow; either they will behave properly or improperly; if properly, their
meeting will tend to good; if improperly, it carries its own cure along with
it. The people will be soon brought into a better method by a sense of
self-preservation, by which they will correct the errors into which they have
fallen.

It may occur, that the voice of the people may be wrong when their
understandings are perverted by priestcraft, or darkened by political
superstition, like the voice once heard in Jerusalem, of crucify him! crucify
him! when that nefarious deed was perpetrated, at which the sun hid his head in
darkness and in blood. But, were the tyrants of the earth as solicitous to
enlighten as they are to punish their unfortunate subjects; were governments to
instruct the poor, instead of hanging up their bodies on gibbets; the voice of
the people would then be the voice of God.

By the Norman Conquest, or rather Robbery, (for that transaction, like every
other, is to be considered by its consequences) the right of voting was greatly
curtailed; but surely we can, with great propriety, meet to petition Parliament
for the restoration of the right of universal suffrage; a right which is so
necessary to the just administration of government; for, if any man comes and
tells me that I must pay a tax to which I have never consented, neither by
myself nor my representative, What am I think of the legality of his claim?
Whenever money is taken from the people by a military power, or by any other
authority not delegated by themselves, call that government what you will, it
is a government of force -- it is the sword which governs. The right then, of
universal suffrage, of which we have been so unfortunately and unjustly
deprived, I repeat, is not only a natural right, but an inherent principle of
the constitution. In the early periods, every man had a vote for his
representative. With some little variation, the practice continued for ages; it
underwent considerable alterations at the Conquest; a period at which the
goodly fabric of Anglo-Saxon government was undermined, and the structure of
tyranny erected in its stead.

It has been observed, that the Revolution of 1688 does not produce the
advantages which might have been expected from such an event. It is true, that,
at the Revolution, universal suffrage was not dispensed to the people with that
liberality which it ought to have been; but still the present form of
government, in my opinion, no more resembles the Revolution, than a dead putrid
carcass does a living body.

The principal advantage of the Revolution was, that it made the chief
magistrate responsible for his trust, by establishing the right of the people
to alter the line of succession to the throne. The House of Hanover, if they
are wise, will not be averse to revolution principles; for it is in consequence
of those principles that the present monarch reigns in Britain. A worthy
member, I believe with the best of intentions, called another to order, and
said he was going to far: -- no man, I apprehend, goes too far, unless he goes
beyond the rule of right -- unless he violates the truth. If the members who
compose a government abuse their trust, May they not be resisted? And, if there
existed a right in any preceding generation to amend the constitution, Can it
be said that that right does not equally belong to the present?

Let us then endeavor to instruct the people in their rights, and to inform
them of our views and our intentions; they will come and sign our petitions,
and we shall be enabled to send them up subscribed by a majority of the people.
The voice of the people will be heard, whenever it is spoken in the language of
truth, and by a number so respectable as to command attention; and it will soon
have that respectability, if we have reason on our side.

As to the manner in which the union is to be formed, we may find precedents
for it in our early history; but the first thing to be done, is to enlighten
the people; -- endeavor to diffuse the principle on which you act. When you
have got a sufficient number in every district, establish a correspondence
among them; -- show them the necessity of uniting in the common plan of
cooperation; then the people, assembled in the different departments of the
country, will resemble the ancient Folkmotes, and will speak in language too
reasonable to be confuted, and too peremptory to be refused.

The manner in which they should organize themselves is of very important
consideration; and they ought to be particularly careful what persons they
choose for delegates to the next convention: let them be plain men, such as I
see here; -- none who have ever breathed the pestilential air of a court -- or
bowed the knee to aristocracy. Let us renounce all attachment to parties, and
be no more deceived by the pretended patriotism of the great. During the
American war, reformers and patriots sprung up like mushrooms, without any
diminution of public burdens. Like mushrooms they were short-lived; for they
sprung from a soil of dung, a botbed of corruption. Pit has succeeded to Fox,
and Fox to Pit, without any reform being obtained; but let us no longer put
faith in such men, unless they bring forward a reform founded on annual
parliaments and universal suffrage: -- that only is the kind of reform which
will satisfy the people, and which they will never cease to claim as their due.
Depend upon it, whenever the leaders of parties see that the people are
determined upon having their rights, they will not only endeavor to swim along
the stream, but will strive to direct its course. Trust them not -- they did
not come forward in the hour of public danger; -- Why then should they be
trusted, when they seek your favor only for personal convenience?

The city of York has been proposed as a proper and centrical place for the
meeting of next convention; but I can assure you that city is the seat of a
proud aristocracy, the seat of an archbishop; however, I would not object to
going there; as the Savior of the world was often found in the company of
sinners, let us go there for the same gracious purpose, to convert to
repentance. The borders of this country and England were mentioned by another
member, and I should rather prefer some place there; for we should have this
pleasing reflection, that we meet for promoting philanthropy and peace, on the
ground which had often been drenched with the blood of our ancestors. Let us
then, fellow citizens, unite heart and hand to bury the hatchet of natural
antipathy, which the wicked policy of courts once instigated us to wield. Let
us brighten the chain of national friendship. Let there be no other wish,
either among Scots or English, than to obtain freedom, and no other rivalship,
than who shall best deserve it.

FURTHER, at a meeting of the said association, upon the 25th day of the said
month of November 1793, or on some one or other of the days of that month, or
of the months aforesaid, within the room or Mason-lodge aforesaid, Alexander
Callender, one of the members, having made a motion of the following or similar
tenor, "That in case the minister, or any other member of either House of
Parliament, bring forward a motion for leave to bring in a Convention Bill,
such as has passed in Ireland, to prevent the people from meeting according to
their just rights by the Revolution, the same motion shall be notice to the
delegates to meet in convention, to assert their rights;" the said motion was
made the subject of discussion in the said meeting, on the 27th day of the said
month, or on one or other of the days of that month, or the months aforesaid,
when sundry amendments, of a wicked and seditious tendency were proposed; and
the said motion, with the amendments, having been, by the said meeting,
referred to some of the members thereof as a committee, to draw up a motion
from the whole, Charles Sinclair, one of the members of the said committee,
did, upon the 28th day of the said month of November, or on one or other of the
days of that month, or of the months aforesaid, read to the said association or
meeting, when assembled within the room or Mason-lodge aforesaid, the
amendments upon the said motion, as agreed on by him and the committee
aforesaid; when the said association or meeting did wickedly and feloniously,
then and there, all the members standing on their feet, solemnly and
unanimously come to a resolution of the following import or tenor:

"That this convention, considering the calamitous consequences of any act of
the legislature which may tend to deprive the whole, or any part of the people,
of their undoubted right to meet, either by themselves or by delegation, to
discuss any matter relative to their common interest, whether of a public or
private nature, and holding the same to be totally inconsistent with the first
principles and safety of society, and also subversive of our own and
acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby declare, before God and the
world, that we shall follow the wholesome example of former times, by paying no
regard to any act which shall militate against the constitution of our country;
and shall continue to assemble, and consider of the best means by which we can
accomplish a real representation of the people, and annual election, until
compelled to desist by superior force.

And we do resolve,

That the first notice given for the introduction of a Convention Bill, or any
bill of a similar tendency to that passed in Ireland, in the last session of
their parliament;

Or any bill for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, or the act for
preventing wrongous imprisonment, and against undue delays in trials in North
Britain;

Or in case of an invasion;

Or the admission of any foreign troops whatsoever into Great Britain or
Ireland; all, or any one, of these calamitous circumstances, shall be a signal
to the different delegates to repair to such place as the Secret Committee of
this convention shall appoint; and the first seven members shall have power to
declare the sittings permanent; and twenty-one shall constitute a convention,
and proceed to business.

The convention does therefore resolve, That each delegate, immediately on his
return home, do convene his constituents, and explain to them the necessity of
electing a delegate, or delegates, and of establishing a fund without delay,
against any of these emergencies, for his or their expense; and that they do
instruct the said delegate or delegates, to hold themselves ready to depart at
one hour's warn-ing."

Which seditious resolution the said Joseph Gerrald not only approved of, but
immediately, on its being so agreed to and passed, did, on the day, and within
the place aforesaid, wickedly and feloniously address the said meeting or
association, in a speech of the following or similar import.

"I rise to congratulate the convention on the adoption of this resolution, not
only on the propriety of the measure itself, but on that unanimity and
solemnity with which it has passed.

I have not been able to procure a copy of the iniquitous act which has excited
such abhorence; but I have here the heads of the bill in the speech of Mr.
Grattan, the man who, while he spoke against the bill, at the same time
betrayed the liberties of his country. This bill, commonly called the
Convention Bill, which passed in the last session of the Parliament of Ireland,
and which is the prototype of what may be attempted in Britain, breathes such a
spirit of cruelty and oppression, that if tyranny were to be personified, it
could not speak in language more insulting to the feelings of mankind.

By the first head the delegates of the people are not allowed to meet to
petition Parliament. Surely despotism could not be more strongly expressed even
in Turkey. There every Bashaw listens to the petitions of his trembling slaves;
yet that privilege is denied to the people of Ireland. But it has been said, to
use a common expression, this bill was first passed in Ireland to feel the
pulse of the people of Britain, that our rulers might know if it beat high with
indignation, or if the blood run coldly in our veins; and we are willing to bow
our necks to the yoke, and suffer in fear and in silence.

In the second head, they are forbidden to meet for the purpose of asking the
redress of grievances. Good God! What is government instituted for, if it is
not for the redress of grievances? I had thought that in the most despotic
government the people were permitted to utter their complaints, and beg to be
relieved of their sufferings; but, at the close of the 18th century, we find
this last indulgence to slaves denied to a part of the British empire. Our
government boasts that it is the best in the world; but it is not in Ireland
that we are to look for its excellencies. Whenever a government tells the
people that they must not petition, that government is tyranny; and whatever
you may be told of its acts of Parliament in favor of liberty, these acts of
Parliament are set aside; they are mere pieces of parchment, and of no more
value.

The third head makes it a capital offense to consider of any public concern.
Now, to make a road, or build a bridge, are public concerns; and of course the
people of Ireland cannot meet on business of that nature, without making
themselves liable to the penalty of this law.

Though I could not get a copy of this bill, the heads, which I have read, are
sufficiently explanatory of its detestable principles; and I hope the measure
which has passed this night will convince the minister, that we are determined
to guard against every attempt that may be made to deprive us of our rights;
and though by some it may be thought a bold, by some a daring measure, yet it
will be found the best for securing the peace of our country: for if such a law
were suffered to pass, if men were not allowed to utter their complaints, a
number of fierce and rancorous passions world arise, and we would seek to
appeal to that last terrible decision, the event of which is uncertain, but
which God and nature allows.

If the servility of the people had been less; if they had dared to meet, and,
in place of murmuring, to have told their rulers that there was danger in
seeking to deprive them of their liberties, we would not have had to adopt this
resolution to night; but when I saw the calm deliberate countenances of all
present, and the solemn manner in which it was passed, I was convinced that it
would not only be a resolution of words, but a rule of action."

AND FURTHER, upon the said 28th day of November, or one or other of the days
of that month, or months aforesaid, and within the room or Mason's-lodge
aforesaid, after the foresaid resolution had been so passed, and the foresaid
speech so made by the said Joseph Gerrald, a motion having been made in the
said meeting, in the following words, or in words of a similar import and
tendency: That a Secret Committee of three and the Secretary be appointed to
determine where such Convention of Emergency shall meet: That such place shall
remain a secret with them and with the Secretary of this Convention: And that
each delegate shall, at the breaking up of the present session, be entrusted
with a sealed letter, containing the name of the place of meeting: This letter
shall be delivered unopened to his constituents; the receipt of which shall be
acknowledged by a letter to the Secretary, preserved in the same state, until
the period shall arrive at which it shall be deemed necessary for the delegates
to set out; the said meeting did wickedly and seditiously unanimously approve
of the same. AND at a subsequent meeting, upon the 4th day of December 1793, or
one or other of the days of that month, or months aforesaid, and within the
said room or masons-lodge aforesaid, it having been moved by Maurice Margarot
one of the members of the said meeting, That the moment of any illegal
dispersion of the present Convention, shall be considered as a summons to the
delegates to repair to the place of meeting, appointed for the Convention of
Emergency, by the secret committee; and that the Secret Committee be instructed
to proceed without delay to fix the place of meeting* the said meeting did
wickedly and seditously, unanimously resolve the same, and appointed the Secret
Committee to proceed as desired. AND FURTHER, on Friday the 6th day of December
1793, or upon one or other of the days of that month, or of the months
aforesaid, the said illegal association or meeting having again assembled in a
room or workshop belonging to, or possessed by, John Laing, wright, situated in
Lady Lawson's Yard, south side of Crosscauseway, in the parish of St.
Cuthbert's and shire of Edinburgh, Harry Davidson, Esquire Sheriff-substitute of
Edinburgh, having, in discharge of his duty, repaired to the said room or
work-shop, in order to disperse the said illegal meeting, the said Joseph
Gerrald, with his associates, did then and there resist the said
Sheriff-substitute, and refused to disperse without being compelled; and so
much so, that after the said Sheriff-substitute had entered the room, and
desired them to disperse, the said Joseph Gerrald wickedly and feloniously
exclaimed, The rights of Britons are violated by this illegal interruption of
our peaceful meeting. It is force, not reason, with which our enemies assail
us. I defy them to assign one reason against the lawfulness of our meetings;
but if they thirst after our blood, they may now gratify themselves; mine I
shall see flow with pleasure, if with it flows the freedom of my country. AT
LEAST, he expressed himself in language of the above import; and did afterward
take the chair as preses of the meeting, and presumptuously did continue to sit
and act, until he was, by the said Sheriff-substitute pulled from the chair;
which conduct of the said Joseph Gerrald was highly aggravated, from the
circumstance that the said illegal association had been, the preceding day,
dispersed by the magistrates of Edinburgh, as being illegal; and also, that the
said Joseph Gerrald had, the preceding day, been apprehended on a warrant of
the said Sheriff-substitute, and ordered to be committed to jail, for being a
member of the said illegal association, till liberate in due course of law. And
the said Joseph Gerrald, when apprehended and carried before Harry Davidson,
Esquire Sheriff-substitute of the county of Edinburgh, on the 5th of December 1793,
did, in his presence, emit and sign a declaration. And sundry papers having
been found in the possession of the said Joseph Gerrald when first apprehended
and afterward inspected in his presence, by authority of the Sheriff of
Edinburgh, two lists or inventories of these papers were made up; one of which,
consisting of ten articles, subscribed by the said Joseph Gerrald, and William
Scott, Procurator-fiscal of the county of Edinburgh; and the other, of nine
articles, is subscribed by the said William Scott and the Sheriff-substitute.
Which inventories, with the whole articles therein contained, (except No, 1.
which had been returned to the said Joseph Gerrald;) as also, the foresaid
declaration emitted by him before the Sheriff-substitute of Edinburgh; together
with copies of Nos. 78, 79, and 80, of the newspaper called, The Edinburgh
Gazetteer; as also, the scroll or draught of the Minutes of the said General
Convention, from the 29th of October to the 4th of December 1793, consisting of
95 pages, and found in the custody of William Skirving, Secretary to the said
Convention, when apprehended by warrant of the Sheriff of Edinburgh, in the
month of December last, being No. 1. of the inventory of papers found in the
possession of the said William Skirving, and made up in presence of the Sheriff
of Edinburgh, upon the 5th of December last, with the said inventory itself,
and the whole of the other papers and writings therein contained; as also, an
inventory of sundry papers found in the custody of Charles Sinclair, one of the
members of the said Convention, and made up in presence of the Sheriff of
Edinburgh, upon the 7th of December 1793, consisting of twenty-one articles,
with the whole of the said twenty-one articles themselves, being all to be used
in evidene against the said Joseph Gerrald on his trial, will for that purpose,
in due time, be lodged with the Clerk of the High Court of Justiciary, before
which he is to be tried, that he may have an opportunity of seeing the same. AT
LEAST, times and places abovementioned, the said acts of sedition were
committed, and the said Joseph Gerrald is guilty actor, or art and part
thereof. ALL WHICH, or part thereof, being found proven by the verdict of an
assize, before our Lord Justice General, Lord Justice Clerk, and Lords
Commissioners of Justiciary, in a Court of Justiciary to be holden by them
within the Criminal Courthouse of Edinburgh, upon the seventeenth day of
February instant, the said Joseph Gerrald, above complained upon, OUGHT to be
punished with the pains of law, to deter others from committing the like crimes
in all time coming. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, etc.

LIST OF WITNESSES A list of the exculpatory witnesses who were cited, will be
given at the end of the trial.
.
1 Harry Davidson, Esquire sheriff-substitute, or late sheriff-substitute, of the
county of Edinburgh. 2 William Scott, procurator-fiscal of the county of
Edinburgh. 3 James Williamson, clerk to the said William Scott. 4 Archibald
Welsh, also clerk to the said William Scott. 5 John Dingwall, writer in
Edinburgh. 6 Joseph Mack, writer in Edinburgh. 7 James Lion, messenger in
Edinburgh. 8 John M'Donald, residenter in Edinburgh. 9 Neil M'Glashan,
residenter in Edinburgh. 10 Alexander Williamson, sheriff-officer in Edin. 11
George Ross, clerk in the Gazetteer Office, Edin. 12 William Ross, clerk in the
Gazetteer Office, Edin. 13 Alexander Aitcheson, student of medicine, residing
in Canongate of Edin. 14 Mitchell Young, painter in Edin. 15 John Wardlaw,
writer in Edin. 16 John Laing, wright in Nicolson's-street, Edin. 17 John
Clark, mason in Edin. 18 William Romans, merchant, Lawnmarket, Edin. 19 Thomas
Cockburn, merchant, Lawnmarket, Edin. 20 Samuel Paterson, merchant in Edin. 21
Alexander Newton, formerly tobacconist in Dunse, now residing in St.
Patrick's-square, Edin. 22 Alexander Reid, joiner and cabinet maker, residing
in Edin. 23 John Gourlay, watchmaker in Edin. 24 Archibald Binnie, type-founder
in Edin. 25 David Downie, goldsmith in Edin. 26 John Buchannan, baker in
Canongate of Edin. 27 Alexander Fortune, leather merchant in Canongate of Edin.
28 John M'Intyre, teacher in College-wynd in Edin. 29 The Right Hon. Thomas
Elder, lord provost of the city of Edin. 30 Niel M'Vickar, Esquire one of the
magistrates of Edin. 31 James Laing, one of the deputy city clerks of Edin. 32
John Campbell, residenter in Edin. 33 John Fraser, residenter in Edin. 34
Benjamin Rise, residenter in Edin.
LIST OF ASSIZE.
James Donaldson, bookseller in Edinburgh. David Ramsay, printer there. David
Deuchar, seal engraver there. Peter Hill, bookseller there. 5 Alexander Wight,
baker there. Thomas Tibbets, hatter there. John Bell, bookseller there.
Alexander Pitcairn, insurance-broker there. David Bridges, merchant there. 10
James Hunter, merchant there. Hector Gavin, engraver there. James Cunningham,
baker there. Andrew Milligan, watch-case-maker there. Sir William Forbes, Bart
banker there. 15 Alexander Spence, jeweller there. Peter Mathie, jeweller
there. John Millar, optician there. Alexander Gardner, jeweller there. William
Creech, bookseller there. 20 Thomas Hutchinson, merchant there. Andrew Kay,
glazier there. William Cuming, shoemaker there. Thomas Kennedy, glover there.
John Hutchinson, merchant there. 25 James Fyfe, merchant there. John Sibbald,
smith there. Alexander Nisbet, manufacturer there. James Collier, merchant in
Edinburgh. John Little, merchant there. 30 Alexander Dudgeon, baker there.
William Ranken, tailor there. Patrick Main, painter there. Alexander Smith,
baker there. James Spence, painter there. 35 James Hunter, Baker there.
Alexander Wright, wine-merchant there. James Craig, architect there. William
Murray, baker there. Thomas Hunter, grocer there. 40 William Calder, merchant
there. John Sinclair, merchant there. James Simpson, baker there. Thomas
Malcolm, shoemaker there. William Crawford, smith there. 45 Archibald Campbell,
brewer there.
ROB. M'QUEEN. ALEX. MURRAY. DAV. RAE.
Lord Justice Clerk. Joseph Gerrald, what do you say to this? Are you guilty,
or not guilty?

Mr. Gerrald. Not guilty, my lord.

Mr. Gilles. My lords, in a case like the present, which has been pleaded by
counsel of the very first eminence, and which has already received the solemn
consideration of this Court, it is a difficult task for any counsel, and
especially for a young counsel, to go over the same grounds again, and that too
with the view of directly and strongly maintaining that other views ought to
have guided your lordships judgment formerly, and that other views ought to
guide it now. Added to this, is that firmly rooted and wide spread notion of
the guilt of all those that stand at this bar accused of sedition. The temper
of men's minds, from many obvious causes, is such, that they consider a person
at this bar under this accusation, as already condemned -- that it is almost
unnecessary to plead for him, except as going through the forms, while he,
whose fortune it is to undertake such a cause, is considered as an effect, a
sharer of the crimes imputed to him whom he defends, and by doing his duty, may
incur all the consequences that ought only to follow his not doing it. -- As to
the panel, thus brought before you, the public eye considers them as the
personal enemies of us all. -- They do not aim, as we are taught to think, at
the ruin of this or that individual -- we have not merely a remote interest in
their destruction, but it is absolutely essential to our own personal safety.
Our properties, our lives, our all, are represented as the objects of their
violence, and against danger so near, and danger so dreadful, we should not be
scrupulous about our means of defense. The strongest feelings of our nature,
those of self preservation itself, are thus called into instant energy amongst
us all. It is difficult in such circumstances to judge right; and the
difficulties are altogether on another side from what takes place commonly. In
the common case the chief danger is of injustice arising from compassion and
mercy. Here the danger is of injustice being done, (unwillingly done yet done
effectually) from motives of fear, and of anger against those who have caused
that fear. In such a case it behooves us to examine ourselves; to be sure of the
grounds upon which we proceed to banish the least appearance of passion; and to
renounce a judgment, however deliberately considered, if an after deliberation
show it to be even doubtful. It is impossible to deliberate too much.

Knowing well that in these respects your lordships think exactly as I do, and
encouraged by this consideration, I shall go on to state, as well as I can,
such arguments as have occurred to me in favor of the unfortunate gentleman
who stands at your lordships' bar. I hope to show your lordships that the
indictment is altogether irrelevant, at any rate that it is irrelevant to infer
that punishment which has been inflicted in the other cases of sedition.

The crime charged, in the major proposition of this indictment, is sedition,
in vague and general terms -- I know very well that by the laws of this
country, explained as they are, and ought to be, by the practice of this Court,
the crime in this part of the indictment may be charged in general terms. I
know that many crimes are so: in the cases of robbery and murder; for instance,
it is not necessary to state these crimes particularly, or to refer to the
statutes, which prohibit the commission and affix the punishment due to these
offenses. But where the law has annexed different degrees of punishment, to
different species or degrees of the same offense, then if the crime is charged
in general in the major proposition of the indictment, the least culpable
species of the offense must be meant, and the lesser punishment only can be
inflicted. Thus, in the case of theft, simple theft is not a capital crime, but
if aggravated by house-breaking it is punished with death. Now, if theft is
charged generally without tins aggravation, the arbitrary punishment due to the
offense of simple theft is all that your lordships can award. In the same
manner with regard to sedition, I believe it is laid down by every writer of
eminence, that there are two species of sedition, verbal, and real -- a smaller
and greater offense, to which our laws have annexed two different degrees of
punishment. The punishment of the first offense, verbal sedition, is fixed by a
statute which I shall afterward mention particularly; and as sedition is
charged generally in this indictment, the lesser offense must be understood.
Upon this ground alone, I trust the punishment must be restricted to the lesser
species of the crime, for if it was intended to accuse this gentleman of a
greater offense, the greater offense ought to have been stated; it cannot,
therefore, be construed into any thing more than verbal sedition, or
leasing-making, and the lesser degree of punishment can only be inflicted.

I trust from this argument that it must be considered as verbal sedition. It
will at least be admitted, that where a crime is charged in general, the degree
and species, must be gathered from the particulars charged in the minor
proposition. The questions, therefore, now to be submitted to your lordships'
consideration are these,

In the first place -- Whether the facts stated in the minor proposition,
amount to any crime at all -- whether they amount to sedition of any kind
whatever?

In the next place -- Whether, if they are criminal, they amount to verbal or
real sedition, and if they amount only to verbal sedition, what is the
punishment affixed by our law to that crime?

The first charge in the indictment is, that "the said Joseph Gerrald, above
complained upon, has presumed to commit, and is guilty actor, or art and part,
of the aforesaid crime, in so far as, a number of seditious and evil disposed
persons having illegally assembled at Edinburgh, during the months of October,
November, and December, 1793, the said Joseph Gerrald, above complained upon
did come into this country, for the purpose of joining and assisting these
persons, and became a member of their illegal and seditious association and
meeting; which illegal and seditious association and meeting, at first
assembled under the designation of a General Convention of the Friends of the
People, but thereafter, presumptuously and seditiously, assumed the name of the
British Convention of the Delegates of the People, associated to obtain
Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments."

My lord, the illegality and sedition laid to the charge of the British
Convention, must consist either in the meeting itself being illegal, or it must
consist in the illegality of the object which they had in view -- that is, the
obtaining Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments, a Reform in the
Representation of the Commons House of Parliament.

Setting aside the object of the convention, the first question is, whether
such a meeting is or is not legal? whether it is allowed, or, whether it is
punishable by the laws of this country? Laying out of consideration the object
which they had in view, the question affects every one who hears me; for who is
there amongst us who has not been present at some convocation without legal
authority? If this is to be punished as sedition, every one present is liable
to that punishment. The actions of these men so assembled together, ((...)
shall speak afterward of their speeches and resolutions, but I say their
actions) were inoffensive and orderly; they are not accused even of the
slightest bread of the peace. No doubt that by the ancient statutes of this
country, convocations within boroughs were prohibited, but what was the nature
of those convocations will appear from the statutes themselves. I shall
therefore read the Act 1563. chap. 83. "It is, statute and ordained that nane
of our sovereign lady's lieges presume, pretend or take upon hand to make
onie privy conventiones nor assemblies within burgh, put on armor, cleeith
themselves with weapons, or make sound of trumpet, or talbrone or use
culveringes, displayed banners, hand seingies, or uthers instruments bellical
quhat-sumever in onie time hereafter, without the special license of our said
sovereign lady and her hienes' magistrates within the burgh quhair the said
tumult and uproar chauncis to be had and obtained thereto, under the pain of
death." Sir Geo. Mackenzie, in his observation upon this act, says, "It seems
that mere convocations or assemblies are not per se punishable by death,
without putting on armor or displaying banners." Thus, in order to bring the
British Convention within this enactment, its members must have appeared in
armor, and with banners, surrounded with all the pride, pomp, and circumstance
of war. The appearance of their meeting was surely very different. Their only
armor was their tongues and their pens, and a few blotted and blurred sheets
of paper the only banners which they displayed. It is not upon this act then
that any proceeding against this convention can be founded. Unarmed
convocations were not at this time prohibited by any law whatever, nor were
they declared to be illegal until the accession of James VI. It was the wish of
that monarch, as your lordships know, to abolish presbytery and to repress the
powers of ecclesiastical jurisdiction vested in the presbyterian clergy. The
disputes which thus arose betwixt him and the clergy was the occasion of a
statute upon this subject. By the act 1584, chap. 131, "It is statute and
ordained be our said sovereign lord and his three estaites that nane of his
hienes subjects of quhat-sumever quality, astaite or function they be of,
spiritual or temporal, presume or tak upon hand to convocate, conveene or
assemble themselves togidder, for halding of councelles, conventions or
assemblies, to treat, consult and terminat in any matter of estaite civil or
ecclesiastical (except in the ordinar judgment) without his majesty's special
commandment or express license, had and obtained to that effect, under the
pains ordained be the laws and acts of Parliament against sik as unlawfully
convocatis the kingis lieges."

After this an act was passed in the same reign, 1606, chap. 17 by which the
act of 1584 was confirmed, with an addition that I shall now read to your
lordships. "That na person nor persons within burgh, whatsomever rank, quality
or condition they be of, presume nor take upon hand from this forth, under
whatsomever color or pretext, to convocate or assemble themselves together at
any occasion, except they make due intimation of the lawful causes of their
meetings to the provest and baillies of that burgh, and obtein their license
thereto, and that na thing be done nor attempted by them in their said
meetings, whilk may tend to the derogation or violation of the acts of
parliament, laws and constitution made for the well and quyetness of the said
burghs. Declaring by their presents, the said unlawful meetings and the persons
present thereat to be factious and seditious, and all proceedings therein to be
null and of nane availl. And the said persons to be punished in their bodies,
goods and gear, with all rigor, conform to the laws of this realm."

Your lordships see, that by this act, all persons are prohibited of any rank,
quality, or condition, from convocating or assembling themselves together, upon
any occasion, except they give due intimation to the provost and magistrates.

My lords, it is no doubt true, that if these acts are still in force, they
apply directly to the British Convention; but if these acts are still in force,
they apply not merely to the British Convention, but to nine tenths of all the
meetings that are held in Edinburgh. These statutes, if enforced, would be
attended with effects at once the most serious and ludicrous. We might be
conveyed from the rooms in George's Street, or George's Square, to the
Tolbooth, from the Tolbooth to your lordship's bar, from your lordship's bar to
the hulks at Woolwich, and, from the hulks, to Botany Bay, with a catestrophe
very dissimilar from the commencement.

Upon these statutes Sir George Mackenzie says, "this crime of simple
convocation is ordinarily pursued before the Council, and is seldom punished,
either by the Council or Justice Court, tanquam crimen per se but as the
aggravating quality of a riot or other crime." My lords, this was the case
before the revolution; that it was never prosecuted but as the aggravating
quality of another crime. Since the revolution, I believe there has been no
trial whatever for this offense, I apprehend therefore that prosecutions upon
these statutes are prohibited by a passage in the claim of rights, which I
shall now read to your lordships. In the claim of rights is the following
passage: "That the causing pursue and forfeit persons upon stretches of old and
obsolete laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, upon lame and defective
probation, as particularly the late Earl of Arguyle, are contrary to law." My
lords, if before the revolution the meeting in unarmed convocations was only
punished as an aggravating quality of another crime, and since has not been
punished at all, we must necessarily conclude that it falls within this
enactment in the claim of rights, of obsolete statutes. As an aggravating
quality of a crime, it may operate to prevent the mitigation, or to increase
the severity of a punishment; -- but though it may increase the degree of the
crime, it cannot alter the nature of it; it cannot convert verbal sedition into
real sedition.

But if any thing further is necessary to show that no man can now be tried
upon these old statutes, it will fully appear from two acts that I am now to
mention. The act against conventicles, 1670, chapter 5. has the following preamble.
"Forsameikle as the assembling and convocating of his majesty's subjects,
without his majesty's warrant and authority, is a most dangerous and unlawful
practice, prohibited and discharged by several laws and acts of Parliament,
under high and great pains. And that notwithstanding thereof diverse disaffected
and seditious persons, under the specious but false pretenses of religion, and
religious exercises, presume to make, and be present at, conventicles and
unwarrantable meetings, and conventions of the subjects, which are the ordinary
seminaries of separation and rebellion, tending to the prejudice of the public
worship of God in the churches."

Your lordships will observe, that in this preamble, it is positively declared
that conventicles fell within these old statutes made against unarmed
convocations, previous to this statute. Those conventicles were subject to
punishment, as being unarmed convocations of the people, and falling within the
statute I formerly read to your lordship, enacted in the reign of James VI. In
the reign of William and Mary, this act against religious conventicles, was
expressly repealed; but, I say the repeal of that act is of no avail, if these
old statutes are still in force. It is of no avail, because men who so meet in
conventicles may be punished under the old statutes passed in the reign of
James VI. Unless therefore this statute, which was considered at the time as a
great attainment to the liberties of the country, it is considered as nugatory,
we must understand that all these statutes against unarmed convocations are now
obsolete. In consequence of these acts every clergyman, who is not a member of
the established church of this country, might be punished for holding unarmed
convocations. By the act passed under James VI. against such convocations, the
preacher might be carried from the pulpit, and the audience from their seats,
to this bar, and punished with DEATH! The act of William and Mary, therefore,
is of no avail, if these old statutes against unarmed conventions are still in
existence. Indeed, from the absurdity to which they would lead, it must be
demonstrable to your lordships that they can be no longer put in force.

Holding, therefore, that the simple act of meeting in convention, as these
persons are said to have done, in itself contains nothing criminal. The
question that next remains to be considered is, whether criminality is attached
to them on account of the professed object which they had in view, the
obtaining universal suffrage, and annual parliaments, a reform in the
representation of the Commons House of Parliament.

My lords, this is a question of politics on which I have no occasion to
deliver my own opinion. All that I have now to enquire is, whether the
particular charges, preferred against the panel in this indictment, amount to
the generic crime of which he is accused. The panel is here said to have been
guilty of sedition; because he associated, with a number of others, in order to
obtain universal suffrage and annual parliaments. This attempt may in one sense
of the word be termed illegal -- inasmuch as it certainly had for its object an
alteration of the existing laws of this country. But in this sense of the word,
the proposal of every new law may be equally termed illegal. It must therefore
be a different species of illegality from this that the public prosecutor
annexes to this convention, when he calls it an illegal and seditious meeting:
and yet, my lords, if there is any new law or any alteration more than another
upon our present laws, in the propriety of which a majority, and a great one
too, of every description of the people of this country has concurred, it is in
this one thing -- of a reform in the representation of parliament.

Men of all ranks and descriptions, from the highest to the lowest, from the
most learned, to the worst informed, have it one period or another declared
their approbation of this measure. As to the mode or degree in which it should
be attempted, different opinions have been held by different men; and this
difference as to the mode has hitherto prevented the object itself from being
attained.

Upon this point, all the eminent men who at present shine in the councils of
our nation have declared their opinions, at one time or another, and almost all
of them have acknowledged the necessity of a reform. Mr. Pit, who enjoys, at
present, the favor of the crown, and the confidence of parliament, has given
his opinion, not merely in favor of reform, but decidedly in favor of that
species of reform which consists in introducing universal suffrage and annual
parliaments. Mr. Fox has also declared himself a friend to reform, though not
to the same length which Mr. Pit has gone; and, on this account, the gentleman
at the bar has spoken of this great statesman in terms of considerable
disapprobation. In the course of a long political life, which might be regarded
as unfortunate, if the enjoyment of true glory were not to be preferred to the
possession of power, Mr. Fox has all along declared himself an enemy to
universal suffrage, and if I am not mistaken, to annual parliaments. Where such
great men differ, it is not for us to decide; but surely much blame cannot be
imputed to the man whose opinions are sanctioned by either of such authorities.
It would be hard, indeed, if this gentleman were to be punished, merely for
having adopted the opinions of Mr. Pit, in preference to those of Mr. Fox --
that the same sentiments which have served to place one man at the head of the
nation, should expose another to the vengeance of her laws -- that they should
raise the one person to the height of preferment, to the pinnacle of his
ambition, and plunge the other into the deepest abyss of human wretchedness.

My lords, what I am going to read will show you, that these sentiments have
been held by men of the first eminence, in point of rank, in point of (reputed,
abilities) of fortune, and of power. The pamphlet, from which I read, was
published under the auspices of a society which owed its formation, in a great
measure, to the Duke of Richmond and Mr. Pit; and of which they were long the
leading members. The language does not disgrace its authors: "Every
application, therefore, for the redress of the present grievances of the
nation, that shall be made to a body of men, no longer under the influence of
their constituents, but on the contrary, uniformly acting in subserviency to
the views and interests of the crown, must of necessity be unsuccessful; and
from the natural effect of disappointment upon the human mind, will probably
impair the vigor of every future exertion." In another passage, "that the
restoration of the Commons House of Parliament to freedom and independency, by
interposition of the great collective body of the nation, is essentially
necessary to our existence as a free people." I shall only read one other
passage: "An Equal Representation of the people in the great Council of the
Nation, annual elections, and the universal right of suffrage, appear so
reasonable to the natural feelings of mankind, that no sophistry can elude the
force of the arguments which are urged in their favor; and they are rights of
so transcendent a nature, that in opposition to the claim of the people to
their enjoyment, the longest period of proscription is pleaded in vain. They
were substantially enjoyed in the times of the immortal Alfred; they were
cherished by the wisest princes of the Norman line; they form the grand
palladium of our nation; they ought not to be esteemed the grant of royal
favor; nor were they at first extorted by violence from the hand of power. They
are the birth right of Englishmen, their best inheritance, which, without the
complicated crimes of treason to their country, and injustice to their
posterity, they cannot alienate or resign. They form that triple cord of
strength, which alone can be relied on, to hold, in times of tempest, the
vessel of the state."

My lord, this charge, then, of having wished for universal suffrage and annual
parliaments, contains nothing criminal, nothing relevant to infer any
punishment at all; and much less the punishment that has been inflicted on the
crime of sedition. I am not now maintaining that a reform in parliament is
expedient, and still less that annual parliaments and universal suffrage should
be the mode of that reform. That mode may be improper -- so Mr. Fox thinks it,
in opposition to what Mr. Pit thinks, or at least, most certainly thought; and
so your Lordships, in opposition to Mr. Pit, may also think it. But, if the
duration of parliaments has been different at different times, if the elective
franchise has also been different at different times, and if our laws have
oftentimes varied and altered both, and may in future vary and alter them
again; then this is a subject upon which every inhabitant of the country is at
liberty to form his own opinion, and take such measures as he thinks proper for
promoting those changes of which he approves. In a matter of this kind, open to
the deliberation of all, the only question is, whether the measures taken are
legal. If illegal measures are employed either to promote or oppose a reform,
they are equally punishable in the one case as in the other. My lords, it is
here stated, that it was criminal to propose this reform in the convention; and
as actions, innocent in themselves, may be made criminal by their relations and
accompaniments -- so the public prosecutor maintains that this convention gives
the tinge of criminality to the proposed reform, in itself perfectly blameless.
But your lordships will attend to where this argument leads. It has been shown,
and I trust will scarcely be denied, that to meet in a convention for innocent
purposes is entirely innocent; on the other hand, it has been equally shown,
that it is not criminal to wish for annual parliaments, or universal suffrage;
but, says the public prosecutor, it is criminal to wish for universal suffrage
in a convention. This is strange arguing -- it is innocent to meet in a
convention; it is innocent to wish for universal suffrage and annual
parliaments; but it is criminal to meet in a convention, and there to wish for
universal suffrage and annual parliaments. So that these two actions, perfectly
innocent in themselves, when joined together form a crime. It is a common
saying, that two blacks cannot make a white; but it seems the converse holds
good, that two whites may make a black. It appears that these men have wished
for universal suffrage and annual parliaments, and that they have wished for it
in a convention; but if it be lawful to meet in a convention, without
expressing such a with, and if the wish itself be innocent, it is totally
impossible that these two acts, in themselves innocent, can form a crime. As in
arithmetic, a thousand ciphers will not make a single unit, so in morals, and
in law, a thousand innocent actions can never constitute one crime. I
apprehend, therefore, that I have shown that the great and general charge in
this indictment, of having become a member of this association, for the purpose
of obtaining universal suffrage and annual parliaments, contains in it nothing
illegal whatever.

It now remains to enquire, whether the resolutions, said to have been adopted,
and the speeches, said to have been made by the gentleman at your lordships
bar, contain in themselves any thing criminal; whether they show that he had
any intention contrary to, or different from the professed objects of the
convention, of which he was a member, that professed object being innocent.

The indictment goes on to state, that "in the whole form and manner of their
procedure, as well as in the principles they avowed and propagated, clearly and
unequivocally demonstrate, that their purposes were of the most dangerous and
destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness, and tending to
subvert the constitution of this realm; imitating, in the form and tenor of
their proceedings, the Convention of France, the public and avowed enemies of
this country; and with whom Great Britain then was, and still is, at war. The
members calling each other, at their meetings, by the name of citizen, dividing
themselves into sections, receiving reports from said sections, some of which
bear date, Liberty Court, Liberty Stairs, Liberty Hall, first year of the
British Convention, one and indivisible; and some of which have Vive la
Convention prefixed, and end with Ca ira; instituting primary societies,
provincial assemblies, and departments," and so forth. My lord, as to the words
Liberty Court, and Liberty Hall, they surely contain nothing criminal. Liberty,
both the word and the thing, has been long known, and I hope long will be so in
this country; there is nothing French in it. As to the French phrases, I admit
that they are very foolish; I cannot conceive that a person of the abilities of
this gentleman could have made use of them; and I believe it will be proved (if
this cause goes to proof) that he had no concern in them. When the old
despotism subsisted in France, French phrases were frequently used; but nobody
ever supposed that they who have adopted this foolish phraseology had any
intention of introducing French despotism into this country. Folly and guilt
are very different things. The use of such phrases may expose one to deserve
ridicule, but not to punishment.

But where would have been the crime, even if the resolutions of this
convention had been written in French altogether? However much we may abhor
French principles, we are not now making war upon the French language; such
contest would resemble the wars of the Greeks and Trojans; not those recorded
by Homer, and which have immortalised the plains of Ilium; but those battles of
a later date, commemorated by our own countryman, the Spectator, and which were
fought with less bloodshed in the gardens of Oxford. When it was first
attempted to introduce the study of Greek into that university, the attempt, as
your lordships know, was violently opposed. Graecum est, non potest legi was
then the sentence of condemnation pronounced upon a book, and the signal of
hostility against all who presumed to read it. The Trojans, however, were
defeated; the study of Greek was introduced, and has flourished at Oxford, and
no SEDITION has followed it.

My lords, the indictment has been read, and therefore I will not go at length
into it. Here is a long speech, said to have been uttered by the gentleman at
the bar, which contains a great deal of matter, tending, no doubt, to make all
these persons with for annual parliaments and universal suffrage. The
conclusion of this speech winds up the whole matter. "Let us then endeavor to
instruct the people in our rights, and to inform them of our views and our
intentions; they will come and sign our petitions, and we shall be enabled to
send them up subscribed by a majority of the people. The voice of the people
will be heard wherever it is spoken in the language of truth, and by a number
to respectable as to command attention; and it will soon have that
respectability, if we have reason on our side." I see that the word command is
here put in italics, as if it implied or suggested the least idea that violence
or force was intended. The word must be explained by its correlative, the
substantive which it governs, attention. It cannot imply that he was to make
use of force to gain attention, but to seek for numbers, as convinced of the
truth and utility of what he proposed; and if numbers and truth cannot procure
attention, what can? The tenor of this paragraph, as I have said, sums up the
import of his whole speech, and shows that nothing like force was intended. It
expressly states "let us then endeavor to instruct the people in their rights,
and to inform them of our views and our intentions; they will come and sign our
PETITIONS." It is not in the form of petition that those persons appear who
mean to use violence: it is impossible, therefore, that a word used
figuratively can imply that violence was meant, or could possibly be intended.

But if I am rightly informed, considerable stress has been laid in former
trials upon this resolution, said to have been come to by the convention. The
indictment states, that "the said association, or meeting, did wickedly and
feloniously, then and there, all the members standing on their feet, solemnly
and unanimously come to a resolution of the following import or tenor, That
this convention, considering the calamitous consequences of any act of the
legislature may tend to deprive the whole, or any part of the people, of their
undoubted right to meet, either by themselves, or by delegation, to discuss any
matter relative to their common interest, whether of a public or private
nature, and holding the same to be totally inconsistent with the first
principles and safety of society, and also subversive of our known and
acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby declare, before God and the
world, that we shall follow the wholesome example of former times by paying no
regard to any act which shall militate against the constitution of our country;
and shall continue to assemble, and consider of the best means by which we can
accomplish a real representation of the people, and annual election, until
compelled to desist by superior force." Now what is contained in this
resolution? It contains a declaration that they will not yield obedience to an
act which has never yet even been proposed in our parliament; and which, I
trust, the situation of this country will never be such as to render necessary.
What they say is this, they will not yield obedience to an act if it should
pass, not to an act of parliament in existence, but an act which exists in
potentia only, which is no more law than the most extravagant proposition that
can be conceived. If this is criminal, it is a crime of a most anomalous and
extraordinary nature. They would not yield obedience to that which, perhaps,
never might be a law; this, I say; is a crime of such an anomalous and
non-descript nature, that I know not under what term, or what degree of
punishment it can fall. But at any rate, certainly the crime of saying that I
will not yield obedience to an act, if it should pass, cannot be equivalent to
disobeying an act after it has passed. Now to what consequences may this lead?
I shall suppose that an act had passed prohibiting conventions; that it had
said that no convention was to assemble, to deliberate upon any public subject;
and that any persons who might afterward meet, should be liable to a fine of
20l. and imprisonment for a month. After this law a convention meets, in
opposition to the act, they are accordingly dispersed, and the persons guilty
are punished according to the penalty stated in the act; but these men who have
not disobeyed any act, they having only resolved to disobey such an act if it
should be passed, are to be punished with fourteen years transportation to
Botany Bay! Such are the consequences that may follow; the members of this
convention are to undergo a punishment beyond all ordinary bounds, for only
having declared their intention to disobey an act, not in existence; while
those, who in fact should disobey it, might be liable only in a trifling
penalty.

My lords, I say again, that it is impossible that any violence could have been
here intended, because if they were to disobey this supposed act, how were they
to disobey it? They must have met in an unarmed and peaceable convention; for
it is by so meeting alone, that they could act in disobedience of such a
statute. If they had assembled, or if they or any other persons should be bold
enough to assemble now, in an armed convention, they would not disobey a
statute similar to that passed in Ireland; they could only disobey that by
meeting in a peaceable, quiet, and orderly manner, to deliberate on public
affairs. But if they had met violently and armed, it would have been in
opposition to statutes that have long existed in this country; and of which the
enactments are fully competent to repress all such illegal violence.

My lords, this is taking the resolution in its very worst sense; but take
this, which may be considered as the preamble of the resolutions, and let it be
explained by the resolutions which follow: the first resolution here is, "that
the first notice given for the introduction of a convention-bill, or any bill
of a similar tendency to that passed in Ireland, in the last session of their
parliament, or any bill for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, or the act
for preventing wrongous imprisonment, and against undue delays in trials in
North Britain, or in case of an invasion, or the admission of any foreign
troops whatever into Great Britain or Ireland; all, or any one of these
calamitous circumstances shall be a signal to the different delegates, to
repair to such place as the secret committee of this convention shall appoint."

Now, your lordships will observe, when, and on what oocasion they were to meet
-- they were to meet, not after the statute had passed, but when a bill was
introduced for passing it -- what could be the object of such meeting? It must
be to prevent it passing into a law, and to remonstrate, as they had a right to
do, against the passing of it. They meant to petition parliament, supported by
such numbers, undoubtedly, as they could procure, to prevent such a bill from
becoming the law of the land. The object of their meeting, therefore, was to
use their best endeavors, in a constitutional manner, to prevent this bill
from being passed into a law; and this resolution clearly proves that they
meant to meet when the bill was brought in, not for the purpose of disobeying
an act, but to prevent it, by all lawful means, from being made an act binding
the subjects of this country to obedience. They were to meet upon the
introduction of a convention-bill, or of a bill for the suspension of the
Habeas Corpus Act, or of the act for preventing wrongous imprisonment; that is,
they were to meet in order to remonstrate, in a constitutional manner, with
parliament against the repeal of those salutary statutes which guard the rights
and liberties of us all. Again, in case of an invasion, the folly of the
resolution is also stated in the indictment as criminal, that "the first seven
members shall have power to declare the sittings permanent, and twenty-one
shall constitute a convention, and proceed to business." Instead of any thing
criminal here, all is innocence. If twenty-one were to constitute a convention,
they could not surely be an armed force to assist the invaders, they could with
difficulty even have repelled them. There is also stated in this indictment, a
second speech, said to be made by the gentleman at the bar, of which I shall
read the conclusion. It is printed in Italic, and therefore, I presume the
public prosecutor meant to lay particular stress upon it. "If the servility of
the people had been less, if they had dared to meet, and in place of murmuring,
to have told their rulers that there was danger in seeking to deprive them of
their liberties, we would not have had to adopt this resolution tonight, but
when I saw the calm deliberate countenances of all present, and the solemn
manner in which it was passed, I was convinced that it would not only be a
resolution of words but a rule of action." Now, what is a resolution but a rule
of action? My lord, every resolution is, or ought to be, a rule of action, and
is intended to be such when it is formed: this, therefore, is a very proper
expression to enforce and explain more fully the deliberate nature of the
resolution entered into, to meet and endeavor to oppose such a bill from
passing into a law, a bill to prevent peaceable and unarmed conventions from
meeting in this country.

The indictment goes on to state, that the said meeting came to a resolution,
"That a secret committee of three and the secretary be appointed to determine
the place where such convention of emergency shall meet. That such place shall
remain a secret with them, and with the secretary of this convention, and that
each delegate shall, at the breaking up of the present session, be entrusted
with a sealed letter, containing the name of the place of meeting. This letter
shall be delivered unopened to his constituents, the receipt of which shall be
acknowledged by a letter to the secretary, preserved in the same state, until
the period shall arrive at which it shall be deemed necessary for the delegate
to set out." Here is much secrecy, but nothing else. And secrecy was necessary
if peaceable conventions were to be prohibited. But an armed force cannot meet
in secrecy, unless we are to suppose that the members of this convention were
to assemble like the troops of Mr. Bays in disguise. The secrecy which they
here observe is the surest proof of their innocence and peaceable intentions.

My lord, in going through the whole of this indictment, I can perceive nothing
relevant in it to infer the crime of sedition, or any other crime. The meeting
itself was innocent, the object they had in view was innocent, and the speeches
and resolutions said to have been made are also innocent; insomuch as they were
merely calculated to promote the avowed object of the convention. They wished
for the support of numbers; but for what? To petition parliament. They were
anxious that a bill should not be brought into parliament to prevent peaceable
assemblies from meeting; and therefore they say they will prevent such bill, as
far as they can, from passing into a law. This also was necessary for the
attainment of their object. All that can be said against them, therefore,
amounts to this, that they took the best measures they could for accomplishing
their purpose of obtaining a parliamentary reform; a purpose legal in itself,
and which, on all hands, is admitted to be, in a certain degree, necessary.

At all events, I humbly apprehend, that the facts stated in this indictment
can only amount to verbal sedition -- that there has been in this case, no
commotion, no rising of the people, and that speeches uttered, or resolutions
formed, can only amount to verbal sedition, or leasing-making.

In order to show this, I must trouble your lordships with reading the
definitions given of sedition by our law writers, comparing them with the
charges set forth in the indictment, and also with the statutes respecting
verbal sedition.

The first is Sir George Mackenzie, book 1, title 7, who says, "Sedition is a
commotion of the people, without authority; and if it be such as tends to the
disturbing of the government, ad exitium principis vel senatorum ejus and
mutationem reipublicae, it is treason; but if it only be raised upon any
private account, it is not properly called treason, but it is, with us, called
a convocation of the lieges."

Sedition, therefore, is a commotion of the people, or a rising of the people,
without authority, according to the definition given of it by this great lawyer.

A similar definition is given by Forbes, book 3, title 2, sect. 1, "Sedition
is a commotion or rising of the people without authority, in order to do any
thing tending to a disturbance of the public peace, though the design be not
executed, which is raised upon a public or private account."

According to Erskine, the crime consists in raising comm^^^^ns or disturbances
in the state.

I believe a definition more full and more accurate is given of this crime by
Dr. Boyd, in his Justice of Peace, in book 1, title 5, "Sedition is any
commotion or rising of the people, without lawful authority, and which tends to
the disturbance of the public peace of the kingdom."

My lord, every one of these definitions represent sedition, not as consisting
in peaceable convocations, or in the speeches and resolutions of such
convocations, but as consisting in commotions of risings of the people.

Accordingly there is a most material distinction to be made between commotions
and risings and speeches and resolutions tending to excite commotions and
risings. These speeches are termed seditious, but the expression is figurative:
they are seditious merely on account of their tendency to excite commotions and
risings of the people, which is really sedition; and this distinction is
expressly pointed out by several of our statutes.

A man who makes speeches and resolutions, the tendency of which is to excite
commotions, is guilty of verbal sedition, but is not guilty of that crime which
he has failed to commit; he is not guilty of those commotions which his
seditious speeches tended ineffectually to produce. If a person excites another
to murder, and the deed is not perpetrated, he is not an accessory to the
murder; he may be punished undoubtedly by the laws of this country, but he is
not guilty of that murder which he instigated, but which he instigated in vain.
In the same manner, these people may be guilty of having endeavored to excite
disturbances, but they cannot be punished as guilty of those commotions which
have not existed. This important distinction is fully recognized in several of
our acts of parliament. In the acts 1555, chap. 60, in the reign of Queen Mary:

For-sa-meikle as diverse seditious persons hes, in times bypast, raised
amaungst the commoun people, murmures and sclanders, speaking against the
queenis grace, and sawing evil brute anent the may Christian King of France,
his subjectes sent in this realm for the commoun weill, and suppressing of the
auld enemies forth of the samin, tending throw raising of sik rumors to steir
the hearts of the subjectes to hatrent against the prince, and sedition
betuixt the lieges of this realm and the may Christian kingis lieges
foresaidis: and, for eschewing of sik inconvenientes as micht follow thereupon:
it is devised, statute and ordained, that gif onie persons in times cumming,
be heard speakand sik unreasonable commoning, quhair-throw the people may
take occasion of sik prievie conspiracy against the prince, or sedition
against the may Christian kingis subjectes foresaidis, the samin, being
proven, fall be punished according to the quality of the fault, in their
bodies and gudes, at the ^^^enis grace pleasure: And, in case the hearer
thereof report not the samin unto the queenis grace or her officiares, to the
effect that the samin may be punished, as accordis, that he fall incur the
saidis pains, quhiikis the principal speaker or raiser of sik murmures
deservis. In no less than two places this is pointed out, 'tending throw
raising sik murmures,' to excite sedition, and again, quhair-throw the people
may take occasion of sik prievie conspiracy.

Lord Justice Clerk. What is the punishment?

Mr. Gillies. In their bodies and goods at the queen's grace pleasure. The next
is the act 1584, chap. 134; this act points out still more clearly the
distinction I just now stated:

For-sa-meikle as it is understand to our sovereign lord and his three estates,
assembled in this present parliament quhat great harm and inconveniente hes
fallen in this realm, chiefly sen the beginning of the civil troubles
occurred in the time of his heines minority, throw the wicked and licentious
public and private speeches, and untrew calumnies of diverse his subjectes, to
the disdain, contempt and reproach of his majesty, his council and proceedings,
and to the dishonor and prejudice of his heines, his parents, progenitors and
estate; steirring up his heines subjectes theirby to misliking, sedition,
unquietnes, and to cast off their dew obedience to his majesty to their
evident perrel, tinsel, and destruction, his heines continuing always in love
and clemency, toward all his good subjectes, and may willing to seek the
safety and preservation of them all, quhilkis wilfully needles, and upon
plain malice, after his heines mercy and pardon, often times afoir granted hes
procured themselves be their treasonable deeds to be cut off as corrupt members
of this common weill: Therefore, it is statute and ordained be our sovereign
lord, and his three estaites, in this present parliament, that nane of his
subjectes (of quhat-sumever function, degree, or quality, in time cumming)
fall presume, or take upon hand privately or publicly, in sermones,
declamationes, or familiar conferences, to utter any false, slanderous, or
untrew speeches, to the disdain, reproach, and contempt of his majesty, his
council, and proceedings, or to the dishonor, hurt, or prejudice of his heines,
his parents, and progenitors, or to meddle in the affairs of his heines* and
his estate present, by-gane and in time cumming, under the peines contained in
the acts of parliament, against makers and tellers of leesinges: Certifieing
them that fall be tried contraveners theirof, or that hearis sik slanderous
speeches, and reports not the same with diligence, the said pain fall be
executed against them with all rigor, in exemple of utheris.

In consequence of the union of the two crowns, in the reign of James VI.
another act passed, to prevent national differences between the Scotch and
English, from being excited by speeches and harangue, 1609, chap. 9. The
preamble of the act shows that it was historically such as I have stated to
your lordship. For remeed and preventing whereof, his majesty remembering how
strait and sever punishment, hes by the laws and acts of his may royal
progenitors, kings of this realm heretofore, been ordered to be inflicted upon
sik as should devise or utter false and slanderous speeches and writtes, to
make dissentions between the prince and his subjects, or raise sedition in the
realm, and considering that all sik purposes and writtes, as may breed
dislyking between the inhabitants of the said kingdoms of Scotland and
England, being now all become his majesty's liege people, equally subject and
equally beloved of heighnes, tenas to may dangerous dissension and sedition
amangs his subjects; therefore, his majesty, with advyce and consent of the
haill estaites of this parliament, statutes and ordeines, that whatsoever shall
hereafter, by word or write, devise, utter, or publish, any false, slanderous,
or reprochful speeches or writtes, of the estate, people, or country of
England or of any counselor thereof, tending to the remembrance of the
ancient grudge borne in time of bypast troubles (the occasion whereof is now
happily abolished by the blessed conjunction of the said kingdoms, under his
majesty's soveraignitie and obedience) or to the hinderance of the wished
accomplishment of the perfect union of the said kingdoms, or to the slander
or reproach of the estate, people, or country of England, or dishonor, or
prejudice of any counselor of the said kingdom whereby hatred may be fostred
and entertained, or mislyking raised between his majesty's faithful subjects of
this isle. The authors of sik seditious, slanderous, and injurious speeches or
writtes, or dispersers thereof, after tryell taken of their offense, either
before his majesty's justice, or the lords of his hienes privy counsel, shall
be severelie punished in their persons and gudes, by imprisonment, banishment,
fyning or mait rigorous corporal pain.

These are the statutes that point out, as I said before, and fully recognize
the evident distinction that exists between commotions and risings of the
people, and speeches or writings, tending to excite those commotions. Your
lordships will also observe, that the crime stated in the act 1606 consists in
endeavoring to excite disturbances, by sermons, declamations, or familiar
conferences. Now, the declamations here mentioned, as distinct from sermons,
upon the one hand, or familiar conferences on the other, must be precisely the
same as the speech said to have been made by this gentleman, or the resolutions
of the other members of the convention. It cannot be supposed that persons
would declaim in the fields where there were none to hear them. Their
declamations must have been addressed to an assembly of the people, met
together, like this convention, in a room; or which would have been still more
criminal, and of still more dangerous tendency, they must have been addressed
to any accidental assemblage of people upon the public streets.

But it is charged against this convention, that their object, though professed
to be a reform in the representation of the Commons House of Parliament, was
really to overturn the government, and subvert the constitution of this
country; and, it has been said, that the tendency of these speeches, joined to
the intention with which they were uttered, converts this crime from verbal,
into real sedition; that this circumstance takes it out of the case of
leasing-making, where speeches are uttered, not with the evil intention that is
ascribed to these persons, of subverting the constitution of the country, and
changes it into real sedition, a crime of a different nature, and of a blacker
dye.

My lords, if those persons formed a plan, and entered into a resolution, of
overturning this constitution, and if that resolution is indicated by their
actions, they are not guilty of sedition, but of high treason; and for that
crime let them be indicted. I say again, if they formed this intention to
overturn the government of this country, and if this intention appears from
their proceedings, they ought not to have been tried on an indictment such as
this, but on a charge of high treason itself; a crime for which no punishment
your lordships can here inflict is at all adequate. In the proceedings of the
convention itself there is no proof of any such design. If such an intention
was proved from their proceedings, the crime would be treason. The consequences
are obvious. If the intention is not proved, the public prosecutor is not
entitled to presume it, and arguing upon that presumption, to accuse this
gentleman of a greater crime than what arises from his speeches, according to
their plain and direct meaning. The intention of subverting the government is
not here indicated in the way that the laws of treason require; that is, there
is no sufficient proof of it, not even a vestige of evidence that could enable
the public prosecutor to bring my client to trial for high treason. Did there
exist any such proof, then the public prosecutor has neglected his duty, in not
bringing an indictment for this crime. He cannot be permitted to say, that the
proof of high treason being defective, he was obliged to charge for another
offense, which very offense was to be aggravated by the treasonable intention
he could not prove: the want of proof of one crime is not the proof of another
crime. This would be to overturn all judicial procedure, to subvert every
notion of jurisprudence. The members of this convention have formed that
intention which is ascribed to them, of overturning the government of this
country, or they have not. Their having formed it, is proved, or it is not
proved. If it is proved, they are guilty of high treason. If it is not proved,
this criminal intention must be laid out of consideration altogether, and
cannot be permitted to aggravate the degree, much less to alter the nature of
the offense charged in the indictment. The deficiency of proof of one crime can
never give rise to a new, or a different crime; if I am accused of murder, and
if evidence of the fact, that I committed the homicide is wanting, will that
ever constitute a charge of manslaughter? I say that the deficient proof of a
greater crime can never constitute a lesser crime -- let the lesser crime be
charged and punished as such, or let the greater crime be charged and punished
as such. If it was the intention of the members of this convention to overturn
the government of this country, they are guilty of treason. -- If it was not
their intention it ought not to be charged; and they are guilty of no crime at
all.

Whether this gentleman at the bar has ever formed such intention is known to
his own breast. Whether he has ever formed such intention is ever known to that
Being, and to that Being alone, who can search the hearts of men, and without
aid of external circumstances, pronounce upon the secret motives of their
conduct. But no human judge can assume this prerogative, -- can presume guilt
from constructions put upon speeches; constructions which may be different by
different persons, and at different times; no man can lay his hand upon his
heart, and upon constructions of this sort say, that this gentleman has formed
any such intention. Even, whatever may be his own opinion, he is not entitled
to act, upon that opinion here; as no legal proof of any sort has been brought,
and no constructive proof of treason is known to our laws. I am speaking here
as if the strange and illegal practices could be permitted, of bringing forward
a higher crime, not to be punished itself, but as the aggravation of an
inferior offense. Even in such preposterous proceedings, could this practice be
countenanced for a moment, there is, in the present case, no evidence on which
such aggravation could be placed.

My lords, the whole actions and proceedings of this convention may fairly, and
with probability, and so far as it strikes my mind, can only be ascribed to
their wishes to attain the proposed object which they had in view, a reform in
the House of Gommons, by the introduction of universal suffrage and annual
parliaments. They may also have proceeded from the treasonable intention
ascribed to them. But where these matters are doubtful, where the writings and
resolutions of men may be ascribed either to bad or good motives, humanity and
justice both require that they should be ascribed to motives that are good.
When these resolutions express an avowed purpose, and when these men declare,
in all their speeches and motions, that they wished not to subvert, but to
reform the constitution, will you say from those very speeches and resolutions,
that this was not their purpose? Are you, from speeches containing declarations
that they wished for reform, to conclude that they did not wish for reform? Are
you from speeches containing declarations that they wished to support the
constitution, to conclude that they wished to subvert it? This is straining
constructive evidence to a great length indeed. Those are questions upon which
men, in their closets, and in private life, may entertain different opinions;
but your lordships know, much better than I do, what the strictness of judicial
evidence requires. We cannot receive in evidence those things which in private
life may convince us of the truth or probability of any fact. I say now,
therefore, as I said before, that could the proof of such intention be
adm^^ted, as aggravating the lesser offense charged, still there is no ^roof of
the aggravation.

My lord, it may be stated that the circumstances of the times in another
country, may afford a proof of the intentions of these men. Upon this it does
not become me to speak in this place; but, with regard to the French
Revolution, I shall only say, that two views may be taken of it in as far as it
respects England -- Those scenes of bloodshed that have been exhibited there,
may show us the danger of innovation on the one hand; but the very same
circumstances may show us, on the other hand, the propriety of adopting a
timely and moderate reform. A delay of reformation, may, as many think, have
produced those transactions which we all in common deplore. Some men may be
impressed with this event, so as to stifle all desire of reformation. To
others, with equally virtuous views, it may appear that this very revolution is
an additional argument for obtaining a moderate and timely reform in the
representation -- Here again the case comes to be the same as before. Who is
entitled to search into this man's breast? He, perhaps, can lay his hand upon
his bosom and say, that he viewed the French Revolution, as holding out to as a
warning not to be too dilatory in obtaining a moderate reform, before the
people are stirred up to those excesses which have been committed in France.

The circumstances of the times then which are brought forward to aggravate the
offenses of these men, may in their own breasts form their justification;
because they may consider the French Revolution as evincing the necessity and
propriety of adopting a moderate and timely reform. Here then I apprehend that
no stress can be laid upon circumstances which operate in two ways; which in
one view, may operate to criminate this gentleman, and in another view, may be
the very proofs of his innocence and virtue.

My lord, setting aside this intention of overturning the constitution, no
vestige of a crime remains. Even with this intention, since there has been no
commotion, no rising of the people, and since words spoken, whatever may be
their purport, can never constitute real sedition, still the only offense is
verbal sedition. This has not been a frequent crime; but it is a crime not
altogether unknown to our laws. In the records of this Court there are two
instances of trials for leasing-making or verbal sedition, upon a statute which
I shall hereafter have occasion to notice; the act 1703. The offenses which
were in those cases charged against the pannels, I apprehend to have been at
least as criminal as those which are laid to the charge of this gentleman.

On February 1st, 1715, John Gratham and others were indicted for
leasing-making and slanderous speeches, tending to excite sedition, and
alienate the affections of his majesty's subjects from his person and
government, by setting up the false pretensions of another. The corpus delicti
was drinking the pretender's health at the Tron Church, by the name of James
VIII. and his happy restoration. This was a crime which was then thought to
amount to leasing-making, and accordingly it was tried upon that statute.

Upon the 27th June, in the same year, John Oliphant, Alexander Wilson, William
Ramsey, bailies of Dundee, William Lion, of Ogle, treasurer, and J. Watson,
vintner, were indicted upon the same statute, and the same offense of
leasing-making, inasmuch as for abetting the pretender's right, they did go
upon the 10th of June, (the pretender's birthday) to the cross of Dundee, and,
in a solemn manner, drank his health, by the title of King James, VIII. king of
those realms; and on the 20th, of June 1715, a thanksgiving appointed by
parliament for the king's accession, when the bells were ringing, they went up
and prevented their ringing, and cursed the king.

I shall leave it to your lordship to decide, whether the crimes of which these
men were convicted be not far more atrocious than the offenses charged against
this gentleman; and at a time too when rebellion raged in this country: -- at
that very time they were thought to amount to leasing-making or verbal sedition
only.

My lord, I now come to enquire as to the punishment to be inflicted.
Punishments upon the old acts are prohibited by a passage in the Claim of
Rights, which I formerly read, and shall now read again to your lordships.
Having particularly in their view this provision in the Bill of Rights, the
Legislature passed the act 1703 chap. 4. (Reads.) "Our sovereign lady
considering that by the acts of parliament following," reciting a number of
acts, "the crimes therein mentioned are made capital, and punishable by death
and confiscation, and that the said laws have been liable to streatches, and
that in respect of their generality, and the various construction which the
same may admit, they may be, as to the foresaid capital punishment, of
dangerous consequence, Does therefore, with advice and consent of the Estates
of Parliament, abrogate and discharge, in all time coming, the foresaid
sanction and pain of death and confiscation, contained in the said acts; and
statutes and ordains, that the punishment of the crimes mentioned shall, for
hereafter, only be arbitrary, according to the demerit of the transgression;
that is, by sining, imprisonment, or banishment; or if the party offender be
poor, and not able to pay a fine, then to be punished in his body (life and
limb always preserved.")

My lord, one of the acts repealed by this statute is the act of 1584, chap.
134, where the offense was, as I formerly stated, directly the same as that
charged here, that is, declaiming in public against the government of the
country. I need not again repeat that declamations cannot be uttered in a
desert, where nobody can hear them, or in a private room, to a private company;
they must be addressed either to such an assembly as this convention, or to the
world at large, in the streets, which would have been still more dangerous; and
therefore, this act being one of those repealed by the statute of 1703, the
punishment of this last statute can only be inflicted upon the crime.

The question comes then to be what is the punishment enacted by this statute,
under the word banishment. With regard to transportation, your lordships know
this was a punishment altogether unknown in this country till the reign of
Charles II. It was then introduced by the Privy Council, in imitation of what
had been done in England, for the purpose of repressing the religious sectaries.

Upon this subject the authority of Sir George Mackenzie seems to be decisive:
"But with us no judge can confine a man whom banisheth to any place without his
jurisdiction; because he has no jurisdiction over other countries, and so
cannot make any acts, nor pronounce any sentences relative to them." Again, in
another place he says, "As to the sending away people to the plantations. It is
answered, That none were sent away but such as were taken at Bothwel Bridge, or
in Argyle's Rebellion; and the turning capital punishment into exile, was an
act of clemency, not of cruelry." If transportation had been a punishment at
common law, I apprehend, Sir George Mackenzie must have been too well
acquainted with that law to think an apology for government necessary. The
apology which he makes is, that these men had committed a capital offense, and
therefore, says he, the turning capital punishment into exile, was an act of
clemency and mercy, as otherwise they might have been punished by death. I
therefore apprehend, that the punishment of transportation could only be
inflicted in the case, that Sir George Mackenzie states, or where it is
expressly pointed out by statutes, or in cases where the punishment is
altogether discretionary, which it is not under the act 1703.

The Roman law has, as your lordships know, made a material distinction between
banishment and transportation. Under a law authorizing the punishment of
regulatio merely, the more severe punishment of deportatio in insulam could not
have been inflicted.

In judging of a matter of this kind, where a statute has expressly declared,
that the punishment of these offenses is to be banishment, the first thing to
be done is to enquire into the common signification of the word 'banishment.'
My lord, this is not a legal or a technical phrase: the whole world are bound
to understand it; and it ought not so much to be referred to law-writers as to
commnon-sense, and the etymology of the English language. It is a question of
philology, rather than of law; and holding it to be such, I refer to the
authothority of Dr. Johnson. He gives the following explanation: 'To banish, to
condemn to leave one's own country;' not a word of sending to another country.
The examples given are the words addressed by Macduff to Malcolm: "O fare thee
well!
Those evils thou repeat'st, upon thyself,
Have banished me from Scotland."
Another signification of the word is 'to drive away:' Banish business, banish
sorrow,
To the gods belongs tomorrow.'


If your lordships could banish business, and banish sorrow along with it to
Botany Bay, we should all be much obliged to you.

My lord, with regard to the statute 1703, chap. 4, I apprehend, that by the
recital of the acts therein given, there is demonstrative evidence afforded of
the meaning of the word banishment. The statute 1609, chap. 9, which is quoted
and its penalty partly repealed by the act of Queen Anne, 1703, declares that
the persons convicted under it 'shall be severely punished in their persons and
goods, by imprisonment, banishment, fining, or more rigorous corporal pain.' At
the time this statute was passed, in 1609, it cannot be maintained, and is not
pretended, that transportation was known in this country, because this country
had then no jurisdiction beyond itself. If banishment, therefore, in the act
1703, signifies transportation, it must be made use of at once, in two
different and contradictory senses. In the act: 609, banishment merely means,
and can only mean, exile from Scotland. In the other acts recited in the
repealing statute 1703, banishment, according to the public prosecutor, means
transportation, that is, imprisonment in some foreign country, attended with
every thing that is ignominious and painful. The term banishment, thus, in the
act 1703, means, by this construction both or either of these punishments,
altogether different in themselves, and of which we know certainly, that the
one was not meant in one of the statutes repealed, and no evidence is brought
that it was meant in any of the others. Such a construction is insufferable.
The word banishment must be understood in one simple sense; and that is the
sense in which it is employed in the act 1609.

Were it otherwise, the consequences are as absurd as they are dreadful. If the
word banishment cannot be employed in two senses in the accurate language of a
repealing statute, and if its simple sense be not exile from Scotland, but
transportation, then the act, intended, and bearing, to be a mitigation of
punishment, would increase, and in an enormous degree, the severity of
punishment. The act 1609, repealed for its severity, is rendered still more
severe. Transportation comes in place of banishment; and thus the Legislature,
who in passing the statute of 1703, intended it as an act of mercy, have in
reality committed an act of cruelty; instead of lessening, they have increased
the severity of the punishment which then existed.

My lord, it has been said, that to sentence these men merely to exile from
Scotland, would be preposterous, as it would not be an adequate punishment, and
because it would leave them opportunities of committing the same offenses in
England. But if this is a preposterous penalty, I am sure the same preposterous
thing is committed twenty times every year by your lordships; for how often is
it that you banish thieves and pickpockets forth of Scotland, leaving them at
liberty to go to England, where, as people's pockets are generally better
filled than they are here, persons of this description will be enabled to
exercise their profession with much greater advantage and success? But, my
lords, a punishment so well known, in our own law, and in the laws of every
country, as banishment, can never be called preposterous.

I stated two trials in the beginning of the present century: John Graham was
indicted for "leasing-making, and the utterance of slanderous speeches, tending
to excite sedition, and alienate the affections of his majesty's subjects from
his person and government; setting up the false and scandalous pretensions of
another, by drinking the pretender's health, at the Tron Church, by the name of
James VIII. and his happy restoration." My lord, there were other persons
concerned in this crime besides him; the verdict was, "the crime not proven
against Graham and Hay, but found proven against Crawford, upon his own
confession:" the sentence was, "that he be amerciated in a fine of 50 l.
sterling, and imprisoned till security found for payment."

My lords, in the other case of "John Oliphant, Alexander Wilson, and William
Ramsay, bailies of Dundee, William Lion, of Ogle, treasurer, J. Watson,
vintner, indicted on the statute of Anne, and the acts contained in it, of
leasing-making, etc. inasmuch as for abetting the pretender's right, they did
go on the 10th of June, the pretender's birthday, to the cross of Dundee, and
in a solemn manner, drink his health, by the title of King James VIII. king of
these realms; and on the 20th of June 1715, a thanksgiving appointed by
parliament for the king's accession, when the bells were ringing, Oliphant went
up to the steeple, and prevented their ringing, and cursed the king."

11th July, 1715.
"The Lords Justice Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, having considered
the verdict of assize, returned on the 5th of July instant, against the said
John Oliphant, etc. pannels, they, in respect thereof, by the mouth of Charles
Kinross, Macer of Court, deprive the said John Oliphant, etc. of their offices
of bailies of Dundee, and the said William Lion, of his office of treasurer of
the said burgh, and declare the said John Oliphant incapable of enjoying any
public office or trust within the said burgh, or within that part of Great
Britain called Scotland, in all time coming, and declare the said Alexander
Watson, and Mr. Thomas Wilson, incapable of enjoying any public office or
trust, in the said burgh of Dundee, in all time coming, and also, declare the
said Mr. William Ramsay and Mr. William Lion, incapable of enjoying any public
office or trust, within the said burgh, for the space of three years next*
after the date hereof; And sick-like, the said lords fine and amerciate the
said John Oliphant, in the sum of two hundred merks Scots, and the said
Alexander Watson in the sum of 100 l. Scots, and the said Mr. Thomas Wilson, in
the sum of one hundred merks Scots money, foresaid, to be paid to his majesty's
Receiver General for his highness use: And ordain, the said John Oliphant,
Alexander Watson, and Mr. William Ramsay, William Lion, and Mr. Thomas Wilson,
to be carried to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, there to remain until the 10th of
August next, inclusive: And the said John Oliphant, Alexander Watson, and Mr.
Thomas Wilson, to remain thereafter in the said prison, until they make payment
of their said respective fines: And ordain, the ma^^strates of Edinburgh, to
set the persons of the said Mr. William Ramsay, William Lion, at liberty, forth
of the said Tolbooth, after the said day: And also, to set the persons of the
other three pannels at liberty, after elapsing of the said day, upon producing
their respective discharges of the said fines, which is pronounced for doom."

In these cases your lordships will observe, that an enormous offense had been
commmitted against the government; and you have heard the ^^^ishment that was
inflicted: whether it was, or was not equivalent to the offense, I leave
entirely to your impartial consideration. But my lord, certainly the
circumstances of the times then were at least as dangerous as the present.
Actual rebellion followed, and many unfortunate men fell in the contest. If any
circumstances could justify the extreme severity of a sentence they were those
which then existed. But all that it was thought necessary to do then was, to
inflict the small punishment which your lordships have heard. I may also
notice, that in the last of these cases, the pannels had been convicted of two
offenses, leasing-making, and a malversation in office as magistrates. Being
thus guilty of two crimes, the accumulated punishments of fining, deprivation
and imprisonment were inflicted upon them. --

Having said so much, I shall now conclude. Before sitting down I must yet
mention one consideration personal to this unfortunate gentleman himself. His
state of health is feeble, and in regard even to this there ought to be some
measure of the punishment. Should he reach his place of exile, his punishment
will indeed be severe. A man of high talents, of a cultivated understanding, is
to be condemned to the communion of thieves and villains, the refuse and dregs
of the human race! In such society he is to be sent to the desolate shores of
the remote southern ocean. From those hapless regions it may, perhaps, be
possible to return; but from his state of health it is highly probable that
this gentleman will never even arrive at his miserable destination. His
sentence of exile will have been to that 'undiscovered country, from whose
bourn no traveller returns.'

I know that the humanity of your lordships will make you pause before you
pronounce a judgment of which such must be the consequences.

Lord Justice Clerk. Mr. Gillies, you have done ample justice to your client,
you have managed his defense in a very able manner.

Mr. Montgomery. My lord, after the very able and full discussion which this
question underwent a fortnight ago, not only by your lordships, but by the
counsel on both sides, I should consider myself much to blame, were I to
consume a great deal of your lordship's time, by entering at large again into
the field of argument then stated, because I feel myself incapable of giving
any additional illustration or adding weight to the argument then so ably
stated by the Solicitor General.

My lords, the counsel for the panel has endeavored to maintain before your
lordships a variety of propositions, all of which it is incumbent upon him to
make out before his client can derive any benefit from them. The first was,
that this libel was too general, that it includes verbal sedition, and that
therefore such a general indictment ought not to be found relevant to the
knowledge of an assize. It is very true, both verbal and real sedition are
known to the laws of this country; but it is not from the major proposition
alone that he is to learn which is meant to be charged; but he is to look to
the minor proposition, and if there is such a thing existing in the law of this
country as real sedition he will there find it.

His next proposition is, that if this indictment is not on account of its
generality to be laid aside entirely, it must be presumed that simple sedition,
or leasing-making, only is the crime laid, and that your lordship in the
interlocutor would so find it; and he instanced the case by an example which I
should have taken to prove the contrary; for it is very well known, that, for
the crime of theft, either a capital or an arbitrary punishment may be
inflicted. The usual mode of laying indictments is the same, that the crime is
of a heinous nature, and severely punishable; and from the minor proposition
you are to learn whether it is such a crime as will infer an arbitrary or a
capital punishment.

My lords, he has stated three different propositions: In the first place, that
there is nothing criminal set forth in the indictment, and that therefore it
ought to be dismissed entirely, because it contains nothing upon which
punishment can be inflicted. In the second place, that if there is any thing
criminal, it can only amount to leasing-making, which infers a smaller
punishment, and not to real sedition, which infers a greater punishment.

And the object of both these propositions was to make way for the last and
main object, namely, to show that under the term banishment in the act 1703,
exile from Scotland, only, and not transportation was intended.

My lord, with regard to the first that there is noting criminal charged in the
libel, I should think it an indignity offered to your lordships and to the
jurors who tried the former cases, and found those persons guilty, to take up
much time in proving that it contains matter highly criminal and deserving of
very great punishment. Mr. Gilles asked if there was any thing wicked, if there
was any thing seditious, or if there was any thing criminal in using the words
ca ira, or in using French terms in this convention, unless the object of their
meeting was criminal.

My lord, in order to judge of the criminality of this libel, I apprehend we
should lay the whole of the facts together, and I will appeal to the
understanding of every man, whether he can figure to himself a more flagitious
crime than that charged against the panel, namely, joining a conspiracy
against the government of this country, which they have endeavored to promote
to the utmost of their power using French terms vive la convention, ca ira,
Liberty Hall, Liberty Stairs, and so on, as general circumstances, go to prove
that the panel at the bar, with other persons, have met for the detestable
purpose of overturning the constitution.

My lord, my brother has endeavored to take off the effect of this most
extraordinary declaration, which those gentlemen not satisfied with simply
resolving, but thought necessary to bind themselves to the performance of by an
oath. He says, in arguing the relevancy, they made this resolution, no doubt
but the act, the passing of which they meant to oppose, has not yet taken
place, and therefore it is no crime; that is not the fact here stated. The
charge here stated, is an attempt to intimidate the government of this country,
that if a law passed, which they foresaw must pass, if their operations were
not put an end to, they were declaring and binding themselves, that if such an
act passed, they would still continue to meet to introduce annual parliaments
and universal suffrage, till such time as they were compelled to desist by
superior force. The gentlemen say, that their object was merely to bring it
about by peaceable means. -- Is it by peaceable means that they intend to do
it, when they tell you that nothing will prevent them but superior force. Is
that peaceable means? Is that the language of a man who means to remonstrate?
No; it is held out as a threat against the government of the country, daring
them to do an act which they know must crush their proceedings.

My lords, my brother has gone on to subsequent resolutions, and one instance
he gives, that they had only peaceable objects in view; that they were not to
meet after the act was passed, but that they were to act immediately upon the
first notice given of a convention-bill; that their object was to procure a
number of subscriptions, in order that they might go up to parliament with such
force as to prevent the possibility of miscarriage. That is his argument, and
ingenious it may be, were it not contradicted by circumstances. From the
indictment your lordship sees, that the members of this convention are to be
entrusted with a sealed letter, to be given to their constituents, containing
the name of the place in which they are to meet in secret, which themselves are
not to know, much less the vast number of persons whose subscriptions they are
to get; and that is the mode which is to have the effect of preventing, or
rather of resisting the execution of this act.

My lord, it is further said, that they had another object in view, the
resistance of an invasion; and that this letter must be understood to have
applied to a meeting of the convention for that purpose. A very likely story,
that a meeting of seven, being all that was required to declare their meeting
permanent, or at most twenty-one, that such a meeting was to resist, far less
repel an invasion made upon this country. My lord, I apprehend nothing farther
need be said with regard to the criminality of the charge as stated in this
indictment. My lord, the gentleman himself has given sufficient evidence, that
they were not to meet for the purpose of petitioning parliament, which is legal
and constitutional, and there are meetings for that purpose which are attended
by people of the greatest respectability. But this seems not to be their
object; for the gentleman himself says, that this measure of theirs may be
thought by some a bold, by others a daring measure. Did the gentleman mean,
when he said this, that the people were to believe that the object they had in
view was merely to petition parliament? No; and he could not have described it
in more emphatical language, which, I am sure, every person who hears it will
feel highly applicable to the proceedings of the British Convention.

My lord, with regard to the next proposition, namely, that this is
leasing-making only, and that the act 1703 should have been specially libelled
on. My answer is very short, that it is not leasing-making, but real sedition;
a crime well known to our laws long before the existence of any statute. Every
lawyer who has treated upon the subject, has not only made a distinction
between leasing-making and real sedition, but between real sedition and high
treason.

My lord, much, no doubt, may be said with regard to the definition of real
sedition; for, from the great variety of shapes which this crime may assume,
and the various degrees of guilt which the actors incur who commit these
crimes, it is absolutely impossible to give any just definition of the crime,
so as to comprehend every possible case; but there are to be found treatises in
the criminal law which point out a clear distinction, and show that the charge
here laid comes within the crime of real sedition.

My lord, I will beg leave to read the definition of Erskine -- the first I
shall read is in his small compend. He says, It consists in raising commotions,
or disturbances in the state; it is either verbal or real. Verbal sedition, or
leasing-making, is inferred from the utterring of words tending to create
discord between the king and his people. It was formerly punished by death and
the forfeiture of goods, but now, either by imprisonment, fine, or banishment,
at the discretion of the judge. Real sedition is generally committed by
convocating any considerable number of people, without lawful authority, under
the pretense of redressing some public grievance, to the disturbing of the
public peace.

My lord, in his larger work, he says, The crime of sedition consists in
raising commotions and disturbances in the state. It is either real or verbal.
Real sedition is inferred from an irregular convocation of a number of people,
without lawful authority, tending to obstruct or trouble the peace of the
community. Such commotions as are aimed directly against the sovereign or state
amount to high treason; but where they are raised merely to redress some
supposed grievance, it is the crime which falls properly under the term
Sedition. In like manner a small book noticed formerly by one of your
lordships, Bayne says, Sedition is an irregular commotion of the people, or
convocation of a number of citizens, assembled without lawful authority,
tending to disturb the peace and order of society. Is not this the very crime
here stated? I apprehend, what has led my brother into an error has been the
confounding of the different senses of the term commotion. Commotion, in an
enlarged sense, may no doubt signify a rising in arms against the government of
the country; but, in another sense, it may signify an illegal convocation of
people, wit^^ut lawful authority, tending to disturb the peace and order of
society. I say, if it was otherwise, there could be no such thing as real
sedition; because, the moment, according to them, that it becomes real
sedition, it ceases to be sedition, it is high treason, not only by the treason
laws as they now stand, but is clearly high treason in the old treason laws.
Therefore, I apprehend, the distinction between real sedition, and verbal
sedition, is perfectly obvious. It is not necessary, in order to constitute
real sedition, that there should be a rising in arms; for the moment there is a
rising in arms, it ceases to be sedition. Leasing-making, on the other hand,
implies this, and no more, the uttering or speaking, either in convocations or
spreading by means of libels or hand-bills, any wicked, false, scandalous
speeches, which tend to introduce jealousies among the people, and to overturn
the state. But sedition may exist without uttering any scandalous and false
speeches; as, for instance, when this gentleman declared and bound himself by
an oath, to resist any act that might pass to prevent the meeting of this
convention -- this was not a false speech; it contained, in a melancholy truth,
that these people set themselves up in defiance of the law of the country, and
declared they would not desist from their wicked proceedings till they were
compelled by superior force.

My lord, it is not necessary to look to our statute book, for the exact
definition of sedition, or when it was first introduced into the law of
Scotland; for it has been well observed, by all of your lordships, that it must
have existed, not only in this, but in every country; that it is coeval with
the existence of society itself, because it is impossible that any country can
exist, if the crime of sedition be allowed to pass without any punishment at
all. In the law of Scotland, it existed for many generations, before it became
the object of statute law, till the punishment applicable by the common law was
not sufficient to refrain the vices and wickedness of the people; and then acts
were made only regarding these particular species of sedition which appeared to
be most criminal, and which appeared to be most levelled against the government
of the country. At that time it never occurred to the justice of the
legislature, and it would have been unjust if it had, to have framed an act so
comprehensive as to include every species of crime which could fall under the
term of sedition, because they must have known that it is a crime, not only
infinite in its variety, but also infinite in its degrees and shades of guilt.
Particular acts of sedition were declared to be capital, and with respect to
some of them, I must call your lordships attention, for they contain a
particular specification of the crime here charged; and had this gentleman been
tried, prior to 1709, when the old treason laws existed in this country, he
must have been tried for high treason, and punished with death.

My lord, the first of these statutes was stated by the Solicitor General, when
he first argued the case to your lordships, 1584* chap. 130, Therefoir it is
statute and ordained, be our said sovereign lord, and his saidis three estaites
in this present parliament, that nane of his lieges and subjectes presume or
tak upon hand to impugn the dignity and the authorite of the saidis three
estaites, or to seek or procure the innovation or diminution of the power and
authority of the same three estaites, or any of them, in time cumming, under
the pain of treason. Does not this gentleman, I would ask, impugn the dignity
of the estates of parliament, when he says, that they would pay no regard to
the wisdom of parliament, and that they would continue to meet till such time
as they were compelled to desist by superior force; and he does not content
himself with that, but justifies their doing so upon the laws of God, and right
reason: he says, if such a law were suffered to pass, if men were not allowed
to utter their complaints, a number of fierce and rancorous passions would
arise, and we would seek to appeal to that last terrible decision, the event of
which is uncertain, but which God and nature allows. Here the gentleman is not
only saying, but binding himself by an oath, that if the legislature should
enact a particular statute, they would resist it, by continuing to meet, till
they were compelled to desist by superior force. Here they are telling the
whole country, that their resistance is sanctioned by the laws of God, and the
laws of reason. I apprehend it to be clear therefore, that if he had been tried
prior to that act, he must have been tried and punished for high treason,
according to the statute I have now read, which inflicts the punishment of
death. But, my lord, there is another act applicable to the present case, it is
the act 1662, chap. 2, An act for the preservation of his majesty's person,
authority, and government. And since the rise and progress of the late
troubles, did in a great measure, proceed from some treasonable and seditious
positions infused into the people, that it was lawful to subjects for
reformation to enter into covenants and leagues, or to take up arms against the
king, or those commissioned by him, and such like; and so on till it comes to
the following enactments. Like, as his majesty and estates of parliament,
reflecting on the said consequences of these rebellious courses, and being
careful to prevent the like for the future, have therefore statute and
ordained, and by these statutes and ordains, that if any person or persons
shall, hereafter plot, contrive, or intend death, or destruction, to the king's
majesty, or any bodily harm tending to death or destruction, or any restraint
upon his royal person, or to deprive, depose, or suspend him from the style,
honor, and kingly name, of the imperial crown of this realm, or any others his
majesty's dominions, or to suspend him from the exercise of his royal
government, or to levy war, or take up arms, against his majesty, or any
commissioned by him, or shall entice any strangers or others to invade any of
his majesty's dominions, and shall, by writing, printing, preaching, or other
malicious and devised speaking, express or declare such their treasonable
intentions, that then these persons are to suffer death, as in cases of
treason. Have not the gentlemen expressed, in the strongest terms, and bound
themselves by oath, that they would resist the government, and that they would
resist it by force? And they justify force by the laws of God and reason. Is
not this then an intention of levying war against the king? Therefore, if the
gentleman had been tried upon this statute, prior to the statute of 1709, he
might have been punished as a traitor; because he has declared his intention to
be to make war against the government, till superior force compelled them to
desist. If the gentleman had been tried, even after the passing of the act
1703, and before 1709, he must have been tried and punished as a traitor. And,
my lord, what effect is the introduction of the treason laws into this country
to have? Are these acts of sedition, of such an aggravated nature, as are
declared treason by law, not to be liable to any punishment whatever? For, my
lord, admitting that there is no such thing as real sedition, then I say the
act 1703, give it the widest range possible, never can reach those acts of
sedition, which were declared treason by former acts. But, my lord, the natural
consequence of the operation of the treason laws of England, coming into this
country, is not to have the effect of leaving these crimes without punishment
at all, but leaves them exactly in the same situation in which they were before
this act of parliament was introduced; and your lordship is entitled to punish,
at common law, as your lordship would have done if the case had been tried
prior to the passing of these acts.

My lord, if I am right in this position, that this crime is real sedition, and
that falling under those acts, it might have been punished as treason, it is
matter of very little consequence what is meant by the word banishment; because
(...) the first place I apprehend this case is not leasing-making, as I have
endeavored to show your lordship; but suppose the case were leasing-making, I
am not bound, in this case, to lay the libel upon the leasing-making statutes;
for, although it was well observed by your lordships that where an act creates
a crime, and specifies the punishment to be annexed upon the conviction of such
a crime, we must apply the statutory punishment. But, my lord, it often
happens, that acts of parliament are introduced where the crime existed at
common law before; and, in these cases, whether the acts introduced a lesser or
higher pun^^hment, unless the act specially takes away the crime at common law,
specially deprives you of the jurisdiction inherent in this court, of trying at
common law, there is no occasion for that statute. Your lordships know when the
crime is made greater, I may charge it either upon the statute or the common
law; and it often happens that the object of the statute is to give
jurisdiction to a court that it had not before, or to introduce a more summary
mode of punishment; and, in that case, unless the act declares that you are not
to try at common law, it is not to be presumed that the common law power is
taken away. For, in the case of bribing the excise officers, though it is
punishable at common law, there are statutes imposing severe fines; and your
lordship will recollect, in the case of Mr. Stein, for bribing Mr. Bonar, it
was strongly urged that, as the act introduces the punishment of severe fine,
you are not entitled to disregard this act and go to a trial at common law, but
you must lay the libel upon this statute, and confine yourself to the
punishment inflicted by that statute; but your lordships common law powers are
not taken away, and therefore you are entitled to try and punish that gentleman
at common law.

My lord, I may exemplify this case by an instance which has been introduced by
my brother; in pleading this case, he mentioned the case of several people
tried upon the leasing-making statutes. Those persons were not tried upon the
leasing-making statutes alone, for they were tried upon the laws of God, and
upon the laws of this and every other well governed realm. I will also refer
the gentleman to another case, in 1712, when the party tried, and the able
counsel who defended him, knew perfectly well the meaning of the word
banishment. His indictment is laid upon the act 1703, and is also laid upon the
laws of God, and of this and every other well governed realm. The counsel for
that gentleman pleaded a variety of objections to the relevancy of that
indictment, but it never occurred to the gentleman to state, that it was not
competent for the court to try him both upon the common law of this land, and
upon the statute law. My lord, it never occurred to him that the punishment was
different by the common law; they never asked your lordships to dismiss the
indictment, because it was laid upon both laws, nor did they argue that your
lordships ought to define and declare to the jury, that the term banishment, in
this act, was exile and not transport^^ion: -- No such thing, and it cannot be
supposed that it was through ignorance, for they were men learned in the law,
and living at the very time the acts were made.

My lord, this, in my mind, affords a strong argument, not only to show that an
indictment is relevant at common law, although an act of parliament has been
introduced, making it a crime, and stating a particular punishment, unless that
act destroys your lordship's power at common law: it goes to show that under
the word banishment, transportation is likewise included, or the gentlemen
would certainly have insisted upon so material a thing for the safety of their
client.

My lord, this leads me to take notice of the last proposition, which is the
main object of the whole argument in this case, namely, that exile, or
banishment from Scotland, only ought to be the punishment.

My lord, I will not follow the gentleman into dictionaries to look for the
term; and the one that he has found does not seem to afford him any assistance.
But, if I can show that transportation was considered as included in the term
by the lawyers of the times, and by historians of the times, there is an end of
this question; for, independent of the various sentences which were read to
your lordships upon the last occasion, and which I shall not consume your
lordships time by reading again, from the books of adjournal of this court, not
only prior to the passing of the act 1703, but down to 1756, when the
punishment of transportation was introduced, I shall refer your lordship to the
sentences of the Court of Session, which show that they understood banishment
in the very same sense; and prior to 1756 there are a variety of cases which
show, that from the incidental jurisdiction they had in the punishment of
forgery, they are entitled at common law, without the aid of any statute, to
send people to the plantations; and the uniform form of the sentence is in
these words, 'ordain that he be carried back to prison, there to remain till an
opportunity offers of carrying him to some of the plantations in America, there
to be banished for ever.' In some cases, it is banished for ever, in other
cases, for a certain number of years.

My lord, I might also resort to the historians of the times -- I will read to
your lordship one passage from Guthrie's History, which clearly shows that he
understood transportation to be included in the word banishment. Immediately
after the execution of the Duke of Argyle, in 1685, Guthrie, speaking of what
acts of parliament had declared, says, 'they declared their abhorrence and
detestation of all resistance, upon whatever pretext, by deed, word, or
writing; and, at last, they passed an act to approve whatever had been done by
his majesty's Privy Cooncil, Justice Court, and those commissionated by them in
banishing, imprisoning, or fining such as refused to take and swear the oath of
allegiance, and to assert the royal prerogative in their utmost extent.'

Your lordship knows, that in this reign, and in the reign of his brother
Charles II. a number of unfortunate people, because they would not subscribe
bonds of peace and the oath of allegiance, were sent by the Privy Council to
the plantations, by ship-loads; and also a number of conventiclers were
remanded back to prison, till an opportunity should be afforded of transporting
them to Barbados, where no less than eighty of them were lying for
transportation. The king would never ratify a deed of the Privy Council, who
banished a man from his dominions in Scotland, to his dominions in England,
because he would not swear the oath of allegiance. It is perfectly well known,
that hundreds of our fellow-citizens were seat in those days to the
plantations. My lord, I do not read this as an example for imitation; no man
can justify such arbitrary proceedings; but no man, I am sure, was ever sent
from Scotland to England, because he refused to take the oath of allegiance. I
will say there is no instance of such a case to be found; they were all sent to
the plantations; and, when your lordship sees this author, when speaking of
those transportations, makes use of the word banishing only; and therefore, it
is very clear that his idea of the word was the very same which I am now
contending for before your lordship, namely, that the word banishment is a
general term; that transportation is only one mode of carrying it into effect,
and that under the term banishment, transportation was intended by the act 1703.

My lord, independent of that, I might ask your lordship, is it natural to
suppose, if it was their intention under this act, that no man should be
transported, that they would have made use of the very term which this Court
have uniformly used when they inflicted the punishment of transportation. No,
my lord, the very reverse is the natural supposition. Besides, I might state to
your lordships that the object of the legislature was merely to take away the
capital part of the punishment; that is perfectly clear from the words of the
act itself. It says, that in respect of their generality, and the various
construction which the same may admit, they may be as to the foresaid capital
punishment, of dangerous consequence, does, therefore, with advice and consent
of the estates of Parliament, abrogate and discharge, in all time coming, the
foresaid sanction and pain of death and confiscation contained in the said
acts; and statutes and ordains, that the punishment of the crimes, therein
mentioned, shall for hereafter only be arbitrary, and then enumerates the
punishment banishment, fining, and imprisonment, which were the common law
punishments then in use. My lord, I beg leave to refer your lordships to the
act 1701, where the power of transportation by this Court is expressly
recognized. As also that no person be transported forth of this kingdom, except
with his own consent, given before a judge, or by legal sentence. I would ask
the gentleman where is the legal statute which authorizes transportation? I
may, perhaps, be told, that the act 1670 authorizes transportation, because
they were to be banished to the Indies; but I will remind them, that that act
was rescinded in 1690, the second act of the second parliament of Charles II.
Here is the only act which mentions the banishing a man to the plantations,
rescinded in 1690; and yet, in 1701, we find an act expressly recognizing the
power of transportation; because it says, that no man is to be transported but
by his own consent, or by legal sentence. Where then is the statute that
authorizes transportation? I say there is no such thing; and therefore it is
clear that it is included in the term banishment, otherwise there can be no
legal sentence of transportation. The gentleman says that, by the act 1703,
banishment is to be understood; and when an act enumerates banishment, fining,
and imprisonment, that you are not to enlarge those, or introduce any other
punishments which are not there specifically mentioned. I should be glad to
know what explanation they are to give of the last clause of the act 1670, with
respect to their refusing to depone as to conventicles. The object of that act
was to discover meetings of conventiclers, and to declare the punishment to be
inflicted upon those who should refuse, when called upon, to say what they knew
respecting these conventicles; the punishment is to be fining, close
imprisonment, or banishment. The legislature foresaw that when the man was
called upon to declare what he knew, he might include and blame himself by so
doing, and therefore it was thought necessary to enact a clause freeing him
from the punishment, and therefore it was provided, that no man's declaration
against any other person should infer against himself the loss of life, or
limb, or banishment.

My brother has told your lordship, upon the authority of Sir George Mackenzie,
that banishment by transportation was illegal, because it is impossible to
confine a man to any place to which he is banished, as though your lordship had
a jurisdiction over him while he is in that place undergoing the sentence of
banishment; but that is not the case, for from the moment he has once landed,
your lordship has no further authority; you are not confining him there; he may
go where he likes, provided he does not return to this country. My lord, he has
also appealed to another passage in Mackenzie, to show that this was an illegal
sentence in his justification of the reign of Charles II. where it is said,
that people were sent abroad from a principle of mercy, because these people
might otherwise have been punished by death; and, my lord, it is very true as
applied to those people who were taken at Bothwell Bridge in 1679; because
historians tell us, that about 1200 of them were taken with arms in their
hands, and in open rebellion, it was therefore mercy to send them abroad and
not try them for their lives; but it was only those persons who refused to
subscribe declarations that by the act 1670 were to be sent abroad, and the
privy council had an express power of sending them to the plantations.

My lord, it is a mistake to say, that sending people to the plantations, was
for the first time only introduced at the time of the rebellion at Bothwell
Bridge; for all those who were taken, a great many years before at the
rebellion which was crushed at the Pentland Hills in 1667, I think, were sent
there likewise. And if your lordship reads the history of this country prior to
1660, you will find a variety of instances where people were sent to the
plantations for refusing to subscribe bonds of peace, and refusing to take the
oath of allegiance. When was the first time it was introduced into this
country, I know not, however, I know from history, that it was not upon the
passing of that act 1660; because, my lord, I read of ship loads of unfortunate
people having been sent away, who thought it inconsistent with their duty to
subscribe bonds of peace. My brother has referred to the act of 1609, which
mentions banishment; and his argument is that transportation could not have
been intended, because transportation was unknown in those days, and therefore
it appears singular that the act 1609, when repealed by the act 1703, on
account of the severity of its sentence, should have enacted a punishment much
more severe than the former. Upon what foundation or authority the gentleman
says, a person could not have been transported under the act 1609, I am at a
loss to discover; for they had just as much a power, and just as much an
opportunity of transporting in 1609, as they had in 1660, when I know a great
many transportations took place.

My lord, I see no reason why transportation could not have been indicted under
in the year 1701, as well as 1660. But I will read to your lordship the last
clause of the act 1609. "And nevertheless, finding therein sik malicious letts
as the devile and his supposts do usually suggest to the hindrance of all just
and god^ie interpryses, specially, by the false and calumnious brutes;
speeches, and writs, craftelie uttered and dispersed by some lauless and
saulles people of this realm, as well in private conferences as in their
meetings at taverns, all houses and plays, and by their pasquills, lybels,
rymes, cockalans, commedies, and siklyke occasions, whereby they slander,
malign, and revile the people, estate, and country of England, and diverse his
majesty's honorable counselors, magistrates and worthy subjects, of that h^s
majesty's kingdom. The continuance whereof being able to incense the people of
England to just grief and miscontentment, may not only hinder the intended
union of all the good subjects of this monarchy, but stir up in them sik
irreconciliable evil will, as with time might bring forth may dangerous and
harmful effects." Can your lordship believe, that as a punishment to men who
had produced such irreconcilable hatred between the two kingdoms, this act
intended that they should be banished into England, where they would have a
much better opportunity of completing their purpose than they could have in
Scotland. I am perfectly sure a judge would have been laughed at who had sent
such a man into England. I am satisfied that no sentence ever was passed upon
this act. It was an act passed by Scotland, under the impression that England
would pronounce a similar judgment. In evidence of this I shall read to your
lordship what Sir George Mackenzie says. But, in my opinion, this act reaches
only such as speak reproachfully of their nation, country, and counselors; but
the whole act ought to be abrogated by our parliament, as being past by us in
expectation that England would make such an act in their parliament, which they
never did; and, upon which account, it was never in observance with us. I am
perfectly satisfied that if this act had ever been put in force, if any
sentence had ever been imposed, it must have been transportation.

My lord, I don't feel it necessary to trouble your lordship any further,
neither of the positions laid down by my brother being applicable to the
present case, because it is not leasing-making, but sedition, so near the crime
of treason, that by the ancient treason laws of Scotland, it would amount to
treason. The act at common law remains in full force, and I am perfectly clear
whether you take the intention of the legislature, or whether you take the
words themselves as explained by historians, by the legislature itself, and by
the sentences of this Court and the Court of Session, your lordships cannot
have a doubt, but that under the act of 1703, you have it in your power to send
this gentleman, or any other who may be found guilty of sedition, to transport
him beyond seas.

Lord Justice Clerk. Mr. Montgomery, you have gone into it very ably and very
fully.

Mr. Solicitor General. My lords, the points which you have now heard debated,
are points upon which I have made up my mind most fully, and which I should not
be afraid to argue in any court, in any place, or against any opponent. But, my
lord, when I consider that this matter underwent a very full discussion this
day fortnight, and when I consider that your lordships, then heard these points
stated with all the ability which the bar could furnish (and I cannot suppose
that your lordships, have drank so deeply of the waters of Lethe, as to have
forgot what passed upon that occasion,) I think it unnecessary to trouble your
lordship with many words, more especially as so much justice has been done to
it, by the gentleman who has already spoken.

My lord, as to the first point, whether there is such a crime known in our law
as that of sedition, I shall not say a single word, because no person who knows
any thing of our law, can entertain a single doubt.

The next point is, whether the facts charged in this indictment do amount to
the crime of sedition, yea or no? and after what we have heard so fully
discussed, and after what your lordships have determined upon the subject, I
cannot suppose that any argument is necessary upon this branch of the subject.

My lord, you have been told that all the crime which this panel has
committed, is the entertaining ideas favorable to universal suffrage and
annual parliaments, and in which ideas he was sanctioned by the most
respectable names. My lord, whatever opinion those persons may privately
entertain, I have not an opportunity to know, but I beg leave to ask of the
counsel on the other side. who, I dare say, are better informed than I am. Have
Mr. Pit and the Duke of Richmond ever formed a convention in England? Have
they ever called themselves the British Convention? Have they ever called
themselves the representatives of the body of the people? Have they ever told
the parliament of Great Britain, that they shall not presume to disperse them?
Have they ever told them that if they dared to bring into parliament a certain
bill, they will resist it by force? Or have they told the public, that in case
of an invasion, they will meet in a secret place? if they have done so, it has
been unknown to me -- and if they have, it says very little for those to whom
the criminal laws of England are entrusted. But as far as I know, no such thing
has ever happened.

My brother, Gillies, who pleaded the cause with very great ability, told your
lordship, that even if the facts stated were proved, as well as the criminal
intention, (which I admit is absolutely essential) that in that case the libel
ought not to be sustained as relevant, in so far as the charges amount to high
treason. Now, my lord, I will so far agree with my brother, that in making out
this charge before the jury, it will be necessary for me to satisfy them that
he had a criminal intention, and if my brother can show me, that the facts
charged in this indictment do come within the treason act, of Edward III. we
shall very soon make a short argument of this case, because I shall immediately
desert the diet. We shall have no more trial upon this indictment, but I shall
immediately apply to your lordships, that that gentleman be committed for high
treason. It is a thing I have fully considered, and I am perfectly satisfied. I
have no doubt of proving the intention, of which the jury will judge, and that
they amount to something which is very near treason, the most aggravated
species of sedition that can be imagined.

My lord, the only other point for consideration, relates to ^he degree of
punishment which your lordships have power to inflict, supposing the crime to
be proved. Now, my lord, I apprehend it is perfectly well established, that
banishment by transportation, which I say is a particular mode of banishment,
is known to the common law of Scotland; it was a power exercised by the Court
of Session without a statute, and exercised by all the criminal courts in
Scotland. When this practice was first introduced, it is impossible for me to
say; but, I believe, much earlier than is generally supposed. It is sufficient
for me to state, that transportation is known to the law of Scotland, and is
acknowledged and recognized in the fullest manner, by the act of 1701.

The question therefore is, whether your lordships in judging of the crime of
sedition, are restrained from inflicting that punishment, supposing it to be a
legal one. I must first show it to be a legal one, and then, whether there is
any statute which restrains the power of the court; and this leads me to
consider the act 1703, which is the single act that the gentleman found upon,
as limiting the power of the court; and upon this statute it is necessary for
me to say very little. Upon looking at the enacting clause, it appears to me,
that the only purpose of the statute was to take away the capital part of it.
It is very true, the act says that the court shall inflict the punishment by
fine, imprisonment, or banishment; and my brother tells your lordship, that
there is a very material difference between banishment and transportation, and
he shows your lordship from Johnson's Dictionary, Shakespeare, and other
respectable authorities, that banishment and transportation are different
things: but I take it to be a very clear point, that in judging of the statute
law of Scotland, we are not to go to an English dictionary, or to poetical
writings -- there can be but one authority, which is neither more nor less than
the language of the common law of Scotland, and where are we to find it? We are
to find it in the records of this supreme court -- search has been made in
those records, and by that search it is made clear, I should suppose beyond the
possibility of contradiction, that according to the law language of Scotland,
before the statute, at the time of the statute, aad after the statute, that
banishment did include transportation.

My lord, instances were pointed out to your lordship, which it will be
unnecessary to repeat, because it is impossible that they can be forgotten, in
all of which your lordships inflicted the punishment of banishment; and, in
order to carry that into execution, you ordain and appoint the persons to be
banished beyond seas.

My lord, I beg leave to mention one case which has not occurred before, and
that is a case which happened in the month of February 1704, which your
lordships will observe was just five months after passing the act upon which
the gentleman found, the act of 1703, having been passed in the month of
September, and this case was determined in the February following. It was a
case which occurred before the Privy Council of Scotland, which your lordships
know was at that time a court invested with a jurisdiction of a very
considerable extent. It was a trial upon leasing-making, (the very crime upon
which the gentlemen found their argument) upon the 4th of February 1704, a
libel against Mr. David Bailie, brother to Captain Robert Bailie, of Manor
Hall, for leasing-making, and the conclusion of it, after setting forth the
fact is, that the aforesaid David Bailie, ought to be severely punished for the
same, with the pains of law, at least conform to the 4th act of the last
session of the current parliament, entitled, "act anent leasing-makers and
slanderers." Here your lordship sees this libel specially refers to the statute
1703, and prays, upon the party being convicted, that he should be severely
punished for the same, with the pains of law, at least conform to the 4th act
of the last session of the current parliament. My lords, this was tried before
a court who did not sit at the distance of ninety years, but who sat within
five months after the act passed; and therefore, it is natural to suppose that
they understood its meaning; and, my lord, I observe by the sederunt, that the
president of the Court of Session was there, the Lord Justice Clerk was there,
and many other of the judges, and therefore it is impossible they could mistake
its meaning. In the first place the party acknowledges the offense; and
therefore there was no need of any trial as to his guilt; and in the next place
he was assisted by no less than six able counsel, and a great deal of argument
there was upon it -- but when you come to the sentence, "the libel having been
found relevant to infer arbitrary punishment, that the two letters libelled on
were all his handwriting, the court hereby ordain and adjudge, that the said
David Bailie be transported to the West Indies, that he be set in the pillory
from eleven to twelve in the forenoon, and in case the person cannot pay the
fine, to be transported, and to be kept in the prison of Air until he be so
transported."

My lord, I know very well that it is not the fashion of the times to think a
great deal of our ancestors, but I shall admit, that in point of wisdom, in
point of philology, in point of philosophy, and many other fine speculative
ideas, I will admit that our forefathers were by no means comparable to us in
those fine theories which modern philosophy has found out with regard to
religion and government; witness the glorious state of France at this moment.
But, my lords, can we understand that act better than they did? Did not they
know their own meaning better than we do? And yet your lordship sees the judges
who sat in that very parliament, within five months after sitting in a court of
justice, upon a case in point, they understood the meaning of banishment, and
they transported him to the West Indies; and, my lord, this is not all, I see,
at this time, the gentleman was not undefended, he was assisted by six able
counsel, and not one of them pretends to say he had the smallest doubt about
it; they argued many points of law, but this was not so much as mentioned, it
was clear beyond the possibility of doubt that it included transportation. I
cannot have a doubt, but that your lordships, upon the fair construction of
this act, have the power, in case this panel should be convicted by the
verdict of a jury; but it will be with your lordships to judge whether you
think he merits it or not. This is a complete answer to the two cases the
gentleman has cited. The act does not bind you to transport, but it is an
arbitrary punishment in the discretion of the court; and, in the present case,
it will be with your lordships to judge whether you think the extent of the
crime merits such punishment. Your lordships can have very little doubt about
the matter, and, I think the proper time for that determination, would be after
the verdict of the jury.

Mr. Laing. My Lord Justice Clerk. By your lordships appointment I have
undertaken a cause which I at first declined, not only from personal
considerations, which I forbear to mention, but because my recent avocations
have been very different from the pursuits of this bar. The cause of my client,
though undertaken by your order, in now my own; and I will plead for him, as I
would for myself, were I placed in his situation at the bar. No considerations
shall now deter me, nor shall the fear of obloquy relax my efforts to establish
his innocence, and overturn the preposterous charges of this indictment.

The arguments maintained on the relevancy may be reduced to three
propositions, to which, whatever illustrations or additional arguments my
recollection and my strength may enable me to contribute, shall be specifically
directed.

1. That the facts charged in the indictment are not of a criminal nature; or
if criminal, that they constitute merely a statutory offense.

2. That where the crime is provided for by statute, a severer, or a different
punishment cannot legally be inflicted at common law.

3. That the punishment of the facts charged in the indictment, if indeed
criminal, are, as regulated by 1703, chap. 4, fine, imprisonment, or
banishment; meaning thereby banishment forth of the realm alone.

My lord, on the first proposition, that the facts charged in the indictment,
if criminal constitute a statutory offense, the argument of the prosecutor
amounts to this, that sedition is a technical or generick term, comprehending a
variety of different crimes; yet unsusceptible, at the same time, of a
definition applicable to every crime. That there is no definition of sedition
strictly applicable to each case, I shall readily admit, for the definitions
given by our lawyers are founded on a previous distinction between real, and
verbal sedition. The former is uniformly described as an actual commotion, or
rising of the people; the latter, the utterance of false reports, or the
publication of writings tending to excite such commotions, or to overturn the
established constitution or government. My lord, this is not an ideal
distinction; it originates from the very nature of crimes, from the difference
between the attempt and the deed, from the necessity of distinguishing between
what is actually committed, and that which is perhaps an abortive attempt to
effect the deed. In murder, a conspiracy against our neighbor's life, when
carried into execution, must be distinguished from an attempt to instigate
another to the commission of murder. So in perjury, subordination of evidence
is a crime of a very different complexion from perjury itself. Here then is a
distinction never to be removed from the nature of crimes; the intention alone
does not constitute the crime; unless it is carried into execution it cannot
amount to the crime which it failed to accomplish. This distinction is also
founded in the nature of crimes against the state, which, I observe, are all
reducible to sedition, to treason, and to verbal sedition. Whatever tends to
the destruction of the state may be termed sedition; but there are acts of
sedition exalted to treason, ennobled on account of their dangerous
consequences, and punished as treason, by attainder, forfeiture, and a rigorous
death. Sedition itself, is a popular commotion to the obstruction of law, or
the interruption of public tranquillity, not directed, however, against the
constitution, nor amounting to treason. (Thus an insurrection though in arms,
to destroy an enclosure, is in England a riot, in Scotland sedition; but an
insurrection to destroy all enclosures constitutes treason.) But there is a
crime different from this; there is an attempt to excite, or to commit
sedition; an attempt which, in treason, and in treason alone, is converted into
an overt act, and, on account of its dangerous consequences, punished by
statute, as treason itself. State crimes, therefore, are either sedition or the
attempt to excite it, or certain actions converted, for the preservation of the
state, into treason. I conclude, therefore, both from the nature of crimes in
general, and from the distinctions essential to crimes against the state, that
an attempt to commit sedition never can constitute actual sedition.

This distinction, and these definitions may be variously illustrated. Nor in a
question concerning the signification of terms, will your lordships reject the
assistance of philology, or of any science that ascertains their common
acceptance, or their proper import. If we resort then to the acceptance of
the word in our own language, sedition is defined by Johnson, our greatest
philologist a tumult, an insurrection, a popular commotion, an uproar. Here an
actual commotion is specified, not that seditious attempt, the tendency, or the
design of which is to excite commotion. If we examine its etymology, sedition,
seorsum itio, is a separation or secession from the body of the people; and in
this sense, the secession of the Roman people to the Aventine mount, would have
been a sedition, had not the cause of the people ultimately triumphed. But the
speeches of Sicinius, which produced that secession, whatever was their
tendency, could never with propriety be denominated sedition. The sedition
described by Virgil. Ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, faevitque animis ignobile vulgus,
Jamque faces et saxa volant, furor arma ministrat;
the actual commotion described in this simile is very different from that
attempt to create sedition, of which the brutal Appius accuses the father and
the lover of Virginia -- "Certis indiciis compertum se habere, nocte tota
coetus in urbe factos ad movendam seditionem. Livy." Convocations were formed
in the city, and during the night, but Virginius and Icilius were only accused
of attempting, by these nocturnal convocations, to stir up the people to actual
sedition.

My lord, the application of this distinction is sufficient to determine the
nature of the crime. If the corpus delicti consists opinions and speeches, or
in resolutions the concurrence of opinions and result of speeches, these are
criminal on account of their tendency to excite sedition, or disturbance in the
state. The tendency of the offense constitutes the guilt; for I maintain, that
in themselves the speeches are not criminal. The resolutions, if locked up in
the breast, the speeches, if uttered to the winds of the desert, the writings,
if concealed in our repositories from human observation, are neither criminal
nor obnoxious to punishment. In the celebrated case of Algernon Sydney, the
papers discovered in his cabinet, and never promulgated, afforded no legal
evidence of treason, and would have constituted no species whatever of
sedition. I repeat it therefore, that the speeches are not in themselves
criminal. The man who writes, without attempting to disseminate or to publish,
a seditious composition, may remain in the country as an innocent citizen; and,
however disaffected in secret to government, will still enjoy the protection of
its laws. Your lordships will therefore observe, that it is not the malus
animus which is punishable, not that mind which is hostile to the state, but
the declaration of that hostile disposition malo animo, to the effect of
exciting disturbance, or with a design to generate similar hostility in the
minds of others. The fact itself may be inoffensive; the attempt may be
impotent; but the attempt, though frustrated, then becomes criminal when
dangerous to society; and its tendency is the circumstance which constitutes
the crime.

My lord, the principle which I have thus endeavored to establish, is fully
recognized in the law of England, in which contempts or misprisions against the
king or government, offenses equivalent to verbal sedition, are punished on
account of their tendency alone. "Contempts and misprisions (says Blackstone)
against the king's person and government, may be by speaking or writing against
them, cursing or wishing him ill, giving out scandalous stories concerning him,
or doing any thing that may tend to lessen him in the esteem of his subjects,
may weaken his government, or may raise jealousies between him and his people."
Though denied in argument, the principle is acknowledged in the indictment
itself. The corpus delicti is there stated, as "of the most dangerous and
destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness of society, and
tending to subvert the constitution of the realm." In every other indictment
for verbal sedition, the same tendency has been uniformly charged.

But, in opposition to the concurrent authority of lawyers, in contradiction to
that essential distinction between a crime attempted, and actually committed,
sedition, it is said, is a technical epithet, expressive of a variety of
distinct crimes, but incapable of a definition to which every seditious offense
may be reduced. Sedition is represented as a hydra united below in a common
trunk, but disparted above into a thousand heads. Of the seditious it is said,
Their aims are various, as the paths they take
In journeying through life.
Nor are their crimes, though obnoxious to legal penalties, reducible to any
legal definition or standard.

My answer is this, that the supposed variety, so unsusceptible of definition,
proceeds from the creation of various statuory acts of sedition, just as lesser
offenses are sometimes converted into statutory treasons. Simple convocation,
unarmed conventions not tumultuous, bonds and leagues among subjects, are acts
of sedition created by statute, and certainly not included in the legal
definition affixed to sedition: an actual commotion or insurrection of the
people. But at common law, the definition is not the less true, that certain
acts not comprehended under it, have been declared by statute tantamount to
sedition, and sanctioned by the penalties attached to that crime. In treason,
of which the definition, contrary to what has been formerly asserted, is
precise and explicit, in treason, which consists in counteracting, or betraying
that allegiance due from the subject by birth or residence, 'the ^^zeal of the
legislature,' according to Blackstone, 'has sometimes de^^arted from this its
primitive idea.' To assert that the legislature cannot limit or alter the
succession, is a statutory treason, not compr^^^nded under its legal
definition. But the legal definition is not (...) destroyed.

My lord, the authority of Erskine and of Bayne has been also quoted, to prove,
that real sedition is a convocation without authority, tending to disturb the
tranquillity of the public. Had the gentleman quoted the preceding sentence
from Erskine, that sedition, consists in raising commotions or disturbances in
the state; your lordship would have perceived from the context Such commotions
as are directly against the sovereign or the state, amount to high treason, but
where raised to redress some supposed grievance, are properly sedition, that
the intermediate passage, related, not to peaceful and unarmed conventions; but
to those irregular and tumultuous convocations, that are always riotous. Bayne,
whose institutions are a brief and imperfect abstract from M'Kenzies, has
obviously confounded sedition at common law with a statutory offense. Popular
commotions to the obstruction of law, or the disturbance of public peace, were
punished at common law; unarmed conventions whatever was their tendency,
prohibited by statute. Happily the laws against peaceful, unarmed conventions
are consigned to oblivion; but to the definition of real sedition at common
law, ^ayne has added a convocation of citizens without authority, and to render
it illegal, specifies its tendency to disturb society. If tumultuous, the
convocation was illegal at common law, but the statutory crime of convention,
to which the definition of sedition is thus arbitrarily extended, was illegal
whatever was its tendency, whether directed to the worship of God, or to the
obstruction of public tranquillity and justice.

Such then, my lord, is the law. I shall now proceed to examine, the facts
specified in the indictment, whether, and how far they amount to the crime of
which my client is accused. The first is, his accession to an illegal and
seditious convention; for I will not presume that a peaceable convention of an
innocent tendency, constitutes a criminal charge today. The illegality of such
a convention must consist in the objects to which it was directed, its
seditious nature in the measures adopted to attain these objects. I shall
therefore examine, first the objects proposed by the convention, and then the
mode in which these were pursued.

And here, my lord, I affirm, that annual parliaments and universal suffrage,
the sole objects proposed by the convention, are legitimate and constitutional
objects of pursuit. These are principles recognized in the theory of our
constitution, nor questionable unless as expedient in practice. Annual
parliaments are confessedly a question of mere expediency, like those of a
triennial or septennial duration. They were appointed, and their legitimacy
recognized by different statutes, the 3 and 34 of Edward III. and continued,
till Richard II. in whose unfortunate reign the use of long parliaments was
first introduced. Your lordships cannot be ignorant that motions for annual
parliaments have been annually renewed in the House of Commons; nor is it
necessary for me to assert the constitutional nature of a question, which, in
1745, when agitated in the House of Commons, on the motion of Mr. Carew, was
negatived only by a majority of thirty two.

But your lordships hitherto have uniformly reprobated universal suffrage, as
an illegal object, repugnant to the principles of our happy constitution;
productive of anarchy, the sources of misery; and, as no people have a right to
will their own misery, it is inferred, that none are entitled to universal
suffrage. Without controverting this logical education, I shall argue, not to a
political, but to a legal effect, that universal suffrage is a principle
conformable to the spirit, and recognized in the theory of our constitution,
though from motives of expediency, not adopted in practice to its utmost
extent. What is the object proposed by universal suffrage? That freemen, who
possess an independent will, not subjugated to the power of another, shall
enjoy, each his suffrage, in the election of those representatives by whose
acts they are bound, by whom their property is disposed of, and their conduct
regulated. Who are excluded in this scheme of representation? Idiots, minors,
paupers, and criminals, all those who have no will of their own, or what is
equivalent, no honest or independent will. What then is the theory of
representation in the British constitution? That those only shall be excluded
from voting, whose situation is such that they cannot be presumed to have a
will of their own. Each proceeds on this common principle that the persons of
freemen, are represented, not their property, and each aspires to this sublime
idea, that the system of representation should be established on a basis as
broad as its superstructure. The practice of our constitution has degenerated,
it is true, from its theoretical perfection, whether, as some suppose, from the
imperfection natural to the human race, or, as others imagine, from the decay
and decriptitude of every human institution. But the principles, my lord, are
the same. Idiots and criminals are excluded in the scheme of universal
suffrage, on the principle that they have no will of their own, and on the same
presumption, poverty, in the practice of our constitution, is a cause of
exclusion. Qualifications of property are therefore no principle in our
constitution, but a test of that principle which our constitution requires.
Instead of constituting, as has been erroneously asserted, the right of
suffrage, they are merely a test of that independent suffrage, which, by the
principles of our constitution, is considered as the inherent birthright of
every British freeman.

My lord, this is no new doctrine which I now maintain. It is supported by the
most popular, and let me add, the most orthodox writers on the English
constitution. Montesquieu, in a passage, (which as the French may implicate
sedition, I shall translate to your lordship) maintains: That in England, all
the citizens, in their different districts, ought to have a right of suffrage
in the choice of their representatives; those only excepted, whose situation is
so vile, that they must be reputed to have no will of their own." To the same
purport Blackstone informs us, 'As to the qualifications of the electors. The
true reason of requiring any qualification, with regard to property in votes,
is to exclude such persons as are in so mean a situation that they are esteemed
to have no will of their own. If these persons had votes, they would be tempted
to dispose of them under some undue influence or other. This would give a
great, an artful, or a wealthy man, a larger share in elections than is
consistent with general liberty. If it were probable, that every man would give
his vote freely, and without influence of any kind, then, upon the true theory
and genuine principles of liberty, every member of the community, however poor,
should have a vote in electing those delegates, to whose charge is committed
the disposal of his property, his liberty, and his life. But, since that can
hardly be expected, in persons of indigent fortunes, or such as are under the
immediate dominion of others, all popular states have been obliged to establish
certain qualifications; whereby some, who are suspected to have no will of
their own, are excluded from voting, in order to set other individuals, whose
wills may be supposed independent, more thoroughly upon a level with each
other. This," he continues, "is the spirit of our constitution: not that I
assert it is in fact quite so perfect as I have endeavored to describe it;
for, if any alteration might be wished or suggested in the present frame of
parliaments, it should be in favor of a more complete representation of the
people.

Here, my lord, universal suffrage is represented by Blackstone as congenial to
freedom, and the spirit of our constitution, qualifications, as the test of an
independent suffrage. But why this test? Not that an universal equality of
suffrage is productive of anarchy, anarchy of misery; but without such test,
that the opulent would arrogate an undue influence inconsistent with liberty.
The test is justified, not as preclusive of a dangerous equality, but because
it restores, to those that are independent, their equality of suffrage. The
question which Blackstone has thus determined, is decided differently by a
judge in India. Sir William Jones has asserted the expediency, as well as the
right of universal suffrage, nor is that accomplished, and celebrated scholar
singular in a question agitated so variously by the ablest politicians. While
the principle has ever been acknowledged in theory, the expediency of universal
suffrage has been determined, in the negative by Mr. Fox, in the affirmative
publicly, in resolutions issued from such a convention as the present, by his
oponent Mr. Pit.

But to what purpose do I quote these passages, or appeal to the authority of
these distinguished names? To demonstrate to your lordships, that universal
suffrage and annual parliaments, the professed object of the British
Convention, are legitimate and constitutional objects of pursuit. It is to
convince your lordships that these objects are strictly constitutional, and
acknowledged in theory; and that their expediency in practice is the only
question. But, my lord, this is a question to be debated between man and man, a
question fit for discussion in the House of Commons, not for the cognizance of
a court of law. It is a question on which the wisest and the greatest have
differed, but let it not be told in England, that universal suffrage, a
principle essential in the theory of its constitution, has been arraigned as
seditious, and proscribed as unconstitutional, in a Scottish Court.

Such then, my lord, were the professed principles, and such the ostensible
objects of the British Convention. It remains to examine the mode proposed, or
the measures adopted, to accomplish these legal constitutional objects; but in
the speeches and resolutions, charged as seditious in this indictment, what is
there to indicate that the secret motives of the convention were different,
that its designs were criminal, or as the public prosecutor has hardly
asserted, that a plan was deliberately formed 'o subvert the constitution? I
shall examine, my lord, as concisely as possible, the resolutions and speeches
contained in the indictment.

The first is a speech extracted from the Gazetteer, and ascribed to Mr.
Gerrald, in the British Convention. My lord, I affirm that this speech is legal
and constitutional throughout, and perfectly conformable to the professed
object of that association. It begins by stating, that after the union of the
crowns, on the accession of James to the throne of England, the people of both
countries, were dep^^ed of some of their most valuable privileges. And who will
deny, that during the sanguinary reign of the Stuarts, the most dangerous
encroachments were made on our liberties? Who will maintain that the privileges
of the people were not then invaded; privileges which, in some instances, the
revolution has not entirely restored? But the speech proceeds to establish
universal suffrage, not only as our birthright by nature, but as a right
actually enjoyed under the Saxon government, and exercised from the Norman
Conquest or Robbery, (a rob^ery, my lord, it undoubtedly was) abridged the
inheritance of our ^^xon ancestors. To restore this natural right, to recover
this inherent principle, as it is termed, of our constitution, it proposes the
most peaceable and legal means, that the people should be instructed in its
importance, and persuaded to solicit its restitution by petitions to
parliament. My lord, this is not the language of sedition, but an assertion of
our unalienable right to petition either branch of the legislature. But there
are passages supposed to indicate a different intention. The petitions were to
be subscribed by a majority of the people, by a number so respectable as to
command attention; and it will soon have that respectability, if we have reason
on our side. On this invidious construction, my brother and my friend has
sufficiently commented. Were command (than which I know not a happier phrase)
expressive of a compulsive force to overawe the legislature, its correlative
would be obey; but here the attention which truth and numbers may be
figuratively said to command or enforce, and which certainly they strongly
solicit, is yielded by parliament, whose attention cannot be said to obey.

The next article of the indictment discloses the grand arcana of sedition; the
resolution ascribed to the convention of resisting the authority of the
legislature, concerning which I shall first examine its import, and then its
criminal amount and complexion. I must premise, however, that in a case like
the present, wherever a declaration is equally susceptible of two construction,
that which is innocent is to be received as its genuine interpretation and
sense. Your lordships may remember the trial of Lord Strafford. An accusatian
against him was, that he said in the public ball at York that the little finger
of prerogative should lie heavier upon them than the loins of the law.' By
inverting the expression thus, that 'the little finger of the law was heavier
than the loins of prerogative, he fairly explained it away. The Commons
persisted in this accusation; but their illiberal construction of a sentence
susceptible of a different meaning, has been reprobated by every historian as
oppressive and illegal. If words, therefore can abmit of two constructions,
that which is most favorable to innocence must always be adopted.

My lord, to proceed to the resolution, the first part of it states, in
general, That if any unconstitutional act be proposed in parliament,
inconsistent with, or subversive of, our known constitutional liberties, we
declare, before God and the world, that we shall follow the wholesome example
of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate against
the constitution of the country; and shall continue to assemble, and consider
of the best means by which we can accomplish a real representation of the
people, and annual election, until compelled to desist by superior force. What
is the import, then, of following 'the wholesome example of former times?' They
meant, it is said, to fly in the face of all constituted authority, and to
resist the government. But is this the wholesome example of former times? No,
this is not the case; for the expression is immediately explained by the
context, by paying no regard to any act which' -- shall do what? 'Which shall
militate against the constitution of this country; and how disregard it? Not by
active and forcible resistance; but with all the resignation of a quaker; by
that passive resistance which a quaker would show, were he to enter the Court,
and remain with his head covered, till your lordships macer should take off his
hat. He submits passively to the laws of his country, when exerted, to which,
at the same time, he pays no previous regard. But the resolution amounts to
this, that the members associated, or delegated, to obtain universal suffrage
and annual parliaments, on the first notice of a bill to suppress their
convention and to frustrate these their constitutional objects, shall assemble
immediately, nor depart till the law, in the event of its being enacted, shall
receive its full operation on them. They assemble on the first notice of the
bill, for this obvious reason, that no meeting could take place when it passed
into a law. They assemble to depreciate, and, by every legal endeavor, to
prevent its passing. But they will continue to assemble till compelled to
desist by superior force. To discover the criminal nature of this passive
resistance, of this resolution to obey upon compulsion only, let us suppose,
for a moment, that an act obviously unconstitutional were adopted by
legislature; that monarchy, no matter how improbable, were abrogated forever,
what would be the conduct of every peaceable citizen interested in its support?
I would appeal to your lordships, sworn as you are to abide by monarchy, that
you would resist, passively at least, though not perhaps forcibly, that act
which you thought unconstitutional, and continue to meet in Court, by regal
authority, 'till compelled to desist by superior force.' Such would undoubtedly
be your lordship's conduct, and such is the precise conduct which the
convention observed. Their ideas of resistance, their resolution not to desist
till compelled by superior force, are explained, and the extent of both
ascertained, by the compulsion in consequence of which they desisted, and the
force by which they were actually dispersed. Their resolution was not to
resist; it was to desist till compelled by force; and when my friend Mr.
Davidson, the sheriff, laid hold of the president's arm, to remove him from the
chair, 'No, Sir,' says the president, this is not force enough; a little more
if you please; accordingly the sheriff, by a very gentle exertion, removed him
from the chair. The whole was a scenic exhibition; and truly, my lord, where
the force was so ludicrous, a resolution not to desist till such force was
exerted, can never be criminal.

My lord, the resolution proceeds, and in ease of an invasion to reassemble in
convention. The construction imposed upon this is, that the convention meant to
join, or assist the invaders. My explanation is very different, that it was the
intention of the members, by every effort in their power, to resist an
invasion. The resolution concludes thus, that all, or any one of these
calamitous circumstances, (and an invasion is one of the preceding
circumstances,) 'shall be a signal for the members to meet in convention.' But
why calamitus, if they did not confider it really as such? If they did not mean
to avert that calamity, why represent it to the people or to themselves, as a
most calamitous circumstance? Can any thing more explicitly point out their
intention? Or when the whole resolution is considered, can your lordships
impose any other construction than this upon it, that the intention of the
members was, by every exertion, to avert that which they justly represented as
a national calamity.

Now, my lord, having determined the sense and import, let us examine the
criminal amount of a resolution considered as so alarming and dangerous, that
the constitution, in the opinion of some wise men, totters already to its very
foundation. A refusal to yield an implicit, uncompelled obedience, to an act
whose existence is only potential, on the supposition too of its proving an
unconstitutional act, is charged today as a direct attack on the authority of
the legislature, constituting a species of real and atrocious sedition. To
impugn the authority of the three estates, or to attempt a diminution of their
power or dignity, was, by 1584, chap. 130, declared to be treason; and the
prosecutor maintains an argument sustained by your lordships on a former trial,
that although the act is superseded by the introduction of the English statutes
respecting treason, the offense that ceases to be treasonable, must still
subsist as sedition at common law. My lord, let me explain the origin of this
act, whose very abrogation, it seems, is productive of a new species of
sedition. It was obtained by James VI. to preserve the ecclesiastical estate,
or rather the episcopal power, in parliament, then in danger of being subverted
by the efforts of our presbyterian ancestors. The dignity of the estates might
be variously impugned, by violence, by publications and speeches, or by
resolutions in parliament. A variety of inferior offenses, or of actions in
themselves indifferent, were therefore converted by this act into treason. But
these offenses, when the act was abolished, were again restored to their
primitive state. Popular commotions directed against an estate of parliament,
would return as formerly to real sedition; speeches, or publications,
derogatory to either of the three estates, to their original situation as
verbal sedition. By the act immediately preceding this statute, to decline the
authority of the counsel was treason, but how absurd to maintain, that because
the act is abolished, the offense, originally a contempt of court, subsists at
common law as a species of real, and atrocious sedition? I conclude, therefore,
that the various offenses comprehended i^ this act, must revert to their
original situation at common law, like him whose patent of nobility is
forfeited, and whose descendants return to the common herd of mankind.

But, my lord, I do not like this act, nor its introduction in this trial. And
I will tell you why. The Earl of Arguyle was arraigned on this statute, and
convicted of treason because he bestowed an explanation of his own on a
religious test, prescribed by parliament, whose authority he thus invaded, and
whose power he impugned. But this conviction dishonored the justice of the
nation, and the act itself, instead of being superseded by the English law, was
abrogated previously by our Claim of Right, or rather declared to have been an
obsolete and dead statute at the very time he wa tried. The Claim of Rights
declare, that James VII. had forfeited his right to the crown, among other
things, by causing pursue, and for^ault several persons upon stretches of old
and obsolete laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, upon lame and defective
probation, as particularly the late Earl of Arguyle, to the scandal and
reproach of the justice of the nation. Thus the Earl of Arguyle, to the
reproach of justice, was condemned on the stretch of an obsolete law. But in
this enlightened period, the gentleman at the bar, more unfortunate even than
the Earl of Arguyle, is to be convicted of a crime that has survived this old
and obsolete act; an unknown sedition that springs like a phoenix from the
embers of treason. Arguyle was convicted, because he impugned an existing law,
but my client is arraigned, because be impugns an act whose existence as yet is
entirely potential. But, my lord, the offenses accumulated on the British
Convention, must return to that situation which they held before this obsolete
statute was enacted; commotions to real, publications and speeches to verbal
sedition.

Not to exhaust your lordships patience, I shall observe of the speech that
succeeds this resolution, and of the convention of emergency, that the first,
by enumerating the restraints imposed by a Convention Bill on the right of
petitioning, coincides exactly with the interpretation bestowed on the
preceding resolution; that the convention, by constitutional means, would
endeavor to prevent the introduction of a law to intercept their petitions,
and to frustrate the ultimate attainment of their objects. As to the other, it
was natural for the convention, in the event of their dispersion in one
country, (which, as their objects were constitutional they must have considered
as illegal,) to provide secretly and beforehand, for re-assembling in another,
beyond the jurisdiction of the sheriff by whom they were dispersed. School
boys, when dispersed in one parish, will repair privately to the adjoining,
where they may renew their bickerings without molestation.

But what is the amount of this, and of every other article contained in the
indictment. Their French epithets, used perhaps foolishly, their resolutions,
and their speeches indicate, it is said a design to subvert the constitution or
government. The Solicitor General undertakes to prove that a plan was formed to
subvert the constitution. Let me tell him, that his evidence will not, and
cannot exceed the indictment, that the whole form and manner of their
procedure, as well as the principles they avowed and propagated, clearly, and
unequivocally demonstrate that their purposes were of the most dangerous and
destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness, and tending to
subvert the constitution of this realm. Their principles, and the tenor of
their procedure is the only evidence from which a plan to subvert the
constitution is inferred. But if such a conspiracy were formed, if such a
design was entertained, it amounts to treason, and should be tried as such. But
a charge of treason, let me tell your lordship, cannot, and dare not be
maintained; not that a concerted design to subvert the constitution, is not an
overt act tantamount to treason, but because there is no legal proof, nor any
evidence whatever, to establish that design. The testimony of two concurrent
witnesses, whether in treason or misprison of treason, is essential to
conviction; but here, I repeat it again, there is no witness* and under the
present indictment none can be adduced, to prove a conspiracy to subvert the
state. Sedition therefore is charged today, and the crime is to be
established, not by legal evidence, not by the testimony requisite in treason,
but by inferences from resolutions, by inuendos capriciously attached to
speeches, either innocent in themselves, or, if criminal, constituting a very
different offense. A design to subvert the constitution, if susceptible of
proof, would amount to treason. Speeches and resolutions are punishable only as
verbal sedition, But an intermediate crime, a constructive species of sedition
is created; and from speeches amounting only in themselves to leasing-making, a
n^w crime, incapable of proof, and unknown in law, is extorted by inference.
The tendency, which alone is criminal in these speeches, is not submitted to
the consideration of the jury; but the supposed motive from which they
originated, are to be converted by an arbitrary and capricious inference, an
inference necessarily influenced by fear, prejudice, and passion, into
constructive sedition. My lord, I affirm that this is subversive of all
judicial procedure. Constructive treasons are now no more; but a crime against
the state may still, it seems, be established by construction, and that which
constitutes in itself an inferior offense, be rendered the evidence of this
constructive crime. In the unjust, and ever memorable trial of Algernon Sidney,
inuendos from his writings composed the chief evidence, but Sir John Hawles
justly remarks, that, as this indictment was an original in the particulars
before mentioned, so it was a second of an inuendo indictment of treason;
Fitzbarris was the first. The prosecutor against Car, as I remember, was an
information, and judgment arrested after a verdict, because it was by inuendo,
of which no precedent could be produced, and although in actions, for words it
was not permitted, yet in criminal matters, being penal, it was resolved it
ought not to be permitted, and certainly much less in treason. In criminal
matters, no inuendo is therefore admissible, much less in treason. My lord, our
own practice corresponds with this. Oliphant and others accused of drinking the
pretender's health in public, 'with an intention of abetting his claim to the
crown,' were tried and convicted of verbal sedition. The tendency of their
speeches to excite disturbance constituted their sole offense; but the
treasonable intention inferred from their speeches, of abetting the pretender's
claim to the crown, was not then charged, as a constructive species of real
sedition.

My lord, an authority occurs on this subject, not usual in a Court of Justice,
yet so opposite, that I shall quote it without hesitation. It is the Monthly
Review for February, wherein a pamphlet is reviewed, the composition of a Mr.
Playfair, a man whom I know not, but who exhorts the nation to wage an eternal
war. Mr. Playfair asserts that it is only a matter of regret, that those who
undermine our government cannot be treated a la Francoise, since it is the
French system that they have taken for their model. What say the reviewers to
this humane proposal? Their honest indignation breaks forth in a stream of
argument and eloquence: A powerful stream of the milk of human kindness flows
through this sentiment of regret that the guilotine cannot be set to work in
this country, on those who do -- what? Betray their country? No; for they are
already liable to the penalties of treason, and to a death infinitely more
painful than that which is produced by the guilotine. Who adhere to the king's
enemies? No; for they are in the same predicament. Who by overt acts attempt to
overturn our government? No; for that also is treason. Whose heads then are
those which the national razor should shave in England, if the pious wish of
Mr. Playfair could have effect? The heads of those who undermine our
government: an expression not known in our law, and of course not to be found
in the index of the criminal code.

Had these reviewers directed their eyes to Scotland, they would have seen,
that, to undermine the government, though, under that denomination, unknown in
law, nor to be found in the index of our criminal code, is created by
implication a crime against the state. They would see that the most iniquitous
attainders of former times, might have been converted into a capital, though
inferior crime. Sidney and Strafford were both convicted, though at different
periods, of constructive treason. But Sidney, though unjustly attained, might
have been condemned for sedition, on those inuendos derived from his writings,
which in treason were not admissible as legal evidence. Strafford too, if his
sentence was iniquitous, might have been legally convicted of constructive
sedition; and if this crime has a legal existence, these men might have
perished unlamented on the scaffold. Strafford was accused, and on constructive
evidence, of an endeavor to subvert the fundamental laws; a crime on which the
statute of treasons was totally silent. Arbitrarily to introduce it into the
fatal catalogue was, in itself, according to historians, a subversion of all
law. But wherein does this differ from the charge against my client of a design
to subvert the constitution and government? Where has this law lain so long
concealed, that it now bursts forth to the destruction of this innocent man?
Where is the precedent for this unknown law, or the landmark by which he could
discover its existence? It is sufficient for his protection, or for our
security, that this new crime of subverting government is prosecuted, not as
treason, but sedition? Or is this new law less a snare to the unwary, because
the capital punishment attached to sedition, may be restricted by the humanity
of Court, to whatever arbitrary punishment the Court may impose? Must he suffer
for a crime that had no existence before, by a law created for the occasion,
that may burst at last on our own heads, and involve us in its ruins? My lord,
let the speeches, if criminal, be punished as such; but let not a constructive
species of guilt be deduced by inference from these speeches, nor a crime
established that is unknown in law.

These speeches, if criminal, are comprehended, as my brother has already
demonstrated, under the acts 1584, chap. 134, and 1585, chap. 10, on which I
maintain, as my second proposition, that where the offense is provided for by
statute, a severer or a different punishment cannot be inflicted at common law.
To establish this proposition will not require any long deduction. Nor would I
condescend to an argument on a proposition almost intuitive, but for an opinion
delivered on a former trial, that where the indictment is founded, and sedition
charged, on the common law, the Court are precluded from resorting to statutes.
My lord, the common law is a collection of usages, the origin of which is
uncertain, but of which the existence is preserved by tradition. The statute,
is a superaddition to the common law; declaratory either of its meaning, or
remedial of its imperfections. If declaratory, it ascertains precisely what the
common law is; nor can your lordship, in your interpretations of the common
law, travel beyond the limits prescribed by statute. Again, if remedial, it
either enlarges and supplies the deficiencies, or corrects the luxuriance, by
retrenching the superfluous excess of the common law. Remedial statutes are
therefore again divided into the law of England, into statutes enlarging and
restraining the common law. As an enlarging statute inflicts a greater penalty
than was otherwise competent, the crime, as in stealing from bleachfields, and
other statutory thefts, may, from motives of humanity, be charged at common
law, to the effect of inflicting the inferior punishment. Thus, in England, as
a misprision is contained in every felony, it is held that the indictment may
proceed on the lesser offense. But a restraining statute limits the penalty
formerly competent; nor can a severer punishment be inflicted at common law,
than that to which the restraining act has already reduced it. A different
punishment cannot even be inflicted; for the judge, whose hands are thus tied
up, has no power to deviate from the statute. Otherwise the consequences would
be most dangerous; the effect of the statute would be entirely frustrated; the
law would depend on the passions, the caprice, or the interest of the man who
prosecutes, the punishment on the discretion of the judge who pronounces the
sentence.

But the punishment, as regulated by 1703, chap. 4, is fining, imprisonment, or
banishment, meaning thereby banishment forth of the realm alone. This is the
third proposition, which I proposed to illustrate. The argument maintained for
the crown is this, that banishment by the mode of transportation is prohibited
neither by the spirit nor the letter of the act; that the spirit, as expressed
in the preamble, meant only to abrogate confiscation and capital punishments,
the letter to specify the most usual arbitrary punishments as then understood;
and it is asked with an air of triumph, who will say that, by banishment the
Court was limited to the inferior of two modes of punishment comprehended under
that generic term?

My lord, the statute itself shall refutes this argument. The preamble recites,
that from their generality, and the various constructions of which they are
susceptible, the laws against leasing-making, (which are previously enumerated)
as inferring death and confiscation, may be of dangerous consequences, and the
enacting clause proceeds accordingly to abrogate the punishments of
confiscation and death. So far the supposed spirit, and the letter are
consistent. But the enacting clause goes farther, not merely to specify the
arbitrary punishments usually employed, but as a restraining statute, to limit
these to an alternative penalty, to banishment, or imprisonment, or a fine, or
on the inability of the party to discharge a fine, to a corporal punishment
mitigated, and expressly limited to the preservation of life and limb. Your
lordships will therefore observe, that the statute extends farther than the
supposed spirit ascribed to the preamble. A fine may be inflicted, banishment
may be inflicted, or imprisonment inflicted; but these penalties cannot be
accumulated, nor corporal punishment superadded to banishment, or indeed
inflicted, unless on the alternative of the party being poor and unable to pay
a fine. The spirit therefore, ascribed to the preamble is contradicted by the
letter of this restraining statute, restrictive even as to that alternative
punishment with which it entrusts your lordships. The question therefore is,
what is the meaning of the term banishment in the act of Queen Anne?

And on this question, the argument from the act 1609, so fully illustrated by
my brother, is to me decisive. I hold, that the banishment prescribed by that
statute is from Scotland alone; as transportation, a punishment unknown when it
passed, was not then in the contemplation of the legislature. This statute is
the last enumerated in the act of Queen Anne, wherein the epithet banishment
occurs but once. Were transportation therefore, as implied in that generic
epithet, to be inflicted under the other acts against leasing-making, then,
this absurdity would take place, that banishment, though employed but once, has
a double signification in the act of Queen Anne. If applied to 1609, it imports
no more than exclusion from Scotland; but when applied to the other statutes
which the same acts enumerates, it implies not only a seclusion from Scotland,
but banishment beyond seas, transportation to the plantations, loss of liberty,
and personal servitude. Corporal punishments are limited to the alternative of
the party being unable to pay a fine: yet this greatest and most ignominious of
corporal punishments is entrusted to your lordships as a mode of banishment.
But, my lord, were banishment, as employed in the act of Queen Anne, an
expression either disputable or doubtful, its precise import is thus
ascertained. When the act 1609 was in the special contemplation, and underwent
the revision of parliament, that signification which was implied, or that
punishment which was prescribed, in banishment, must in dubio be presumed to
have been affixed to the same word, when employed by parliament in the act of
Queen Anne. If banishment, by the act 1609, be simple exile, or exclusion from
the realm, there is no reason to suppose that it acquired the additional sense
of transportation beyond seas, when that statute was revised by the act of
Queen Anne.

To this argument, my lord, I have heard no answer, and I hold it decisive. But
the act against wrongous imprisonment, and another of Charles II. inflicting
banishment to the plantations on those who refused to depone against
delinquents, have been preposterously quoted. The first, by banishing to the
plantations, demonstrates, the solicitude of parliament to distinguish
transportation, a punishment recently introduced, from simple banishment as
understood at common law; in the other, an act against wrongous transportation,
as well as wrongous imprisonment, the expression banishment is not once
introduced.

But, my lord, if transportation, which I hold to be a punishment superadded to
banishment, be a mode of banishment comprehended under that generic term, if
under a statute, sanctioned merely by banishment, your lordships are entitled
to inflict transportation; then, under a sentence of your lordships inflicting
banishment, those to whom the execution of the laws is entrusted, would be
entitled, equally with your lordships, to transport to the plantations the man
whom your sentence has merely banished. My lord, the consequence follows
inevitably from the argument, and my client, banished today by your lordships,
may be transported tomorrow by the executive power.

But a case from the records of the Privy Council has been quoted as decisive.
Baillie, a few months after the act of Queen Anne, was convicted of
leasing-making, and condemned by the Privy Council, to be banished and
transported, placed in the pillory, and adjudged infamous. I mean not to impugn
the authority of a court of law, when I assert that this sentence was most
unjust and illegal. The Privy Council was necessarily arbitrary, uniting the
executive power to its judicial authority. The trials in that court were
without jury, and the sentence was pronounced when the party was withdrawn. But
a more illegal sentence than the one proposed to your lordships as a precedent,
cannot be conceived. In every article it violates the act of Queen Anne.
Banishment, or imprisonment, could only be inflicted alternatively, and
corporal punishment, in the particular alternative of the party being poor and
unable to pay a fine! But a gentleman certainly not too poor to discharge his
fine, is declared infamous, a punishment which the statute has not authorized,
and condemned to the pillory, a corporal punishment replete with infamy.
Transportation, infamy, and the pillory are all accumulated on his unhappy
head; and as if to refute the plea that transportation was an alternative mode
of banishment, he is first banished from the kingdom, and then ordained to be
transported to the plantations. But instead of the illegal sentence of a court
abolished as oppressive and tyrannical, if your lordships regards the just and
lenient decisions of your predecessors, what is the conclusion? That the spirit
of the statute, as interpreted twelve years after its enactment, is mild and
equitable, when offenses not less henious than those in the indictment,
committed too on the eve of rebellion, were so mercifully punished.

My lord, a reference has also been made to decisions recited on a former
trial, to the effect of proving that in these cases, transportation was the
mode in which banishment, the generic punishment, received execution. I
observed that the sentences, as in the case of Rankin* were precisely to this
effect: The court adjudge the panel to be banished forth of the realm, and
ordain him to return to prison, and to be confined therein till occasion be had
for his transportation to the plantations. We are told that the last part of
this sentence is an explanation, declaratory of the first, and confinement,
till an opportunity offer for transportation, as well as transportation itself,
is interpreted as the mode in which banishment forth of the realm must receive
execution. Now my lord, it appears to me that this inference is not logical;
for banishment forth of one country, never can imply transportation to another.
My explanation is this; transportation to the plantations, as inflicted in the
latter part of the sentence, is supplemental, not declaratory; an additional
part of the sentence of banishment forth of the realm; not explanatory of its
meaning, or of the mode in which it was to be carried into execution. The
crimes thus punished by transportation are immaterial: they were either
capital, and mitigated to less than death, or offenses of which the punishment
is arbitrary and without control; for thus without the intervention of
statute, transportation was first introduced into our law.

With your lordships permission, there are yet two circumstances to which I
shall advert; the motive or the expediency of the punishment which I deprecate,
and its disproportion to the offense. The motive hitherto uniformly assigned
for transportation is, that there is no security, nor advantage to be obtained,
by banishing across the Tweed, those who will still disseminate their sedition
in England. My lord, has England no laws for her own preservation, that she
must be indebted for protection to the severe vigilence of a sister kingdom? Is
it requisite that the laws of Scotland should interpose to prevent the future
repetition of crimes in England? Sedition in Scotland is sufficiently repressed
by expulsion from Scotland: but must England be secured by your sentence, even
from the apprehensions of similar sedition? To prevent the future commission of
crimes in England, you impose a punishment which, if the crimes were actually
committed, the laws of that country would not authorize, and could not inflict.
It is the spirit of true punishment to prevent the future, by exhibiting a
corrective example of the past; not by inflicting the penalty previous to the
apprehended crime. With us the offense as bailable does not amount to felony:
in England it could not be punished with banishment. Why then inflict a
punishment appropriated to felony, as preventive of a crime apprehended in
England, a punishment which could not be inflicted in England, were the crime
committed?

My lord, on this immense disproportion between the punishment and the offense,
let me suggest a distinction which I am too much exhausted to illustrate. --
Clarendon was banished, Barrington transported. Clarendon, when exiled by a
vicious court and a venal monarch, lived abroad, to himself and to his country,
to illustrate the annals of British story. Bollinbroke, though expelled for
treason, lived to return, and in a corrupt age, to revive the flame of
patriotism in every English breast. Atterbury, though in exile, and under
discountenance, closed the honored remainder of his life with dignity and in
peace. But a man whose offense is inferior, whose abilities are equal, and his
integrity, I am bold to say, superior to Bollinbroke's, whose genius may
distinguish his name, and enrich the literature of his country, depends on your
sentence -- whether his future life shall be lost to society, himself doomed to
a receptacle of vice and misery, and transported to a shore from which
apparently there is no return. From the state of his health I must add, that a
sentence of transportation is to him, in all human probability, a sentence of
death.

Lord Henderland. My lord, the subject of our present consideration is not as
to the guilt or the innocence of the panel at the bar, but as to the relevancy
of the libel; and, my lord, I shall be very short in what I have to say. It is
certainly necessary to examine every criminal libel that comes before us, for
crimes may be charged in a different way; a charge may be relevantly laid in
one indictment and not in another; and, my lord, in a crime of this kind, which
relates to a society, or convention, the views of which society may change very
much, and the views of the members may be very different, men misled by folly,
or misguided by faction, may have gone into meetings, into conventions of this
kind, not aware of the views which they might have; not aware of the
consequences which they might draw from it, may, at last, come to feel the
hollow ground upon which they stood, the dangerous footing that they were upon,
and the consequence of their guilt might be very various indeed; therefore it
becomes me to examine this libel closely.

My lord, the question is, is it relevant or not? that is, do the facts charged
in the minor proposition come up to the crime charged in the major proposition;
that is all my province, I have nothing more to do with it.

My lord, this libel charges the crime of sedition, and the general import of
the minor proposition is, that this person has been guilty, in so far, as he
has been an active member in a seditious society; a society, or convention,
that is charged in the libel to be seditious. With respect to the logical
conclusion, there cannot be a doubt; for, I think, this proposition may be
fairly assumed, that whoever is an active member of a seditious society is
guilty of sedition: by active, I mean concurring in those measures which render
and characterize that society to be a seditious one; but I should not be
satisfied with an indictment laid in that way.

My lord, if an indictment was to charge murder in the major proposition, and
in the minor proposition it was said to be, insomuch as he murdered such a man
upon such a day, no doubt the conclusion would be logical; but I do not think
it would be a fair one; because it is the duty of the public prosecutor to
specify the particular circumstances. If it said he was guilty of murder, in so
far as he murdered such a man, upon such a day, by running him through the body
with a sword, of which he died in a few days after, that is a proper and a
relevant libel. Suppose it were to say, in so far as he thrust such a person
through the body with a sword upon such a day, of which wound he died, that
would be a relevant libel; because, although the term murder, or the felonious
intent is not repeated, it is, and must be the construction of law and common
sense, unless he be able to set up a defense against it, and establish that it
was done by accident, which, to be sure, would be a relevant defense.

Now, my lord, the capital object in every indictment, is to consider the facts
specified in the minor proposition, and how far they come up to the general
charge in the major proposition. We have heard a great deal about sedition,
real and verbal; distinctions which are taken by systematic writers for
perspicuity and clearness, but the true way to judge of sedition is to take it
from the object before you, that is the fair way; for I can conceive verbal
sedition as criminal, as dangerous as any that can be committed by actions.
Suppose a man to run into the streets and call out To arms! to arms! kingly
power is useless; it is cumbersome, it ought to be laid aside. Parliament is
venal and corrupt. Let us name a body of our own to assume the power which they
have improperly taken. Rouse and assert your rights. Why, my lord, it may be
said this is but words; but suppose he gets people to follow him, then, to be
sure, if they proceed to overt acts, it would be rebellion, it would be
treason; but suppose nobody follows him, is there no criminality? Is there no
danger to society? Is there no injury to government if such proceedings are
tolerated? Can any man doubt that this would be a sedition totally different
from any thing that I can conceive with respect to leasing-making?

My lord, I hold it perfectly clear, taking that systematic distinction that
authors assume for their conscience, that there is a sedition by words totally
different and distinct in common sense and reason from leasing-making. My lord,
in the same way the impugning the authority of parliament, or of any of the
states, that is a crime that cannot be suffered; as long as parliaments exist
they must be defended against it by the common principles of that government
which they have assumed: it requires no statute, it requires no usage, it
follows from the nature of the thing, that the impugning of that authority is a
crime, and is the crime of sedition; and I care not whether it be merely in
words, or whether it be followed by actions.

My lord, I lay out of the question the act 1584, which declared it to be
punished as treason; but I say it is part of the common law, and, as was well
expressed by the young gentleman who spoke on the part of the crown, must be
part of the common law of every state, of every society, of every government
that can exist in the world.

My lord, having said so much the question then is, whether there is any charge
made against this society (for I shall first speak of the society) that amounts
to this crime, setting at naught or impugning the authority of parliament? If
there is, I am sorry to draw the conclusion, but I must draw it logically that
this convention was a seditious meeting; and if this panel which is the second
question, shall appear to have been active in bringing about any such
resolution, then I must hold him to be guilty of sedition. Now, my lord, I will
not run through the whole of the argument, which has been long, and which has
been ably and well descanted upon on both sides; I will say particularly so
upon the part of the panel; and, if it had not been on so serious an occasion,
I should have had great pleasure in hearing these gentlemen display that
ingenuity, that ability, and that force of reasoning which they have discovered
in this cause; but, my lords, it is one thing to admire, and another to
approve. My lord, I should be glad it were in my power to give a fair
construction to that part of the indictment which I am now coming to. I think,
if in the common sense of mankind it admitted of that construction, I am bound
to give it; but I must explain according to the context, according to the
nature and the plain sense of the object of the resolution. Now, gentlemen, the
resolution that I allude to has been under our consideration before; you will
take it in connection with the motion made by Mr. Callander, which is also
recited in the indictment; and then comes this resolution: That this convention
considering the calamitous consequences of any act of the legislature, plainly
referring to the Convention Bill which passed in Ireland, which may tend to
deprive the whole or any part of the people of their undoubted right to meet,
either by themselves or by delegation, to discuss any matter relative to their
common interest, whether of a public or a private nature, and holding the same
to be totally inconsistent with the first principles and safety of society, and
also subversive of our known and acknowledged constitutional liberties, do
hereby declare before God and the world, that we shall follow the wholesome
example of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate
against the constitution of our country. My lord, with respect to the opinion
which they may form of this Convention Bill, that is one thing, or that any
body may form of it; but to declare, by a solemn and deliberate resolution,
that they have determined to pay no regard to an act of the legislature, but
holding in contempt the authority of that legislature, I can put no other
construction upon it; if the gentlemen of the jury can, they are at liberty to
do it. I am sorry I am obliged to anticipate what may be the effect of their
deliberation, but there is no help for it; I must give my own opinion in this
case upon the charges before me, and I cannot after all the attention that I
have given it put any other construction upon it, than that it was a seditious
act, a seditious, deliberate declaration, to be held up by them to all their
adherents, that an act of the legislature of this kingdom was to be set at
naught.

Gentlemen, as to the particular activity of this panel at the bar, you have
his speeches. It may be said that a speech against the Convention Bill in
Ireland is not sedition in this country, because Ireland is a foreign country;
but you are to take what he says, with respect to that bill, in connection with
the resolution which he means to support; and you are to take into your
consideration what he says in another part of his speech: When I saw the calm,
deliberate countenances of all present, and the solemn manner in which it was
passed, I was convinced that it would not only be a resolution of words, but a
rule of action. This, at least, to push it no further, shows his conduct and
his activity in this resolution, which I must, in sound construction of common
sense, consider as sedition.

Gentlemen, I will not run over the different proceedings of this convention;
-- they divided themselves into sections, departments, and so on. -- They also
had sittings, committees of organization, instruction, and finance; and, taking
those into consideration, I am at a loss to find out the necessity of such a
form of governnment, if they only intended to petition parliament.

My lords, that resolution is against the common law of the country, and it is
expressly against the statute 1584; and what shows the difference between that
and leasing-making is this, that in the very same parliament, or the next,
there is an act about leasing-making; and what occasion could there be for that
act if they were not different the one from the other? I have heard it said by
an honorable and ingenious gentleman who has argued this case, that this act
was abolished at the Revolution, because the Earl of Arguyle's trial, which
perhaps in part proceeded upon these acts, was said to proceed upon old and
obsolete laws. It does not proceed upon old and obsolete laws. Now, gentlemen,
you all see how far this was abolished; one of the first acts of the Convention
Parliament is to make it high treason to impugn the authority of the Convention
of Estates; but do they say that this necessary defense of the constitution,
which renders the impugning the authority of parliament a crime at common law
was to be left out? No; they knew better. They knew that government must be
supported; and had a convention met at that time, and told this convention of
the estates, You have no power to make such a law, we will resist your
authority, they might have been tried, under that statute, for endeavoring to
resist their authority. And in Queen Anne's first parliament, within four acts
of the act 1703, of which we have heard so much, is just the same thing as was
done in the convention parliament: Our sovereign lady, the queen's majesty,
with advice and consent of the estates of the kingdom presently assembled in
parliament, enacts, statutes, and declares, that the meeting of parliament now
convened," etc. 'is a lawful and free meeting of parliament, for the ends
therein mentioned. And farther, in pursuance of the first act of the first
session of this parliament, and without any derogation thereto, it is declared,
that it shall be high treason for any person to disown, quarrel, or impugn the
dignity of this present meeting of parliament, upon any pretense whatsoever.'
And in 1703, it is still stronger in the 'act ratifying the turning the meeting
of the estates in the year 1689 into a parliament. Our sovereign lady, with
advice and consent of the estates of parliament, ratifies, approves, and
perpetually confirms, the first act of King William and Queen Marie's
parliament, dated the 5th June 1689, entitled an act declaring the meeting of
the estates to be a parliament, and of new enacts and declares, that the three
estates then met together, the said 5th of June, 1689, consisting of noblemen,
barrons, and burrows, were a lawful and free parliament: And it declared, that
it shall be high treason for any person to disown, quarrel, or impugn the
dignity and authority of the said parliament. And farther, the queen's majesty,
with consent foresaid, statutes and declares, that it shall be high treason in
any of the subjects of this kingdom to quarrel, impugn, or endeavor, by
writing malicious and advised speaking, or other open act or deed, to alter or
innovate the Claim of Right, or any article thereof. This is the very act
immediately preceding that against leasing-makers; and when I see these
principles of just government prevail among our ancestors, shall I believe that
the impugning the authority of parliament, the dignity of parliament, and its
authority, should be punished as simple sedition? Why, it is impossible for me
to believe it when I read this act. -- It cannot fall under the leasing-making
statutes; it is quite a different thing. -- It is arranged in the law books
under the head of treason, but still it was sedition before, punishable from
the nature of the thing at common law; and if it is not high treason in
England, it remains sedition in Scotland, and punishable at common law as such.

I do not mean to enter into any argument upon the subject of transportation;
but I have a strong suspicion in my own mind, from various parts of Sir George
Mackenzie, that he does not so much as mention the word transportation in all
his book, though long after the practice of transportation had come in; and I
do not say any thing upon this occasion that is not found. The crime here
charged is not leasing-making, it is sedition, in the proper sense of the word,
sedition at common law. I will not compare the constitution of this country to
that of England, because I am unacquainted with it. I am not sufficiently
acquainted with their manners, their genius, their temper; but if we are not
entitled to punish, at common law, the crime of sedition, I know not what we
are entitled to punish. The crime may not apply to the panel; he may be able
to state a defense to take it off, or prove circumstances that may satisfy a
jury. It is the province of the jury to judge of the intent, and every
circumstance relating to it; and it is my duty to declare, that it is my
opinion, that this man ought to be committed to the knowledge of an assize. --
I have examined this matter with great care, and with anxious care, that I
might not do injustice to him on the one hand, and, on the other, that I might
do my duty. Upon the whole, I think it was such an intention to resist the
legislature of the country, and to bring its power in question, that, in my
opinion, I cannot but commit this libel to the knowledge of an assize, in order
for them to judge of its criminality; and I am sure they will act with the same
candor, and take the same pains that I have done.

Lord Eskgrove. My lord, the subject of our consideration is not whether this
panel is guilty or not, but as no man, by the laws of this country, is put
upon his trial before a jury, till the Court have given their opinion that the
facts charged will make out the crime laid, it is our business to consider
whether the facts charged in the minor proposition do, if proved, amount to the
length of showing that this person, accused, has committed the crime of
sedition. My lord, I have no difficulty in giving my opinion, that the major
proposition is relevantly laid. -- It is usual and proper for the prosecutor to
set forth particularly the different facts, from which he infers the actual
commission of a crime, or the intention with which these facts have been
committed. It is here stated, that there was a felonious seditious intention,
and that such and such circumstances occurred, from which that intention is
inferred. It is stated, that there was an illegal association and meeting,
which assumed the name of The British Convention of the Delegates of the
People, associated to obtain Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments.' -- And
my lord, it says, that they 'did, in the whole form and manner of their
procedure, as well as in the principles they avowed and propagated, clearly and
unequivocally demonstrate, that their purposes were of the most dangerous and
destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness, and tending to
subvert the constitution. That is undoubtedly a relevant charge, if the
prosecutor can prove it. Then it goes on to state, that they imitated the
Convention of France, the public avowed enemies of this country, with whom
Great Britain then was, and still is at war. My lord, I agree with what one
gentleman said, that the use of French words and French terms in this manner,
might at one time appear merely as signs of folly, and at another it might
appear to admit of another construction; but if you attend to it you will
observe it is imitating a body of men with whom we are at war, and who have
rendered themselves objects of horror throughout all Europe. I would be glad to
know what could be the meaning of having primary assemblies, departments, and
so on, unless they meant to form a sort of legislative body among themselves;
and to what end their deliberations were to be applied, we are to judge upon
the subsequent facts in this indictment, and upon them alone; namely, the
resolution which they took, and the plan which they were pursuing, they were
endeavoring to obtain universal suffrage and annual parliaments. My lord, as
to universal suffrage, so far as I know, I never heard that it had obtained in
the British Constitution, or that it can obtain without overthrowing the
constitution; and therefore, though it may be lawful to obtain a change, yet if
it is a change of that sort, it goes to show that it was not their intention to
improve the constitution, but to subvert and overthrow it; for it is that which
I never heard obtained in the constitution at the happy era of the Revolution.
My lord, they thought it necessary that they should have a convention; -- a
pretty thing in this country -- a convention; not a convention of men coming
together merely, but they were the representatives elected by others; and, my
lord, this is thought so important a matter, that they are afraid of any thing
happening to prevent their meetings, and therefore here follows, in this libel,
a resolution, that if an act should pass to prevent meetings of conventions
they were determined to resist it. My lord, the libel sets forth this
resolution:

That this convention, considering the calamitous consequences of any act of
the legislature which may tend to deprive the whole, or any part of the people,
of their undoubted right to meet, either by themselves or by delegation, to
discuss any matter, relative to their common interest, whether of a public or
private nature, and holding the same to be totally inconsistent with the first
principles and safety of society, and also subversive of our known and
acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby declare, before God and the
world, that we shall follow the wholesome example of former times, by paying no
regard to any act which shall militate against the constitution of our country;
and shall continue to assemble, and consider of the best means by which we can
accomplish a real representation of the people, and annual election, until
compelled to desist by superior force.

Now, my lord, this determination, if words are plain, is a resolution not to
disobey a law already made, but to disobey a law which they expected to pass
when it should pass; and when there is any notice given of it, then there is to
be a secret convention assembled; that secret convention to declare their
sittings permanent, after the manner of the French Convention, and they are to
continue to sit till they are compelled to desist by superior force. And, in
the twelfth page of the libel, it is stated that this panel, at the end of a
long speech, immediately after this resolution, told them, and though by some
it may be thought a bold, by some a daring measure, yet it will be found the
best for securing the peace of our country; for, if such a law were suffered to
pass, if men were not allowed to utter their complaints, a number of fierce and
rancorous passions would arise, and we would seek to appeal to that last
terrible decision, the event of which is uncertain, but which God and nature
allows.

If the servility of the people had been less; if they had dared to meet, and,
in place of murmuring, to have told their rulers that there was danger in
seeking to deprive them of their liberties, we would not have to adopt this
resolution tonight; but, when I saw the calm deliberate countenances of all
present, and the solemn manner in which it was passed. I was convinced that it
would not only be a resolution of words, but a rule of action.

My lord, I must confess that I can put but one construction upon these words;
that they meant to appeal to the terrible decision of the sword. My lord, I
shall add no more upon the general relevancy of this charge; I am clearly of
opinion that this is sedition, and sedition of the most aggravated nature. My
lord, much has been said of real sedition and verbal sedition; some gentlemen
seem to think that there can be no such thing as real sedition, for that it
would amount to treason. But, my lord, supposing a man to have wrote a paper
saying, I propose you shall meet in convention, and you shall have primary
assemblies, and shall resolve to resist any law that may pass to disperse them,
why, that would be exciting sedition; but here is a body of men actually met
together, a combination and conspiracy of a hundred, or a hundred and fifty
people, in the form of a convention of delegates, resolving to resist the
government established by law.

My lord, I am clearly of opinion, that that species of offense, call it
sedition or what you will, I call it the greatest of all sedition, would have
been punishable by the acts of parliament already spoken to by my brother; and
I have no doubt that this resolution to oppose the authority of the
legislature, to prevent them from making laws, or disobeying those laws when
made, is a resolution and a conduct that would have been punishable capitally
in former times, and is punishable independent of all the acts regarding
leasing-making, or what I call calumny of the king and his ministers. But, my
lord, it is not only this resolution that I call sedition, but there is another
thing, your lordship will observe what is said in one of the speeches of this
gentleman, set forth in this libel. Let us then endeavor to instruct the
people in their rights, and to inform them of our views and our intentions.
Your lordship sees they were to instruct the people, and teach them their
principles, to inform the country of what their principles and doctrines were,
so that, if their principles were had, leasing making is a much inferior
species of offense than this.

In the last place, as to what your lordship may propose (if the libel be
proven) as a punishment, your lordships have given your opinions on a former
occasion, that there is no law ^^^^^^ining o^ from inflicting banishment by the
mode of transportation. If I had had any difficulty before, I own, an authority
quoted this day by Mr. Solicitor General would at once have done away every
hesitation upon the subject. Your lordship heard the authority of a judgment of
the privy council, which was read upon a libel, laid upon this very act of
parliament, and pronounced by judges who were sitting (no doubt most of them)
in parliament at the time that act was passed; and therefore, I think there can
be no doubt that your lordships are authorized to sentence to banishment by
transportation. One of the gentlemen said, that the act of 1703 made it an
alternative punishment, either banishment, fine, or imprisonment; but, my lord,
the men who drank the pretender's health were condemned to fine, to
imprisonment, and also the disqualifications of office, and therefore it was by
no means confined to any one of them. I am of opinion, in this case, that your
lordship should find the libel relevant to infer the pains of law which is
restricted to an arbitrary punishment.

Lord Swinton. My lord, the question now under the consideration of this court
is as to the relevancy of this libel. My lords, in the short time that I have
sat here as judge, three of these cases have occurred; Muir, Skirving, and
Margarot. In each of them I gave my opinion upon the relevancy, as also upon
the punishment, and it is very disagreeable to go over the same ground again,
especially when gentlemen of more abilities than myself have already done it;
for that reason I shall be exceedingly short, and only go to where I think the
essence of the crime lies.

My lord, the crime charged in the major proposition is, in general, sedition.
The facts charged in the minor proposition amount, in my opinion, to this, to a
charge of a seditious conspiracy to overturn the established government, the
happy government of this country, by force and outrage, if it cannot be done
otherwise. I say it amounts to a seditious conspiracy to overturn the
constitution by force and outrage, if it cannot be done otherwise.

My lord, whether these facts are relevant to infer the pains of law, needs
very little consideration. My lord, that it is a sedit^ous conspiracy to
overturn the constitution, one need only read the aim and intention of this
British Convention, as it is called, the British Convention of Delegates of the
People, associated to obtain Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments. The
gentlemen who have appeared, and displayed so much ability for the panel, have
taken a great deal of pains to fritter down what is meant by universal
suffrage. My lords, I maintain that it is not only inconsistent with the
British Constitution, but inconsistent with every constitution or government
that ever did exist, or ever can exist, that every mortal who has arms, and
legs, and head, (and we are all equal, -- all of like passions and like
judgments with one another, that every one of them shall have equal suffrage.
In what? Not only in the election of legislators, but of magistrates, of
ministers, and of judges too. Universal suffrage, according to their meaning,
is a suffrage to rejudge what judges may do; also to judge whether they will
obey an act of parliament or not, and whether the acts of these annual
parliaments are agreeable to their mind or not. I will tell you what, -- annual
parliaments are inconsistent with any government at all; because, if these
parliaments should pass an act which these universal suffragants disliked, they
have a right, from nature, to meet and say this is a wrong act -- we did choose
these people, but they have gone contrary to our universal suffrage; and we
have a right to rejudge them, and overturn what they have done. And I will give
it you in the prisoner's own words, if it be true as charged in the libel, in
his supposed speech. If you appoint a man to act as your agent, and make his
situation such that he has every temptation to betray you, without incurring
the danger of being called to an account, the probability is, that he will
sacrifice your interests to his own. It is therefore that a free suffrage of
the people is what every man ought to desire, as that alone can make the
interest of the representative and his constituents the same.' -- Now, mark
this, 'The great art of government, I apprehend, is this, that all should be
governed by all. That is to say, that the whole of the suffragants, the whole
voters, shall be governed by the whole voters. -- What is this but saying, that
the mob shall be governed by the mob, the multitude shall be governed by the
multitude? -- Who would be chose a judge by such governors? Because they would
rejudge him. -- There has been one instance in France, where the revolutionary
tribunal and the jury, having found that the people were innocent, these
suffragants, these general voters thought the judges did wrong, and they judged
them over again; and, if the account we have be true, every one of them were
carried to the lamp-post. So the plan is, that there should be an appeal from
the guillotine to the lamp-post; that is the plan of this universal government.
He says, Were all mankind to assemble in public meetings, one of two things
must follow, either they will behave properly or improperly; if properly, their
meetings will tend to do good, if improperly, it carries its own cure along
with it. The people will soon be brought into a better method by a sense of
self-preservation, by which they will correct the errors into which they have
fallen. That is to say, they would cut one another's throats, and the few that
remained would see their folly. But, my lords, further, this motion of
rejudging of every thing, and of the conduct of parliamant, is carried through
the resolution which they came to, before God and the world, that if there
should be any proposition for bringing into parliament a Convention Bill they
would resist it. But, my lords, you need only to read these things; they do not
need argument. I am therefore clearly of opinion that it is sedition; not only
tending to overturn the British government, but every government; and that it
is most surely relevant to infer the pains of law.

Lord Dunsinnan. My lords, the consideration of this very point was so lately
before us, and the Court gave the same opinion which your lordships have now
given, that I think it is unnecessary for me to say more, than that I think, in
this case, as I did in that, that this indictment contains matter relevant to
infer the crime of sedition.

Lord Abercrombie. My lords, the question which has has been so ably argued
today is precisely the same that has been argued before your lordships in the
former cases. And, my lord, in the first place, I am now, as I was then,
decidedly of opinion, that no good objection, has been stated to the relevancy
of this indictment. In the second place, I am of opinion, that the objection to
the punishment of transportation, founded upon the act 1703, has no good
foundation; and I think so for two reasons. In the first place, that it does
not apply to the crime charged against the panel. The crime charged against
him is sedition, and sedition of the most aggravated nature. A man may be
guilty of leasing-making without being guilty of sedition; and vice versa, he
may be guilty of sedition without being guilty of leasing-making. In the next
place, supposing that act to apply to this precise case, I am of opinion that
the sole and whole purpose of that statute was to take away the punishment of
death, leaving the power to inflict, according to the circumstances of the
case, either simple banishment forth of the realm, or banishment by
transportation.

My lord, it was said that upon looking into dictionaries, it appeared that
banishment did not extend to transportation. But, my lord, every body knows
that the same word may mean one thing in common language, and have a very
different interpretation in a statute; for, to give an example, my lord, heir
apparent, I believe, in the English language, signifies a person the oldest son
of another during his father's life, as the Prince of Wales is heir apparent to
the crown; but your lordship knows, that heir apparent in the statute law of
Scotland has a very different interpretation; for by the law of Scotland, a man
is not heir apparent to his father till his father be in the grave, and he may
possess his estate for half a century in the character of heir apparent; and
many other instances might be given. Even if we look into Johnson's Dictionary
for the word transportation, he says it is banishment for felony. Your lordship
sees, tha^ even if we were at liberty strictly to adhere to the common forms, ^
speech, the argument would not hold good, I have not the (...) lest doubt that
your lordships have a power to banish by transp^^tation.

My lords, the learned counsel for the panel, both of them concluded a very
long and able argument, with a circumstance which I own I heard with regret,
because I always regret any circumstance which in my mind tends to aggravate
the guilt of a person standing in the unfortunate situation of the panel. Both
the one and the other of his learned counsel, in speaking of the punishment of
transportation, stated that his case would be extremely hard, because he was a
gentleman, a man who possessed talents, qualities, and virtues which would be
useful and ornamental to society. My lord, I am very sorry that such a man
should be in his situation, because if he should be convicted it aggravates his
crime highly. Had he been a man ignorant and uninformed, it might have been
some apology for his offense; and though such a man when he transgresses
against the laws of his country must be punished, yet it would have been a good
reason for inflicting the mildest punishment that we could consistently with
our duty inflict; but, my lord, if such are the qualifications of the panel
now at your bar, so much the deeper and more aggravated is his guilt; for, my
lord, we all know from the highest authority, that to whom much is given, of
him much be required.

Lord Justice Clerk. My lords* when the question was before us this day week,
the panel applied for counsel, and I was very happy to hear that it coincided
entirely with the opinion of all your lordships. My lords, I have attended with
the greatest attention to all these questions of sedition, from the first of
them down to the present day, and we heard similar questions upon the relevancy
of Charles Sinclair's indictment discussed with great abilities at the bar, and
also fully discussed by the court; and I do own, although I hope I am always
open to conviction, in every question that comes before me, whether civil or
criminal; yet I say I do own, that from the first to the last of these
questions, I never, at any period, entertained two different sentiments. With
respect to the first point, I am sure that much less than what is laid in the
minor proposition would support the crime charged in the major proposition; and
with respect to the judgment your lordships have given, I shall only say, that
I am very clear we have full power to pronounce that sentence, and that we
should not have done justice to the country if we had pronounced a smaller
punishment upon any of those cases. I shall therefore not add any more, but
that I concur with your lordships in the opinion that the libel is relevant to
infer the pains of law.

Thursday March 13, 1794.
When the Court met, the interlocutor on the relevancy was read over, and the
following gentlemen were chosen as Jurors: David Deuchar, seal engraver,
Edinburgh. Peter Hill, bookseller there. John Bell, bookseller, there. James
Hunter, merchant, there. Andrew Miligen, watch-case-maker, there. Sir William
Forbes, Bart, banker, there* Peter Mathie, jeweller, there. Alexander Gardner,
jeweller, there. William Creech, bookseller, there. Thomas Hutchinson,
merchant, there.


Mr. Gerrald. My lord, I object to Mr. William Creech; I understand he has
repeatedly declared, in private conversations, that he would condemn any member
of the British Convention, if he should be called to pass upon their assize;
and I wish to refer it to his own conscience, and his oath, whether he has not
prejudged the principles upon which I am to be tried.

Lord Henderland. My lord, the objection is, that he has prejudged the
principles upon which Mr. Gerrald is to be tried; that he said he would condemn
every member of the British Convention; it is stated in a loose way, it is not
stated that he said he would do so whether they were guilty or not; I cannot
see that it is a relevant objection; if he had said, he would condemn them
whether they were guilty or not, it would have been a good objection, but at
present it is too generally laid.

Lord Eskgrove. If the allegation had been, that Mr. Creech had said he would
convict Mr. Gerrald, right or wrong, the objection would be good; but if it was
only in common conversation that he had such an opinion of the intentions of
the British Convention, it is not a good objection.

Lord Swinton. I am of the same opinion.

Lord Dunsinnan. I perfectly coincide with your lordships.

Lord Abercrombie. I am of the same opinion.

Lord Justice Clerk. As this objection is stated, I hope there is not a
gentleman of the jury, or any man in this Court, who has not expressed the same
sentiment.

Mr. Gerrald. Then my trial would be a matter of form merely, because a
juryman, by saying out of doors that he would condemn every member of the
British Convention, takes for granted that very principle which remains to be
proved. If a juryman had aversed only that he would condemn all the disturbers
of the public peace, no doubt he would be well warranted in making that
assertion; but, he says he will condemn them, not because they were disturbers
of the public peace, but because they were members of a convention, the
illegality of which yet remains to be established. So that your lordship must
see that such a general declaration operates to the same conclusion, that he
would condemn a man for that which may turn out to have been legal and
constitutional.

Mr. Creech. My lord, I never said so, it is impossible that I ever could say
such a thing.

Lord Henderland. I think Mr. Gerrald is very ill advised in the way in which
he stated the objection; because he has, in fact, acknowledged himself a member
of the convention.

(The objection was repelled.)

John Hutchinson, merchant, there. John Sibbald, smith, there. Alexander
Nisbet, manufacturer, there. William Ranken, tailor, there. Archibald Campbell,
brewer, there.
Lord Justice Clerk. Do you object to any of these gentlemen?

Mr. Gerrald. Yes, my lord, I object to William Ranken; and the ground of my
objection is this, and I can sustain it by both precedent and principle. It
consists in this, Mr. Ranken is tailor to the king; and, of course, being in
the pay of the crown, being occasionally in the habit of receiving favors from
it, he cannot be a fit person to pass upon my assize. And, my lord, I will
sustain it by precedent. In the trial of Algernon Sydney, which, I trust, will
never be adduced as a precedent, except to be violated, it is stated that the
colonel excepted to several of the jury, to some as not being freeholders, and
others as being in the king's service, and receiving wages from his majesty.
And* I find by the act of Parliament which took place immediately after the
glorious Revolution for reversing the attainder of Algernon Sydney, the very
first causes stated as a ground of reversing the attainder, are, Whereas
Algernon Sidney, Esquire in the term of St. Michael, in the thirty-fifth year of
the reign of our late sovereign King Charles II. in the Court of Kings Bench at
Westminster, by means of an unlawful return of jurors, and by denial of his
lawful challenges, and so on. For these reasons the attainder was reversed.

Lord Henderland. The very same objection was stated in the case of Mr. Mair,
and was then repelled.

Lord Justice Clerk. If it had been the king himself I don't see that it could
be a valid objection.

(The objection was repelled.)

EVIDENCE FOR THE CROWN.
William Scott sworn. Examined by Mr. Montgomery.

Q. Does it consist with your knowledge that a warrant was issued to apprehend
the panel at the bar?

A. Yes, he was apprehended on the morning of the 5th of December.

Q. Was you present at the declaration emitted by him that day?

A. Yes.

Q. Was it emitted voluntarily and freely? -- A. It was.

Q. Was he sober and in his senses at the time? -- A. He was.

Q. Look and see if that is it?

A. It is; it was emitted upon the 5th of December, and he found bail the same
evening.

Q. Did you see him next day?

A. I did; on the evening of the next day I went to the meeting of the British
Convention, accompanied by the lord provost, sheriff-substitute, and
magistrates, in Lady Lawson's yard; when we went in we found that whoever had
been in the chair had left it. Mr. Gerrald was standing near the chair speaking
to the meeting. Mr. Margarot said, they were met upon a constitutional
business, to address the king, or something to that purpose; and somebody
called out, that nothing could be done till the chair was full. Mr. Margarot
was called to the chair, and took it. Mr. Davidson then asked if that was the
meeting calling themselves the British Convention; they replied that they were;
upon that he said, "if that is the case, you must dismiss; we are come here for
that purpose." Then there was a call for Mr. Gerrald to go on, but Mr. Davidson
opposed it, and took Mr. Margarot, who was in the chair, by the hand, and
pulled him out, and then there was a call for Mr. Gerrald to take the chair,
which he did, and Mr. Davidson made use of the same means to induce him to
leave the chair as he had done to Mr. Margarot, and he submitted to the
compulsion; they considered it as sufficient that he was desired to leave the
chair and was taken by the hand. It was then said that it was usual, before
dismissing the convention, that they should pray, which Mr. Gerrald did, See
Appendix, No. 2.
and then left the chair; but before he left the chair, as well as at the
beginning of the meeting, it was called out that they would remember that the
meeting had voted themselves permanent the night before.

Q. Does it consist with your knowledge that on the evening prior to this, the
convention were dismissed by the magistrates?

A. I was informed so.

Q. When Mr. Gerrald was brought for examination to the sheriff-clerk's office,
were there any papers brought?

A. Yes; when Lion the messenger and other officers executed the warrant upon
Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerrald, they brought them to the office, with their
papers.

Q. What became of those papers?

A. After Mr. Gerrald and Mr. Margarot were examined, it was proposed that the
trunk should be opened, but Mr. Margarot refused to deliver up the key; the
trunk was kept till next day, when a warrant was issued to send him to jail
till he did deliver it up; he refused still to give it up, but finding there
was a warrant issued, he held it in his hand and said, if you choose to take it
you may; he stepped aside a little till it was opened, and when he returned he
saw the papers looked over, and those that did not apply to the business in
hand were given up to them again.

Q. Was it opened in your presence?

A. Yes, and in the presence of Mr. Davidson, the sheriff-substitute.

Q. Look at that paper.

A. It is the inventory of the papers found in the trunk.

Q. Were all the papers that were inventoried marked? -- A. Yes.

Q. Would you know them again? -- A. Yes.

Mr. Solicitor General. Look them over carefully by the inventory, and see if
these are the papers so inventoried -- are they marked with your initials? --
Yes.

(The witness then examined the papers, and compared them with the inventory of
the papers found in Mr. Margarot's trunk.)

Witness. The first seven articles were claimed by Mr. Gerrald, and the others
by Mr. Margarot.

Mr. Montgomery. Were any other papers brought to the sheriff-clerk's office?

A. Yes; when the warrant was executed against this gentleman, one was executed
against Mr. Sinclair also, at the Black Bull, who was very much indisposed at
the time, and his papers remained at the office, till he was in a situation to
come to be examined.

Q. Were you present when his papers were inventoried?

A. I was.

Q. Was Mr. Sinclair present? -- A ^e was.

Q Had he an opportunity of peru^^ng it?

A. It was read over to him.

Q. Did he object to any of the articles being put into it?

A. No.

Q. Look at that.

A. That is the inventory of Mr. Sinclair's papers,

(The Witness examined the papers, and compared them with the inventory.)

Q. Do you know that there was a warrant issued to apprehend Mr. Skirving? --
A. Yes, at the same time.

Q. Were any papers of his found?

A. Yes, the warrant was executed by Lion the messenger, accompanied by Fraser,
Mack, and Dingwall.

Q. Were you present when the inventory of those papers was made up? -- A. Yes.

Q. Who brought them to the sheriff-clerk's office?

A. The officers brought Mr. Skirving, with the papers in a bag, Mr. Dingwall
put his seal upon them, and Mr. Skirving also, and they remained sealed up in
that bag till they were taken out before the sheriff.

Q. Were they taken out in his presence? -- A. Yes.

Q. Are they marked with your initials?

A. Yes, they are; this is the inventory of them.

Mr. Clerk. My lord, I understand that the convention was not established under
the denomination of the British Convention, till 19th November, 1793. Now, one
and all of these papers, as I understand then, that Mr. Scott is going to
prove, are of dates anterior to the existence of the British Convention,
private papers of Mr. Skirving's, which cannot affect this cause.

Mr. Solicitor General. If these papers were produced for the purpose of
rearing up a charge of guilt, founded upon these papers, the objection would be
good, because he is only charged with sedition in the convention; but that is
not the purpose for which they are produced; they are produced as papers not
constituting guilt of themselves, but as circumstances of evidence, which,
though I think they are not decisive ones, ought to be laid before the jury.

Lord Justice Clerk. Are they libelled upon?

Mr. Solicitor General. They are all libelled upon.

Lord Justice Clerk. You know you are entitled to prove every fact and
circumstance that may establish the pannel's guilt, as being art and part in
the crime.

Mr. Solicitor General. It is very possible that the panel may find something
among them that may be useful to himself; I don't know whether he will or not;
there are nine tenths of them that I shall not say a word about.

(The witness examined and compared the papers found in Mr. Skirving's
possession with the inventory.)

William Scott cross examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. When did you first see Mr. Sinclair's papers?

A. On the morning of the 5th of December they were brought to the office, with
Mr. Margarot's, and Mr. Gerrald's, but as Mr. Sinclair could not be brought to
the office at that time, his papers were not opened till about the 7th or 8th,
when he was able to come.

Q. How were the papers secured when you first saw them?

A. Wrapped loosely in a towel.

Q. Were they sealed? -- A. No.

Q. In whose hands did they remain from the 5th to 7th.

A. They remained in the sheriff clerk's chamber, in a locked room.

Q. You said they were inventoried in the presence of Mr. Sinclair*

A. Yes.

Q. Did he offer any protest upon that occasion?

A. I cannot recollect.

Q. Try and recollect.

A. I know he declined answering questions.

Q. Did he offer to take a protest that these were not his papers?

A. I do not recollect it.

Q. You don't recollect the circumstance of a protest at all?

A. No.

Q. Who were present besides you?

A. Mr. Davidson, Mack, and Lion.

Q. I wish to ask whether, when you went to this meeting, you saw any sign of
violence, riot, or disorder?

A. No. I saw no confusion till the magistrates came there, there was no
appearance of a riot.

Q. Do you know whether Mr. Sinclair's papers were opened by any person
whatever, before he saw them.

A. No, not that I know of -- they were locked up and sealed.

Mr. Gillies. Does it consist with your knowledge that a paper was given to Mr.
Gerrald out of the bundle, previous to taking the inventory?

A. No, not previous to taking the inventory; amongst the papers there was one
which he said was very material to him, and we thought in was of no
consequence, and therefore gave it up to him upon the 6th, and a receipt was
given for it.

Harry Davidson sworn. Examined by Mr. Montgomery.

Q. You are sheriff-substitute of the county of Edinburgh.

A. I am.

Q. Do you know that a warrant was issued against Mr. Gerrald.

A. Yes.

Q. Was he brought before you in consequence of that warrant?

A. He was.

Q. Look at that, is that the declaration that he emitted when he was brought
before you? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was it emitted freely and voluntarily? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did he appear to be sober and in his senses at the time?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you observe upon what day that declaration was taken?

A. I think it was upon the 5th of December.

Q. Did you see Mr. Gerrald next day?

A. I did, in the evening, at a meeting of the British Convention, in a
wright's shop, in Lady lawson's yard, at the south side of the town. I went
there with the lord provost and some of the magistrates, with a number of
peace-officers; there was a very great crowd, the shop shas quite filled when I
went in; Mr. Gerrald was speaking; I saw a number of people whom I had seen the
night before, particularly Mr. Margarot, and Mr. Gerrald. I asked if that was
the British convention? I was told that it was. I told them I was the
sheriff-substitute of the county; upon that Mr. Gerrald went on speaking. I
begged that I might be heard; that I was the sheriff-substitute of the county,
and was come to disperse the meeting. I addressed myself principally to Mr.
Margarot, as he seemed to be the chief person there; I told him I considered
the meeting as an illegal meeting, and I ordered the people to disperse; some
conversation ensued upon that, and he told me they were a peaceable and
constitutional meeting; that if I would hear what was then going on, I should
be satisfied that they were what he said they were, and that they were then
meeting upon a petition to parliament; and he showed me a paper, laying upon
the table, with the words petition to parliament written upon it. I told them
that I came for the purpose of dispersing them, and that I was determined to
remain there till they were dispersed; finding that I was determined to
disperse them, Mr. Margarot, with the approbation of the meeting, took the
chair, and said they should not dissolve till force was used. I told them I
hope force would not be necessary; that I had force with me, but should be
sorry to be under the necessity of using it. He said some mark of force was
necessary to be used; upon which I took him by the hand, and desired him to
come out of the chair: it was a friendly shake of the hand, but he thought that
was too slight; I then put my hand to his shoulder, and he came out; they
seemed to think that I had committed an assault upon them, and threatened to
prosecute me; I laughed at them. Mr. Gerrald was then called to the chair, and
I made use of the same kind of force with him; after that he made a prayer,
which they said was the usual way of breaking up the assembly, and I certainly
allow that staid till I saw them all out of the room; I then looked the door
and took the key. Mr. Margarot said it was unnecessary to disperse them, for
they had declared themselves permanent. In answer to that I said it might be
so, but they certainly should not meet any where in the county; that if they
did, they should be dispersed in the same way that they were that night.

Q. When Mr. Gerrald was brought before you, were there any papers brought with
him?

A. Yes, Lion, the messenger, who apprehended Mr. Margarot, Mr. Gerrald, and
Mr. Sinclair, brought a number of papers in a locked trunk; which, he said,
contained the papers of Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerrald; they were not opened till
the next day.

Q. Who had the key?

A. Mr. Margarot; he refused to give it up till a warrant was issued to open it
by force.

Q. Was is opened next day in your presence? -- A. It was.

Q. Was there an inventory made of them? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerrald present;

A. They were both present.

Q. Look at that paper? -- A. This is the inventory.

Q. Did you sign it?

A. Yes. Mr. Scott selected those which he thought any way necessary or
connected with the charge against him, and gave the rest back; an inventory was
made of those that were retained, which is this in my hand. (...) see the
papers that belonged to Mr. Gerrald have not my initials.

Q. Were they marked by Mr. Scott?

A. Yes, they are marked both with Mr. Scott's and Lyon's initials; those
claimed by Mr. Margarot are marked with my initials.

Q. Were there any papers said to have belonged to Mr. Sinclair?

A. Yes, some of them were given back to him, and some of them were retained.

Q. Is that paper an inventory of them?

A. Yes, it is marked with my initials.

Q. Was Mr. Sinclair present when they were so marked?

A. Yes, he was

Q. Do you know of any papers of Mr. Skirving's being brought to the office? --
A. Yes.

Q. Were they inventoried before you? A. Yes, they were.

Q. Look at that?

A. This is the inventory of them, and this is the scrall of the minutes of the
convention which was found at Mr. Skirving's.

Q. Was Mr. Skirving present when that inventory was made up*

A. Yes.

Mr. Clerk. My lords, some of the papers libelled upon are not here. In the
inventory of papers there is one mentioned The rules, orders, and regulations
of the meeting called the British Convention, which is wanting; for any thing I
know that may be a very material piece of evidence to show what was the
particular nature of the convention, and with what particular views and for
what particular purposes they met; and it is a very great defect in the
evidence indeed, that the public prosecutor, after libelling upon these
writings and inventorying them, has not produced so material a paper as this. I
was entitled to come here, trusting that this paper would be produced by the
public prosecutor. I say that paper containing the rules, orders, and
re^ulations of the British Convention, is a material paper, and he does not
produce it.

Mr. Solicitor General. The libel bears, that certain inventories are to be
produced, and the papers mentioned in those inventories, the gentleman might
have known two or three days ago, what were to be produced, and what not; and
it was incumbent upon him to have inspected them; and, if any were wanting, to
apply for a diligence to enforce their production.

Lord Justice Clerk. The public prosecutor libels upon such and such papers; it
was your duty to see if those papers were in the clerk's hands, and if they
were not, you could have applied to the Court and got a diligence for the
recovery of it.

Mr. Solicitor General. And this happens to be a printed paper of which they
must have one hundred copies in their possession.

Mr Laing. I don't know how we are to get a diligence when we did not know in
whose possession it was.

Mr. Montgomery. Here it is, my lord, I have found it among the papers; here
are eleven copies of it; in going over the papers Mr. Scott happened to miss it.

Harry Davidson cross examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. It is hardly necessary to ask whether you observed any thing like scenes of
riot or tumult in the convention?

A. None at all.

Q. When did you first see Mr. Sinclair's papers?

A. The messenger, Lion, brought them along with the other papers at the time
Mr. Gerrald and Mr. Margarot were apprehended, but Mr. Sinclair being unwell,
and confined to his room, he was not, on that account, brought to the
sheriff-clerk's office at that time.

Q. In what way were they brought to the office?

A. Tied up in a handkerchief. Lion told me they were papers of Mr. Sinclair's,
but I did not touch them. They were wrapped up and tied, but I did not observe
any seal.

Q. I think you said they were inventoried in Mr. Sinclair's presence? A. Yes.

Q. Was you present? A. Yes.

Q. Did he sign it? A. No.

Q. What did Mr. Sinclair say; did he deny those papers to be his?

A. I do not recollect that. I think he acknowledged that they were his?
because, when the papers were selected, and part of them given back to him, he
received them as his.

Q. Was any mention made by Mr. Sinclair of a protest?

A. I really do not know; one of the gentlemen did, but there were so many of
them that I cannot say whether it was Mr. Sinclair or not.

Q. You are uncertain whether he took a protest or offered one?

A. I cannot say. I don't think Mr. Gerrald made use of the word protest;
either Mr. Sinclair, Mr. Skirving, or Mr. Margarot did, but I cannot say which.

Q. Do you recollect that he gave any reason for not signing the inventory?

A. He refused to sign it, because he thought it was a wrong step, contrary to
law.

Q. Did he say any thing more as a reason for not signing it?

A. Upon my word I do not recollect. The sum of what he said was put down in
his declaration.

Q. Can you say, from your own knowledge, that all proper and necessary means
were used in order to prevent any other papers being introduced into the
bundle; or, on the other hand, to prevent any papers from being taken away from
that bundle?

A. I cannot say that I had any particular access to know the fact, for I did
not see them till they were afterward opened in my presence.

Q. Were they sealed up before they were opened?

A. I don't think his papers were sealed.

Q. Is it not usual, in these cases, to seal up the papers to prevent any from
being taken away, and to prevent others from being put in? A. Yes.

Q. How was it that it was omitted upon this occasion?

A. I cannot say; there was a great deal to do in the office; I was there from
before nine in the morning, till between nine and ten at night; the papers were
lodged by the messenger in the sheriff-clerk's hands.

Mr. Solicitor General. You say they were opened in the presence of Mr.
Sinclair? A. Yes.

Q. Did he say there were any of the papers that were not his?

A. Mr. Gerrald, Mr. Margarot, and Mr. Sinclair, staid in the same house
together; and I remember one or other of them saying there was a paper that was
not his, that it belonged to one of the other gentlemen.

Q. Did Mr. Sinclair acknowledge those papers to be his?

A. When Mr. Scott selected them, Mr. Sinclair sat by him, and what papers Mr.
Scott did not think necessary to retain, he gave back to Mr. Sinclair.

Lord Dunsinnan. Did Mr. Sinclair see and know that they were marked as his
papers, and made no objection to them?

A. Yes.

One of the jury. What length of time might elapse between the time that the
papers were brought to the office, and the time when they were opened?

A. They were taken upon the Thursday, and they were not opened till he was
able to come for examination, which was on the Saturday forenoon.

Q. Do you know, of your own knowledge, who brought those papers; was it Lion?

A. Lion brought them into the office himself, in my presence, and said they
were Mr. Sinclair's papers.

Q. Did Mr. Sinclair take any concern in what was passing, as to the inventory?

A. Not any thing further than putting into his pocket those that Mr. Scott
returned to him.

Lord Henderland. Do you know where they were kept from Thursday to Saturday?

A. I do not of my own knowledge; but I think, when I asked Mr. Mack, he said
they had been under h^s own lock and key.

Mr. Gillies. Was Mr. Sinclair desired, upon that occasion, to s^gn the
inventory? A. Yes he was.

Q. Did he sign it?

A. I think he did not. In the first place he declined to sign his declaration,
because he considered himself improperly brought before me, and I think he
mentioned that as he had declined to sign his declaration he should decline to
sign the inventory of course.

Mr. Solicitor General. Did he complain of papers being taken from him under a
general warrant as an illegal thing?

A. I don't know that he said any thing about general warrants; Mr. Margarot
did, but Mr. Sinclair was much milder.

Mr. Gillies. The witness has said he refused to sign the inventory for the
same reason that he refused to sign the declaration. Now, the fact is, that the
declaration is signed by Mr. Sinclair.

Witness. That is a circumstance that I had forgotten.

Mr. Solicitor General. The fact is, he signed the first page of the
declaration, and refused to sign the rest; that is the fact.

James Lion sworn. Examined by Mr. Montgomery.

Q. Did you execute a warrant against Mr. Gerrald and Mr. Margarot?

A. Yes; I went to the Black Bull to enquire for these gentlemen; the waiter
acknowledged they were in the house, but declined going with me to their rooms;
he told me the number of their rooms, and the first room I went to was Mr.
Gerrald and Mr. Margarot's. I knocked at the door, and they desired me to come
in, which I did. I told them I had a warrant to carry them before the sheriff;
they were in bed; they got up immediately; I collected together the papers that
were in the room. Mr. Margarot proposed putting them in a trunk, and asked Mr.
Gerrald if he would put his into it, he consented; they were all put in, and
Mr. Margarot took the key into his possession. When he was coming away, says
he, I don't give you the trunk, you may take it at your peril. I told him I was
not scrupulous about that, and immediately gave the trunk to a chairman, to put
it into a coach. I looked out Mr. Sinclair's papers likewise, and took them at
the same time.

Q. Speak to Mr. Gerrald's and Mr. Margarot's papers first.

A. I must rehearse this: When we came to the sheriff-clerk's office in the
coach, I left the trunk and the other papers in the office, and sent a message
to Mr. Scott to inform him of what I had done, and then I got a message from
him to bring Mr. Sinclair in a chair. I went to Mr. Sinclair and told him; and
then there came a message that they wondered I was so long, and then there came
another message to let him remain at his lodging, which I did till between 9
and 10 o'clock at night.

Q. When was the trunk opened?

A. I think it was two days after.

Q. Was you present when it was opened? A. I was.

Q. Who had the key? A. Mr. Margarot.

Q. All the time? A. I know nothing to the contrary.

Q. Was there any inventory made up of the papers?

A. Yes, at the sheriff clerk's office; there was none made at their lodgings.
When the trunk was to be opened, Mr. Margarot would not give up the key, and it
was proposed to get a Smith to break it open, but it was delayed that day. The
next day Mr. Margarot was brought before the sheriff-substitute and Mr. Scott;
he said he would not give it up, but held it in his hand, so, (describing i^)
and said it must be taken from him by force; Mr. Scott was going to take it
from him, but Mr. Davidson said no, he must not do it, some other body must do
it, and then Mr. Mack gave a gripe at it, and took it from him; it was then
opened, an inventory was made, and I put my initials at the back of it.

Q. Look at these papers, and see if these are the papers you found in Mr.
Gerrald's room?

A. Yes, they are, they have my initials upon them.

Q. Was Mr. Sinclair in a separate room from Mr Gerrald and Mr. Margarot when
you executed the warrant? A. Yes.

Q. Were the papers separate? A. Yes.

Q. And you brought them with you to the sheriff-clerk's office?

A. Yes; and Mr. Margarot and Mr. Gerrald were in the chariot with me.

Q. What did you do with Mr. Sinclair's papers?

A. I left them in the sheriff-clerk's office.

Q. Was you present afterward, when they were opened?

A. Yes.

Q. How long after was it?

A. I am not certain; it might be a few days after.

Q. Did they seem to be in the same situation as when you brought them into the
office?

A. They appeared to me so; they were in my handkerchief, my name was in the
handkerchief.

Q. Were you present when the inventory of them was made out?

A. Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Sinclair there? -- A. Yes.

Q. Were any papers given back to him? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did he take them?

A. He took all that were given him, which was some that were not considered
material to the business in hand.

James Lion, cross-examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. You have said that you carried Mr. Sinclair's papers to the office
yourself? -- A. Yes.

Q. And left them there -- A. Yes.

Q. Was there any objection make by any person concerning the manner in which
you had secured those papers in the sheriff-clerk's office, or any where else;
did nobody tell you it was exceedingly dangerous to keep those papers unsealed
up?

A. A do not recollect any such thing.

Q. Did nobody say that other papers might be put in that did not belong to Mr.
Sinclair?

A. To the best of my remembrance no person stated any such thing; and, with
humble submission to you, my lord, I went from the sheriff clerk's office to
bring off Mr. Sinclair, and I was not back till 9 or 10 o'clock at night, so
that the papers were in the sheriff-clerk's office all that time.

Q. Did you take any notice of Mr. Sinclair's papers when you feized them?

A. I found some of them lying upon the desk, and one paper I got lying below
the bed.

Q. Have you any other means of knowing that these are the same but that of
knowing your own handkerchief?

A. Upon my word I don't think there was any thing else.

Mr. Solicitor General. At the sheriff-clerk's office, did you deliver them
into any body's custody?

A. There were two of Mr. Scott's clerks there, Mr. Mack and Mr. Dingwall, but
I was so hurried I was not there, I dare say five minutes; but I think I
desired them to take care of them.

Q. A day or two afterward, when you saw this bundle opened, had you any
reason to believe or suspect that any alteration had been made?

A. No, none at all; they appeared to me to be in the same state.

Mr. Gillies. Did you see Mr. George Sinclair at any time with Mr. Charles
Sinclair? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did he say any thing to you upon this subject, about their being tied up
loosely; recollect yourself?

A. I will. Have patience, and I will recollect.

Lord Justice Clerk. Who is Mr. George Sinclair?

A. He is Mr. Sinclair of Bride End. I have some faint remembrance that he said
something about an inventory, but I don't recollect that it was while I was
with Mr. Charles Sinclair; I don't know but it was after they were examined, I
am not sure.

Mr. Clerk. Was Mr. George Sinclair present when the inventory was taken?

A. He was not in the sheriff-clerk's chamber that day.

Q. Did you see Mr. George Sinclair either before or after taking the inventory?

A. I saw him that day that I was waiting with Mr. Charles Sinclair; and, if I
mistake not, he was over at the office, but I think not the day that the papers
were examined.

Q. Have you any recollection of any thing of this kind being said by Mr.
George Sinclair?

A. I cannot say; I cannot be positive; I am upon my oath, and I must be
guarded in every respect.

Q. Did he not tell you that it was wrong and dangerous not to inventory these
papers when they were seized?

A. To the best of my recollection he said something, that it was a pity but
there had been an inventory, or something of that nature.

Joseph Mack sworn. Examined by Mr. Montgomery.

Q. Did you attend the sheriff-clerk's office? -- A. Yes.

Q. You are clerk there? -- A. Yes.

Q. Were you present at the execution of the warrant against William Skirving,
secretary to the British Convention?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see the papers found in his possession? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was there an inventory made of them?

A. Yes; they were put into a bag, and sealed by Mr. Dingwall and Mr. Skirving.

Q. Did you see the inventory of them?

A. I came in while the declaration was making, and I saw the inventory made
out.

Q. Were the papers acknowledged by Skirving?

A. Yes; and the papers that were of no consequence were given back to him.

Q. Did he acknowledge these papers to be the same that were put into the bag?
-- A. Yes.

Q. Were you in the sheriff clerk's office when some papers were brought in a
trunk? -- A. Yes.

Q. Who brought them?

A. I believe it was James Lion, the messenger; the trunk came into my
possession very soon after.

Q. Did you write an inventory of the papers in that box?

A. Yes.

Q. Were any other papers brought besides those that came in the box?

A. There were some papers which came in a napkin.

Q. Did you keep those papers? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did you keep them locked up? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did you see an inventory made of them likewise? -- A. Yes.

Q. And they were in your possession till the inventory was made?

A. Yes, and after it too.

Lord Eskgrove. During the time it was in your possession, were there any
papers taken out or any put in? -- A. None.

Mr. Solicitor General, Was it under your lock and key all the time -- A. It
was.

Mr. Montgomery. Have you the charge in general of all the papers in that
office? -- A. Yes.

Q. Is that the inventory that was made up of Mr. Sinclair's papers? -- A. It
is.

Q. Look at that bundle of papers and see if they are the papers in the
inventory?

A. (Looks over them.) My initials are upon the back of every one of these
papers.

Q. Do you see Mr. Scott's initials upon them likewise?

A. Yes, and Mr. Davidson's likewise.

Joseph Mack cross-examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. You spoke of some papers being brought loose in a napkin Was you in the
office when they were brought?

A. I cannot say positively that I was in the office, but I got them soon after.

Q. You cannot recollect then, positively, who put them into your hands?

A. I believe I found them in the sheriff's room.

Lord Justice Clerk. Was the sheriff there himself?

A. Mr. Davidson, Mr. Scott, and Mr. Dingwall were in the room.

Mr. Clerk. Were they under the charge of any particular person?

A. No; they were lying in the room, and I took them away.

Q. I think you said these papers were afterward locked up?

A. Yes.

Q. When did you lock them up?

A. After the examinations that day were finished.

Q. At what time was that?

A. I cannot exactly recollect; it might be about 9 o'clock.

Q. Lion brought these papers loose in a napkin, and the box was locked? -- A.
Yes.

Lord Justice Clerk. And the napkin was not locked? -- A. No.

Mr. Clerk. Is it not usual when you seize papers to seal them up? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was you present when the inventory was taken? -- A. Yes.

Q. And Mr. Sinclair was present? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was you present when an objection was taken, either by Mr. Sinclair or for
him, upon the ground that the papers were not sealed up? -- A. I do not
recollect it.

Q. Do you recollect Mr. Sinclair's declaration upon taking the inventory? --
A. Yes.

Q. What did he say when this was doing?

A. He seemed very easy upon the business, and behaved very much like a
gentleman.

Q. Did he say the papers were his?

A. He did not deny that they were his; he took back the papers that were
returned to him.

Q. Did he say any thing about a protest?

A. Yes, he offered to take a protest, and Mr. Davidson told him it was not
usual to receive protests in these cases.

Q. Upon what ground did he offer to take a protest?

A. Because his papers were taken from him, as he imagined, illegally.

John Dingwall sworn. Examined by Mr. Montgomery.

Q. Were you present at a search made in Mr. Skirving's house for papers? A.
Yes.

Q. Did you find any papers there? A. Yes.

Q. Were they put into a bag in your presence?

A. They were put into two bags.

Q. And were they sealed? A. Yes.

Q. In Mr. Skirving's presence?

A. Yes; I put my seal upon one end, and he put his seal upon the other.

Q. Did you see those bags afterward? A. Yes.

Q. Where? A. In the sheriff-clerk's office.

Q. Look and see if these are any part of them?

A. This paper, or scroll of minutes, I found lying upon the table in Mr.
Skirving's room.

Q Did you see an inventory made up of these papers? A. Yes.

Q. It was fairly made up? A. Yes.

Q. Did you assist in making it up?

A. I made out Mr. Skirving's declaration.

Q. Was you present when Mr. Sinclair's papers were brought into the
sheriff-clerk's office? A. No.

Thomas Cockburn sworn. Examined by Mr. Anstruther.

Q. Did you belong to the society of the friends of the people?

A. I was a member of that society.

Q. Was you a delegate to the convention that met in Edinburgh in October last?
A. Yes.

Q. Did you attend that that afterward met in November?

Q. Yes; the British Convention?

Q. What was the occasion of the meeting of the second convention in November.

A. The occasion, so far as occurs to me, was the arrival of some delegates
from England.

Q. Was the panel at the bar one of those delegates from England, in
consequence of whose arrival that second convention met?

A. I always understood that Mr. Gerrald was one of them.

Q. When you first met in October, what did you call yourselves.

A. The convention of the Friends of the People, and afterward the British
Convention, as I understood, but I was not present at the time?

Q. Did you attend frequently?

A. I attended frequently, and was absent frequently.

Q. And what title did you give each other?

A. There were various designations, but Citizen was the one they most commonly
used.

Q. When you were divided into smaller bodies, what did you call yourselves?

A. They were first, I think, denominated Divisions; afterward Sections, and
there was another name which I do not recollect.

Q. What name were they most frequently called by?

A. I do not recollect at present.

Q. Do you recollect any institution of what was called Primary Assemblies? A.
No.

Q. Do you recollect their being divided into Primary Societies?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever hear departments mentioned?

A. I do not recollect.

Q. Had you different kinds of committees appointed?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recollect the names of any of those committees?

A. I think there was one of them designed the Committee of Union.

Q. Had you any Committee of Organization?

A. I think there was.

Q. Was there any that took charge of your money matters; how was that designed?

A. They were not very regular; but there was a committee instituted for that
purpose, which was usually called the Committee of Finance.

Q. And likewise Committees of Instruction?

A. I do not recollect that.

Q. For instructing different parts of the kingdom, such as the Highlands, and
giving them political knowledge?

A. There was a motion, I recollect, for promoting constitutional knowledge.

Q. Do you recollect that there was a committee for that purpose?

A. So far as I recollect at present there was mention made of a committee for
promoting constitutional knowledge.

Q. Had you likewise a Committee of Secrecy?

A. It may be called a Committee of Secrecy, but there was no name that I know
of given to it by the convention.

Q. Which carried on its proceedings more privately than the other committees
from which it got its name, I suppose, of a Committee of Secrecy? A. Yes.

Q. When you met, what did you call your meetings?

A. They were most frequently called Sittings, but I paid very little attention
to that circumstance.

Q. Did you ever hear of any person who had deserved well getting the honors
of the sitting?

A. I think I have heard in one of the committees some such thing of a single
person; humorously it might have been mentioned by some humourish man, and I
don't doubt but it might be taken down in the minutes, but those minutes were
never authenticated by the convention, because it was designed that they were
to have a committee to revise them.

Lord Eskgrove. Was any person, a stranger, ever admitted to a sitting in the
convention?

A. All I recollect is, that the honors of the sitting were mentioned.

Lord Eskgrove. To the best of your recollection, was any stranger ever allowed
to sit in the convention, upon a motion of that sort?

A. I do not recollect. I think I recollect it was rather honorable mention
than honors of the sitting that I heard.

Mr. Anstruther. When you received pecuniary assistance, was honorable mention
made of it?

A. It is that that occurs to my recollection most, but I cannot be very
positive; I only recollect something of the word honorable mention, or
something of that nature.

Q. How did you date your proceedings on what took place in the convention? Did
you take the year of God in the common way, or in any other way? A. I cannot
recollect.

Q. Did you ever hear of the first year of the British Convention, for example?

A. I cannot recollect; I never looked in the minutes.

Q. Was it not the practice in the convention to read over the subsequent day
what passed the day before?

A. I was not there till the business of the day was generally over.

Q. Did you never hear what was the manner of their dating their minutes?

A. I don't recollect any thing about it; I cannot say either one way or the
other; I was seldom present when that business was done; but I once remember
hearing it read before the convention went to business.

Lord Justice Clerk. Have you no recollection of hearing of the first year of
the British Convention?

A. I think I remember hearing something of that kind, but I cannot say upon
what occasion.

Mr. Anstruther. Did you ever see the panel there? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did he frequently speak there?

A. Not so frequently as others.

Q. Did he ever act as preses?

A. I don't recollect ever seeing him act as chairman in my life.

Q. Did you ever see him act as chairman to any of the committees? -- A. I was
not a member of any of the committees.

Q. Did you happen to be present at a meeting on the 21st of November when the
measure of a general meeting of the Scotch and English delegates was proposed?

A. There was a committee of union appointed to draw up regulations with
respect to the people in England and the people in Scotland, whose minds might
be one, with respect to the subject of reform, in order that they might be
united in their endeavors.

Q. Do you recollect upon that occasion the panel at the bar making a speech,
and you say he made few speeches, so that you will be the better able to
recollect?

A. I said he did not speak so frequently as some.

Q. Do you remember that speech?

A. I think there was a conversation one evening with respect to the union, and
to the best of my recollection he did speak upon that occasion; I was there
part of the time.

Q. Was you at that time in the practice of reading the Gazetteer when
published? -- A. I used to read part of them.

Q. Did you read that in which Mr. Gerrald's speech appeared, of which you say
you heard a part?

A. I cannot say but I might have seen it, but at this distance of time I can
say very little about it. I make no doubt but I read it.

Q. Did you think that the account you saw in the paper agreed with what you
heard in the meeting?

A. My memory is not so tenacious as to recollect a long speech; I cannot be
very positive.

Q. But in substance did it appear to you to be the same that was delivered by
Mr. Gerrald.

A. All I can say is, that I am ready to give a candid answer to any thing that
I know, but as to what may be read from a newspaper I cannot say.

Mr. Solicitor General. The question is, whether the account given in the
Gazetteer agreed with what you heard in the convention.

A. So far as I recollect I did not observe any thing remarkably deficient in
it.

Q. Look at that paper and read it?

A. With respect to newspapers, I hope the Court will allow me this, which I
think is fair, that any question that is put to me, or read to me, I shall
endeavor to give a fair answer, but as for reading it, I will not be concerned
with it.

Mr. Anstruther. Was you present when a motion was made by Mr. Callander, to
this purpose, that in case the minister, or any other member, bring into the
House of Commons a motion for a Convention Bill, as passed in Ireland, for
preventing the people from meeting according to their just rights by the
Revolution, the same motion shall be noticed to the delegates of the respective
societies, immediately to meet in convention to assert their rights?

A. To the best of my recollection, I heard a motion of Mr. Callander's read
one night to that purport.

Q. Was that motion made the subject of discussion at a future meeting?

A. I don't recollect being present upon that business till it was taken up as
a report returned from a committee.

Q. Who was it that read that report?

A. I think it was Mr. Sinclair.

Q. Did you read those parts in which the minutes of this convention were given
an account of? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was any resolution adopted in the convention in consequence of this report?

A. So far as I recollect, the convention conversed upon the report a long
time; and, if I remember right, they agreed, that in case of a Convention Bill,
similar to that which had passed in the parliament of Ireland being brought
into the parliament of England, that that should be considered as a reason why
they should hold a meeting, which was mentioned as a Meeting of Emergency.

Q. Did you hear of any other cases in which they were to meet?

A. I think there were others in the report; but I am not able to say
positively whether they were taken into the consideration of the convention.

Q. Do you recollect any other cases?

A. I think one of them was a suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act; and I think
there was mention made of the landing of foreign troops, or a foreign invasion,
I am not certain which.

Lord Justice Clerk. Did you think they might not be both used?

A. I cannot say.

Mr. Anstruther. What troops did you suppose those foreign troops were?

A. I cannot say; it might be the troops of any country, it was in a general
sense.

Q. Did you suppose they were to meet upon the landing of troops who were our
allies though not British troops, for instance Hessians and Hanoverians?

A. As to the intention of that, it is what I cannot enter into.

Q. Upon the oath you have now taken, did you hear that the convention were to
meet upon the landing of Hessians or Hanoverians in this country? -- A. I
cannot recollect.

Q. You have mentioned three cases of emergency; was any mention made of the
suspension of the act for preventing wrongous imprisonment? -- A. I do not
recollect.

Q. Where were they to meet? -- A. I know not.

Q. Who was to fix the place of meeting?

A. To the best of my recollection there was a committee appointed for that
purpose.

Q. Were they to keep it in secret till it happened?

A. They were not to tell it; there was a confidential trust reposed in a few
that they were to fix the place and find ways and means.

Q. Was there any mention of sealed letters being delivered to them fixing the
place of meeting, which were not to be opened till delivered by the delegates
to their constituents?

A. I think I heard a mention made of sealed letters, but then I don't lay that
that was the mode that was determined.

Q. What number was to proceed to business in case of these events happening?
-- A. I cannot be positive upon that subject.

Q. Was this resolution come to in a more solemn manner than any other
resolutions in the convention?

A. So far as I recollect the convention deliberated upon it in a very decent,
serious manner; and at last, they resolved it standing

Q. They all stood up, to declare their purpose of carrying it into execution
more solemnly than usual?

A. We all stood up; and I think we did so upon another occasion.

Q. Do you recollect what that other occasion was?

A. I rather have heard of it than was present at it.

Q. Was it at the proposal for a union?

A. I was not present.

Q. Or upon their changing the designation of their meeting to that of the
British Convention? -- A. I was not present.

Q. Did they, in passing this resolution, declare before God and the world,
that they would do so and so?

A. I recollect the expressions before God and the world were made use of.

Q. Did you ever hear such solemn expressions made use of upon any other
occasions? -- A. I do not recollect.

Q. Did the panel make a speech upon that occasion, after this resolution was
so solemnly passed?

A. So far as I recollect, Mr. Gerrald did speak, after the resolution.

Q. Did you pay attention to this speech? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did you afterward read that speech in the Gazetteer?

A. I do not doubt but I might in reading the Gazetteer.

Q. And did the account in the Gazetteer much differ from what you had heard?

A. I can say no more than I have already said, that I did not observe any
thing remarkably erroneous in it.

Q. Was it a cool deliberate kind of speech, or was it warm and animated?

A. I don't recollect, but Mr. Gerrald spoke in his usual tone.

Thomas Cockburn cross examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. You said you was a member of the convention; what did you understand to be
the purposes for which they met?

A. The purposes in general, for which the convention met, was a reform in the
British House of Commons.

Q. By what means did the convention intend to accomplish this reform?

A. The means, so far as I understood, that they intended to use, was to
endeavor to collect the minds of the people who were of the same opinion, and,
by legal methods to obtain their object, in a peaceable manner, so far as I
understood.

Q. Were they to petition parliament?

A. It was agreed upon in the convention as I understood in October; but I was
not present.

Q. What did you understand to be the object of the British Convention which
met in November?

A. I understood nothing essentially different from the convention that met
before; the only difference was the accession of a number of delegates from
England; their design I undertstood to be the same.

Q. You have been asked whether Mr. Gerrald made a speech upon the 21st of
November; now I beg leave to read it over to you, and then tell me if you
recollect Mr. Gerrald making such a speech?

A. If there are any words that I recollect I shall tell you.

Mr. Burnet. He has already said, that when he read the Gazetteer there was
nothing essentially different.

Mr. Clerk. He said, that he generally read the Gazetteer, and he perceived
nothing remarkably deficient; he spoke generally. I have not yet heard the
witness say that he heard Mr. Gerrald make this speech which seems to be
principally founded on in the indictment; and therefore I conceive it necessary
that the fact should be ascertained, whether the witness heard that speech, yea
or not.

Mr. Solicitor General. I can certainly have no objection, except this, that
the witness has been examined on the part of the prosecutor, and has given all
the answers that he can give.

Lord Justice Clerk. There is one observation, I shall make to the gentlemen of
the jury, that this witness has attended several meetings of the convention,
and when he was there, Mr. Gerrald made some speeches, although not so many as
some other people did; and he tells you he was induced to read the Gazetteer,
at least, so far as related to the proceedings of the convention. The speeches
made tonight are published in the Gazetteer tomorrow, and I would ask whether
that witness's comparative view of the speeches at that time, or so long after,
is most likely to be right.

Mr. Fletcher. He says there was nothing remarkably erroneous: now that appears
to me clearly to imply that there was something erroneous.

Lord Justice Clerk. It does no such thing.

Lord Henderland. The way that I have taken it down is this, that he did not
observe any thing remarkably deficient or erroneous in the speeches in the
Gazetteer; that he don't doubt but he may have read it in the Gazetteer, and
did not recollect any material difference.

Mr. Fletcher. Your lordship will allow me to explain my meaning: the words
are, that he observed nothing remarkably erroneous; I submit to your lordship,
and to every man who hears me, if that does not imply that there was something
erroneous; it may therefore happen that upon reading it over to the witness, he
may say that those parts charged as most criminal are erroneous.

Lord Justice Clerk. I deny the conclusion Mr. Fletcher has drawn from his
premises; the plain meaning is, that there was no remarkable difference.

Mr. Gillies. It is certainly true, that his recollection must have been more
accurate then than at present; but this is equally true, that the witness,
having just heard these speeches, would not read them with that attention that
he might if he now read them: for my own share, in such circumstances I should
not have read it at all.

Lord Justice Clerk. I think the witness' own idea of the matter is very
different: he says he read over the Gazetteer, and observed nothing remarkably
deficient. What do your lordships say; shall it be read, yea or nay?

Lord Henderland. I don't see any particular reason why it should not be read.

Mr. Solicitor General. Let the witness read it himself?

A. No, I beg to be excused; I think I should rememember it better by hearing
it read than by reading it.

(The Clerk of the Court then read the speech from the Gazetteer.)

Mr. Clerk. Do you recollect reading the speech you have now heard in the
Gazetteer?

A. I think, so far as I recollect that it is the same.

Q. Do you think it has mistated any thing that was delivered in the speech?

A. I think in the course of reading, I recollect a great many words
interspersed through this speech that I recollect Mr. Gerrald spoke in the
course of a speech one evening; but I do not mean to identify the whole speech.

Q. You mentioned a motion of Mr. Callender's when you was present?

A. I heard a motion made which I understood to be a motion of Mr. Callender's.

Q. It was read to you from the indictment, but I shall read it to you again --
"That in case the minister, etc (reads the motion from the indictment) I think
you said, to the best of your remembrance, this was the substance of the motion
you heard?

A. Yes.

Q. I shall now read it from the minutes of the convention: That in case the
minister bring into the Commons House of Parliament a motion for a Convention
Bill, it shall be noticed immediately to the delegates. You will observe this
is a much shorter, motion and something different: now which of these,
according to your recollection, was the real motion you heard at the time?

A. Who had the management of the business I cannot say; but the thing that was
first read was similar to what I heard.

Mr. Solicitor General. Mr. Clerk has had one speech read to this gentleman, I
desire that the other may be read, and he will say whether he recollects any
material errors.

(The Clerk then read the other speech from the Gazetteer.)

Mr. Solicitor General. Now, is this nearly the substance, or do you recollect
any great difference?

A. I recollect considerably less of that than I do of the other; the beginning
of it I don't recollect at all.

Lord Justice Clerk. Did you read the Gazetteer when it was first published?

A. I was in the habit of reading the Gazetteer.

Lord Justice Clerk. It gives me great pleasure to hear a witness, who was a
member of a convention like this, give his evidence fai^^y, like an honest man.

A. I wish the gentlemen of the jury to understand that I have not identified
the speeches in the Gazetteer.

Mr. Solicitor General. We know you have not; nor shall any body say that you
have.

Mr. Clerk. I observe a great many sentences in this indictment, printed in
italics; and I take notice of this, that the jury may be upon their guard, and
not suffer themselves to be misled by that means.

Mr. Solicitor General. It is very wrong, that there was any part of it printed
in italics, and how it happened I don't know; but all I can say is, to desire
the gentlemen of the jury to pay no regard to them.

Alexander Aitcheson sworn.

Lord Dunsinnan. Has any body offered you any reward, or promise of reward for
giving evidence here? -- A. None.

Q. Has any body told you or instructed you what to say?

A. If his majesty himself had instructed me what to say I would not have
regarded it.

Q. Have you any malice or ill will against the panel at the bar?

A. No, far from it; I consider him as a second LYCURGUS, a voluntary exile for
the good of his country, and for the same reason too; -- a wish to give a
better code of laws to his countrymen than they have hitherto enjoyed.

Q. You was a member of the British Convention?

A. Yes, I had that honor.

Lord Dunsinnan. You will remember that whatever you may say regarding your own
conduct you cannot be made an object of prosecution for.

A. My family is doubtless obliged to the public prosecutor.

Examined by Mr. Anstruther.

Q. You was a member of the convention of October?

A. Yes.

Q. That was given up? -- A. Yes after they had sat four days.

Q. When was it resumed again?

A. I do not at present recollect, but it was some time in November.

Q. Was you a delegate? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did not you give in a resignation?

A. Yes, I gave in my resignation, as I had not time to tend regularly, but it
was not accepted, and I did therefore attend occasionally.

Q. What was the occasion of their meeting the second time?

A. Because the delegates from England did not arrive in time enough, and
therefore we were called together again upon their arrival.

Q. Who were those delegates?

A. There were four or five of them: there was Citizen Margarot, Citizen York,
who I believe has since died abroad, Citizen Brown, Citizen Sinclair, and the
panel at the bar.

Q. When you first met in October, and afterward in November, by what
designation did you pass?

A. The Convention of Delegates.

Q. Did you change that designation?

A. Yes, to that of the British Convention.

Q. What was the purpose of your meeting?.

A. To obtain a Reform in Parliament, by Annual Parliaments and Universal
Suffrage.

Q. Who acted as secretary? -- A. Citizen Skirving.

Q. Had he any assistant? -- A. Yes, I had that honor.

Q. Did you frequently attend in that capacity?

A. I did, as often as I could.

Q. Were there any minutes of the proceedings?

A. Yes, there was a scroll of minutes.

Q. Should you know them again? -- A. Yes, certainly.

Q. You wrote part of it yourself? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was it not the practice of the British Convention, always on the subsequent
day, to read over the minutes what passed the day before?

A. It was the general practice, but was sometimes neglected.

Q. Were there ever any observations or remarks made?

A. Corrections were frequently suggested at the time, and other corrections
were delayed till the committee should meet to correct the whole.

Q. From what you know of those minutes, that you had occasion to take down
yourself, do you think the account they gave was a fair and accurate account?

A. As far as my memory could serve me, though no doubt I may have made many
mistakes.

Q. Had you occasion to bear the minutes read over of what passed when you
(...) present? -- A. Yes, frequently.

Q. Did the panel at the bar frequently attend the meetings of the convention;
was be constantly attending?

A. Whether he was constant or not I cannot say; I have seen him there.

Q. Did he take an active part in the business?

A. He took an active and a very public spirited part.

Q. Did he act as preses or chairman?

A. I do not recollect his being called to the chair, I rather think he was not.

Q. Do you recollect, on any of the nights that you attended the British
Convention, any proposal having been made for a union between the delegates of
the two countries, England and Scotland?

A. Some such proposal I believe was made when I was absent, but I think I
heard of it.

R. Did you come in during the evening when it was canvassed?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you hear any thing of a Committee of Union to be appointed?

A. I heard that there was such a thing proposed.

Q. You was not in when the proposal was made?

A. I am not certain, but I rather think not.

Q. Was you present when the panel made any speech?

A. I was present when he made several; and I was told he had made many when I
was absent, which I regretted that I had not heard.

H. Do you remember that he made any upon this proposal of union? -- A. I
cannot charge my memory with it.

Q. If you came in, in the course of the night, when the proposal was made, it
is possible you may recollect?

A. I came in upon this occasion, while Mr. Gerrald was speaking.

Q. If the speech, or a part of it, was read to you, you could possibly tell
whether it was accurate or not? -- A. I cannot say.

Q. Take a glance over that paper, and tell us if you recollect it?

A. I think you had better show me the indictment: he certainly is not indicted
upon the newspaper account. (looks it over) I think I can say that I recollect
nothing of it but these words, The voice of the people may be wrong when their
understandings are perverted by priestcraft, or darkened by political
superstition, like the voice once heard in Jerusalem of crucify him! crucify
him. The striking allusion that was made by the panel to that important
transaction makes me recollect it. As to any thing else that passed that
evening I cannot recollect. I think I came in a little before this part of the
speech.

Q. Do you think that was the night on which the motion for a union was
canvassed? -- A. I cannot say.

Q. Did you read the Gazetteer at that time?

A. Not when they were published; I had very little time.

Q. Do you recollect after this, a motion being made in the convention, said to
be a motion of Mr. Callander's, in the following words, or words of a similar
import (reads Callender's motion from the indictment)?

A. I do not recollect whether I was present at that time or not; I know that
such a motion was made by Mr. Callander.

Q. Do you know if it was referred to a committee to make any amendments or
alterations? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was there any report?

A. Mr. Callander was very much enraged that his motion was not adopted
precisely in his own words.

Q. By whom was the report given in? A. I cannot say.

Q. Look at that (Callender's motion in the minutes)?

A. That is my handwriting.

Q. That regards the motion we are now talking of?

A. Yes, it does.

Q. Look at that (Mr Sinclair's amendments), it seems to have been in your
possession, and marked in your handwriting?

A. Yes.

Mr. Solicitor General. That is one of the papers that was found in Sinclair's
possession.

Witness. It was handed to me as assistant secretary.

Mr. Anstruther. Was you present when this amended resolution was discussed,
and did you continue there during the evening?

A. I cannot say, I rather think not; for almost every evening I was obliged to
go away upon the business of a respectable gentleman.

Q. Do you recollect having been present at that convention, when there was any
proposal to burn a motion?

A. I think I recollect it.

Q. Whom was that motion made by?

A. Mr. Sinclair, I opposed it, because we had hitherto done every thing with
openness and candor.

Q. Do you recollect the nature of that motion that was proposed to be burnt?

A. I think it related to the calling a convention of emergency.

Q. Had you any idea of the reason why he made such a proposal?

A. Owing to some arbitrary stretches of power that had been threatened.

Q. Do you remember a motion made by Citizen Margarot of the followtng import,
That a Secret Committee of Three and the Secretary be appointed, etc. (Reads it
from the indictment.) Was any resolution adopted for carrying that into
execution? Was there a committee appointed?

A. I believe there was a committee of three or four.

Q. By what name was it called?

A. A Committee of Emergency.

Q. In what cases was this committee to assemble the convention?

A. I believe one was in case any illegal attempt should be made to disperse
the convention. Another occasion was in case of a foreign invasion; and I heard
next day that another was, in case the habeas corpus act happens to be
suspended, or the act for preventing wrongous imprisonment. In any of these
cases the convention of emergency were to meet.

Q. How was this convention of emergency to be assembled?

A. I know of no particular mode in which they were to be assembled.

Q. Do you recollect what number they were to consist of?

A. There were just three and the secretary appointed on this business.

Q. You had no idea of the place where the convention were to meet? -- A. No.

Q. That was kept secret? -- A. Yes.

Q. And this, to the best of your recollection, was the motion proposed to be
burnt? A. Yes.

Q. You said the reason of proposing that measure was, that some arbitrary
stretches of power had been made?

A. No, they had not been made; they were only threatened.

Q. Do you recollect how you generally designated each other in the convention?

A. We addressed each other in different modes, very often Sir, very often Mr.
such a thing, frequently Citizen; and I recollect farther, that the person who
introduced the word fellow-citizens amongst us, was a very respectable young
nobleman, Lord Daer; and he used it singly for a long time, like the man who
walked near thirty years with an umbrella over his head, and nobody followed
his example.

Q. When you were divided into smaller parties, what were they called?

A. They were first called divisions, and then classes, afterward the word
sec^^ons, was adopted as preferable.

Q. Did you ever use the word sittings?

A. Yes; and I suppose you call this a Sitting of the Court of Justiciary.

Q. You had in your official capacity an opportunity of seeing papers given in;
how were they dated?

A. Variously, according to the fancy of the writer.

Q. Here is one dated from Liberty Court?

A. Very good* but, my lord, what objection have you to the word Liberty Court?
Is the very name of liberty become unpopular? And here is another dated Liberty
Stairs. Now, my lord, we have a number of new titles, and new streets, both in
Edinburgh and Leith. I have been in Merchant street, where I believe no
merchant ever lived, and where I am sure there is not a single merchant's shop;
I have been in Quality-street, where not a person of quality resides; I have
been in Princes-street, where a Prince never walked; I have been in
Queen Street, where her most gracious majesty never set her foot. Besides
these, we have St. George's-street, St. Andrew's-street, St. James's-square,
St. Patrick-street, --

Lord Justice Clerk. What is all this idle harangue to the purpose?

A. My lord, I must say, it is exceedingly improper, (I beg pardon for saying
it,) to interrupt a man upon oath. It is surprising that the words liberty
court should be found fault with, when we have so many new streets named after
saints, although the majority of their inhabitants, so far from being saints,
are in reality of the fashionable religion, that is the French religion, as
your lordship perhaps would call it, or in plain English, of no religion at
all. It is certainly proper to give a court that had no name, the name of
liberty; nothing seditious can be inferred from it, any more than any thing
superstitious can be drawn from the streets named after the Roman Catholic
saints.

Lord Justice Clerk. You are not come here to give dissertations either on one
side or the other; you are to answer to facts, according to the best of your
recollection, and according to the great oath you have taken, answer the facts
that are asked of you?

A. My lord, I wish to pay all due respect to your lordship and this Court, but
I consider myself as in the presence not only of your lordship, but also as in
the presence of the KING of KINGS and LORD of LORDS; and therefore, as bound by
my oath, to say every thing that I can consistently with truth, to exculpate
this panel, who I am sure is an innocent man.

Mr. Solicitor General. Many things you have now said, will, in my opinion,
tend to do more hurt than good to the panel.

Witness. Of that, the gentlemen of the jury will judge.

Lord Justice Clerk. Mr Solicitor General, it is needless to put any more
questions to this man.

Mr. Solicitor General. I shall put no more, my lord.

(The witness was then ordered to withdraw.)

Lord Justice Clerk. Put him out then. Put him out!

William Ross sworn. Examined by Mr. Burnett.

Q. What profession are you of? -- A. A printer

Q. Was you clerk in the Gazetteer office? -- A. Yes.

Q. Who had the management of that paper?

A. Alexander Scott.

Q. Was you a member of the meeting of the friends of the people?

A. Yes.

Q. Was you a member of the convention? -- A. Yes.

Q. And of the British Convention? -- A. Yes.

Q. Did you act in any capacity in either of these meetings?

A. No.

Q. Do you write shorthand? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was you in the use of taking down the debates in the convention? -- A. I
took notes in the convention.

Q. For what purpose did you take those notes?

A. For my own amusement.

Q. Did you not take them for the purpose of publication in the paper?

A. I did publish an account of them in the Gazetteer.

Q. Then you took those notes for the sake of publishing them?

Lord Justice Clerk. Take his own words; he says he took them for his own
amusement, and published them in the Gazetteer.

Mr. Burnett. I believes you have a brother in this town?

A. Yes.

Q. Was he in the use of attending the British Convention?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he assist occasionally as secretary?

A. I cannot say whether he acted as secretary or not.

Q. Did he assist in any shape?

A. I have seen him taking notes, and writing.

Q. Did he take notes of the debates? -- A. Yes.

Q. When you published the debates in the Gazetteer did you state them as
accurately as you could?

A. I cannot say for the accuracy of them.

Q. Did you intend to make them as accurate as you could?

A. I did.

Q. Did you revise the proof sheets of the paper?

A. Sometimes I did, I had not always an opportunity.

Q. Are you acquainted with Mr. Gerrald, the panel at the bar? -- A. Yes.

Q. Was he a member of the British Convention?

A. I have seen him there.

Q. Did he take a leading and active part in the business as far as you saw?

A. I cannot say that I observed him take any leading part more than others.

Q. Did he make speeches?

A. I have heard him speak in the convention.

Q. So far as you recollect, did you take notes of his speech and publish them
in the Gazetteer?

A. I published in the Gazetteer speeches of different persons, and I suppose
Mr. Gerrald's among the rest.

Q. Did you ever see Mr. Gerrald act as preses?

A. I cannot recollect.

Q. Do you remember a motion made by Mr. Callender in the convention?

A. I think I do; but it is at such a distance of time that I cannot recollect
much about it.

Q. Do you remember any debate with regard to a question of union? -- A. I
think I do.

Q. Do you remember if Mr. Gerrald made any speech upon that subject?

A. I remember his speaking; but what his speech was I cannot say.

Q. Look at that newspaper; is that, to the best of your belief, the speech
that you wrote out for the Gazetteer?

A. I cannot say.

Q. This paper is published by you, is it not?

A. It appears to be so.

Lord Dunsinnan. Was it an accurate account? Did you intend to make it
inaccurate?

A. I did not intend it, but from circumstances I am sure it is not accurate.

Lord Eskgrove. Did you intend to put any thing in that did not pass?

A. I had taken a cold and did not hear well; and, not being practiced in the
shorthand writing, I filled it up as I thought suited the occasion.

Mr. Burnett. Do you remember any amendments being made upon that motion of
Callender's?

A. I have some recollection of this motion of Callender's.

Q. Was that motion passed as given in by him, or were there amendments? I will
read it from your own paper, (reads it.) Was you present when these
observations were made by Mr. Sinclair? -- A. I was.

Q. And did you write that, as far as you recollect?

A. I think I wrote that part of the Gazetteer; but I cannot answer for the
accuracy of it.

Mr. Solicitor General. Do you remember any thing about a Convention of
Emergency being appointed to meet in certain cases? -- A. Yes.

Q. Tell us the cases in which they were to meet?

A. I recollect something of it, from having told it in this Court before.

Q. Was the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act one?

A. It was mentioned.

Q. Was a suspension of the act for preventing wrongous imprisonment mentioned?
-- A. I believe it was.

Q. Was an invasion mentioned?

A. I don't recollect hearing of that.

Q. Was there any thing about landing foreign troops?

A. I think foreign troops were mentioned.

Q. Was the passing an act similar to the Irish Convention Bill one? -- A. Yes.

William Ross cross-examined by Mr. Clerk.

Q. Had you access to know that Mr. Gerrald was much indisposed, during the
meeting of the convention, and frequently absent from the meetings?

A. I suppose Mr. Gerrald's health was not in a very good state; ever since I
first saw him I imagined he was not in a very good state of health.

Q. I suppose you attended these meetings pretty regularly, by your taking down
the debates in shorthand?

A. I was a good deal there.

Q. Did you observe that Mr. Gerrald was frequently absent from those meeting?
-- A. It might be so.

Q. Tell the jury again the circumstances on account of which you did not
publish it as accurately as you wished?

A. I had not sufficient practice in shorthand to write it accurately; and
another thing was, I was just recovered from a fever, and had a severe cold
that I could not hear well.

Q. You mean to say, that what you published, is in substance the same that you
heard in the convention, but that a good deal was filled up from supposition?

A. Yes, a great deal of it was; and I cannot now say what part of it was so
filled up; I filled it up as I thought suited the nature of the question.

Q. Did the convention authorize the publication of those debates in the
Gazetteer?

A. They did not; the convention had no concern with them?

Q. Do you know any instance in which it was moved that their proceeeings
should not be allowed to be published in the Gazetteer?

A. I heard a debate one evening, it was late when I came in, concerning taking
the votes, and I thought it alluded to me.

Q. Do you recollect any thing of a motion returning thanks to Mr. Scott for
the publication of the Gazetteer?

A. To the best of my recollection I never heard such a motion.

Mr. Gillies. Was you present upon the 4th December, 1793. when the following
motion was proposed: That the moment of any illegal dispersion of the present
convention, shall be considered as a summons to the delegates to repair to the
place of meeting, appointed for the convention of emergency, by the secret
committee, and that the secret committee be instructed to proceed without delay
to fix the place of meeting?

A. I cannot recollect that I was; but I think I have heard of the motion.

Q. Do you think, upon the 4th of December, that Mr. Gerrald was present, or do
you remember his being ill at that time, and absent from the meeting on that
account?

A. I cannot say; all that I recollect about Mr. Gerrald's absence is, that I
always thought he was in a bad state of health, but when he was absent or
present I cannot recollect.

One of the Jury. I would ask you, in the first place, were the convention
acquainted with your intention to publish their proceedings, previous to
publication; and, in the next place, did they ever complain of its being
inaccurate?

A. I dare say they knew nothing of it previous to publication.

Lord Justice Clerk. But did any of them complain to you or Mr. Scott that they
were inaccurately taken down?

A. I have already said, I came into the convention one evening, and there was
a talk about the notes being taken, and the impropriety of it, and I thought
they alluded to me.

Mr. Solicitor General. Did you, upon that, discontinue taking notes? -- A. No.

Q. You continued taking them till they were dispersed?

A. The day they were dispersed I was taken before the sheriff.

Lord Abercrombie. Did any member, or did the convention, complain that you had
not taken them accurately?

A. Yes; one member particularly spoke of my inaccuracy respecting the number
of delegates from Sheffield, and a number of inaccuracies.

Q. What were the others? -- A. I cannot recollect.

Q. What was the nature of the accuracies?

A. They were accuracies in words.

Mr. Gillies. Did Mr. Sinclair ever complain of the general inaccuracy of
taking down the debates?

A. I do not recollect any particular person.

George Ross sworn. Examined by Mr. Burnett.

Q. You were clerk in the Gazetteer office? -- A. Yes.

Q. You was a member of the British Convention? A. Yes.

Q. Was you in the use of assisting the secretary?

A. Yes; I sometimes assisted the secretary, and so did several other persons.

Q. Was your brother one? -- A. No, never.

Q. Is that your handwriting?

(Reads) "Citizen Gerrald appointed chairman," Yes, it is.

Q. Did you ever hear him make speeches in the convention?

A. I have heard him speak in the convention.

Q. Do you remember any debate about a Union.

A. I recollect something about a union of the societies of England and
Scotland.

Q. Do you remember Mr. Gerrald speaking upon that subject?

A. I don't recollect whether he did or not.

Q. Do you remember a motion made by Mr. Callander about a Convention Bill?

A. Mr. Callander made a motion, that in case any motion was made in parliament
to bring in a bill, such as the Convention Bill in Ireland, that the convention
should meet and petition parliament to prevent it.

Q. Was that motion referred to a committee?

A. I do not recollect.

Q. What was done with it?

A. I do not recollect at present.

Q. Do you remember Mr. Sinclair making any amendments upon it? -- A. I believe
there were amendments proposed.

Q. By Mr. Sinclair? -- A. I cannot recollect.

Q. Were those amendments passed?

A. I believe they were, but I am not very certain.

Q. Do you remember any thing about the amendments?

A. No, I do not.

Q. Read that?

A. (Reads) Citizen Sinclair read the amendments upon Citizen Callander's
motion. and then comes another person's handwriting.

Q. How much of that is your handwriting?

A. The three last lines.

Q. Do you recollect nothing at all about it?

A. I don't recollect the particulars of the motion.

Q. Was there any thing in Mr. Sinclair's amendment about a Convention of
Emergency? -- A. I do not remember it.

Q. Did any other body mention it?

A. I remember a convention of emergency being mentioned.

Q. And when was it to meet?

A. In case of a bill being brought into parliament similar to that passed in
Ireland.

Q. In any other case were they to meet?

A. In case of Hessians and Hanoverians being landed in this country they were
to petition parliament.

Q. In case of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act?

A. I do not recollect.

Q. Or of the act for preventing wrongous imprisonment?

A. I don't recollect.

Q. Or in case of a foreign invasion? A. I do not recollect.

Q. Read that? A. (Reads) Citizen Gerrald, in a very energetic and animated
address, expressed his happiness at the motion passed.

Q. That is your handwriting? A. Yes.

Q. Do you know the reason of that blank being left in the minutes?

A. I cannot tell that, but if you would have allowed the convention to sit and
publish their minutes, it would have been filled up.

Lord Justice Clerk. Remember you are upon your oath?

A. I know that very well; I come here to tell the truth. All I know about it
is, it must either have been left to be put in at a future period, or, from
hurry, or some reason, it could not be put in at that time.

Mr. Burnett. Were the speeches made in the convention published in the
Gazetteer?

A. Yes, what my brother took down.

Q. Did you ever read them in the Gazetteer?

A. I have read them, but I have very little time to read.

Q. Did there appear to you to be any thing stated in the Gazetteer that you
did not hear in the convention?

A. If I had read them particularly over, I perhaps could have answered to that.

One of the Jury. Who corrected the speeches for publication?

A. I believe my brother, at least I suppose so.

Q. Did you ever correct them yourself?

A. I don't know whether I ever did or not, perhaps in reading over the proof I
might.

Mr. Burnett. Here is a paper with "Vive la Convention!" and "Ca Ira, George
Ross;" is that your handwriting?

A. Yes.

George Ross cross examined by Mr. Gillies.

Q. Those words Vive la Convention and Ca Ira were written by you at one of the
sections? A. Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Gerrald ever present at this section? A. No.

Q. Did the convention authorize these expressions?

A. No, they never did. I believe Mr. Gerrald never belonged to any of the
sections.

Q. How came you to put these expressions?

A. There was no harm in that.

Q. Was it a fancy of your own?

A. It was, without any orders, just a fancy of my own.

Q. Was any thing of that kind stated in the minutes of the convention?

A. They were written by me before either the convention or the panel could
know any thing of them.

Q. Were they afterward read over and approved of by the convention?

A. There were several members thought them very foolish.

Mr. Solicitor General. But they were read over and lodged with the secretary
as official papers? A. Yes.

Mr. Gillies. Were these expressions, Vive la Convention and Ca Ira, read over
to the convention, or only the report from the section?

A. It depended upon the person who read them.

Lord Henderland. When they were read, was the person reading in the habit of
concealing any part of it?

A. I cannot say.

Mr. Burnett. Here is a paper, first year of British liberty, one and
indivisible, by the appointment of the rabble of Sans Culottes.

Mr. Gillies. Was the panel concerned in writing that paper?

A. I cannot say.

Mr. Burnett. Were not the whole convention divided into sections? A. Yes.

Q. At what time did the section meet, of which you was a member? A. In the
forenoon.

Q. And they made their report in the evening? A. Yes.

Mr. Gillies. Did you ever see Mr. Gerrald at any of these sections? A. I never
saw him at one.

(The declaration of the panel was then read.)

Mr. Solicitor General.

Gentlemen of the jury, you are now about to exercise the most important
function that private persons can be called upon to exercise; -- to determine
with regard to the guilt or innocence of the unhappy person who stands at this
bar; and were the case at all difficult, in proportion to its importance, I
should consider your situation, gentlemen, to be at this moment of a very
hazardous and a very delicate nature. But you are not, upon this occasion,
obliged as jurymen sometimes are, to wade through a difficult proof, through a
variety of contradictory evidence, to balance deposition against deposition,
and from a long train of circumstances, with a trembling step, to investigate
where the truth lies. This, gentlemen, is a province which often falls to the
lot of jurymen; and, to be sure, calls for the utmost attention with which the
human mind can be vested. This is a case which commonly happens, where those
who break the laws of their country trust to being able to conceal the offense
of which they have been guilty for impunity, and of course it must require a
difficult, a laborious investigation.

Gentlemen, the present case is of a different kind; the offenses charged
against this panel were of too public a nature; they trusted not to concealing
the truth for impunity, but to circumstances of futurity, by which they hoped
to set criminal justice at defiance; but their hopes have been defeated, and I
have this day to lay before you a proof so complete as that which I shall have
the honor of stating to you.

Gentlemen, it will be necessary for me to ^^ke up more of your time than at
first might be imagined, because the most material part of the proof you have
not yet heard; it lies not so much in the parole evidence that has been given,
as in the written evidence lying upon the table; and, before I enter upon the
particular parts of the evence, I believe it will be proper to lay under your
view a general statement of the written evidence which has been adduced, and
the manner in which it has been authenticated; doing it in this manner in the
beginning of what I have to say, will save repetitions, and will save you the
trouble of again and again recurring to the same matter.

Gentlemen, the written evidence, upon which I chiefly rely, consists, in the
first place, of the minutes of the convention, (call it scroll or what you
please) made up by the secretary of the convention, and by his assistants. I
say, gentlemen, this important document, fortunately for the sake of public
justice, has been recovered out of the hands of the secretary, and is now lying
upon the table. Gentlemen, when it was seen that the audacity of the British
Convention had come to such a height that it was impossible for the magistrates
and officers of the law not to take measures against them, one of the first
steps resolved upon was, to take proper measures for getting hold of the
written documents in Skirving's possession, and by those proper measures, so
taken by the officers of the law, has this evidence been secured, and now lies
before you, completely authenticated. The authentication of it is perfectly
complete; you have the evidence of the persons who seized it in the possession
of Mr. Skirving; you have them traced to the sheriff-clerk's office, and there
you have them inventoried and signed in the presence of the parties; and
therefore I shall hold these minutes as completely authenticated, and shall
have occasion to refer to them again and again in support of the charge I am to
maintain.

You have, in the second place, the evidence of the papers recovered out of the
possession, partly of the panel, and partly of his companion Margarot, which
were got by Lion, and opened by the key out of Margarot's pocket, in the
sheriff clerk's office, all which now lie upon the table completely
authenticated.

In the third place, you have the writings found in the possession of Sinclair,
by Lion the messenger, at the time he attended the execution of the warrant,
put into a napkin, and by him carried to the sheriff-clerk's office, not
inventoried that day, because Sinclair was indisposed, but inventoried two days
after; they are also completely authenticated. I am sure, from the nature of
the case, it is impossible any alteration could have been made, and among those
papers you will find some very important and very decisive documents of
evidence indeed. And,

In the last place, if it may be called written evidence, there is the evidence
arising from those numbers of the Gazetteer which are also produced. It is very
true, that in general, accounts given in a newspaper cannot be received before
a jury; but you will observe, this is a newspaper in a very particular
situation, published by a member of the convention who is now under sentence of
fugitation on that account, and recognized by the convention itself. Gentlemen,
it may be necessary to point out to you in what way this was recognized by the
convention, as giving a fair account of their proceedings. I see there appears
in the minutes many resolutions about supporting the Gazetteer, as a paper of
their party; and, in one of the minutes, a person of the name of Colin Nory
having applied for a copy of the minutes, the answer returned to him is this,
that it will be unnecessary, because they will find them in the Gazetteer. I
say then, you cannot have a doubt but that it contains as fair and accurate
account as you can expect; at least accurate enough for all the purposes for
which I shall read them.

Now, gentlemen having thus stated and given you some account of the evidence
which I have to rely upon, I shall now proceed to consider the charge brought
against this panel, and the evidence by which I say every part of it is most
completely and without contradiction substantiated. The general amount of the
charge comes to this, that in the months of November and December last, a set
of seditious persons assembled in this city, and assumed to themselves the name
of the British Convention of the Delegates of the People, associated to obtain
Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments. That such a meeting was held in this
city is a fact too notorious and too well remembered by every one of us to
admit of contradiction; that this panel was a constituent member of this
meeting is equally clear and indisputable, having come here by delegation from
one of the societies in London, I believe the corresponding society; but it
matters not which, and that he attended and took an active part in the
resolutions of those meetings will not be disputed by himself. I believe that
he took an active part, and I must say, that from the talents which this
gentleman has shown, and from the character given him by his counsel, I have no
doubt that his abilities and education qualified him to take a very
distinguished part in the convention, as one of the leaders and prime movers
among them.

Gentlemen, I say, if nothing more had been proved against this panel than his
taking an active part in the proceedings of a meeting of this kind, upon that I
would maintain that he is guilty of sedition; because I say the meeting itself,
from the very nature of it, and the part he took in it, is sufficient to
constitute a charge of sedition against him. For what was this meeting? What is
the name that they assume to themselves? They call themselves the British
Convention of the Delegates of the People; plainly conveying an idea that they
were the representatives of the great body of the people at large, and
endeavoring to vest themselves with legal authority. I say this alone is
seditious and contrary to law: the people of Great Britain are represented by
their delegates in parliament; there their representation lies, and an attempt
of any other body of men to call themselves the representatives of the people
is seditious -- is illegal. A convention, it is very true, is not a name so
entirely new in Scotland as might have been imagined; a convention was a legal
name in Scotland, given to a legal body, invested by the sovereign with
parliamentary powers, in some degree, at least with powers very little short of
those vested in the parliament. We know it was a convention of the delegates of
the people in Scotland which accomplished the Revolution: at that period, the
people of Scotland alarmed at an indignant invasion of their rights, seeing
their privileges in church and state invaded and threatened with the
establishment of a despotic power; at that period, that memorable period to
which we all look back, at least in name, with reverence, at that period, the
people of Scotland, all that was great and good and wise in this country,
assembled; at that time we needed not delegates from corresponding societies in
London, there was then no occasion for inflammatory hand-bills and two-penny
pamphlets; the people of Scotland know when their rights are invaded; at that
time their constitution was attacked, and a despotic power threatened them; at
that time a convention met of every thing great, respectable, and good; and
they established the principles of the Claim of Rights, and provided against
any encroachment upon that constitution, by such guards as appeared to them to
be perfectly sufficient.

But, gentlemen, what is the object of this British Convention of the delegates
of the people? We are told it is to obtain universal suffrage. I say,
gentlemen, that universal suffrage is not only contrary to, not only not
authorized by the constitution of Great Britain, but a complete subversion of
that form of government under which we live, and which was established at the
time of the Revolution. At that period our forefathers published to the world
their ideas of government in the Claim of Rights; they declared openly and
manfully what they thought sufficient to make them a free and a happy people,
and to support the constitution. And, give me leave to say, and tell many of
those people who talk so loudly of the Claim of Rights which they never read,
that every right then stipulated for by our forefathers, every title of them is
at this moment enjoyed by the poorest wretch that breathes in Scotland. If the
gentleman can show me one single instance in which the Claim of Rights is
invaded. I will this moment sit down and give up the argument. But we are told
that universal suffrage is a speculative opinion with respect to government;
that wise men differ upon it, and that it is a part of the freedom which we
enjoy to have the liberty of fairly discussing every political subject, and
this among the rest. Gentlemen, this is a proposition which I will take the
liberty to deny. I will take the liberty to say, that the maintaining the
freedom of discussion of political questions to that length which is subversive
of the constitution is most illegal and most unconstitutional; for, what is the
situation in which we all stand? We are not here in a state of nature, we are
not savages, and now for the first time to choose a constitution for ourselves;
not like a man shipwrecked upon a desert island, free to choose any mode of
government we please. No; we are all o^ us born subjects of the British empire,
subjects of Great Britain, which is the most inestimable blessing, and the most
inestimable birthright that can be bestowed upon us. From our birth we owe
allegiance to the constitution established at the Revolution; we are not to
venture to say that another constitution would do better in its place. I say,
by law we owe allegiance to it from our birth, and by law we are bound to
prevent it being encroached upon, and that no body of men have a liberty to say
we will indulge in speculation, and there is no harm in speculation, I say,
that subjects of Great Britain, born under allegiance to the constitution, have
no such liberty. Now, gentlemen, I ask was universal suffrage any part of the
constitution established at the Revolution? Was it ever so much as thought of?
Was it ever so much as mentioned among those rights which our ancestors have
established? Not a word. The patriots of those days to whom we are so much
indebted, had too much good sense not to see that any scheme of that kind was
inconsistent with that species of government, composed of monarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy, which was then established; they saw that any
scheme of that kind would be inconsistent with it, and that it would be
dangerous and chimerical: but what their good sense led them to see and to shun
we are able to judge of upon much surer grounds. This topic is no longer a
matter of theory, in which men will indulge, as they please, their different
opinions; it is a matter which has been brought to the test of experience, in
the only case in which it has been tried since the world began (for the Anglo
Saxon government knew of no such thing): one experiment has been tried, in the
government of France, and the result of that experiment I shall not mention; it
is a subject from which I turn aside with horror and detestation, and yet this
is the time after this experiment has been tried, after it has produced those
horrible mischiefs in a neighboring country, which we cannot think of without
shuddering, this is the very time when this British Convention will lift up
their own mad opinions against the experience of ages, when they say in spite
of the Revolution, in spite of the principles then established, and in spite of
what has happened in France, we will obtain this universal suffrage, which, if
obtained in any country in the world, would just produce the same consequences,
or nearly the same that it has done in that unhappy ill-sated country which I
just now alluded to.

Gentlemen, I shall only suppose, that in place of associating themselves for
the purpose of obtaining universal suffrage, as they tell us, suppose they had
entitled themselves an association, in order to obtain a demolition of kingly
power and nobility; to be sure they might have told us it was mere matter of
speculation, that many good men had thought we were much better without kings
and without nobles; but I am sure, living in this country and under the
constitution of Great Britain, any proposition of that kind maintained by any
body of men, would be illegal and seditious.

Gentlemen, having shown you that the object of this association was illegal,
let us now consider the means which they took to accomplish their object, which
include the different acts of sedition charged against this panel, because
every one and all of those steps which they took, toward obtaining this
favorable object, are gross and aggravated instances of sedition.

Gentlemen, the title which this meeeting assumed to itself I have already
spoke of; and which was, I apprehend, in itself illegal, as calling themselves
the delegates of the people, that is to say, the delegates of the people at
large.

But the libel further states, and did in the whole form and manner of their
procedure, as well as in the principles they avowed and propagated, clearly and
unequivocally demonstrate, that their purposes were of the most dangerous and
destructive tendency, hostile to the peace and happiness, and tending to
subvert the constitution of this realm, imitating in the form and tenor of
their proceedings the convention of France, the public and avowed enemies of
this country, and with whom Great Britain then was and still is at war, the
members calling each other at their meetings by the name of Citizen, dividing
themselves into sections, receiving reports from said sections, and so on.
Gentlemen, for evidence of this, besides the testimony of the witnesses that
was delivered in your presence, I only refer you to the minutes of the
convention which will be lying before you when you deliberate upon this
subject. Turn to every page, and you will see there is no part of it the
language of Great Britain, but all of it this new fangled jargon which has been
accompanied with so much confusion. We find Committees of Finance, of
Organization, Primary Assemblies, and so on. You will find, by looking at the
minutes, or these reports of sections found in the possession of Skirving, the
most complete evidence of this; and I believe there is not a single phrase of
mischief, consecrated to every thing that is bad in France, but has been
adopted by the members of the British convention.

Gentlemen, it is very true, that this mode of imitation is not, by the law of
Scotland, a crime in itself, nor do I charge it as such; it is only mentioned
in the libel as a circumstance of evidence, in order to show to the jury the
general views and intentions of the parties. There is nothing wrong in the word
convention, there is nothing wrong in organization, or in liberty and equality;
there is nothing wrong in these words nor any other in the whole English
Dictionary; it is the improper association of them which I apprehend here, go
to mark the dark and dangerous designs which these people have not been able to
conceal. Prudence might have told them, that whatever alterations they meant to
make in this country, they should not have borrowed these expressions of
France; but the fury of reformation was so mad, and so rapidly did the torrent
run, that they were always speaking out the beloved object they had in view;
and thus we have Committees of Finance, of Instruction, of Organization, and
all the rest.

Gentlemen, you were told the other day, by a very ingenious counsel on the
part of Mr. Gerrald, that this imitation of French manners was by no means new
in this country; that something of the same kind had taken place before, and
nobody ever found fault with it. It is true, we may all remember when all the
fopperies of the fashions of France were our objects of imitation; but did they
endanger the constitution of this country? Was it ever pretended that they were
to give laws to Britain, and alter her constitution? Did the tailors, the
milliners, or the frizeurs ever pretend to legislate for this country? Did they
ever pretend any thing but to make our coats or powder our heads? That species
of imitation may be ridiculous, as it certainly was; but it was perfectly
innocent; it had not the smallest resemblance to that of which these gentlemen
have been guilty; it no more resembles it than if a man should choose to please
himself with the diverting tricks of a monkey; this might be innocent, but it
does not follow that in society he would be allowed to imitate the savage
ferocity of a tiger; the one may be ridiculous, but the other is detestable and
dangerous: it is on that account, and not because it was an imitation of French
manners, that it is charged as pointing out the mischievous views and
intentions which actuated the minds of these people.

Gentlemen, the libel next proceeds to state several speeches made by this
panel, who, by all accounts, appeared to have a talent for public speaking, of
which you in all probability will soon have a specimen; and he certainly has a
talent for composition; of that we can all judge. It is stated, that on the
21st of November, he made the speech which is engrossed at length in the libel,
and which has been read before you this day. Gentlemen, the evidence that he
made the speech does not rest solely on the testimony of the Gazetteer,
^^^hough even that I should have thought sufficient evidence to establish the
general import and substance of the speech; because, I will read to you an
abridgment of that speech, taken from an authority which the gentleman will not
pretend to question, I mean the minutes of the convention, which is just as
bad, or rather worse if any thing, than that published in the Gazetteer: (reads
from the minutes) Mr. Gerrald observed, that whatever difference of opinion
might exist within those walls, we can never forget that our friends and our
enemies are in common, and that our object is equally the same; -- he took a
view of the means we should take to gain our object --, entered fully into our
right to Annual Parliaments -- minutely investigated the Principles of
Government -- asserted that the end of all government is the good of the
governed,' which is certainly very true -- ' that if money is taken out of our
pockets, it signifies not whether it is by the robber on the heath, or the
monarch on the throne -- made many remarks on the Revolution-settlement, and
the benefits derived from the Revolution, but clearly demonstrated that they
are now totally taken away, which agrees with the words in the Gazetteer, that
the present form of government no more resembles the Revolution than a dead
putrid carcass does a living body. Now, if you compare these together, you will
find, that this short account is a most faithful and accurate abridgment of Mr.
Gerrald's speech, as stated in the Gazetteer, which I shall not trouble you
with reading again -- there are just two single passages I beg leave to call
your attention to: It was justly observed by Citizen Callander, that, soon
after the union of the crowns of England and Scotland, the people of both
countries were deprived of some of their most valuable privileges. It was from
that period that the greatest encroachments began to be made on public liberty,
but, if that union has operated to rob us of our rights, let it be the object
of the present one to regain them. If the event exists for our shame, as it has
existed for our chastisement, let it also exist for our instruction.

Now, Gentlemen, I here say, that that is a most abominable libel upon the
union of the two kingdoms, one of the most auspicious events that ever
happened, to say, that 'from that period, the greatest encroachments began to
be made upon public liberty, is an assertion that is most false and seditious;
for since that period there have been no encroachments upon public liberty, and
no individual citizen has been deprived of any of his most valuable privileges.

Gentlemen, the only other passages that I shall take notice of in this speech
is this: It has been observed, that the Revolution of 1688 did not produce the
advantages which might have been expected from such an event. It is true that,
at the Revolution, universal suffrage was not dispensed to the people with that
liberality which it ought to have been; but still, the present form of
government, in my opinion, no more resembles the Revolution, than a dead putrid
carcass does a living body: which is just saying in other and more florid words
what is stated in the minutes, that the blessings obtained by the
Revolution-settlement were now totally done away.

Gentlemen, the next branch of the indictment which we shall proceed to, which
is the most material and the most inexcusable of the whole, which carries the
deepest guilt against this panel, is what relates to Citizen Callander's
motion, the proceedings of the convention which followed upon it, and the share
which this panel took in its proceedings.

Gentlemen, in order that you may have a complete view of this important branch
of the cause you have to try, I shall state from the minutes, progressively,
the history of the proceedings which took place with regard to this motion of
Citizen Callander's. The business originated in a motion made by Citizen
Callander, a gentleman now under sentence of fugitation, for the part he took
in this business; he did not dare to stand his trial. Citizen A. Callander
moved, That in case the minister bring into the Commons House of Parliament a
motion for a Convention Bill, it shall be noticed immediately to the delegates.
This is the general substance of Mr. Callander's motion, as taken down in the
minutes of the convention, upon the 25th of November; and upon the 27th it is
debated in the convention. Mr. Callander's motion being then taken under
consideration, amendments were proposed by Citizens Downie, Sinclair, Margarot,
and Gartley. Citizen Margarot was for adopting the spirit of the motion, but
thought it more expedient to postpone it till the conclusion of the convention
business, and moved that a committee, consisting of the mover, seconder, and
those who had moved for amendments, be appointed to draw up a motion that may
probably meet the ideas of all. After some consideration it was agreed, upon
the motion of Mr. Callander, that the sense of the house should be taken, first
upon the spirit of the motion, secondly, upon the words of the motion, and
thirdly upon Mr. Margarot's motion. Upon the first motion it was carried
unanimously to adopt the motion as to its spirit; secondly, by a great majority
not to adopt the words of it; and thirdly, that the amendments referred to a
committee as above. So that you see, gentlemen, the result of this debate upon
Callander's motion is to adopt the spirit of it, but with respect to amendments
to refer it to a committee.

Then, gentlemen, let us see what the minutes say further upon this subject:
"Upon the 28th of November the motion is again taken into consideration, and
the report of the committee, to whom it was referred to make the amendments
upon Callander's motion, is brought up: Citizen Sinclair read the amendments
upon Citizen Callander's motion, as agreed upon by the committee, and it was
agreed upon the motion of Citizen Blank, that the house should resolve itself
into a committee for its mature consideration. In the course of the
conversation, Citizen Brown gave a history of the Habeas Corpus Act. After an
excellent discussion of the question, pertinent remarks, and amendments the
convention was resumed, and the whole as amended, being read over, the members
stood upon their feet, and solemnly and unanimously passed the resolution as
follows. -- After this there is a blank of a page and upwards, which I shall
afterward fill up to your satisfaction: in the mean time I shall go on with
the minutes.

Citizen Gerrald in a very energetic and animated address, expressed his
happiness at the motion passed; Citizen Brown followed him in a manly speech,
and proved the influence of the executive government over the parliament;
Citizen Margarot then read, and proposed the following motion: That a Committee
of three and the secretary, be appointed to determine the place where such
convention of emergency shall meet, that such place shall remain a secret with
them, and with the secretary of the convention, and that each delegate shall,
at the breaking up of the present session, be entrusted with a sealed letter,
containing the name of the place of meeting; this letter shall be delivered
unopened to his constituents, the receipt of which shall be acknowledged by a
letter to the secretary preserved in the same state until the period shall
arrive, at which it shall be deemed necessary for the delegate to set off. This
motion was seconded by Citizen Moffat and passed unanimously. Now, gentlemen,
let us go back to the blank, which I shall now be able to fill up, as I
believe, to the full satisfaction of every man who hears me; the blank is to be
filled up by the amended resolution proposed by Sinclair, which amended
resolution is one of the papers, two copies of which were found in Sinclair's
possession when he was apprehended by Lion, and carried to the sheriff-clerk's
office, there inventoried, and now lie upon the table: one of them appears to
be a good deal blotted and interlined, which is entitled at the back, in the
hand writing of Mr. Aitcheson, Mr. Sinclair's amendment of Mr. Callender's
motion and that important paper I must now beg to read to you, fully
authenticated as it is: Resolved that the following declaration and resolutions
be inserted at the end of your minutes. And you will now attend to a paragraph
in the Gazetteer, which Ross took down, and which he says he does not
recollect, but which you have in the minutes, in the Gazetteer, and in the
indictment. Resolved, that this convention, considering the calamitous
consequences of any act of the legislature which may tend to deprive the whole,
or any part of the people, of their undoubted right to meet, either by
themselves or by delegation, to discuss any matter relative to their common
interest, whether of a public or private nature, and holding the same to be
totally inconsistent with the first principles and safety of society, and also
subversive of our own and acknowledged constitutional liberties, do hereby
declare, before God and the world, that we shall follow the wholesome example
of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate against
the constitution of our country; and shall continue to assemble, and consider
of the best means by which we can accomplish a real Representation of the
People, and Annual Election, until compelled desist by superior force.

"And we do resolve,

That the first notice given for the introduction of a Convention Bill, or any
bill of a similar tendency to that passed in Ireland, in the last session of
their parliament;

Or any bill for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, or the act for
preventing wrongous imprisonment, and against undue delays in trials in North
Britain;

"On in case of an invasion;

Or the admission of any foreign troops whatsoever into Great Britain or
Ireland; all, or any one of these calamitous circumstances, shall be a signal
to the different delegates to repair to such place as the secret Committee of
this Convention shall appoint; and the first seven members shall have power to
declare the sittings permanent; and twenty-one shall constitute a convention,
and proceed to business.

The convention does therefore resolve, That each delegate, immediately on his
return home, do convene his constituents, and explain to them the necessity of
electing a delegate, or delegates, and of establishing a fund without delay,
against any of these emergencies, for his or their expense; and that they do
instruct the said delegate, or delegates, to hold themselves ready to depart at
one hour's warning This is the resolution which, even the audacity of the
convention dare not insert in the minutes, and I am not surprised at it -- a
more daring insult to the established government of the country never existed.
Gentlemen, upon the first part of it, an attempt, or something like one, was
made by the counsel to quibble away the import of it, that they would pay no
regard to any act of the legislature; that is, that as soon as such a bill was
brought in, they would meet, and endeavor to prevent it from passing; but if
you attend, you will see this could not be the meaning of it, it is, as plain
as words can make it, a resolution upon the part of these gentlemen, to bid
defiance to the legislature of Great Britain. That we who know better than you,
will oppose force to force, and instead of paying regard to it, will make it a
signal for us to hold a Convention of Emergency, to be held at a place unknown
to the parties themselves to be fixed by a secret committee, and that each of
the delegates shall be entrusted with a sealed letter containing the name of
the place of meeting. This is one occasion of the meeting of the convention of
emergency, but it is not the only one; there is another which well deserves
your serious consideration; one of the cases specified in which this convention
were to meet, in a place unknown to any but a chosen few of their own number,
is in case of an invasion. Gentlemen, this is not entirely a fancied case; we
all know that an invasion of this country has been projected, was then, and is
yet in agitation, (when it will be attempted God only knows) by its most
inveterate foes, not as in former times proceeding from a rivalship in arms --
a contest of ambition -- no, the object of the invasion as declared by
themselves, is no less than to annihilate the Government of Great Britain; to
cut it up as a monstrous piece of tyranny, to destroy that favorite of liberty
and of wisdom that was reared by our ancestors, and which has so long been the
glory and pride of every Briton and the admiration of mankind; and which, for
that reason, has been so long the envy of our foes. This constitution, in the
preservation of which is involved every privilege, every public right, and I
will add to it every domestic comfort, is by this invasion to be swept away at
once; a calamity which, if it should happen, (which I trust it never will, but
no thanks to those gentlemen) than compared with which, what is there in the
history of man to equal it? Of all the calamities, of all the punishments that
ever were inflicted upon a nation, if the whole vials of divine vengeance were
to be exhausted upon any people, or all the calamities that can proceed from
the convulsions of nature, or pestilence, or still more desolating famine; I
say the whole of these calamities compared with a successful French invasion, I
might for my own part, consider as visitations of kindness and compassion; and
yet this is one of the cases which their resolution provides for. This is the
crisis, this is the moment which, if ever it should occur, and it may, God
knows how soon, when the power of Britain must be exerted. Let me suppose the
event, that the French assembled near our coasts; suppose them (which God
forbid) either to vanquish Britain or defeat her vigilane and arrive, and
prepare to land -- in that awful moment, when the armies of Britain, I trust,
under their sovereign shall muster upon the coast to repel the foe, shall carry
with, them the wishes of every good citizen, every thing that is wise and good
in the country giving every assistance in their power; in that dreadful hour
where are we to find the British Convention? Do we find them assembling under
the banners of our constitution? No, they tell us, that it is their resolution,
that they have declared before God and the word, that in that hour they will,
conspirator-like, slink into a corner, shun their fellow-citizens, form a body
of their own, and meet in a place where they themselves know not, and is only
to be unfolded by the opening of a sealed letter when the hour arrives.

Gentlemen, though the mind of man can only be viewed by that All-seeing Eye
which can pierce into it, yet a human tribunal can judge of intentions from
actions; and taking the actions of those men, a proved by the most authentic
documents, they were dark, they were dangerous.

Gentlemen, it has been said that it might be their intention to unite
themselves to repel a foreign -- to repel an invasion. Had that been their
intention, would they have chosen to secret themselves from the rest of their
countrymen? Were they so mad (and mad I admit they were in many things) as to
think that a hundred men, or whatever their number was, were sufficient to
repel an invasion? No; to a foreign foe, such a force as theirs must appear
contemptible. It is true, they were formidable, not by their numbers, nor by
their arms, but they were formidable by being an enemy in our own bosoms. This,
this alone made them formidable. As to its being their intention to repel the
invasion, it is too eccentric, I am sure, to gain credit from any man.

Gentlemen, what mighty motives had this convention to stand forth to repel
this host coming against us? Suppose the period arrived, they behold the power
of Britain assembled under its lawful sovereign; there they see a king, a
government which they consider as no better than a dead carcass; there they see
an aristocracy which is hateful to them. Do they see universal suffrage? No; it
is that which can never, be allowed by the constitution of Britain. But what is
the case? They meet in a dark place. What do they meet for? To obtain universal
suffrage. What do the invaders offer them? Universal suffrage -- you shall have
it from the pure fountain head, from the source of every thing that is wise of
political instructions, from the fountain head, the Convention of Paris. You
shall have no aristocracy -- you shall have no religion, if you please; but of
that I say nothing -- you shall have primary assemblies -- you shall have every
one of these things which you appear to be so remarkably fond of. Gentlemen, it
is unnecessary for me to carry the matter so far as to suppose that this panel
or the other members came to the dark, the desperate, the wicked resolution of
joining the foes of Britain, in case of an invasion, it is by no means
necessary. But supposing they meant to go no further than what they declared,
to meet in a secret place, unknown to the government of this country, perhaps
to negociate with a foreign enemy; but in either way their intention was dark,
it was wicked, it was criminal. Gentlemen, with regard to many of the members,
I do in charity believe, that they concurred in this resolution, not seeing the
precipice on which they stood, unconscious of the end to which it tended. But I
am sorry to say that is an apology that will not do for Mr. Gerrald; he is a
man who supports this resolution, and follows it up by an inflammatory speech;
it is impossible that he could be ignorant of the point to which it led; it is
impossible he could be innocent, he must be more or less criminal, and the
smallest criminality that can be ascribed is very great indeed, far more than
sufficient to support the charge of sedition which I have made against him.

Now, gentlemen, the next thing is the speech of which the minutes very shortly
say, Citizen Gerrald, in a very energetic and animated address, expressed his
happiness at the motion passed. Gentlemen, I shall only read one or two
expressions in it, and you will attend to the occasion upon which it was made;
it was made just after the convention had passed this solemn resolution and
declaration before God and the world; in this state, when their minds were in
this situation, in a state of avowed hostility, Mr Gerrald rose up and made a
speech, adding fuel to the flame, he says, Though I could not get a copy of
this bill, the heads of which I have read are sufficiently explanatory of its
detestable principles; and I hope the measures which have been adopted this
night will convince the minister, that we are determined to guard against every
attempt that may be made to deprive us of our rights. And though by some it may
be thought a bold, by some a daring measure, yet it will be found the best for
securing the peace of our country. For if such a law were suffered to pass, if
men were not allowed to utter their complaints, a number of fierce and
rancorous passions would arise, and we would seek to appeal to that last
terrible decision, the event of which is uncertain, but which God and nature
allows.

If the servility of the people had been less; if they had dared to meet, and,
in place of murmuring, to have told their rulers that there was danger in
seeking to deprive them of their liberties, we would not have had to adopt this
resolution tonight; but when I saw the calm deliberate countenances of all
present, and the solemn manner in which it was passed, I was convinced that it
would not only be a resolution of words, but a rule of action.

Gentlemen, upon the reading of this speech, you will consider that it was
addressed to a number of persons who had, a few minutes before, come to the
resolution of flying in the face of the legislature, which is so plain that I
shall say no more about it.

Gentlemen, I have now gone through the charges in the indictment, and I think
I have established every one of them in such a way as must have given you
satisfaction. The only part of the charge that remains is, that at the time the
magistrates came to disperse them, even after that Mr. Gerrald again takes the
chair, and would not leave it till he was turned out; they declaring that the
dispersion was of no consequence, for they had declared themselves permanent.
Upon that it is unnecessary to say any thing, because you heard the evidence
was given upon it; and you will give it such attention as you think proper.

Thus I have endeavored to lay before you what appeared to me to be the most
material parts of the charge against this gentleman, substantiated by that
evidence which appears to me so satisfactory; and as the panel has produced no
evidence, it is impossible for me to see what defense he may make. I shall only
say, in general, that if he disputes the fact, I refer you to the evidence now
lying upon the table. If he says that the facts, supposing they are true, are
not criminal, I appeal to your own common sense, I appeal to your own
judgments, to the judgments of every court of law who have ever decided in
criminal cases. If he should say, notwithstanding all (for his counsel
insinuated something of the kind,) that he acted from the purest intentions,
and that his intentions were innocent, I must tell you, that with regard to the
absolute purity of his intention, it is impossible for human penetration to
see; that must be reserved in every case to the last day, when every truth must
come out; but you, as well as every other tribunal, must judge according to the
evidence and according to the facts as they lie before you; and from those
facts I think I have satisfied you, that their intentions were seditious,
wicked, and criminal. I shall trouble you no further upon this case, but leave
it to your decision. I have stated the grounds upon which I think myself
entitled to demand a verdict of guilty.

MR. GERRALD.

Gentlemen of the jury, Mr. Solicitor General has told you with great truth and
solemnity, that the cause of which you are at present the judges, is one of the
most important which ever came before man for the purpose of determination.

Gentlemen, if at an early period of my life it had been announced to me, that
the task of defending the rights and privileges of nine millions of people
would have devolved upon me, a simple individual, I should certainly, from my
youth up, have devoted my whole time, with unremitting application, that I
might be enabled to execute so sacred and important a trust. Unfortunately,
though a considerable period has intervened between the time of my being served
with an indictment and my trial, yet I have been, in a great measure,
distracted by various avocations, and my health much impaired by continual
sickness. From my duty, however, no earthly consideration shall induce me to
shrink. I this day, come forward to advocate a cause, that which the sun never
shone upon one of more deep and general concernment; and, impressed with this
awful consideration, I advance to it with a tremor that shakes every fiber of
my frame. But whatever be the result of this day's deliberation, I shall always
look back to the part, which I have taken, with the consciousness of a man who
has endeavored well; for, however weak the flesh may be, the spirit is
strongly inclined to the service.

Gentlemen, the state prosecutions which agitated and disgraced the middle of
the last century, were by no means of the same importance with those of the
present day.

The contest between John Hampden and the crown rested solely upon this
question; whether the crown or the parliament should have the power of raising
the supplies; but it was always allowed that the object of these supplies was
the advancement of the general happiness. The cause which you are called to
decide upon, is not merely a matter of pecuniary consideration; you are called
upon decide whether man, who is by his nature social and rational, shall meet
in society for the purpose of improving his faculties, and exercising those
powers of reason which the common Father of us all has given us, to enlighten
our understanding and enoble our hearts; or whether by relinquishing every
thing that is virtuous, every thing that is praiseworthy, every thing that is
valuable in the condition of our humanity, we shall be reduced to a situation
beneath the beasts that perish.

Gentlemen, as an Englishman, I will not say a stranger in this country, for,
from being members of the same community we have the same friends and the same
foes; and the articles of the Union, I believe, say, that the natives of both
countries are entitled to the same privileges -- yet as an Englishman, I cannot
but consider my situation as varying in some measure from that of a native of
this country. In England, had I committed the supposed crime charged against
me, the process would have been very different. The present legal process too
much resembles those instituted in the last century, when prosecutions upon
prosecutions were instituted for the purpose of destroying the freedom of our
country: I say, the proceedings of the High Court of Justiciary too much
resemble the proceedings of the Star Chamber before it was abolished. We have
not in this country the advantage which we have in England of the bills being
originally found by a grand jury. We have not afterward the privilege of a
petty jury selected entirely by the sheriff; but I understand that the assize
is first appointed by the public prosecutor, from which fifteen are afterward
selected by the court.

This circumstance did not however deter me, (though it was frequently argued
amongst other arguments) from coming down here to take my trial. No; when the
scourges of the late prosecutions, and the melancholy fate of the prosecuted
were held over my head, I was not to be deterred from doing my duty; though by
many I was considered as devoted a victim as Regulus departing into voluntary
exile, or like Curtius plunging into the gulf for the salvation of his country.

Gentlemen, informations began in England, during the reign of one of our worst
princes, Henry VII. who filled his private coffers by the plunder of his
subjects. In conformity to this process, I am sorry to acquaint you, that I was
brought before the sheriff of this county by the operation, not by the regular
service, of a warrant. When I was taken up I asked for the warrant, but it was
refused. My temper, I trust, is mild and peaceful; though, in England had a
similar process taken place, the officer might have paid for his irregular
conduct with the forfeiture of his life. But that was not my purpose; for as
truth is my only object, so reason is my only weapon. My papers were taken out
of my bureau and carried before the sheriff. Knowing that those papers could
contain nothing to criminate me, I claimed them as my property, and signed the
claim without any hesitation. I am shocked, however, to think that so gross a
proceeding should take place in any country as a disclosure of secrets by
taking private papers. Since the original seizure of my papers, a private
letter has been arrested in its passage to me from London, and in an attempt to
see the contents, has been destroyed without it is ever reaching me. I demanded
what could be the object of this procedure. I was informed that it was for the
purpose of collecting evidence against me. This oollection of evidence then, it
seems, may be made with impunity in Scotland, by as gross a violation of the
laws of the land, as certain other collections are made, of which the
collectors when taken are afterward hanged.

Gentlemen, the Solicitor General acknowledged with much candor, that if he
could not prove the criminal intention, he could prove nothing. It is upon this
grand principle that I rest my defense; it is neither upon legal chicanery nor
legal quibbles, these would be unworthy of the cause in which I am engaged. If
the criminality of the intention alone can constitute the offense, either in a
legal or moral point of view, I trust I shall be able to make out so clear a
case, notwithstanding the calumnies which the lying breath of rumor may have
cast upon me, that you yourselves, discarding prejudices which it is possible
you may have imbibed, will retire from this Court as fully satisfied of my
innocence as I am myself.

Gentlemen, if fugitation is in the eye of law deemed a presumption of guilt,
appearance by parity of reason must be deemed a presumption of innocence.
Notwithstanding the pressing solicitations and strong inducements held out to
me by the society who delegated me, and who would have paid my bail, I
determined to come down and appear before you. Can there then exist a stronger
proof of the consciousness of the puriry of my own intentions, than my having
voluntarily appeared before that tribunal which I might have shunned, and from
which innocence itself has fled?

Gentlemen, though it does not come immediately before you, I do conceive that
by being brought to trial at this particular time is a harsh and rigorous
measure; and it is rather remarkable that on the last Monday, a period which
was marked for the first day of my trial, and when I appeared here before the
Court, our Representatives in Parliament were in fact sitting in judgment upon
these very judges; nor do I think it would have degraded the dignity of their
functions, if they had acted with less heat and more deliberation, and had
patiently waited till the result of the proceedings of the High Court of
Parliament had been known upon their conduct.

Gentlemen, the history of Briton furnishes us with abunda^t instances of the
interference of the legislature to correct judicial errors. In the case of
Hampden, which was a period which must be dear and valuable to every
Englishman, the parliament, by their interference, prevented the robbery of the
subject, by the arbitrary fiat of the crown. It is not fit, I own, that they
should interfere where the public is not deeply interested; but where it is,
they are bound to do so in justice to their representatives, and they always
have done so. Nay, they have gone further, and where the necessity was great,
they have even come to a resolution in point of law, contrary to the judgment
of a court of law, and to the opinion of ten out of twelve judges. In case the
judges violated the law (a circumstance which in the late cases is yet to be
determined,) or where they suspected any undue influence, either in the
exertion or the support of the prerogative, by officers, of the crown, or by
judges, they have always interposed. Is it possible to forget or to controvert
either their conduct, or the propriety of it, in the great case of ship money,
which was first brought into question by Mr. Hampden, a private gentleman, who,
so far from regarding the trumpery, petty-fogging consideration of damages,
declared, that he would not pay it were it but one farthing, if pretended to be
demanded of right, and by color of law; and yet proceeded, according to my
lord Clarendon's own account, with great temper and moderation in that suit.
His lordship adds, and all the world knows, that never any cause had been
debated and argued more solemnly before the judges, who, after long
deliberation among themselves, and being attended with the records which had
been cited on both sides, delivered each man his opinion and judgment publicly
in court, and so largely, that but two judges argued in a day. Ten of them
solemnly pronounced their opinion for the right claimed by the crown, and which
if had regularly exercised for four years immediately preceding: but, as Lord
Clarendon observes, (Lord Clarendon was a monarchical man, much attached to
Charles I.) the judgment, proved of more credit and advantage to the gentleman
condemned than to the king's service, however, (adds he) these errors in
government were pot to be imputed to the court at that time, but to the spirit
and over activity of the lawyers of the privy council, who should more
carefully have preserved their profession and its professors from being
profaned by those services which have rendered both so obnoxious to reproach.

Gentlemen, this circumstance, I apprehend, is an object very important for
your consideration, and which, I trust, will have some influence in the
guidance and direction of your verdict; inasmuch as you find that in England,
in a case where ten out of twelve of the judges gave their opinions against the
defendant, yet, still their sentence was reversed at a higher tribunal, that of
Parliament. The sentence was reversed, and even Clarendon, a monarchical man,
who comes down to us under great purity of character, tells you, that these
prosecutions were instituted and carried on by the crown lawyers, who were over
active in the execution of their duty, and had subjected them and the
profession as obnoxious to reproach.

Gentlemen, the indictment contains against me four charges I shall endeavor
briefly (in order that I may take up as little of your time as possible) to
state these charges specifically, and to give as specific answers to those
charges, as the combined operation of my understanding and my conscience
directs me to give.

The first charge is of so extraordinary a nature, that it was some time before
I could bring myself to sit down to a serious refutation of it; and upon any
occasion not so important as the present, I should either have combatted it
with the weapon of ridicule, (of which, even it is hardly deserving) or have
thrown it behind me with silent contempt. I have been charged with making use
of French terms, though it has been proved, as I shall presently show, that
this charge, ridiculous as it is, is also fallacious.

Gentlemen, it is a most extraordinary thing, that such a charge should be made
in a country, against a native of that part of the kingdom, I speak not of
Scotland, but of England, where all our old law proceedings are in that very
language. The writings of the venerable Littleton, whose tenures contain the
whole doctrine of our law of landed property, upon which my Lord Coke, the
great Oracle of English Law, has written his Commentaries, are in the French
language.

Britton, and other writers of as great authority, though of more remote
antiquity, and who are deemed the legal patriarchs (as it were) in the history
of jurisprudence, wrote in French; and the king himself, even at this period,
never gives his assent or refusal to any act of parliament which binds the
subject, without expressing himself in the language of that country.

Gentleman, I say not this for the purpose of vindicating myself from these
charges, for it has been proved to you clearly, from the evidence of Ross, that
these French terms were of his own insertion. But I cannot help thinking that a
spirit of malevolence dictated that part of the charge, and that these
invidious insertions were made for the purpose of insusing into your minds an
idea that I wished to cooperate with F^ance, with whom we are now at war: and
I am the more authorized to state this as the first indictment, with which I
was served, was totally devoid of these charges, and they have only been
introduced in the second. But these terms were the pepper and salt to season
the dish for the gratification of the palate of the crown lawyers, and I, it
seems, was to be offered up, like another Theyestes, as a victim for the
banquet.

Gentleman, the next charge against me in that of having used the word citizen.
It was said upon a former occasion by the Solicitor General, that the use of
the term was in itself innocent, and in many circumstances might undoubtedly be
proper; but here, again he made a distinction. If a man, in the year 1745,
(said he,) had walked the streets with a white cockade, it would have been
highly criminal; but now the action would be perfectly harmless, because there
is no party existing amongst us of an attachment to whom it might be
interpreted as an emblem.

But, gentlemen, I hope your understandings will not be perverted by language
of this kind, as you must see a most material and essential difference between
marching up the streets with a white cockade, and using the term citizen. The
using of this term, though it may by some be deemed ridiculous, can, by none,
be judged criminal. The word citizen is a term of peace, and denotes that
relationship in which we stand to each other, as members, of the same
community, for the performance of our civil duties; whereas the wearing of a
cockade is the emblem of a military occupation, and in the year 1745 was a
particular and avowed emblem of hostility to the government of the country.

Gentlemen, the next part of the charge is, that these meetings were illegal
and seditious. Now their illegality, I apprehend, must depend either upon one
or other of these three principles; either on the name Convention which we
took, the principles which that convention intended to establish, or the manner
in which they conducted themselves after they met. Take away these three things
and no charge remains, consequently no ground of criminality. With regard to
the first, our assumption of the name of Convention, I am sure your own
understandings will inform you, and it is a position to which the crown lawyers
have assented, that to take a particular name does not constitute a crime. Many
respectable gentlemen, in point of fortune and talents, met in a Convention,
expressly so called, for a Reform in the Scottish Boroughs, in Edinburgh, and
though their views were different from our, still it shows, that the bare
assumption of that name does not constitute an offense in the eye of the law.
Our crime must then depend either upon the principles which the British
Convention intended to establish, or the manner in which they conducted
themselves when met.

Gentlemen, in a cause so sacred as the present, I would scorn to tell a lie to
save my life. I boldly avow, and I hope the reasons on which I shall defend the
principles will be equal to the confidence with which I make the assertion,
that our object was to procure, by peaceful means, Annual Parliaments and
Universal Suffrage; and, in so doing, notwithstanding all the declamation that
has been urged against it, I shall endeavor to convince you that the
establishment of these principles is not only conformable to every maxim of
sound government, but congenial to the spirit of the British Constitution
itself. In order, gentleman, to ascertain the first point, that Universal
Suffrage (persons incapacitated by crimes and insanity excepted) is in fact
consonant to the first principles of all good government, it will be necessary
that we take some short view of the fundamental principles of society itself.
The great object of the social institution, the great object for which men form
themselves into society is, I apprehend, the safe enjoyment of their lives and
property. If then, in the earliest stages of society, every man possessed a
right to the preservation of his life, and also to the peaceable enjoyment of
his property, it follows of course, that the mode of government, which is best
calculated for the attainment of those ends for which government itself was
instituted, must be precisely that very mode of government which all reasonable
beings would wish to see universally adopted amongst men. Now, as every man
claims from nature, a right of judging for himself on the best manner of
promoting his own interest, and as no individual is born with any
distinguishing mark of pre-eminence over his fellow-men, or with any character
of exemption from the ordinary frailties of human nature, so every act of
authority exercised by one man over another, or by a legislature over, the
collective body of the people, unless it be exercised by the consent of the
individual or of the collective body of the people governed, must be an act of
tyranny. The right of the exercise of the understanding is the noblest
privilege of our nature, and indeed is inseparable from our condition as moral
agents; moral agency, in fact, being nothing else, but the being guided by the
dictates of our own understandings and consciences in preference to those of
another. And if, after the enactment of positive law, we submit to its
authority, from which our private judgment may have revolted, it is only
because a greater number of reasonable persons consenting to the law, than of
those dissenting from it, carries with it the strongest presumption that the
passing such law has been the result of a greater portion of reason, than its
rejection would have been -- that it is founded in justice and truth, and
therefore more conducive to the great ends of society, inasmuch as it has
received the authoritative stamp of the approbation of the greater number of
its members, who, in all well regulated communities, being equally entitled to
a participation of its benefits, must of course be equally interested in
promoting its welfare.

It is not true, that when men agree to erect a government they give up any
portion of their rights. No; they only adopt a different mode of enjoying them.
They give up nothing; but by combining their own particular force with the
force of others, they adopt a plan, by which they are enabled to possess their
rights in greater security. All just government, therefore, being only a
delegation, it cannot be armed with more power than it derives from the consent
of them over whom it is exercised. Now, as prior to the establishment of
government, no man had a right to take from another any property without his
consent, and as all just authority exercised by any government must be derived
from the people, so the government (which is, in other words, a national
association for general good) cannot of right exercise any power, which one
individual, before government was established, was not authorized to exercise
over another. Hooker, to whom Queen Elizabeth, always applied the just epithets
of learned and judicious, asserts, that the principle which I have just stated
is the only solid foundation of all legislative authority. Laws they are not,
says he, which public approbation has not made so. Hooker's Eccles. Pol. lib.
i. sect. 10. And Mr. Lock expressly says, that, as government cannot be
supported without great charge (a truth which we, God knows! feel every day to
our cost,) so it is fit that every one who enjoys his share of the protection,
should pay out of his estate his proportion for the maintenance of it. But
still it must be with his own consent, i. e. the consent of the majority,
giving it either by themselves, or their representatives chosen by them. For if
any one shall claim a power to law and levy taxes on the people, by his own
authority, and without such consent of the people, he thereby invades the
fundamental law of property, and subverts the end of government. FOR, WHAT
PROPERTY HAVE I IN THAT WHICH ANOTHER MAY, BY RIGHT, TAKE WHEN HE PLEASES TO
HIMSELF? Here then, Gentlemen, is the doctrine or Universal Suffrage expressly
laid down. For as no man, in a state of society, can be altogether without
property, either inherited or acquired by his daily labor, and as every man in
the country pays a tax to government, either directly to the tax-gatherer, or
indirectly through the commodities which he consumes, which all taxes
ultimately affect, so it appears to me clear as the light of Heaven, that every
man of adult years, not incapacitated by crimes or insanity, has a RIGHT TO A
VOTE; otherwise he may exclaim, in the language of Mr. Lock, what properly
have I in that which another may, by right take when he pleases to himself?
That government, then, gentlemen, which is not a government of consent, must of
necessity, be a government of usurpation. -- After all, there are but three
modes, (except a man allows himself to be a public mendicant) in which money
passes from man to man; by force, by fraud, or consent.

The first, it will not be contended, except by conquerors or highwaymen, can
ever establish a just ground of possession. By the operation of the second
principle, I am afraid, it does pass, whenever a man pays a tax in a government
in which he is not represented. -- During the American war, Lord Camden, the
first law authority in England, and now president of the council, repeatedly
asserted, that "taxation and representation were inseparable." Now, if his
lordship meant any thing by the word representation, he certainly must have
meant adequate representation, for no other deserves the name, or answers the
end; which adequate representation is well explained by Sir Thomas Smith, a
writer of great note and authority, in his Commonwealth of England, p. 37.
"Every Enlishman," says he, is intended to be present in parliament, either in
person, or by procuration and attorney, of whatever pre-eminence, state,
dignity, or quality soever he be, from the prince to the lowest person in
England. And the consent of the parliament is taken to be EVERY MAN's consent.
Here is the doctrine of Universal Suffrage, laid down in words as strong as the
English language can afford. It was then to repair these ravages, which time,
whom my lord Bacon terms the greatest INNOVATOR, had occasioned, that the
British Convention sat; it was not to deform our constitution, but to restore
it; it was not to promote, but to prevent its destruction, that we assembled.
Besides, gentlemen, if the principle which Mr. Lock again states (see book on
Government, p. 236.) be just, that the preservation of property being the great
end for which man enters society, it necessarily supposes and requires, that
the people should have property, without which they must be supposed to lose
that by entering into society, which was the end for which they entered into
it; too gross an absurdity for any man to own. Men, therefore, in society,
having property, they have such a right to the goods, which by the law of the
community are theirs, nobody has a right to take their substance, or any part
of it from them, without their own consent. If such then, gentlemen, is the
principle which ought to regulate the intercourse between man and man, in the
common affairs of life, by how much more ought that principle to be observed by
the legislature itself, to whom the most sacred of all trusts has been
committed, and whose breach of any sound and salutary principle will be the
more criminal, in proportion as such breach will be more extensively
mischievous?

These are the principles of a man, who has a long time deservedly passed for
one of the greatest masters of reasoning which England ever produced; who wrote
in express vindication of the Revolution, and who, afterward, held a place
under King William (and would to God places had been always as worthily
bestowed!) until he went to receive the final reward of his labors, from that
Being who will always conser it upon those who deserve it well. Gentlemen, it
is worthy of remark, that, not only speculative writers upon government, but
writers upon municipal law, Sir William Blackstone himself, a judge, should lay
down the same principle, not in express terms indeed, but, as you will see,
very strongly by implication. He says, In a free state, every man who is
supposed a free agent (and unless a man is incapacitated by crimes or insanity,
every rational being may be so denominated) ought to be in some measure his own
governor. See Black-Comment-octavo edition, page 158. Now, if words have any
meaning, what does this establish, but the doctrine of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE? For
I know of no other definition of liberty, than that those who are bound by the
law should have a share in the making of it, either personally, or by deputy;
and no other idea of slavery, than that state in which men are governed without
this consent. Men who make laws for me, may indeed impudently tell me that I am
free, for men may lie; but unless I have some share in the appointment of those
who are to govern me, I can, in no sense, be said to be my own governor; but,
on the contrary, have no more concern with the government of my country, than I
have with those of Turkey or Morocco. Now, if the strict observance of this
principle be necessary to give government a moral right, to take away the
property of the subject, in how far greater degree, should the same principle
be observed, as alone constituting a solid ground of authority, which can
empower the legislation to frame laws, for a breach of which men are to be
deprived of their lives? -- It has been said also that the plan of universal
suffrage is visionary and impracticable. But this observation, if true, though
it may mark the plan itself as absurd, must necessarily discharge from blame
all those who have proposed it. For a nonentity, like a phantom, is not to be
dreaded, and a plan that is attended with no danger, is certainly no object of
legal prosecution. No, gentlemen, our Creator, I am confident, has placed every
thing that is valuable, every thing that is necessary for our happiness, within
the grasp of human attainment. If then we should wantonly indulge wishes, and
pursue objects, which are neither proper for us, nor attainable, the true and
only punishment should be (as it must be) the frustration of our hopes, and the
anguish of our disappointment. If like children we cry for the moon, like
children we should cry on.

But, fortunately for me, gentlemen, my experience enables me to give a flat
contradiction to the position advanced. I myself, resided, during four years,
in a country where every man, who paid taxes, had a right to vote; I mean the
commonwealth of Pennsylvannia. I was an eye witness of many elections which
took place in Philadelphia, the capital of the state, an industrious and
populous city, and can safely assert, that no one riot ever ensued. For, in
truth, gentlemen, the representative had no interest distinct from his
constituents; the office which he undertook was rather a burden than a
benefit, and as the government was too poor to purchase, and the people too
virtuous to barter away their liberties, (even if the case had been otherwise)
so the deputy, though he had every opportunity to serve, had no temptations to
sell his constituents. What then has been found by experience to be wholesome
food for Americans, can never prove hurtful or poisonous to Britons, the parent
stock from whom Americans are descended.

Gentlemen, I am aware, that every practice and institution is alone defensible
upon its own intrinsic merits, and the reason of the thing; yet the adoption of
any principle, by men eminent for virtue and learning, is certainly no small
presumption of the soundness of the principle itself. Gentlemen, Sir William
Jones, a name too distinguished in literature to derive splendor from any
encomiums I can bestow upon it, and who has acted as a judge for more than
twelve years in India, previously to his departure published a tract in which
he vindicated the doctrine of Universal Suffrage. At a very early period of my
life, I was honored with the friendship and patronage of this gentleman, and I
am sure he would deeply feel, even after this long separation, any calamity
which might befall me; a calamity (if it be one), certainly, not altogether, but
in some measure, perhaps, produced by conversation with those whose practices
were pure, and whose principles I conceived to be just, and who were therefore
objects of reverence among men. Yet this very gentleman, at this very period,
holds an office of great trust and great emolument in his majesty's important
settlement of Bengal, and unseals those sacred fountains of justice which
gladden and refresh fifteen millions of men.

Gentlemen, having now proved to you that the principles of which I am accused
must be, in fact, the principles of all good government, and that they have
been supported by the greatest of all human authorities; I shall now prove, I
trust, equally to your satisfaction, from incontrovertible historical
documents, that they are also congenial to the spirit of our constitution.

Gentlemen, Montesquieu has told us, that the rudiments of our excellent
constitution are to be sought and found in the woods of Germany; where, as
Tacitus informs us, all were free, and where all were entitled to deliberate
upon matters of national importance. No proposal could pass into a law, binding
upon the people, which had not been approved by the people.

De Germania. De minoribius rebus PRINCIPES consultant, de majoribus OMNES. Ita
tamen ut ea, quoque, quorum penes plebenarbitrium est apud principes
PROTRACTENTUR. I have adopted the reading of Colerus and Aeadalius in
preference to the common reading which is pertractentur, and which corresponds
with the Greek, the proper business of the ancient senates.

Gentlemen, in the earliest stages of society, when commerce was scarce buding,
almost every inhabitant held a certain portion of land: and as land, alone in
those days, was the fund from which taxes were raised to support the expenses
of government, so every land holder (of which description was almost every
member of the community) had a right to vote. Squire, in his view of the Anglo
Saxon Government, a book of very profound research. (Gentlemen, Squire was
Archdeacon of Bath, and afterward Bishop of St. David's, and it is certainly no
part of the Episcopal function to disseminate seditious doctrines among the
people) Squire tells us, the affairs of the country were, at that time,
conducted by the king, the witenagemot, and the myclegemot. The witenagemot, or
kings court, was an assembly of the best and the wisest men in the nation,
corresponding to what our privy council is, or (I beg pardon of our ancestors)
corresponding to what a privy council ought to be. The myclegemot, on the other
hand, were a body chosen by the people at large, corresponding to what the
principles of our constitution suppose the parliament should be, a real
representation of the people The Witenagemot (says Squire, see p. 190) were
persons supposed to be best acquainted with the exigencies of the public. It
was their duty to propose what they thought most expedient for the good of the
whole: the new laws, especially, seem all to have been drawn up and prepared by
them, though nothing which they did of this kind was obligatory to the
community, until it had received the general confirmation. How was this general
confirmation brought about, but by the vote of every freeman? a term applicable
to all, except such as were in a state of personal slavery, who upon the Norman
conquest were denominated villians; a set of men, corresponding to what, your
lordships well know, the civil law calls adscupti gleba; but who have ceased to
exist in this country for near a century and a half, villainage being formerly
abolished by an act of parliament, passed in the early part of the reign of
Charles II. As it is strictly conformable to the spirit of our constitution, to
continue all laws and customs in favorem libertatis, so personal slavery being
now done away, and all British citizens being freemen, they are of course
entitled to all those privileges which even the express letter of our early
constitution conferred upon them, as described, exercised, and enjoyed, in
their fullest extent.

Gentlemen, this was the form of government, which in a very early period
prevailed; these were the principles which flourished during the reign of the
Great Alfred, than whom never lived a purer legislator; and who, Hume, in
express terms, tells us, approached as nearly to human perfection as the
infirmities of human nature would admit. If then, gentlemen, these doctrines
are conformable not only to the universal principles of justice and of reason;
if they are so expressly maintained by so respectable an authority as that of
Mr. Lock; if they are implicitly assented to by so respectable a judge as Sir
William Blackstone, (for the words 'every man is his own governor,' mean that,
^ they mean nothing) if they have been publicly avowed by Sir William Jones,
who, in point of learning, yields to no man to whom this kindom has given
birth, since the days of Lord Bacon; I cannot, surely, be charged with
innovation and a design to disturb the public peace, for having circulated
principles that have long been current, and which men of so distinguished
reputation have acquired fame in supporting.

Gentlemen, I know much nonsense has been talked about virtual representation:
but if representation be not real, it is no representation at all. I wish to
God that the supporters of virtual representation would impose on us only
virtual taxes, and inflict virtual punishments; but this they will not do:
therefore, till that event, I do not think they have any right to more than
virtual taxation. Gentlemen, I lay down these principles as subjects for your
consideration merely; for I hold that every inconvenience is to be borne for
the preservation of the general peace. But whenever governments act directly
contrary to the end for which they were instituted; when, instead of being the
guardians, they become the oppressors of our liberties, common sense, common
justice, and express law authorities, will tell us they are no longer objects
of obedience: and this our ancestors confirmed, when they established the
Revolution.

Gentlemen, I am not so well skilled in the historical antiquities of Scotland
as I could wish, or, perhaps, as it was my duty to have been; but I beg you
will carry this principle continually in your minds, that if such have been the
privileges of England, and if this country is entitled, by the articles of
union, to the same privileges, I see no offense in wishing, and attempting to
effect, that Scotsmen should be admitted to a participation of the same rights.
I have, in my hand, a book of the late Dr. Stuart, who has written upon the
public law and constitution of Scotland, in which are several passages that
favor, very much, the doctrines I have laid down, and which, at the same time,
prove a strong similitude between the ancient Scottish and English
constitutions. In the body of the laws of William the Lion, who began to reign
in the year 1165, are these notices: Assisa regis Willielmi, facta apud Perth,
quam episcopi, abbates, comites, borones, thani, et TOTA COMMUNITAS REGNI,
tenere firmiter juraverunt.' 'An assize of King William, made at Perth, which
the bishops, abbots, knights, barons, thanes, and the whole community of the
kingdom, firmly swore to maintain.' Cap. 7. And again, 'statuit rex per
concilium et assensum TOTIUS COMMUNITATIS SUAE.' 'The king has enacted by the
advice and consent of his whole community. Cap. 4. The preamble to the laws of
Robert I. is also in these words habitoque solemni tractatu, cum episcopis,
abbatibus, prioribus, comitibus baronibus, et aliis magnatibus, DE COMMUNITATE
TOTIUS REGNI ibidem congregatis, super variis et arduis negotiis,' etc. The
constitution was greatly treated of, with the bishops, priors, knights, barons,
and other great personages, of the whole community of the kingdom, at the same
time gathered together, upon various and arduous affairs.' So when John Baliol
told Edward I. that he ' could not and dared not express any sentiment which
concerned his kingdom without consulting his people, he meant something more
than the sanction of the prelates, the nobles, and the tenants in capite. Ryley
Placet. parl. p. 159. an. 1293. And Dr. Stuart, that profound and laborious
antiquarian, positively says, that the expression of Baliol is easily
comprehended, and had a reference to the whole kingdom. (See Observations
concerning the Public Law and Constitutional History of Scotland, p. 334.) The
expression Magnates, or great men, which is found in the statute of Robert I.
that I have just quoted, may, I am aware, be supposed to apply only to persons
of higher rank, yet, upon examination, it will, I am confident, be found
strictly applicable to the representation of the people, the tota communitas.
For in England it appears exactly in the same sense; and we know, both from
Rymer and Pit, that in that kingdom, noble, most noble most illustrious, most
precious seignors, monseignors and sirs, were appellations of the Commons.
Here, then, is a proof, that in the early period of the history of Scotland,
the whole community of the kingdom, (i. e. every free man) not collectively, no
doubt, but representatively, were concerned in passing those laws, which they
also swore they would firmly maintain.

Gentlemen, I cannot account for this coincidence between the constitutional
forms and principles of England and Scotland, at so early a period of our
histories, without supposing that they must be congenial to the natural order
of all government itself; and that these deviations which have since been made
by the ravages of time, have been the abuses of the constitution, and not the
principles of it.

Gentlemen, the third charge against me is that of having urged arguments in
support of annual parliaments though I have heard from very respectable
authority, no less, I believe, than one of the learned lords upon the bench, he
did not conceive there was any material objection to such a measure. He gave
indeed no decisive opinion upon it; but he seemed to think, that a mere
peaceful discussion of the subject of annual parliaments would not render a man
an object of criminal prosecution by the laws of this country. But I go
further; I apprehend that annual parliaments may be supported as well by the
reason of the thing, as by ancient usage; and upon this plain principle, that
power long continued is too apt to corrupt the disposition of the possessor,
and that a people, when they entrust so sacred a charge as that of making laws,
(the abuse of which may work a destruction of their lives, and the ruin of
their property) cannot be too vigilant in observing the conduct of those to
whom they delegate this trust, nor too quick in recalling them whenever they
abuse it. By long parliaments we lose the great advantage which our
constitution has provided, of curing the evil, before it grows confirmed and
desperate, by the gentle method of choosing a new representative; and the
people are by consequence reduced to have no other alternative, than that of
submitting or resisting; though submitting will be as grievous, and resistance
much more difficult, when the legislature betrays its trust, than when the king
alone abuses his power, Besides, short parliaments, should they become suddenly
corrupt, carry with them their own corrective; for, leeches, and other
blood-sucking worms, as Davenant well observes, are engendered in standing
pools; flowing waters do not corrupt nor breed so many insects.

It is a melancholy fact, but it is a very certain one, that parliaments have
generally been dangerous in proportion as they have been long.

The long parliament (peculiarly so denominated on account of the length of
time which they sat) that sat in the reign of Charles I. I believe were pretty
instrumental in bringing the head of that unfortunate monarch to the block. I
cannot therefore believe, that long parliaments can be supported by gentlemen,
who avow, that their intention is to defend monarchical principles; when a
parliament was that which overturned the monarchy, and beheaded the sovereign.
The House of Commons which sat for so long a time in the reign of Charles II.
were so notorious for their profligacy, that Rapin assures us, one half of them
were bribed by the court of France, probably, the other half by our own.

Gentlemen, I am well aware that it may be said, that if elections were more
frequent, greater tumults would ensue. I apprehend the reverse of this position
is exactly the truth; for, it might be worth the while of a member of
parliament to get elected under the corrupt influence of the Minister, when he
is in for seven years though not when he is in only for one; for, knowing that
he must, at the end of a year give an account to his constituents, he would
take greater care how he executed the important trusts committed to him, than
if he was delegated for a large time. If then, gentlemen, the object of getting
into parliament would not be such as to make it a stronger inducement for
person's, in general, to become members, of course tumults would not so
frequently ensue at general elections as, to our misfortune and disgrace, they
do under the present system. -- In support of this doctrine of annual
parliaments, I am fortified by the authority of a gentleman, who is and who has
long been, a member of the House of Commons, I mean Mr. Alderman Sawbridge,
who, wearied out, at last, by continual disappointments, has abandoned his
project, not from conviction, but despair. The treasury bench, indeed, solito
more, "according to custom," never made Alderman Sawbridge's proposal the
subject of discussion; but, as often as the motion was made, coolly negatived
it, by the dead eloquence of numbers.

Gentlemen, parliaments you must recollect, were annual, till the time of Henry
VIII. He was the first who broke in upon the custom of annual parliaments; and
he, I trust, will never brought forward as an authority as he was a monster of
whom it was, emphatically said, that he spared no man in his wrath, nor woman
in his lust; and, who distinguished himself during a long and a bloody reign,
by oppressing his subjects, and beheading his wives. Besides, gentlemen, as the
great object of the SOCIAL INSTITUTION is to call forth, to their fullest
excition, the aggregate faculties of all those who are members of it, for the
purpose of producing the greatest possible sum of happiness; so, if this custom
of annual parliaments were revived (for they are not innovations) it would
introduce many more into public business, who are now excluded from it, and
whose minds being inflamed and invigorated with a love of glory, and a passion
for promoting the public weal, would rouse themselves from that supineness
which invites oppression, and which is too often the bane and destruction of
nations. For, under the present system, many persons having scarcely any
concern with the government, except as they are called to support it by the
payment of taxes, they either grow careless and indifferent about the measure
which it adopts, or seek to better their condition by recourse to violence.

Gentlemen, it appears that such also was the law of Scotland; for I find by a
statute passed in the 1st parliament of James VI. in the year 1587, it is
ordained, that the commissioners of all the schirreffdomes of this realm be
elected be the freehalders foresaids, at the first head court after Michaelmas
zeirly. It is, therefore, no new doctrine in Scotland any more than it is
England. And I find by an article of the Claim of Rights that the Old Scottish
Constitution was to be restored; which claim of rights certainly took place
after the passing of that act, and which act constitutes an essential branch of
the scottish Constitution.

A very eminent writer, gentlemen, upon annual parliaments, begins his book
with this very remarkable observation, where annual election ends, slavery
begins. And he states precisely the reasons that I have stated to you, that if
power, continues long in the same hands, it has a tendency to corrupt, and that
it should not only be delegated for the benefit of those over whom it is
exercised, but, that it should also be delegated in such a manner as to prevent
any permament, if not immediate abuse of it.

Gentlemen, I now come to the period of the Revolution, an event which
established our constitution, (it is said) a constitution, however, which weak
men, I fear, praise without understanding, and which wicked men violate while
they praise. The English delegates have been charged with an intention of
having come to this country, for the purpose of destroying those advantages and
benefits which the subjects of the two united kingdoms derived from that
glorious event. If the charge could be brought home to us, it would not be
merely a transportation to Botany Bay, which ought to be our sat, but an
execution at the gallows. But (...) charge is totally unfounded, and I am
surprised that it has been brought forward by persons in particular situations;
since that charge, like many others, will, upon examination, recoil on the
heads of those who made it. I will show you, gentlemen, that the benefits of
the Revolution have been done away, but not by us; for it was our purpose to
revive them. Has it not been proved, by Mr. Wharton, in the House of Commons,
in a speech to which no answer was given, that not one single vestige remains
of the wholesome regulations which the Revolution produced. I know that it is
treading over beaten ground; but, I trust, you will not think your time
uselessly consumed, when it goes to establish a point, upon which my guilt or
innocence materially depends. I shall now read to you extracts from a pamphlet,
of which I am not ashamed to avow myself the author, entitled "address of the
British Convention to the people of Great Britain," and which was drawn up by
me at their express direction: "The spirit of Alfred again rose to animate the
councils of his regenerated country. Scotland, which had long groaned under the
domination of an austere and insolent aristocracy, was called in to share with
her brethren of England, the blessings of freedom, which she had contributed to
produce. Placemen and pensioners were excluded by law from the House of
Commons, lest a sense of their dependence on the crown should, as it must, make
them forgetful of their duty to the people. Parliaments were not to sit for
more than three years, since power long continued is commonly abused, as those
entrusted with it, are too prone to forget the hand which gave, and the purpose
for which it was given. Ministers were made answerable for the counsels which
they afforded, and the throne, now guarded by the vigilance, and sustained by
the love of all its subjects, was no longer a sanctuary for the treachery of
its servants.

Friends and countrymen, these wise and wholesome provisions, which were once
the boast and security of Britons, now form o^^y an object of melancholy
remembrance. They are buried in the same sepulcher with the bodies of our
ancestors. In many parliaments, which have sitten since the Revolution,
placemen and pensioners have been so numerous, as to control the will, while
they violated the rights of the people. Since that time, parliaments have more
than doubled the term of their duration, not by an appeal to the voice of their
electors, but by the arbitrary effort of a self constituted authority. Judging
from this specimen, and drawing the natural inference, that what has been done
may be done again, we know of no barrier or security, at present existing, to
prevent a future parliament from enlarging the term of their duration to twenty
years, or, if it suits their interest or ambition, from declaring themselves
perpetual. The responsibility of ministers has become an empty name. Crimes,
which during former periods, would have called down upon the heads of their
guilty authors the just vengeance of an injured nation, have been only a
passport to opulence and power. The people of Britain have seen the very
ministers who dismembered the empire, squandered a hundred millions of money,
and poured out the blood of more than a hundred thousand of their
fellow subjects in a cruel and desperate contest, again recalled into the
confidence of their sovereign, and loaded with the honors and emoluments of the
empire.

Thus you behold, that the spirit of those regulations, which the Revolution
produced, is fled, and what remains is only the dead carcass which encumbeas
the statute book. We now ask, who are those, that are guilty of innovation? Is
it that band of hirelings, to whom coruption is food, or is it we, who wish
only to restore the principles of our Saxon ancestors, which gave us freedom,
and that sacred compact which confirmed it at the Revolution? If the
foundations of the throne are shaken, are they shaken by us, who seek only to
replace it on those solid grounds, on which it was originally erected; or, are
not they rather shaken by those who, with hollow professions of loyalty in
their mouths, have sought to establish the authority of the crown, by the
renovation of those practices which banished the Stuarts, and by the violation
of those principles which elevated the Brunswicks? We cherish the constitution
of our ancestors, not as a speculative bauble, but as a practical good, and we
contrast, with an honest pride, our own sincere admiration of that system, with
the fawning treachery of its real foes -- of men, whose praise is profanation,
and whose external homage is concealed blasphemy."

Yet, notwithstanding, the present system of government is a libel upon our
real constitution; the word constitution, constitution! is rung in our ears
with unceasing perseverance. This is the talisman which the enemies of reform
wield over the heads of the credulous and the simple; and, like old and wicked
enchanters, having first bound them in the spell, take advantage of the
drowsiness which their arts have created. But to hear placemen and pensioners
talking of a constitution, when their whole lives are one uniform violation of
its principles is, like a monk preaching population, or a farmer general
commiserating the distresses of the poor.

Gentlemen, there is one particular error, into which all those who have
enumerated the regulations which took place at the Revolution have fallen, and
of which, until a few days past, I myself was not conscious. Having no other
object but truth, I beg leave to state it to you. The bill for excluding
placemen and pensioners, though it passed in the reign of King William, was not
to take effect until the accession of the house of Hanover. In the intermediate
period, indeed, that act was repealed; but does not the passing of the act, at
the period of the revolution, clearly prove that we are entitled to its
revival, now, when the house of Hanover is sitting on the throne, in
consequence of that very revolution; and when it may be safely inferred, that
the act alluded to, and their compliance with its principles, was made a
condition of their subsequent elevation?

Gentlemen, the public prosecutor has, in vague and general terms, charged me
with an intention of overturning the constitution; but I now call upon him in
terms particular and precise, to declare whether the system under which he acts
has not rooted out every valuable principle, every wholesome regulation, which
the revolution produced; whether those regulations are a living spirit, or a
dead letter; whether placemen and pensioners do not now swarm around the
treasury bench, like vermin on the banks of the Nile. And even when, by a
mockery of our understandings, they vacate their seats, for a short time, for
what is called the Chiltern Hundreds, are they not again re-elected? -- elected
did I say? No! again nominated by the peer who originally sent them, in a
manner as peremptory as the king, by his Conge d'Elire, nominates a bishop!
This, gentlemen, is not idle declamation; it is solid fact, and
incontrovertible proof. I therefore call upon you, my countrymen, in your turn,
and ask you, how you can conscientiously lay your hands upon your hearts, and
solemnly declare, before God and the world, that I have attempted to overturn a
system, of which it has been proved to you not a vestige remains? Do you not
know, that those who instigated this prosecution, when called upon to revise
these principles of the constitution, as they could not answer the arguments of
the patriot Wharton, preserved a sullen and criminal silence? What then must
you think of a state prosecution, which rests for support on so sandy a
foundation; or what rather must you not think of the conduct of those men, who,
while they are heaping upon my devoted head the charges of treasons,
conspiracies, and sedition, can give the real scandal of so notorious and
wilful an insincerity?

Gentlemen, the triennial bill has long been repealed: but why not now revive
it; -- since the reason on which it was repealed has long since ceased? For, if
you will take the trouble, gentlemen, of looking at the parliamentary debates
of that period, not even the rankest ministerial hireling attempted to defend
the measure, upon any other principle than that of temporary expediency; as it
was thought unsafe to expose the country to the tumult of a geneneral election,
when a rebellion was raging in the heart of the kingdom. But now it seems, the
septennial bill has become as much a part of our government, as the malt-tax,
the mutiny-bill, and a standing army; which when first passed, it was declared,
were only to be temporary, and, like the septennial bill, were only submitted
to on the fatal plea of a state necessity. "The responsibility of ministers, it
is stated, has become an empty name." Would to God it were false; but is not
the fact as melancholy as it is true? Do not those ministers who conducted the
American war (an event which shook these kingdoms to their deepest foundation)
conduct the present war? Did not Lord North, who was prime minister during the
whole of the war, enjoy, for many years after the war was ended, a sinecure
place of 5000l. a year (now indeed devolved upon Mr. Pit?) And do not his
family, at this very hour, receive from the country a considerable income,
granted during their father's ministry, by way of reversion, though I could
never learn that they have earned it by their services?

Gentlemen, the right of our meeting in convention by delegation has been
expressly, denied by the Solicitor General, and he, (I am sure if I mistake his
meaning, it is not purposely, and I beg he will interrupt me) I think he denied
our right to meet by delegation. -- Had we met as the united delegates of all
Britain, we should have arrogated a title to which we had no right. But we did
no such thing: we met, only, as the representatives of some thousands, who
delegated us for a purpose which we knew to be constitutional; and we conducted
ourselves in a manner firm, but peaceable.

If, in the common concerns of life, a man can receive a power of attorney to
manage, the pecuniary concerns of another; so, I trust, he is authorized to
carry into execution, for the benefit of his fellow creatures, affairs of a
much greater concernment; otherwise you deny him, in fact, that privilege,
without which all others are nugatory, I mean the essential privilege of
self-preservation. I am happy, however, that the charge is brought forward, as
a ground of criminality; inasmuch as the meeting, which delegated us, was
publicly held in an open field, in the face of day, in the presence of many
thousands of our fellow citizens, who were calm and attentive spectators of
what was passing, and in the presence, even, of five hundred peace-officers,
some of whom were members of our association, and others sent, by the secretary
of state, to watch over our proceedings and to make their report. Of the
latter, I can assert from my own personal knowledge, many became converts to
our doctrines; which, as they were founded in reason, and have no other object
than the general welfare of mankind, must make converts of all who have not an
interest in opposing what it is their duty to practice. All these things,
gentlemen, were suffered to pass, under the eye of the police, under the very
beard, if I may say so, of the secretary of state himself, who is, ex officio,
the great conservator of the public peace; and in the very heart of the capital
of our country, which is, or which ought to be, the great sanctuary of the law.

Gentlemen, the publicity of our conduct was certainly a proof that we deemed
it to be innocent. And if the officers of state deemed it to be otherwise, upon
what principle can you excuse their supineness and inactivity in not dispersing
the meeting, and taking up the delegates, since to prevent crimes is far better
than to punish them, and far more the duty of the civil magistracy, unless, in
the pride and haughtiness of their hearts, they sought to cherish the seeds of
a state prosecution against men whom they had marked out as the victims of
their resentment? Their conduct, then, we can only look on as TRAPS TO ENSNARE
US. Gentlemen, if what I have stated be well founded, we are entitled to draw
these melancholy inferences; that the articles of the Union are violated in
this business, and that there is not, as the fourth article avers there shall
be, a communication of all rights and privileges between the subjects of both
kingdoms; since a man may commit, with impunity, on the other side of the
Tweed, what, if he crosses it, he shall be transported for; that an unity of
the principles of action, an equal and undistinguishing law, operating, either
to the punishment or security of all citizens alike (and which is the great
badge of freemen) does not prevail among us; but that the code of the two
countries is an heterogeneous mass, like Nebuchadnezzar's image, made up,
partly of clay, and partly of brass. These facts, it would be like burning day
light to prove, and he that runs may read them.

Gentlemen, the great and distinguishing mark of men is reason. If we are
debarred from the privilege of exercising this invaluable faculty, we are
reduced to a situation (I will not say on a level with the beasts of the field,
for many of them, like ourselves, are social and gregarious, and have the
power) from the exercise of which the laws of this country has not as yet
debarred them (of communicating their ideas, though not indeed by articulate
sounds) if we are debarred from this privilege, then, I say, we are reduced
even lower than the brutes, and put upon a level with oysters and other
shellfish, whose powers of motion are limited to gape and receive, what the
bounty of nature, unlike that of the governments of the earth, which rather
take than give, confers for their support. The constant theme of the supporters
of government is the excellence of the British Constitution. Willing as we are
to admit the position, it is certainly not unreasonable to ask how is this
excellence to be ascertained. It is surely not a matter of instinct;
consequently, can only be ascertained by the exercise of our reason. If you
deny us this privilege, or, what is nearly the same, punish us for the use of
it, your government, I aver, stands precisely upon the same foundation as the
governments of Turkey and Algiers; for the Viziers, the Bashaws, and other
state officers of those arbitrary governments, so long as they are enjoying
their salaries, and fleecing the people, will assert, no doubt, with equal
confidence, that those governments are the best, and that all attempts to
examine, or controvert by reason, the principles on which they are founded, are
highly seditious, have a tendency to disturb the public peace, and are,
therefore deserving of the punishment of the law. If you interdict the free use
of our reasoning faculties on matters of government (and they do no more) you
and they are exactly on a par; and if you do not, the dispute between us is at
an end, as you concede the very point for which we are contending.

Gentlemen, it is a very melancholy consideration in the present times, and it
is with a mixture of grief and astonishment I speak it, that the very same kind
of arguments, which at the dawn of the Reformation were made use of by the
Catholic clergy, who were endeavoring to hold the people in the fetters of
superstition, are now made use of by those very persons, who, for purposes
equally selfish, are repressing the progress of political information. Cardinal
Bellarmine, a man eminent for learning, but vehement in his opposition of
religious reformation, declaims, particularly against the impious attempts to
diffuse knowledge among the lower classes; and to lay open the Holy Scriptures
to vulgar eyes. Religion in those days, it seems, like government in the
present, was to be believed and confided in without being examined. Oh!
Preposterous insult to the dignity of human reason! Oh, Blasphemy against the
author of all goodness! As if the parent of knowledge were capable of giving a
revelation to his creatures, to be adopted for ages by millions of reasonable
beings, that would not stand the test of human enquiry! The true religion, like
all free governments, appeals to the understanding for its support and not to
the sword. All systems, whether civil or moral, can only be durable in
proportion as they are founded on truth, and calculated to promote the GOOD OF
MANKIND. This will account to us, why governments suited to the great energies
of man, have always outlived the perishable things which despotism has erected.
Yes! this will account to us, why the foul stream of prejudice and calumny,
which is continually washing the dissoluble fabrics of all superstitious
impostures, passes without injury, by the adamant of Christianity.

It is worthy of remark, gentlemen, that in our days, the great champion of
despotism has not scrupled to borrow his favorite phrase from a monkish
writer, who was an enemy to the Reformation: Knighton, an abbot of Leicester,
who wrote at the beginning of the Reformation, when he is deploring the
publication of the Scriptures to the common people, has this remarkable
expression, Pity it is, that this evangelical pearl should be trodden down
under the foot of swine. Mr. Burke laments, that learning should be trodden
down under the hoof of the swinish multitude. In justice to the mouldering
monk, I must however observe, that the expression considered merely as an
expression is truly beautiful; whereas, Mr. Burke's phraseology is as destitute
of taste and congruity as it is devoid of benevolence.

But, gentlemen, if you take the principle of the thing, you will find that
every nation has a right, not only to preserve the form of government which is
actually established; but, also, by the peaceful and calm operation of reason,
to improve that form of government, whatever it may be. If you deny this
position, you must say, that our ancestors had a privilege which we have not a
right to exercise: an absurdity too gross to deserve a serious refutation;
since all men being born equally with the same rights, through every succession
of ages, no generation can annihilate or curtail the rights of a subsequent
one. The moral right, indeed, of altering any goverement must always depend
upon the particular circumstances of the case, but the abstract right is always
vested in the PEOPLE; of the moral exercise of which (however they may
occasionally abuse it) they must be, and they are, the proper and ultimate
judges. What, therefore, the Solicitor General has said, that we have, now, no
right to frame or alter the constitution, but that it is our duty implicitly to
obey it, since it was established at the Revolution, and transmitted to us by
our ancestors, I deny to be sound reason, or salutary political doctrine. In
adopting this position, I am fortified by the authority of Algernon Sydney,
than whom a purer spirit never appeared before the tribunal of his maker; Laws
and constitutions (says he) ought to be weighed, and whilst all due reverence
is paid to such as are good, every nation may not only retain in it. self a
power of changing or abolishing all such as are not so, but ought to exercise
that power according to the best of their understanding, and in the place of
what was either at first mistaken, or afterward corrupted to constitute that
which is most conducive to the establishment of Justice and Liberty. But such
is the condition of mankind, that nothing can be so perfectly framed as not to
show some testimony of human imbecility, and frequently to stand in need of
reparation and amendments. Many things are unknown to the wisest, and the best
men can never wholly divest themselves of passions and affections. By these
means, the best and wisest are sometimes led into error, and stand in need of
succession like to themselves, who may find remedies for the faults they have
committed; and nothing can or ought to be permanent but that which is perfect.
No natural body was ever so well tempered and organized, as not to be subject
to diseases, wounds, or other accidents, and to need medicines, and other
occasional helps, as well as nourishment and exercise; and he who, under the
name of innovation, would deprive nations of the like, does as much as lies in
him, condemn them all to perish by the defects of their own foundations. Some
men observing this, have proposed a necessity of reducing every state, once in
an age or two, to the integrity of its first principles: but they ought to have
examined, whether that principle be good or evil, or so good that nothing can
be ever added to it, which none ever was; and this being so, those who will
admit of no change would render errors perpetual, and depriving mankind of the
benefits of wisdom, industry, experience, and the right use of reason, oblige
all to continue in the miserable barbarity of their ancestors, WATCH SUITS
BETTER WITH THE NATURE OF A WOLF THAN THAT OF A MAN. Sydney on Government,
quarto edit. p. 405.

Gentlemen, we all know that the human mind is suffered to be active in the
improvement of those civil arts, which conduce to the comfort and happiness of
human life, I mean the mechanical arts; and shall the grand art of all, that of
making men secure in the enjoyment of their acquisitions. I mean the art of
government, be alone neglected, alone compelled to be stationary? But
abandoning the principle and reason of the cases, the facts themselves
contradict the assertions of our adversaries. Our constitution has never been
stationary. It has been in a gradual state of improvement; and a writer to whom
this country had the honor of giving birth, I mean Hume, expressly tells us,
that the history of England is little else "than a history of reversals." Do we
not know that the acts of parliament are frequently set aside, and others
directly contrary passed in their stead? By the treaty of Troyes, after the
battle of Agincourt, which was regularly ratified and confirmed, and no
opposition made to it, either by France or England, the two kingdoms were for
ever unrepealably united under Henry V. Where is now the unrepealable union
between England and France? Oaths were heaped upon oaths to bind the nobility
of England never to violate any of the constitutions of Richard II. as Rapin
assures us (vol. 1. p. 245.) where are his constitutions now? During three
successive reigns, the national religion was three times successively changed
by act of parliament. A more complete tyranny cannot be conceived than William
the Conqueror established over the people of England. Yet but a few reigns pass
away, and the barons establish a legal right to redress their grievances by
FORCE. Magna Charta says, Destring-^cu^ et gravabunt nos, etc. The barons
complaining and failing of redress, shall lawfully distress and aggrieve the
king all manner of ways, as by taking his castles, land possessions, etc. till
redress is granted. After the restoration comes the corporation act, and
declares all resistance unlawful. The same doctrine is preached in the act of
attainder, and militia acts. Nor thirty years after this comes the Revolution,
and abolishes the whole system of passive-obedience, and non-resistance; sends
the whole royal family a packing, and brings in the house of Nassau. The
liberty of the press was taken away by the 13th Charles II. The liberty of
petitioning was abolished the same year; and then the corporation charters were
taken away. All these were restored by the Bill of Rights. Do not then,
gentlemen, these facts prove Mr. Hume's words, That the history of England is
little better than a history of reversals. There are some men, I know, who see
a spectre in every bush. Lord Nottingham, when the Union was in agitation,
declared that the changing of the term England to that of Great Britain would
subvert all the laws of England. And in our own days there are of the same
description of men of whom we may say, that the word innovation, to use
Mortimer's expression, has frozen up their souls, like fish in a pond. After
all, the most useful discoveries in philosophy, the most important changes in
the moral history of Man, have been innovations. The Revolution was an
innovation; the Reformation was an innovation; Christianity itself was an
innovation.

Lord Justice Clerk. You would have been stopped long before (...), if you had
not been a stranger. All that you have been saying (...) ^^dition; and now, my
lords, he is attacking Christianity.

Lord Henderland. I allow him all the benefit of his defense; but (...) are the
present situation of this country, with what happened at the Revolution, when
the forms of civil government and the liberties of the subject were done away
by the infringement of all law; or with that period, in which the sovereign is
said to have forfeited his life! I cannot sit here without observing as was
done in England, in the year 1745, when the rebels were tried; I cannot sit
here, as a judge and as a man, without saying that it is a most indecent
defense. It is my duty to observe this; but I am for the panel going on in his
own way.

Mr. Gerrald. I conceive myself as vindicating the rights of Britons at large;
and I solemnly disclaim all intention of attacking Christianity. I was merely
stating the fact.

Lord Justice Clerk. Go on in your own way.

Mr. Gerrald. I think I may be allowed that at least.

Lord Justice Clerk. Go on sir.

Mr. Gerrald. I should have been going on if your lordship had not interrupted
me.

Gentlemen, the great charge against me is, that I came down here for the
purpose of carrying on reform; and if I am not allowed to go into a vindication
of these general principles, and an enumeration of particular abuses, I may be
condemned indeed, but I certainly am not heard. I was only arguing that the
supposed principles charged upon me were such as have been adopted by the best
and wisest of men; and if they can show me, from higher authority, that they
are unconstitutional, I would instantly become a convert to their doctrines;
but reason alone, and not assertion, can convert me. I shall now endeavor to
prove to you that our object was perfectly constitutional.

Gentlemen, by a return of the representation in parliament, an object which we
feel equally interested in with all other British subjects, given us by a
society called the Friends of the People, many of whom are members of
Parliament, and, among others, the illustrious Sheridan, (the brilliancy of
whose talents can only be equalled by his disinterested attachment to the
liberties of his country) it appears that in England 2611 persons -- return to
parliament 327 members, and in Scotland 98 persons elect 15, and the remaining
30 are elected by about 1400.

This is not an adequate representation; but a mockery of representation; and
therefore not such a representation as the original principles of our
constitution intended, or as the Revolution was meant to promote. Surely,
gentlemen, it is not the semblance of a parliament that we want, not the more
name of a parliament, the magistratuum vocabula, as Tacitus well expresses it;
but such a parliament as shall preserve our interests, and express our wills.
If the court's governing without a parliament was formerly the object of our
terror; if its governing with a parliament is as justly the object of our
wishes; its governing by a parliament is an infallible method, not only to
compass, but give sanction to our ruin. With regard to the first of these
governments, our terrors have long slumbered; for, while we so fully give, why
should the sovereign take? But if ever the period should arrive, when the House
of Commons should invariably answer to the calls of the crown, though they
should be deaf to the cries of the people; that they should purchase on the one
hand, only to sell on the other; that instead of redressing grievances they
should authorize them; instead of prosecuting malefactors, they should screen
them; instead of protecting and defending the rights of their constituents,
they should perfidiously betray them; if ever such a period should arrive, I
say, we might still amuse ourselves with the word constitution; but hope itself
would sicken, as the constitution, in fact, must be every where undermined, and
at the first sound of the trumpet of despotism, like the walls of Jericho,
would sink into a heap of ruins.

Gentlemen, I was not drawing any parallel, when the bench interrupted me,
between the state of this country at this time, and the state of it at the
Revolution; but, I was laying down a principle, that if persons in any given
period had a right to meet for the purpose of bettering their government, they
had the same right at every subsequent period. The Revolution was carried into
effect by open force, but here there was no idea of force, which I trust, I
shall be able to prove. In our meetings there was no idea of any force at all,
and therefore, instead of drawing a parallel between the situation of the
country at that time, and at this, or of inculcating the propriety of having
recourse to force, we were doing directly the reverse.

Gentlemen, I shall now briefly examine the principles, which the report of my
speeches in the convention attributes to me. It is there stated, that I said no
meeting of the people can be called a mob, if their deliberations be directed
toward the public good; but if men meet for an opposite purpose, for promoting
the misery or the destruction of the human race, though they sit down with
crowns on their heads and sceptres in their hands, they are truly a mob.

These, gentlemen, I hold to be moral and self-evident propositions; that it is
not the possession, but the just exercise of power, which should render it an
object of reverence among men; and that the essential principles of vice and
virtue are not altered by the practices of persons in high stations -- Promota
justitia (says, St. Austin) quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia? 'If justice
were laid aside,' as this venerable father has well said, the governments of
the world would resemble dens of robbers; and men would follow only those who
can inflict the greatest punishments, or give the greatest rewards; but since
the reception of such opinions would be the extirpation of all that can be
called good, we must look for another rule of our obedience; and we shall find
that only to be the law, (I mean that Tully calls the sanctio rectua) which
being founded upon what eternal principle of reason and truh, whence the rule
of justice, which is sacred and pure, ought to be reduced, and not from the
depraved will of man, which fluctuating, according to the different interests,
humors, and passions, that at several times reign in several nations, one day
abrogates what had been (...) acted the other. This sentiment, then, just and
reasonable in itself can never be construed into a reflection upon the present
government; unless you suppose that which I never asserted, namely that it is
applicable to the present government; in which case you must commit the very
offense which you are called upon to condemn, and attribute those motives to
the particular magistrates of our own country, which I only supposed might
occasionally influence the conduct of many.

I am next charged with saying were all mankind to assemble in public meetings,
one of two things must follow; either they will behave properly or improperly;
if properly, their meeting will tend to good; if improperly, it carries its own
cure along with it. The people will be soon brought into a better method by a
sense of self preservation, by which they will correct the errors into which
they have fallen. Than this sentiment, gentlemen, I conceive nothing can be
more innocent, and more strictly and logically true. By the "assembly of the
whole community" I certainly did not mean what a learned lord, in his argument
on the relevancy, erroneously. I hope not intentionally, stated to be my
meaning, the meeting of all the people in their collective capacity, which
would impede business, and give rise to tumults. No. -- I meant the meeting of
the people in their representative capacity -- but, such a representation as
should collect and express their wills, as really and truly as if they had been
assembled in their collective capacity. A fair, full, and complete
representation -- not a delusive vision, an empty phantom, an unreal mockery.
This I can also inform his lordship was the only sense conveyed by my words,
'the great art of government is that all should be governed by all', -- words,
(which his lordship thought proper to ridicule because he did not understand
them,) and which, besides their own intrinsic weight have been adopted by wise
and virtuous men, both in ancient and in modern times. "This therefore, (says,
Sir William Temple, when speaking of the constitution of the ancient Germans,
from which our own is, as we have seen, derived) is that constitution, which
has been celebrated as the truest and the justest temper that has ever been
found out between dominion and liberty; and it seems to be a strain of what
Heraclitus said was the only skill, or knowledge of any value in politics,
which was the secret of governing all by all" (Sir William Temple, Miscellanies
part ii. p. 255.) Surely, if ever there was a principle of plain sense, this is
one; for who so likely to promote their own interests as the persons most
concerned in it? Who so eager to apply the cure, as those who feel most acutely
the smart of the disorder?

Gentlemen, I am further charged with having said, that "if governments were to
instruct the poor instead of hanging up their bodies on gibbets, the voice of
the people would then be the voice of God." Now, what do these words amount to?
Why, that since every government claims a right to punish, it is previously
boned to instruct the subject in what he should do to avoid it. For, as the
just powers of government, as we have before had occasion to observe, are
derived from the people; so no people either will delegate, or can have a right
to delegate, to any set of men, the power of wantonly inflicting pain upon
them; which, undoubtedly, would be the case, if the subject could, without
injustice, suffer the penalty of a law, even though he had not been previously
told of its existence. I speak not, now, of those moral laws which pure native
intellect enables us to discover, and which may be read, as Dryden says,
without the spectacles of books, but merely of those positive regulations of
society which mere human intellect alone cannot know to be breaches of duty,
unless previously instructed. In these cases, then, to withhold instruction is,
on the part of government, not merely the omission of duty, but the commission
of a crime; and society sins against the man before the man can sin against
society. I therefore infer, that instruction alone can constitute a duty, and
that laws can enforce no obedience but where they are explained. This, my
lords, is not factious doctrine, nor calculated to weaken the principle of
obedience to the laws: they are precisely the sentiments of Sir William
Blackstone, a judge whose principles were most unquestionably loyal, and who
makes exactly the same distinction, as I have done, between the mala prohibita,
and the mala in se; Blackstone's Commentaries, Vol. iv. p. 8. between offenses
against the law of nature, and offenses against the state. The lawfulness of
punishing criminals, says he, is founded upon this principle, that "the law, by
which they suffer, was made by their own consent; it is a part of the original
contract into which they have entered, when first they engaged in society; it
was calculated for, and has long contributed to their own security." Now, if
the consent of the punished be the only lawful principle of authority on the
part of the punisher, that consent must be either express or implied. That it
is an express consent, it can never be contended, and as to an implied consent,
we are still authorized to ask, what is the ground of the implication?

The publication of an act of parliament (the only mode of publication which
government condescends to make use of) by the king's printer, only -- in the
old German character, which few men can read -- and which is sold at a price
which as few can afford to pay, rather resembles the behavior of Caligula, the
Roman tyrant, who (according to Dion Casius) wrote his laws in a very small
character, and hung them up on high pillows, the more effectually to ensnare
the people, than the conduct of a legislature, whose authority, being founded
on the consent of the people, must, of course, break their trust, whenever they
violate the principle which created them. -- To read to the prisoner, for the
first time, when he stands at the tribunal, any act, for the breach of which he
is arraigned, is to him precisely the same thing as it would be to originate it
at the time by the same tribunal, for the express purpose of condemnation. In
such case, indeed, he may perish by the forms, but certainly not by the
principles of justice. Sir William Blackstone also regrets the frequency of
capital punishments to be found in our code; and feelingly says, that it is a
melancholy truth that among the variety of actions which men are daily liable
to commit, no less than one hundred and sixty have been declared by act of
parliament to be worthy of instant death;' and adds, 'that so dreadful a list
instead of diminishing, increases the number of offenders.

Gentlemen, it was upon a painful review of this subject, that I asserted that
government* had far better instruct the people than hang up their bodies on
gibbets; for as there is something in the nature of man, that so severe
punishments have never been found effectual to prevent any sort of crime. The
most effectual way to prevent crimes is, to prevent the temptation; to take
care that the people be educated in virtuous principles, and every man brought
up and enured to labor and industry, that has no estate to subsist on. If this
be not done laws may be avenged but cannot be obeyed; they may inspire terror,
but can never command respect.

Gentlemen, I must observe, and I think it lies within the compass of my
defense to state to you, that we can only be innocent in coming down for the
purpose of procuring reform, upon this supposition that reform was necessary,
and if I had not been allowed to go into the proof of that fact, I should stand
in this melancholy situation -- that a charge would be brought against me, and
the only proper means of repelling that charge would be denied me.

Gentlemen, I now come to the dissection of the evidence, which I trust, you
will find to be so scanty, and insufficient, as that it is impossible to fix
upon me any well-grounded and colorable charge of sedition.

Gentlemen, the phantom conjured up to terrify the timid, the Medusa's head
which is to petrify you all with horror and astonishment, is the motion
attributed to Mr. Sinclair, (but which I shall, shortly, prove to you never
passed) which not only inculcated the principle of resistance, but with the
British Convention it is asserted meant to carry into execution.

I was not a little surprised to day, to hear this legal and constitutional
principle denied in round and unqualified terms; when it should be recollected,
that it is to this principle we owe our liberties. The right of
self-preservation, is a right of which no human institution can divest us,
since human institutions themselves, were formed only the more completely to
accomplish that end. To support any political institution, therefore by the
destruction of that principle would be absurdly to sacrifice the end to the
means. If the laws of God and men (says Sydney) when the magistracy is left at
liberty to break them, and if the lusts of those, who are too strong for the
tribunals of justice cannot be otherwise restrained than by sedition, tumults,
and wars, -- those seditions, tumults and wars, are justified by the laws of
God and man. Sydney on government, p. 188. For as all magistrates were set up
for the good of the people; so whenever they act contrary to the end of their
institution, they may be lawfully opposed; Quia eatenus (as Grotius well
observes) non habent imperium. De Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. Here then, gentlemen,
you see the principles of resistance laid down by a writer on the civil law
(with whose works, their lordships are, possibly far better acquainted than I,)
and recognized also by that sage and hero the immortal Sydney, who, after a
life spent in a continual struggle against vice, tyranny and faction, fell a
martyr at last to the liberties of his country. The sentence passed upon him,
however, by the infamous Jeffries, has met with the unanimous execration of
posterity, and his attainder was accordingly repealed among the first acts
which took place at the Revolution.

Gentlemen, were I called upon to give a definition of sedition or of
rebellion, I would frankly avow, that I know of no other than this; the
conspiracy of the law against the interests of the many. And this rebellion may
be equally carried on by those who are entrusted with the power of the state,
as by those who originally conferred it, and who are the objects of its
exercise. If those who by force take away the legislature,' says Lock, 'are
rebels, the legislators themselves, as has been shown, can be no less esteemed
so, when they who were set up for the protection and preservation of the
people, their liberties and properties, shall invade and endeavor to take them
away: And so they, putting themselves in a state of war with those, who made
them the protectors and guardians of their peace, ARE PROPERLY, AND WITH THE
GREATEST AGGRAVATION REBELS. Treatise on Government, octavo edition, p. 294, 5.

This principle of resistance, gentlemen, is deeply interwoven in our
constitution, and is as strongly laid down, even by writers on our municipal
law, as it is by those, who are philosophical and speculative. The liberties of
Englishmen (says Blackstone, Vol. I. p. 144.) should be perfectly known and
considered by every man of rank and property lest his ignorance of the points
whereon they are founded should hurry him into faction and licentiousness on
the one hand, or a pusillanimous indifference and criminal submission on the
other. Nor do I apprehend that this knowledge of the rights of Britons, is to
be limited merely to men of rank and property since ^he poor man is, and by the
same means too, equally entitled to the preservation of his mite, as the rich
man to the enjoyment of his millions. And of this opinion also seems to be the
learned judge, when, shortly after, he says to vindicate these rights, when
actually violated or attacked, the subjects of England are entitled, in the
first place, (the word subjects is certainly equally applicable to all
descriptions, high and low, rich and poor) to the regular administration and
free course of justice in the courts of law; next, to the right of petitioning
the king and parliament for redress of grievances; and lastly, to THE RIGHT OF
HAVING AND USING ARMS FOR SELF-PRESERVATION AND DEFENSE. Vol. 1. p. 144. Thus
you see, gentlemen, that these principles are neither new nor dangerous; not
new* because co-eval with the Revolution; not dangerous, because avowed by a
calm philosophical writer who enjoyed the favor and patronage of his
sovereign, and since supported by the authority of an eminent writer whose
office it was to lay down the principles of law, and administer justice to the
subjects of these realms.

Gentlemen, I defy our bitterest enemies to prove that it was ever our
intention to make any practical application of these doctrines; for, as the
same learned judge well observes, "all oppressions, as they may happen to
spring from any branch of the sovereign power, must necessarily be out of the
reach of any stated rule, or express legal provision;" so I say with him also
that "if ever they unfortunately happen, the prudence of the times must provide
new remedies upon new emergencies." Blackstone, Vol. 1. p. 245.

Gentlemen, I shall now state to you, as shortly as I can, what was said by the
witnesses. Mr. Scott says, I think, among other things, that when he came into
the convention, on the 6th of December, he asked the chairman the object of our
meeting. The reply was, that we were met for the purpose of addressing the king.

Mr. Davidson tells you, indeed, that he came for the purpose of dispersing the
meeting. He was asked, also, if there was any appearance oi tumult. He answers
in the negative; that there was no appearance of tumult and disorder, though
the president was forcibly taken out of the chair; to whom he, at first gave a
friendly shake, though he was afterward obliged to convert it into a Cornish
hug. WE, then, gentlemen, were the persons who were forcibly assaulted; but we
did not make use of force for the purpose of repelling force.

Gentlemen, the external proofs that have been alleged, particularly of this
resolution which was said to have passed, amount to what? They amount, in fact,
merely, to this, that a number of papers were taken from a public Inn by the
officer, and put into a loose bundle; then taken by him to the sheriff's
office, where they were left for some time, without any particular attention
being paid to them; certainly in so loose a state that it was very possible for
any other papers to have been put in; consequently all degree of credibility
due to the evidence is done away, inasmuch as they were not sealed, though I
understand it is always the custom to seal up papers, as it appeared from the
evidence delivered today at the ba^. For, I conceive that, after they have
been in that loose state, ^t is impossible ever to identify these papers,
unless the man has the faculty of looking through a pocket handkerchief. How is
it possible, if the papers had been taken and put into a loose bundle, and
suffered to lie a considerable time without any actual inspection, and several
persons being in the room; how is it possible, I say, that these papers can be
proved to be the same that were taken out of the room of Mr. Sinclair?

Gentlemen, you will find one material circumstance, however, to which, I
trust, you will give your most mature consideration, to which is, that an^
attempt to identify those papers should, by all regular and due course of
evidence, have been made, before they are produced to the jury, as the ground
of criminating any panel at this bar; for, if they are not indentified, I do
not see with what color or justice they can be brought forward for the purpose
of criminating any person. This paper is not proved ever to have been adopted
as a resolution by the convention. It no where appears, even in what is called
the minutes of the convention, but which I deny to be the minutes of the
convention; nor is there any proof that ever they were adopted by the
convention as their minutes. It ought to have been proved in the hand writing
of Mr. Sinclair who is the reputed author of this motion; and even if an
attempt to identify his handwriting had been made, even then I say the
evidence would still have rested upon a very precarious foundation. In the case
of Algernon Sydney, it was a similarity of handwriting that was the principal
ground of his conviction. That very circumstance, also, gentlemen, is recited
in the act of parliament as one of the principal grounds of reversing his
attainder; though the paper alluded to, was found in the closet of Colonel
Sydney, as this paper is said to have been found in the room of Mr. Sinclair.
Sydney himself well observes, upon his trial, "that similitude of hands is
nothing; as hands may be so counterfeited, that no man shall know even his own
hand. A gentleman that is now dead," says he, "told me that my Lord Arlington,
about five years ago, desired him to write a letter and seal it as well as he
could. He wrote it with care, and sealed it with a wafer and wax upon it; and
within a few days my Lord Arlington brought him five letters, and he did not
know which was his own." Trial of A. Syd. p. 31. If, then, gentlemen, even if
there had been actual proof that this was in the handwriting of Mr. Sinclair
(a circumstance which never could be proved, and which has not this day been
attempted to be proved), if such actual proof, I say, would not have been
admitted as sufficient evidence to criminate Mr. Sinclair, inasmuch as the
motion in question never became part of the minutes of the convention -- far
less should this scroll of paper condemn me, who am only accused of verbally
supporting the written motion which Mr. Sinclair is said to have made. If upon
the trial of this excellent young man, who, at a period of life, which the
greater part of mankind consume in frivolous or vicious dissipation, is
dedicating his whole time to promote the happiness of his fellow creatures; if
upon a subsequent trial an honest and impartial jury shall, as they must,
acquit him of the charge, both upon a general conviction of his innocence, and
particularly, upon the insufficiency of the evidence brought against him, what
must be the remorse, what the anguish of that jury, who shall have condemned
the accessory upon that very evidence, which, on the fullest investigation,
shall have been found incompetent to the conviction of the principal? This
event, were it possible to happen, I should most deeply deplore, not merely on
account of my own personal sufferings, but for the scandal it would affix to
the administration of justice, for the disgrace it would bring upon our common
country; and, above all, for the deep and lasting infamy that it would entail
upon you, my countrymen, gentlemen of the jury. In such case, the principle of
my condemnation would even be worse than that of Sydney; posterity would review
it with equal abhorrence, and therefore let me conjure you, as you tender not
only my safety, but your own personal reputation, suffer not the iniquities of
those times to be revived and imputed to these.

Mr. Mack tells you, that he did not get the papers from Lion, that they were
lying in the room in the sheriff-clerk's office carelessly. Mr. Skirving's
papers were sealed it seems; but this motion upon which the great ground of
criminality is laid, is suffered to lie loose. If that precaution was not taken
equally in all cases, I certainly ought not to suffer for the negligence of the
officer.

There is one certain and infallible proof, gentlemen, that this motion, upon
which so much stress is laid, never did, in reali^^, pass in the convention. It
has come out in the evidence, that ^^e motion was marked by Mr. Aitcheson -- if
then, it was marked by him, it clearly could not have been adopted by the
convention; for if it had, it would have gone into the hands of the Secretary,
who would have marked it with his own signature, and it would have constituted
part of the minutes. On the contrary, you have strong circumstantial proof (the
best that the nature of the case will admit) that so far from passing in the
convention it was even laid aside; inasmuch as it was only marked by Aitcheson,
and not by the secretary whose practice it was invariably to mark them as an
essential preparative to their insertion in the minutes. Besides gentlemen,
where was this paper found? Was it found in the possession of Mr. Skirving,
when all his papers were seized, and to whose custody all resolutions that
passed in the convention was regularly committed? No; it was not even pretended
to have been so found; it is stated to have been found in the custody of Mr.
Sinclair alone who was a simple member of the convention, and who was never
entrusted with the guardianship of its minutes. This single fact renders all
reasoning upon the subject unnecessary. It amounts to a moral demonstration of
what I advance; and he who would not be convinced by proof so glaring, and
facts so undeniable, would not receive conviction though one should rise from
the dead.

Gentlemen, you no doubt, are well aware, that it is the duty of jurymen to
find the verdict secundum alegata et probata, according to facts alleged and
proved. Many principles contained in those speeches attributed to me I glory in
having uttered, as they are perfectly reconcilable with the soundest
principles of government and good order. But there are parts of those speeches
which are false and spurious. Animated as I am, with a love of truth, and
determined to tell it at whatever hazard, I will neither assume what I have not
said, nor deny what I have said. If then, you give me credit, which, I am sure,
as honest men you cannot withhold from me, for my veracity and openness in one
instance, you have no right to mistrust me in another.

I have already told you, that as jurymen you are bound to find a verdict
according to facts alleged and proved. I, now, gentlemen, will seriously ask
what evidence have you, that the speeches charged in the indictment, and which
are copied from the Gazetteer, are the real speeches which I made in the
convention? What is the mode of proof? Thomas Cockburn tells you that he had a
general collection, when he was in the habit of reading the Gazetteer, that
they bore a resemblance to the speeches which he has heard me make in the
convention. Gentlemen, I trust you are well aware of the sacred duty which you
are now to execute, and that you will be of opinion, that in a case so solemn
as the present, a bare general collection of what is said, or supposed to be
said, in the heat of debate, will never constitute a sufficient ground of
criminal conviction. I allow, that in t^^ ordinary intercourses of life, a
general collection is certainly su^^^^^^nt ground whereon to form a judgment,
otherwise human affairs ^^^st stand still. But you are not now met for the
ordinary purposes of life; you are met to determine the guilt or innocence of a
man, accused, on the one hand, of having disturbed the peace, and esteemed on
the other, for having attempted to promote the good of his country; and upon
your determination will rest, not only his fortune and his fame, but, in all
probability, his life itself. What then is the evidence upon which this great
stake depends? Mr. Cockburn, when pressed by my counsel, who, through the whole
course of the cause have conducted themselves, not only like able counsel, but
like firm and inflexible patriots, says, that he cannot identify one single
passage. What does this confession amount to? That he cannot swear they are the
speeches I made; for, if the terms general recollection have any meaning at
all, I apprehend they have this meaning, that all general recollections are
composed of the recollection, of some particular passages. Now, he does not
identify one single passage. Some of them you may deem criminal, and others
innocent; nay, even meritorious; and therefore I presume you cannot convict any
panel upon such loose indeterminate evidence; which is, at least, as likely to
fix upon him what is praiseworthy, as it is to charge him with what is
criminal. But he recollects, 'a great many words interspersed in that speech.'
Why, doubtless, gentlemen, when Mr. Cockburn had heard any person speak for a
considerable length of time, he must have some recollection upon his mind of
what had passed; but I trust that words interspersed through a speech are
certainly too loose to found a verdict of conviction of a far less crime than
that of which I am accused, and to authorize a punishment of far less severity
than such as if convicted I shall inevitably suffer.

This gentlemen is, so far as concerns the first speeches. But of the second
speech he says he recollects less than of any other; though this is the speech
upon which Mr. Solicitor General chiefly founds his charge, and against which
he has planted the whole artillery of the law. After all, gentlemen, the
witness, though closely pressed in his examination by the crown lawyers, closes
his evidence with these remarkable words 'that he does not mean to identify any
of the speeches.

Gentlemen, if the freedom and lives of British subjects are dependant upon the
loose and general recollection of words spoken too at a considerable distance
of time, we may, indeed boast our liberties and the benignity of our laws, but
they are merely an empty boast, and not a solid and substantial good.

But, gentlemen, there is one circumstance still stronger than any I have
stated to you. If any persom might be supposed to retain an accurate
recollection of the speeches, it must be William Ross, who being able to write
shorthand, would in all probability carry away with him, with more accuracy
than any other person, the speeches which are attributed to me. Ross tells you,
he never took notes by the express direction of the convention, nor ever
published them by their order. Now, if charges of criminality are to be brought
forward against men upon such loose evidence as this -- the unauthorised
transcript of a shorthand writer, and which transcript, or even verbal
evidence, is to be taken as proof -- we must deem the judicial process of our
country not a shield of protection, but a rod of chastisement. Persons actuated
by malicious motives, the retainers of a profligate administration, may enter
the meetings by a shorthand writer, and, for a small gratification, may induce
him to take down, as the speeches of any member, words highly criminal, but
which at the same time have never been spoken; and afterward, by procuring
them to be inserted in a newspaper, may subject the party to a state
prosecution. Against this engine of persecution what remedy has innocence? Why,
the party aggrieved, may prosecute the printer for a libel, I mean if he has
money, for that is a necessary ingredient to the attainment of justice: and if
he has none, however deep the injury, and calamitous its consequence, he must
sit down silent under the charge, until he has an opportunity of vindicating
his innocence in court when the Lord Advocate, who is, ex officio, the guardian
of our liberties, shall be graciously pleased to drag him, as the ill-fated
victim of a state prosecution.

Gentlemen, the rules of evidence, being all founded upon the plain principles
of common sense, must in all countries be nearly the same. In an English Court
of Judicature the evidence produced against me would, I am certain, be deemed
incompetent to a conviction on the slightest charge. Why then in Scotland
should not an equal measure of justice be meted out to me, an Englishman, which
you, though Scotsmen, would in England readily obtain?

Furthermore, Ross the shorthand writer swears that he is not very well
skilled in his art -- which, even in the most skilful, is a fallacious mode of
identifying a speech -- nay, that he was afflicted with deafness when he
attended the convention, and, having frequently lost the thread of my
discourse, inserted of his own invention, a great part of that which appeared
in his paper. Gentlemen, is not this single confession sufficient totally to
destroy the identity of the speeches, and consequently the solidity of the
evidence against me? A question was asked by one of the jurymen which carried
with it an apparent weight -- whether any of the convention had complained that
their speeches were inserted or misrepresented? To which Ross answered, No. I
am sure you cannot but be aware, that if the members of the convention had been
in the constant habit of complaining of all the misrepresentations which the
lying breath of rumor had circulated against them -- if they had thought it
necessary formally to contradict whatever malice propagated and credulity
received -- the object of their mission must have been entirely abandoned; and
instead of asserting those principles which we felt to be just, our time would
have been consumed in refuting aspersions which we knew to be false. No!
gentlemen, we rested upon the consciousness of our innocence, and upon the
broad basis of public confidence, to which our honest and disinterested
exertions had given us a claim.

George Ross depones, that I had no knowledge of the insertion of the words, Ca
ira, Vive la Convention, Liberty Hall, etc. but that he himself was the person
who inserted the^. I should not have repeated this insignificant circumstance,
but that I observe unfair inferences have been drawn from them, in order to
load us with additional guilt.

Gentlemen, I hold this to be a sound principle both of reason and of law, that
if you once can prove that any meeting was in itself legal, though after the
meeting any illegal resolutions were adopted, provided it cannot be proved that
you were present at those meetings aiding and abetting those illegal
resolutions so passed, no degree of criminality can possibly attach to you.

You are then to advert to the general principle which proves the illegality of
the meeting, and not to the particular resolution which if you did not support
can never be brought in evidence against you. Much stress has been laid upon
this committee of secrecy, upon which very strange and contradictory language
has been held by the public prosecutor. Sometimes we are represented ^s a set
of desperadoes, who met in open day for the purpose of violating the laws and
the subsisting constitution of the country: at other times that we met in holes
and corners, as our projects were so nefarious that they could not bear the
light. To round the circle of contradictions, a learned judge upon the bench
has declared, that however criminal our intentions, our conduct was open, and
in this respect our imprudence was equal to our guilt. By these various and
even opposite charges, the punishment inflicted by the Sicilian tyrant is
realized upon the unfortunate members of the convention -- stretched upon the
iron bed of legal torture, if too long we are lopt, if too short we are
stretched. If we act with openness, there our candor is audacious guilt; if
secretly, we only refrain from insulting our country by the publicity of our
measures, that we may in greater security accomplish her ruin. Seven men, it
seems, were deemed sufficient by this resolution, to constitute a convention,
which was to overturn the government! Absurd and impossible supposition! Were
our rebellious troops, like those of Mr. ^ayes, at Brentford, to start up when
called for? Or, is it supposed that we were to realize the fable of Pyrrha and
Deucalion, and generate men by casting stones behind us? The very supposition
of your giving the smallest degree of credit to this absurd allegation, would
reflect such disgrace upon your understandings, and is so highly derogatory to
the British Constitution, the principles of which are the objects of universal
reverence, that I cannot entertain it for a moment. For feeble, indeed, must
the foundation of that constitution be, which can be even endangered, much more
overturned, by a meeting of no more than seven individuals.

Gentlemen, from a particular expression stated in this indictment, calamitous
circumstances, you must see that we looked upon every invasion to be
calamitous, from whatever quarter it proceeded; -- but, if we had intended to
make an open opposition to the laws of our country, or were plotting its
destruction secretly and in the dark, we should, certainly, never, have used an
epithet of that description. The very insertion of the term calamitous proves
to a moral demonstration that all invasions, from whatever quarter, would have
been deemed objects not of approbation, but of regret.

Gentlemen, it has been said, that the admission of foreign troops into Great
Britain was also one of the calamitous circumstances which would induce the
convention to meet again. To this charge, if it will avail any thing to the
public prosecutor, I freely plead guilty. As a Briton I shall ever think myself
bound to watch with anxious attention the introduction of any foreign troops,
and upon this plain principle, that I conceive the native valor of Britons is
always adequate to their own protection. If it be otherwise, we hold our
freedom by the most brittle tenure -- for as foreigners can have no common
interest with Britons, the same mercenary arm which protects us for pay may
enslave us for plunder. But what does this resolution state? That we will do
any thing unconstitutional? Far from it. It states that "we shall follow the
wholesome example of our ancestors, by paying no regard to any act which shall
militate against the constitution of our country." Now, before government can
properly make this resolution a ground of criminal accusation against us, they
must confess that they either had passed, or meaned to pass an act, militating
against the constitution. For under no other circumstance was any opposition
mentioned, or intended. Is it not rather singular then, that before they can
infer our guilt, they must confess their own? Acts of parliament are in general
sacred things, but they may be, in particular cases, so grievous and
oppressive, that human nature will revolt from them. The constitution, as
Treasurer Burleigh long since observed, can never be undone but by a
parliament; which proves however, that a parliament may undo it. In the reign
of Henry VIII. an act of parliament was passed, giving to the proclamations of
the crown the validity of a law. It was also made a capital offense for any
person to foretell the death of the king -- in consequence of which, Sir Anthony
Denny, his physician, when he lay at the point of death, was af^aid to mention
to him the danger of his situation. To judge or believe that Anne Cleves was
not a virgin when she married him was declared high treason. Until very lately
for a gipsey to remain twelve months within the kingdom was declared felony
without benefit of clergy. In Scotland, Evenus the third king of that name,
caused a law to pass, by which the wives and daughters of noblemen were exposed
to his lust, and those of the commons to the lust of his nobility. Tulit legem
Evenus ut c^ivis liceret, pro opibus quot alere posset, uxores ducere; ut rex
nuptias sponsarum nobilium, nobilis plebeiarum proelibarent pudicitiam, ut
plebeiorum uxores cum nobilitates communes essent. BUCH. L. 4. c. 14. Many
other acts might be mentioned which have long blotted and disgraced the statute
book; are these acts, then, in the eye of reason, proper objects of obedience?
Nay, are they not rather honored in the breach, than the observance? "Laws,"
says Hooker, "must be obeyed, unless there be reason showed that the law of
reason, or of God, does enjoin the contrary," ECCLES. POL. B. 1. sec. 16. Which
plainly implies that there are bounds to the civil obedience of the subject.
Acts, then, which are subversive of our happiness, are contrary to every right
of civil society and comfort, utterly incompatible with all laws either moral
or revealed, and therefore mere acts of power, having neither the force not
validity of a law. But I deny that it was ever the intention of the Convention
to resist any acts by force. The words of the resolution are, "unless compelled
to desist by superior force." What was this force to be superior to? Why,
forsooth, to twenty-one members peaceably met, and peaceably discussing
political subjects. Nay, do not the very words themselves plainly import, that
though the mere mandate of the magistrate (as such a mandate would be a gross
violation of the law which he was bound to observe) would be disregarded by the
Convention, yet the appearance of force would be the signal of dispersion? For
upon what principle of common sense, or probabilities, can it be supposed that
we should have wantonly exposed our lives to certain destruction by an appeal
to arms; we, few in number, peaceful in intention, without ability to act,
without hope to succeed, without power, without influence, without motive,
without means?

But the sincerity of this declaration has been already evinced by a fact of
recent date and public notoriety. When Mr. Sheriff Davidson, on the last
evening on which the Convention sat, entered the hall, attended by constables
and other officers, belonging to the civil power only, did the slightest
symptom appear of an inclination to resist? No; Mr. Margarot and myself, who
successively acted as presidents that evening, were indeed forcibly pulled out
of the chair; because, as we were conscious, that we could not be legally
ordered to quit it, a voluntary abdication would have been justly interpreted
as a dereliction of our right. But did we resist, I again repeat? No; Mr.
Davidson's testimony this day, has confirmed my assertion. We dispersed, he
tells you, without tumult or disorder. It was we, then, against whom force was
employed, but who employed none. We suffered injury but offered none.

The introduction of foreign troops into the kingdom, without the sanction of
parliament, is an infringement of the Bill of Rights, and a violation of the
constitution of our country. Doctrines, I know, have been openly avowed by the
minister, justifying the measure as legal and constitutional; but this avowal,
I believe, struck every one who heard him, his own creatures excepted, with
horror and astonishment; nor do I apprehend, that at a future though not
distant period, he will be fond of repeating what in the plenitude and
insolence of power he has lately advanced.

Lord Stanhope, who is a member of that legislature which ought to be the
peculiar guardians of our rights and privileges, and who, I believe, is as
incorrupt a senator as ever this country gave birth to, since, like another
Socrates at Athens, he preserves himself free from the contagion which is every
where raging around him; Lord Stanhope, I say, with his accustomed honest
daring thus expressed himself upon the subject of which I am now speaking
"Armies (said he) have in all ages been the engines of tyranny, and by them the
civil rights and liberties of all nations have been destroyed. The measure is
of itself such a flagrant violation of the constitution, that if the same
arguments are used in support of it in this house which have been used in
another place, I make no difficulty in declaring that the authors and abettors
of such blasphemous doctrines ought not to survive their treason. I feel
(continued he) as little difficulty in declaring that IF THOSE TREASONABLE
DOCTRINES ARE ATTEMPTED TO BE PUT INTO EXECUTION BY THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT,
IT THEN BECOMES THE DUTY OF THE PEOPLE TO RESIST FORCE BY FORCE." If then, this
excellent man could hold, with impunity in the senate himself, and in the
presence of the great officers of state, these bold but constitutional
doctrines, upon what pretext of law, or under what color of justice can you
presume to punish me, who have merely stated hypothetically, what he has
advanced, plainly, openly, unconditionally?

Gentlemen, I cannot but observe one very unfair suspicion which the crown
lawyers have endeavored to infuse into your minds during the course of these
trials* In order to inflame your passions, at the same time that they may
assume to themselves an appearance of lenity, they tell you that the crimes
with which we stand charged approach very nearly to high treason; and an
appeal, not very honorable I think to the appellants, is continually made to
old and obsolete statutes, on which state prosecutions were grounded when
tyranny was at its height, to prove, that had we fallen, like the apostles of
freedom, in the last century, on those 'evil days,' like them too we should
have been the victims of a legal tyranny. This procedure I must consider as
abhorrent, from the cool and sober rules of justice. Suffer not, therefore, I
conjure you, your tempers to be inflamed, to the destruction of an innocent
man, because the public prosecutor, in the rage and phrenzy of loyalty, has
though proper to dig into the dusty rubbish of antiquity, under which the
embres of despotism have long been smothered, and to awaken those sleeping
lions by rattling up a company of old records which have lain for so many ages
by the wall neglected and forgotten See Lord Stafford's Speech in the State
Trials.
.

Gentlemen, another circumstance, upon which much stress has been laid, is that
of a blank appearing among the minutes; and as this blank followed after the
resolution which we have just now been discussing, it has been unfairly
inferred, that it was our intention to fill it up with matter, at a proper and
convenient season, the publication of which would have amounted to high
treason. But, gentlemen, if you will turn to the minutes, you will find that
there is not one blank alone, but many. And this circumstance, when coupled
with the observation of the Solicitor General, must convince you how extremely
dangerous it is to condemn any man upon the evidence of these minutes, which
have been so long in the possession of those who are the officers and
dependents of government. For, as state prosecutions are frequently the
instruments, by which a profligate administration sacrifice the bold and
incorruptible exposers of their measures, so it is always in the power, as, no
doubt, it must be frequently in the inclination of the public prosecutor, to
fill up the blanks with more heavy and additional matter, which being
confounded with the original minutes, may be offered in evidence to a jury, as
a sufficient ground of conviction for high treason.

The difference of process and of the criminal codes of Scotland and England
must, to every thinking mind, be a subject of most serious alarm. In the
southern part of the kingdom, nay, in the capital itself, the seat of the
legislature, and the fountain head of all justice! men are suffered to meet
under the very beard of the Secretary of State, and to pass with impunity
resolutions exactly corresponding in principle, and equally strong in
expression with those, which if passed in Scotland, will send both the mover
and seconder, in company with thieves, felons, and murderers, to toil and
perish on the bleak and inhospitable shores of New-Holland. Is the Tweed then,
which the God of nature has made only to be a geographical separation between
the two countries, by the folly and wickedness of man to be perverted into a
legal, a moral, a political separation? The resolution to which I have just now
alluded was a resolution passed by the London Corresponding Society, and is as
follows; That during the ensuing session of parliament, the general com^^^tee
of this society do meet daily, for the purpose of watching the proceedings of
the parliament and of the administration of the government of this country. And
that upon the first introduction of any bill, or motion inimical to the
liberties of the people, such as, for LANDING FOREIGN TROOPS IN GREAT BRITAIN,
or IRELAND, for repealing the HABEAS CORPUS ACT, for proclaiming MARTIAL LAW;
or for PREVENTING THE PEOPLE FROM MEETING IN SOCIETIES FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
INFORMATION, OR ANY OTHER INNOVATION of a similar nature; that, on any of these
emergencies, the general committee shall issue summonses to the delegates of
each division, and also to the secretaries of the different societies
affiliated and corresponding with this society, forthwith to call a GENERAL
CONVENTION OF THE PEOPLE, to be held at such place, and in such a manner as
shall be specified in the summons, for the purpose of taking such measures into
their consideration.

Resolved -- That the preceding address and resolution be signed by the
chairman, and printed and published. -- J. MARTIN, Chairman. T. HARDY,
Secretary.

Upon these resolutions, though circulated throughout the united kingdoms, no
prosecution has been grounded. Are we not then to infer, either that the
Secretary of State has been criminally negligent of his duty, and that though
he crushes sedition in Scotland, he tolerates it in England; or, for upon no
other principle can he be excused, that the resolutions and the publication of
them is perfectly harmless, and that the code of Scotland which marks them out
as objects of punishment, like that of Draco, is written in blood.

Gentlemen, during my trial a principle has been laid down by the Lord Justice
Clerk, which I deem to be in the highest degree, reprehensible, as it strikes
at the root of that confidence which all men should repose in law, and of that
security which all men have a right to expect from it. The Lord Justice Clerk
declared that the judges had a discretionary power in annexing the punishment
to the particular crime of sedition. Had a judge in England held a similar
doctrine, the judgment seat would have tottered under him. If law be a certain
rule of action, defining the offense and annexing the punishment, the degree
and nature of the punishment should be specified, with equal precision as the
degree and nature of the offense; otherwise we hold our freedom as mere tenants
at the will of a judge, and not as we ought, by the known and explicit
declaration of the laws. Lord Camden, the first law authority in England, has
said, that, DISCRETION IS THE LAW of tyrants; in the best men it is caprice, in
the worst it is every folly, vice, and infirmity to which human nature is
liable.

Gentlemen, let not the word discretion mislead you. Legal discretion is not
the arbitrary discretion of the judge. No; it is, as well defined by Lord Coke,
discernere per legem quid sit justum, "to discover through the medium of the
law that which is just and proper." ^^udges must determine," (says the preamble
to an old statute o^ ^^enty VII.) "not by the crooked co^d or discretion, but
by the golden met-wand of the law." A beautiful expression, and full of
intrinsic wisdom.

"Misera est servitus, (says Lord Coke), ubi ius vagum atque incognitum est:"
"wherever the law is vague and uncertain, the people are in a state of wretched
slavery." And that law is certainly vague and uncertain, which not specifying
the punishment as well as the crime, leaves it to the arbitrary discretion of
the judge.

Gentlemen, my feelings, my exertions, and my state of health have exhausted me.

Lord Henderland. You may sit down Mr. Gerrald, and take a little breath.

Mr. Gerrald. I thank your lordship.

(Mr. Gerrald having rested a few minutes proceeded as follows:)

Gentlemen, I trust that I have now proved to your conviction the general
purity of my intention, of which the object was to carry into execution, a
constitutional reform in a peaceful manner; that however we may differ as men
and citizens upon speculative principles of government, yet the doctrines which
I have advanced are founded upon the great and immutable principles of reason
and of truth; that they are the sentiments of the most revered writers, Lock,
Sydney, Jones -- that even Mr. Pit and the Duke of Richmond formerly professed
to act upon them; that they are perfectly congenial to the spirit of the
Anglo-Saxon government, and not in a great degree differing from the principles
of the old constitution of Scotland, as Dr. Stewart has proved to you; that our
peaceful resolution of obtaining a reform was never violated by our practice,
as the testimony of Sheriff Davidson evinces; for when assailed by the civil
power we repelled not force by force -- that the officers of the law violated
the law in their illegal assault upon our persons; and that even then such was
our desire to preserve the public peace, that we chose rather to suffer than to
act; -- though we could have acted under the shelter of those laws which we are
falsely charged with having a design to subver^

As men whose rights and security are interwoven ^th our own, advert, I beseech
you, to the circumstances of our dispersion. The first magistrate in this city,
attended by a posse of constables, enters the convention hall, when the members
who composed that convention were assembled upon a legal principle, for a
constitutional purpose, and conducting themselves in a calm and peaceful
manner. Without reading the riot act, for which indeed, he could have no
pretext from the object and conduct of the meeting, he forcibly drags the
president from the chair and disperses the convention. At a future day, when a
meeting is advertised to take place, not as the BRITISH CONVENTION, but of THE
FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE, the magistrates of Edinburgh, attended by the town guard
block up the passage to the house which we had hired as a place for our calm
and peaceful discussion, and, though not the slightest appearance of tumult
existed, forcibly prevent the members from assembling.

Gentlemen, if the principle upon which these magistrates acted be a principle
authorized by any human code, I say that its operation and effect must be the
basement of the human species and the extinction of civilized society. It
divests us of the right of exercising our power of reason, and places us in a
situation beneath, the beasts that perish. If the magistrate of any country
makes supposed principles and not actions the object of coercion; if upon his
own loose constructions and speculations of danger he commits outrage, under
pretense of preventing it; if instead of arguing from the consequence to the
principle, he inverts every rule of right reason, and infers the consequence
from what he thinks proper to adjudge the principles the safety and freedom of
human action is at an end. In such case the magistrate takes upon himself to
determine that which is undeterminable; to mark as an object of punishment not
a present and actual, but a future, possible, and contingent consequence; and,
by punishing motives, which have not displayed their qualities by their
effects, to arrogate to his own limited and short-sighted capacity a privilege
which belongs only to Eternal Omniscience.

Feeble, indeed, must be that civil government which depends for support, upon
every trivial occasion, upon the aid of the military arm. But, in the case
alluded to, we had at least one consolation; the soldiery who interposed were
not a foreign but a British soldiery; and I trust, that however the latter may
be, for a time, deluded, they will recollect, upon all great and trying
occasions, that though necessity may have made them soldiers, yet society has
made them citizens, and nature has made them men. But not only are the
principles, which I defended, pure; but even had they been otherwise, the
evidence, I affirm, which has been produced in order to fix them upon me, has
been incompetent to its avowed purpose. Not the slightest evidence has been
afforded, that the convention either published, or caused to be published by
their authority, these serolls of paper attributed to them as their minutes.
They never authorized the publication of any speeches which were made in the
Convention; nor does it appear, by any testimony, that the speehes printed in
the Gazetteer were identically the speeches delivered in the convention. On the
contrary Ross, the shorthand writer, swears that he frequently inserted, from
his own mind, words and sentiments which never fell from the speaker. There is
no proof that the motion attributed to Mr. Sinclair, which is the great ground
for criminating me, ever passed the Convention; and even if it had, an attempt
to identify that motion with the paper produced, should certainly have preceded
it being produced in evidence. Why was this attempt not made? The reason is
obvious, it must, of necessity, have failed. For was it not proved to you, that
all Sinclair's papers which were seized, were thrown into a loose bundle,
unsealed, tossed for a considerable time about the sheriff's office, in a state
in which it was very easy for any person to have inserted other papers not
belonging to Mr. Sinclair, consequently all possibility of proving the identity
of the papers absolutely destroyed.

With respect to the speeches attributed to me, not one witness would identify
upon oath any one single passage which they contain. And even Cockburn, whose
testimony upon that point is the strongest, declares, that he has only a
general loose recollection of what passed; a ground certainly too scanty and
insufficient for the conviction of a man whom the laws of his country presume
to be innocent; and which presumption can never be destroyed but by the
establishment of stronger proof. Stabitur praesumpioni donec probitur in
contrarium: The presumption stands till the contrary is proved. Co. Litt.

But the particular circumstance to which I beg to chain down your attention,
is the assertion of the public prosecutor, that if you were convinced that my
intentions were pure, you were bound in duty to pronounce my acquittal. Yes,
gentlemen, this is the solid rock of my defense; the purity of the intention by
which I was actuated. Could any thing but an ardent love of truth, and a desire
of promoting the happiness of my fellow creatures, have induced me to brave the
present prosecution, and by dispelling the mist of prejudices which darkens
their understandings, promote the happiness even of my prosecutors themselves?
In this glorious, though arduous undertaking, by what possible motives of gain
or ambition could I have been actuated? Examples have not been wanting of men
of whom the world was not worthy, who have fallen victims to an active and
zealous virtue; but their fate will never deter firm and well regulated minds
from the performance of that which they will consider as the most sacred of
duties, the fulfillment of their engagements to their oppressed and insulted
country. These were the sentiments which actuated the conduct of our common
master when he wept over the city. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that stonest
the prophets, and slayest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have
gathered ye even as the hen gathers the chickens under her wing, but ye would
not!

In every relative situation of life, we should do our duty, however hazardous,
and leave the consequences, which must be ultimately beneficial, to the supreme
disposer of all human events.

Gentlemen, when you consider that one great object of the Convention was to
promote a more close and sincere union between England and Scotland, you cannot
reasonably convict, as a disturber of the public peace, any man engaged in so
laudable an undertaking. Yes, it is our pride and our boast that the extinction
of those national prejudices which have too long disturbed and disgraced both
parts of the kingdom, was one great motive of our honest exertions. And,
surely, our time is far better consumed in strengthening the cement of
affection which, as inhabitants of the same island, it is so natural for us to
feel, than in wasting and exhausting ourselves in the wrangles and contentions
of the continent, by which we abandon our local advantages as in Flanders, and
ultimately expose ourselves to become the prey of some foreign or domestic
invader. To atchieve mighty conquests, is the lot of few; because few there
are, who have either ability or opportunity to obtain them. But to cherish and
desseminate the principles of peace and good will toward all men, is certainly
the duty of all, because it lies within the power of all, and must contribute
to the happiness of all. Moderate talents, steady exertion, and good intentions
are fully adequate to this end. This was all to which the members of the
Convention made pretense; and they repose themselves with confidence upon the
judgment which their country may pass upon their conduct, whether the powers
which they displayed, and the means which they adopted, were not well
calculated for its attainment.

The Solicitor General, indeed, during the course of this trial, has
distinguished me by a marked and particular compliment; but it was coupled with
a charge, that, if I am guilty, must render me doubly so; that my efforts were
exerted to disturb the peace of my country: No, gentlemen, whatever portion of
talents God has thought proper to confer upon me has never yet been prostituted
to so imfamous a purpose, and I turn with horror from a compliment to my
understanding, which can only be purchased by the extinction of every generous
sentiment of the heart, and the sacrifice of all things that are sacred among
men.

Gentlemen, when I look forward to the political horizon, the prospect seems
awful and gloomy to a degree, at which the best men must shudder, and the
ablest men must feel themselves incompetent to describe. Every thing is turbid
and portentous. Indeed a blacker cloud never hung over this island. Those who
are versed in the history of their country, in the history of the human race,
must know that rigorous state prosecutions have always preceded the era of
convulsion: and this era, I fear, will be accelerated by the folly and madness
of our rulers. If the people are discontented, the proper mode of quieting
their discontents is, not by instituting rigorous and sanguinary prosecutions,
but by redressing their wrongs, and conciliating their affections. Courts of
justice, indeed, may be called in to the aid of ministerial vengeance; but if
once the purity of their proceedings is suspected, they will cease to be
objects of reverence to the nation; they will degenerate into empty and
expensive pageantry, and become the partial instruments of vexatious
oppression. -- Whatever may become of me; my principles will last for ever.
Individuals may perish; but truth is eternal. The rude blasts of tyranny may
blow from every quarter; but freedom is that hardy plant which will survive the
tempest, and strike an everlasting root into the most unfavourable soil.

Impressed with the justice of these sentiments, dungeons, fetters, exile,
carry no horror to me; for I say, with the immortal Sydney, though I have a
particular love to my country, of which, I hope, that I have given some
testimony; though I think that being exiled from it is a great evil, from which
I would redeem myself with the loss of a great deal of my blood; yet, when that
country of mine, which used to be esteemed a paradise, is now like to be made a
stage of injury; the liberty which we hoped to establish oppressed; the best of
our nation made a prey to the worst; the parliament, court, and army corrupted;
the people enslaved; all things vendible, and no man safe, but by such evil and
infamous means as flattery and bribery; what joy can I have in my own country
in this condition? Is it a pleasure to see all that I love in the world sold
and destroyed? Shall I renounce all my old principles, learn the vile court
arts, and make my peace by bribing some of the crew? Shall their corruptions
and vice be my safety? Ah! no; better is a life among strangers than in my own
country upon such conditions. Whilst I live I will endeavor to preserve my
liberty; or, at least, not consent to the destroying of it. I hope I shall die
in the same principles in which I have lived, and will live no longer than they
can preserve me. I have in my life been guilty of many follies, but as I think
of no meanness. I will not blot and defile that which is past, by endeavoring
to provide for the future. I have ever heard in my mind, that should God cast
me into such a condition as that I cannot save my life, but by doing an
indecent thing, he shows me the time is come when I should resign it; and when
I cannot live in my own country, but by such means as are worse than dying in
it; I think he shows me that I ought to keep myself out of it. See Sydneys
Letters.

Gentlemen, I am in your hands, I feel not the slightest anxiety, if ^ould
promote the cause, I would cheerfully make the sacrifice; for, if I perish on
an occasion like the present, out of my ashes will arise a flame to consume the
tyrants and oppressors of my country.

Moral light is as irresistible by the mind, as physical by the eye. All
attempts to impede its progress are vain. It will roll rapidly along; and as
well may tyrants imagine, that by placing their feet upon the earth they can
stop its diurnal motion, as that they shall be able, by efforts the most
virulent and pertenacious, to extinguish the light of reason and philosophy,
which happily for mankind is every where spreading around us.

Surely the experience of all ages should have taught our rulers, that
prosecutions can never efface principles; and that the thunders of the state
will prove impotent when weighed against patriotism, innocence, and firmness.
Whether, therefore, I shall be permitted to glide gently down the current of
life, in the bosom of my native country, among those kindred spirits whose
approbation constitutes the greatest comfort of my living, or, whether I be
doomed to drag out the remainder of my existence amidst thieves and murderers,
a wandering exile on the bleak and melancholy shores of New-Holland, my MIND,
equal to either fortune, is prepared to meet the destiny that awaits it. Seu me
tranquilla senectus.

"Expectat, seu mors atris circumvolat atris,
"Dives, inops, Romea, seu forsita jussit."
EXVL. To be torn a bleeding member from that country which we love, is indeed,
upon the first view painful in the extreme; but all things cease to be painful,
when we are supported by the consciousness that we have done our duty to our
fellow creatures? and a wise man rising superior to all local prejudices, if
asked for his country will turn his eyes from this dim spot which men call
earth, and will point, like Anaxagoras, to the Heavens. MILTON.

Gentlemen, my cause is in your hand. -- You are Britons -- You are freemen. --
Nothing more therefore is necessary to be said. You have heard the charge, you
have heard the evidence. And you know the punishment which follows upon
conviction. Weigh well, then, whether the charge itself involves any guilt;
whether the evidence produced affixes that charge upon me; and above all,
whether, in case of conviction, the punishment which I am to suffer, is not
more than proportionate to the offense.

Before I take my leave of you this night, perhaps for ever, let me remind you,
that justice is in every situation, and in none more than that of a jury, to be
adminstered in mercy. Upon your strict attention to this grand moral maxim,
depends your own final doom and unalterable allotment, and to those who refuse
to practice it the throne of mercy will be inaccessible and the Savior of the
world will have been born in vain. Rambler.

Lord Justice Clerk.

Gentlemen of the jury, you have heard a great deal, and I will not keep you
much longer, because I consider it as very unnecessary, in speaking to
gentlemen of your found sense and understanding; you have given very particular
attention, and are as able to judge of it as I am. The libel has been found
relevant, after the most deliberate discussion, by counsel at great length; and
it was also considered very fully from the bench: it was found relevant to
infer the pains of law, and is now submitted to you, to try whether the panel
is guilty of the crime libelled, yea or no.

Gentlemen, the crime charged is sedition, and a very heinous crime it is; and
nothing can strike more at the peace and quiet of society, and indeed it tends
to subvert society altogether. The public prosecutor, in justice to the panel,
that he might be prepared for his defense, has charged different facts and
circumstances, from which he infers the crime of sedition, and the libel
concludes, all which, or part thereof, being found proven, he ought to be
punished with the pains of law, which in this case is an arbitrary punishment:
the meaning of this is, that although the public prosecutor libels a variety of
facts and circumstances, yet, if he brings a proof of such facts and
circumstances as you shall be of opinion sufficiently supports the charge of
sedition, you will find the panel guilty, or the libel proven; and, if you
think there is nothing to substantiate the charge, you will find the libel not
proven, or find the panel not guilty.

Gentlemen, the first thing you have to enquire into is, whether you think that
meeting that denominated itself The British Convention of the Delegates of the
People associated to obtain Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments was a
seditious meeting; and if you think it is not a seditious meeting, then, to be
sure, you will acquit the panel, because what is charged against him is, the
part he took in that seditious meeting; but if you think it is a seditious
meeting, then you will enquire whether the panel is accessory art and part or
not.

Gentlemen, as to the first question, how far there is evidence to establish
this convention of delegates to be a seditious meeting it will occur to
yourselves. Gentlemen, that there has been already, no less than two of your
fellow subjects convicted of the crime of sedition, as members of that
convention, and accordingly condemned to transportation, and that there are
other two indicted for the same crime, but did not think proper to stand their
trial, and they accordingly stand fugitated by a judgment of this Court, Mr.
Callander and Mr. Scott; you have, therefore, gentlemen, the verdicts of two
very respectable juries stamping upon this meeting the character of seditious.

Gentlemen, it has been said, and much insisted upon, that it is contrary to
the rights of mankind, in general, not to be allowed to apply to parliament. I
don't say that is a criminal act, if it rested there alone; but, Gentlemen, I
would submit to your own feelings, it is not a matter that rests upon evidence,
but upon your own feelings, as men, as members of society, and as subjects of
this kingdom, whether you feel any grievances that this country labors under,
that should entitle them to make such a cry against the government of the
country: for my own part (and I appeal to your own feelings if it is not a just
observation,) I have always considered this country as the envy of the world at
large, as the happiest kingdom upon face of the earth; and I submit to you,
whether or not as much happiness does not exist in this kingdom as ever did?
Every man is sure of enjoying every thing he has in perfect security: his life
is secure, and his liberty is secure, by the laws of the country, and his
property is also secure; he is absolutely certain that nothing will be taken
from him that he has any right to enjoy.

And I submit it to you, whether or not even if there had been ground for
complaints, it was a proper time to bring forward those complaints; at a time
when we were involved in a war with a ferocious and cruel nation, at present
setting the rest of Europe at defiance, and when the greatest unanimity, among
the subjects of this kingdom, is absolutely necessary to put an end to that
war; I submit to you, whether any good member of society, would prefer his
complaint against the government of the country at such a time. But if you feel
as I feel, that the complaints are groundless, and that the country is living
in a state of tranquillity, secure of their lives and properties against every
attack whatever; I submit to you, whether is that man innocent who calls the
people together, and impresses their minds with ideas hostile to the government
of the country, with ideas of mal-administration on the part of the king, the
parliament, and the administrators of public affairs, to impress their minds
with an idea that all is corrupt, and that a reform is absolutely necessary, by
annual parliaments and universal suffrage, a thing that never can be obtained
by the consent of Parliament; and if you consider a moment, I am very sure that
if the people were to obtain it, they would themselves feel the bad effects of
it before a twelve month was over, and they would be glad to have the old
constitution re-established; and therefore, if persons call such meetings of
the people together, I submit to you, whether that is innocent, when the
consequence is alienating their affections from the king and constitution, and
from the government of the country, exciting them to rise up, and overturn the
government by superior force?

Gentlemen, it is said, that the description of their meetings calling
themselves citizens, dividing themselves into sections, making conventions of
emergency, secret committees, and all the rest of it, are innocent things in
themselves; and I don't think his majesty's Advocate has laid them as a crime
unconnected with any other circumstance; but, gentlemen, the text is always
best understood by the context; you are not to take this paragraph in the
indictment by itself, but from the whole as laid and as proved you are to judge
of the meaning and intention of the parties here; and when you find meetings
established in this country under denominations never before known, as
committees of emergency, of organization, of finance, and all the rest of it;
when you see that assumed at a period when we are in an open declared war with
France, when we ken that is borrowed from the convention of France, and when
you compare it with the whole of their conduct, particularly the resolutions of
that meeting and the speeches, I say you will consider, whether upon a fair
construction of the whole, they were not imitating France in the form of their
government, and that the object of their meeting was, like France, to overturn
the established constitution, and put every thing upon the same footing with
France, where aristocracy is reviled, the king reviled, and indeed where there
is no constitution at all. That, gentlemen, is the great object of your
enquiry; and when you attend to the whole of the resolutions and motions, as
they appear upon the face of the minutes which were recovered out of the hands
of their own secretary, and compare them with the papers found in the
possession of Margarot, Sinclair, and Gerrald, and also, with the parole
evidence that has been given in this case, you will judge whether upon the
whole it does not appear to you, that these people were imitating the French
Convention, and that they meant to follow the spirit of the French, in
establishing their form of government.

Gentlemen, there are a number of seditious resolutions and speeches in this
indictment, and one of them a very capital one, which I think borders as near
upon high treason as any thing I ever saw: "That this convention, considering
the calamitous consequences of any act of the legislature which may tend to
deprive the whole, or any part of the people, of their undoubted right to meet,
either by themselves or by delegation, to discuss any matter relative to their
common interest, whether of a public or a private nature, and holding the same
to be totally inconsistent with the first principles and safety of society, and
also subversive of our known and acknowledged constitutional liberties, do
hereby declare, before God and the world, that we shall follow the wholesome
example of former times, by paying no regard to any act which shall militate
against the constitution of our country; and shall continue to assemble, and
consider of the best means by which we can accomplish a real Representation of
the People and Annual Election, until compelled to desist by superior force."
The language of this resolution is too plain to need any illustration -- it is
absurd to suppose that they meant to carry any thing by strength of arms; for
what could such a small number do against the military force of this country --
twenty one is the number to precede the action; but that is not the number of
people to be engaged in this action, for they were only the delegates of the
people; and it appears that these delegates, when they opened their secret
letters, were to convene their constituents and repair to the place of meeting.
I hope there were not many of them; but if they had been allowed to go on, I
dare say, they would have been found to be the representatives of a great many
more than I could wish for.

Now, Gentlemen, when you consider the whole of this resolution, and the
speeches, and the sealed letter to be given to each delegate, the contents of
which is not to be known, and when the very emergency has happened upon which
they were to meet (for the landing of foreign troops is one of them), is it
possible for you to believe that it was merely a reform in parliament that they
intended? If it was, there was no occasion for any secrecy at all: but on the
other hand, if a rising of the people was intended, then I conceive that a
committee of secrecy, and a convention of emergency is necessary and prudent,
and the idea of a reform in parliament is all nonsense; for if that was their
intention, they would have made their application openly to parliament, and
parliament would have granted or withheld their petition.

Gentlemen, it is very obervable that there is a blank in the minutes; now in
order to supply that, there is a paper recovered from the possession of Charles
Sinclair, "That in case the minister, or any other member of either House of
Parliament, bring forward a motion for leave to bring in a Convention Bill,
such as was passed in Ireland, to prevent the people from meeting according to
their just rights by the Revolution, the same motion shall be notice to the
delegates to meet in convention to assert their rights."

Gentlemen, it is said, that this paper is not authenticated, and to be sure,
if you think it is not you will lay it out of your consideration: but in the
first place, it was found in Mr. Sinclair's chamber, tied up in a handkerchief,
and brought in a chaise along with Mr Gerrald and Mr. Margarot to the
sheriff-clerk's office Mr. Mack generally had the keeping of the papers there;
says he, I don't think I was there when the papers were brought in, but I came
in very soon after; the examinations were going on, and it was put into my
hand, the handkerchief was laid upon the sheriff-clerk's table, the sheriff was
sitting there, and the clerks, the procurator-fiscal and so on. It it possible
to suppose that these persons all men of character, would do that, in order to
convict an innocent man, for which they ought to be hanged, by extracting
evidence and putting false evidence in its place? Mack says, that he locked it
up, and it was under his lock and key till it was opened and inventoried in
presence of Sinclair himself, and other persons. This paper is marked at the
back by Aitcheson, and Aitcheson told you, that he acted as assistant
secretary, so that this paper is endorsed by Aitcheson in character of
secretary to the convention, and afterward found in Sinclair's possession, as
he was the mover I think of the amendments upon Callander's motion. But,
Gentlemen, that is not all, for here are two or three witnesses tell you
precisely that it was debated in the convention, and resolved on, that in
certain cases this convention of emergency were to meet, and one of those cases
is, if any bill should be brought into parliament similar to that which passed
in the parliament of Ireland, and this is confirmed by the evidence of more
than one or two witnesses. Why, Gentlemen, this paper so well authenticated,
found in the possession of Charles Sinclair, brought to the sheriff-clerk's
office, committed to the care of the gentleman who is the usual keeper of the
papers in that office, and kept under his lock and key till they were opened
before Mr. Sinclair himself, I submit to you whether that is not very good
evidence, that this paper (which is of the highest importance, and which
borders upon high treason) is sufficiently authenticated to your satisfaction;
and indeed gentlemen, there is a great deal more than that, because there is
even Mr. Gerrald's first speech, which is at such great length in the
indictment, of which Cockburn swears that he recollects that a number of
paragraphs in it were delivered in the meeting, and he does not pretend to say
that there is any thing materially different in the paper from what he heard in
the meeting; though he will not identify the whole of it, he did not see any
thing remarkably erroneous in it; that is, he could not say it was verbatim the
same, but in point of substance he could not discover any difference. Then,
Gentlemen, there is William Ross, a member of the convention, who writes the
short hand, he swears he took this speech down in shorthand, and from that
published it in the Gazetteer, and the public prosecutor copied it from the
Gazetteer: this is pretty good evidence to show that that speech was delivered
in that meeting. This is the speech, "I rise to congratulate the convention,"
etc. (reads from the indictment.)

Now, gentlemen, in the first place, this is published in the Gazetteer, and
taken by the public prosecutor verbatim from the Gazetteer, and is confirmed by
the parole evidence, as also by the minutes of the convention, where you will
find the substance of it; and I submit to you whether there is not sufficient
matter to establish this meeting to be a seditious meeting; and if you are
satisfied that it is a seditious meeting, the next question is, whether this
panel is guilty, actor, or art and part in the proceedings of such meeting.

Gentlemen, the concluding of the libel is, that if he is found guilty, actor,
or art and part of the crimes charged, that is sufficient to inse^^ the pains
of law; and the law is, that if any unlawful act is committed where a number
are concerned, one person may be more active in the commission of the fact than
others, but in the eye of the law they are all considered as guilty, art and
part in the crime charged, and all liable to suffer the pains of law.

Gentlemen, I have anticipated a good deal of the evidence upon this head
already. When you see Mr. Gerrald taking a very active, part and making
speeches, such as you have heard to day, I look upon him as a very dangerous
member of society, for I dare say he has eloquence enough to persuade the
people to rise in arms.

Mr. Gerrald. Oh my lord! -- My lord, this is a very improper way of addressing
a jury, it is descending to personal abuse. God forbid that my eloquence should
be ever made use of for such a purpose.

Lord Justice Clerk. Mr. Gerrald, I don't say that you did so, but that you had
abilities to do it.

Gentlemen, he has no relation, nor the least property in the country, but he
comes here to disturb the peace of the country, as a delegate from a society in
England to raise sedition in this country: I say, he appears to me, to be much
more criminal than Muir, or Palmer, or Skirving, because they were all natives
of this country.

Gentlemen, if you are satisfied that this meeting is a seditious meeting, I
don't see how it is possible to avoid the consequence of finding this panel,
guilty art and part of the crime charged: but, Gentlemen, it is not my verdict
that is to be returned, you will return such a verdict as your own consciences
will direct.

Friday, March 14, 1794. -- Eleven o'clock.

The Court having met pursuant to adjournment, and the names of the jury having
been called over, they brought in the following

VERDICT.
EDINBURGH, March 14, 1794.
The above assize having been enclosed, made choice of the said William Forbes
to be their Chancellor, and the said Peter Hill to be their Clerk, and having
considered the criminal libel, raised and pursued at the instance of his
Majesty's Advocate for his Majesty's interest, against Joseph Gerrald panel,
the interlocutor of relevancy pronounced thereupon by the court, and the
evidence adduced in proof of the libel, they all in one voice find the panel
Joseph Gerrald GUILTY of the crimes libelled; in witness whereof, their said
chancellor and clerk have subscribed these presents, in their names, and by
their appointment, place and date as above.

Signed WILLIAM FORBES, Chancellor. PETER HILL, Clerk.

Lord Justice Clerk. Gentlemen, I am perfectly satisfied that you have given
that attention to this case which it deserved; and now you are at liberty to go
about your business.

Mr. Gerrald, now is your time to speak, if you have any thing to say.

Mr. Gillies. My lords, I have an objection to state to this verdict. I need
scarcely say that I mean no reflection upon the gentlemen of the jury who have
delivered in the verdict, and who, I have no doubt meant to discharge their
duty conscientiously, to the best of their knowledge. I state this objection
with the more confidence, that it is not so much an objection to the words or
to the form, as to the substance of the verdict. It is essentially necessary by
the laws of this, and every other country, that the jury should consider the
whole evidence before them; and so much is this the case, that even if they do
consider it, yet if the verdict does not expressly bear that they did so, your
lordship knows better than I do that such a verdict is void. This verdict bears
that the jury have considered the criminal libel raised and pursued by his
majesty's Advocate, for his majesty's interest, against Joseph Gerrald, panel,
the interlocutor of relevancy pronounced thereupon by the Court, and the
evidence adduced in proof of the libel.

My lord, they ought also to have considered the defense which was stated, and
the evidence adduced or referred to, on the part of the panel; and they not
only ought to have considered these in fact, but their verdict ought to have
stated, that they did consider this evidence, and that they did take into
consideration this defense.

But, my lords, this is not all. In a common case I know well, that, if a
verdict is returned to your lordships, stating that the jury have considered
the evidence before them, no proof can be received that they have not
considered that evidence. It must be taken for granted that the jury have
considered it, as the verdict states that they have done so. The evidence of
the verdict itself cannot in the common case be re-argued, because I cannot be
permitted to lead a proof of what passed among the jury after they were
enclosed. No such proof can be received, in opposition to what the verdict
itself bears. But what is the case here? There was here a most voluminous body
of written evidence laid upon this table: these writings, it was admitted by
the candor of the public prosecutor, might, and I will be bold to say, did
contain much evidence in favor of the unfortunate gentleman at your lordships
bar. This written evidence consisted of several hundred pages, which could not
have been read in less than six or seven hours. I must say therefore, in point
of fact, that the jury neither did, nor could consider the great body of
written evidence that was laid before them. If I saw man in this room last
night, and if I see him here again this morning, I cannot believe that he has
been at Botany Bay in the interim; in the same manner, if a jury enclose for
twenty minutes, and afterward return and say they have considered the body of
written evidence, which it must have taken several hours to consider, I cannot
believe them: we know that the fact must be otherwise; and the proof which I
offer is complete, that the jury were only enclosed for twenty minutes, a space
of time in which it was not possible for them to have read the evidence which
was laid before them, and which it was their duty to consider. It was the more
necessary for the jury to have considered this body of written evidence,
because the panel did not take the advantage of a counsel to state his
defense; and, however great his talents may be, he is not, he cannot be
possessed of that legal knowledge and of those professional habits necessary to
enable any man to comment upon evidence. It was still the more necessary for
them to consider this written evidence, as the public prosecutor admitted
before them, that it might contain a great deal of exculpatory proof, upon
considering which, I am entitled to conclude, that the jury would either have
found this gentleman not guilty, or have returned a special verdict, finding
part of the crime libelled on proved, and part not proved. I need not enlarge
upon what I have now stated. The jury were bound by every principle of justice,
by every rule of law to consider this evidence; and I offer to prove, that they
did not consider it, that they were enclosed only twenty minutes, a space of
time in which it was impossible for any human being to consider it.

Mr. Solicitor General. My lords, I shall trouble you with a very few words in
answer to the objections stated by my brother. The first is, that the verdict
does not specially bear that the jury had considered the evidence on the part
of the panel. It is a pretty good answer to that, that there was no evidence
adduced on the part of the panel; the only evidence that was adduced, was on
the part of the prosecutor, upon which evidence the panel was willing his
defense should rest. The next objection is, that the verdict bears that they
have considered the evidence adduced in proof of the libel, when it was
impossible they could have done so, from the time that they were enclosed. My
lord, it was perfectly unnecessary that they should consider every word of this
voluminous body of evidence. The evidence which I founded upon on the part of
the prosecution could be considered in five minutes, as well as in five years.
And as to the panel, I do not remember that he founded upon any one part of
it; and if he did, I am sure the jury had a perfect opportunity of
consideration.

Mr. Clerk. My lords, I shall trouble your lordships with but few words, and
before I begin, I must take the liberty of making the same profession that Mr.
Gillies did, that I have no doubt but this jury meant to discharge their duty
most conscientiously and most faithfully; but a jury of the most honest as well
as faithful men may be mistaken in the discharge of that duty.

My lords, I must in the first place speak with respect to what Mr. Solicitor
General said, that there was no evidence adduced on the part of the panel. It
is true there was not; but he made a defense, and a very long and able defense
it was, and there is nothing in that verdict which shows that the jury have
taken that evidence into consideration.

With regard to the next point, it is very true that the most material parts of
that evidence might have been comprehended in a very small compass; but how was
this matter to be determined? It could only be determined by reading over the
whole of the evidence; and the more so, because the greater part of that
evidence was incompetent to be produced, and ought not to have been produced,
inasmuch as they referred to a period long before the panel had any connection
with the convention. My lords, the public prosecutor himself said it might
comprehend a great deal of exculpatory matter -- after that concession was it
not their duty to read through that evidence in order to discover that
exculpatory matter? My lords it is said that he did not found upon these
papers: it is true he did not; but he made a defense of three hours and a half,
in which he exhausted himself upon other subjects, leaving it to the jury,
trusting that they would supply the defects of his evidence, and that they
would consider the written evidence lying before them.

Lord Justice Clerk. What do your lordships say to this?

Lord Henderland. My lord, the jury in returning their verdict were not bound
to say any thing farther than that upon considering the evidence they found so
and so. With respect to the pannel's defense, he was fully heard, and it is
impossible to suppose it was not considered. With respect to the evidence that
was lying upon the table, they have formed an opinion, a constitutional
opinion, which they were entitled to form, and we are bound to presume that it
was partly formed upon that evidence.

Lord Eskgrove. My lord, I think, that with respect to this verdict, the jury
have returned a very proper verdict; for my lord, it is neither necessary nor
customary to say, that they considered the arguments used, either on one side
or the other -- if they had said that they had considered what the panel had
said at the bar they must also have stated that they had considered what his
majesty's Solicitor General had stated in support of the charge. They are
supposed to have considered both, but it is not customary to state more than
they have here stated; you must believe that the jury considered every thing
proved and every thing stated on both sides. As to what time they took I know
not, nor is it my duty to enquire; they would take as much time as they thought
proper; they have declared that they did so; and I am of opinion that there is
no relevancy in the objection.

Lord Swinton. My lord, the jury have stated in this verdict, that they
considered all that was laid before them, the libel, the interlocutor of
relevancy, and the evidence. It is not usual for them to say that they have
considered the arguments. As to the time that they took to consider we have no
right to enquire: they could look at the material parts of the evidence in a
very few minutes; and whether they looked at it or not we have no business to
enquire, if it was on their memory it was sufficient. I am convinced that they
have acted honestly and faithfully, as they were bound by their religion and
their oath to do.

Lord Dunsinnan. My lord, an intelligent and respectable jury have, upon their
great oath, returned a verdict bearing to proceed upon the evidence, and the
only evidence that was laid before them, which was the evidence in support of
the prosecution: every body present knows that there was none offered on the
part of the panel, and they could not consider evidence which was not laid
before them. As to what fell from the panel, they have no doubt considered it;
and they have returned a verdict which appears to me a very proper one.

Lord Abercrombie. I am of the same opinion.

Lord Justice Clerk. My lords, I should have been very much surprised if this
panel should be acquitted upon a blunder in a verdict; but the verdict appears
to me to be most unexceptionable, and the objection is founded in a
misapprehension of the case altogether: the panel and his counsel declared
they had not any proof; if they had any proof by parole evidence, it was their
duty to have brought it forward, and if they had meant to have founded upon the
written evidence on the table, they ought to have pointed out what parts of
that evidence they meant to found upon; and therefore you must consider that he
had no evidence to bring in exculpation, and all that the jury had to consider,
was the evidence on the part of the prosecution. The public prosecutor libels
upon a bundle of papers, and because two or three hundred pages of writing are
produced and all, ten lines of that is necessary to found upon in support of
the charge, can it be necessary that the jury should go through it all? In
cases of forgery it may be necessary to produce very long writings, and perhaps
only two or three lines of it may be founded upon for the support of the
charge; but can it be supposed that it is necessary for the jury to read over
the whole of it? The thing is too gross to be listened to by any court
whatever. The jury considered all that it was necessary for them to consider;
they considered the libel, the interlocutor of relevancy, and the proof on the
part of the prosecutor. Then they say there was a long defense, and they should
have stated that they had considered that, -- My lords, the jury did their duty
in not considering that defense: it was a defense against the relevancy of the
indictment, and the first two hours of this speech went to show that all that
he had done was innocent. But, my lords, was it not offered to the Court in a
very long pleading and found relevant? I apprehend the jury have done their
duty properly: they have a power to be sure, if they think proper, even after
the libel is found relevant, they may acquit, but the duty of a jury and of a
judge are distinct; it is the business of the Court to determine the law as to
the relevancy of the libel, and of the jury to judge of the fact; and as it was
found relevant by the Court, the jury had no more to do but to consider the
evidence, and in my opinion, they have returned a very proper verdict, finding
the panel guilty.

Mr. Gerrald, if you have any thing to say, now is the time.

Mr. Gerrald. My lord, I have very little to say. I am as little hurt, as I am
surprised at the verdict returned, inasmuch as I find that the public
prosecutor himself, in the House of Commons, anticipated the fate which I was
to meet; but my lord, I trust that a moral and enlightened world, collectively,
will do justice to the purity of the motives which have actuated my conduct;
and I glory in being the advocate of a cause, (...) which is complicated truth,
justice and freedom, which I know must and will ultimately triumph.

Lord Justice Clerk. Your lordships will now proceed to give your opinions upon
the punishment which you think in this case ought to be inflicted.

Lord Henderland. My lord, the panel at the bar is found guilty of the crime
libelled, which is sedition. And my lord, after the very able argument and
sound constitutional law which you heard from the Solicitor General, it would
be highly improper in me, as it would be irksome to your lordships that I
should enlarge upon the nature of this charge.

My lord, we are to consider of the punishment due to that crime, of which we
have had so many miserable examples before us, that I can propose nothing else
but this, that the prisoner shall be recommitted to prison, and there to remain
till an opportunity shall offer for carrying the sentence that I propose shall
be pronounced against him of banish^^nt by transportation, for the space of
fourteen years, into execution.

My lord, it appears to me, that by no means an adequate punishment can be
inflicted for this offense; and even if this has the appearance of severity,
which I cannot think it has, it is the only judgment that could be pronounced
in such a case, to secure the safety of this country from the commission of
such crimes. I am convinced that the people of this country, who are an
intelligent, an acute, and a sensible people, however much they may be led away
by seditions persons, when they come to res^^^t coolly, dispassionately, and
fairly, upon the nature of this crime, upon the danger that arises from the
commission of it, and upon the security and the safety they enjoy, by the
exercise of that discretionary power, which is vested in this Court by law,
will be of opinion that the judgment we pronounce this day is a just and a
proper one.

Lord Eskgrove. My lord, I am extremely happy, that this gentleman has had a
full and a fair trial, and that he has acted with the propriety of calling in
the assistance of able counsel, who have done hohour to themselves, and justice
to their client; and my lord, I understand (for my state of health did not
permit me to remain in Court the whole of the time) that the gentleman himself
is a man of great abilities, and that he was indulged by the Court, in stating
every thing that he wished to state. My lord, I apprehend, that after the
arguments we have heard, there can be no doubt that this Court, by the law of
this country, whatever it may be in other countries, are authorized to inflict
the punishment of banishment by transportation, and that this is the only
proper punishment that can be inflicted for the crime here charged, to prevent
others from committing the same crime, and to keep peace and tranquillity within
this part of the kingdom. And, my lord, in consequence of what your lordships
have uniformly pronounced upon cases of this kind (which I am heartily sorry
there has been occasion for). I cannot see any thing in this case that could
authorize me to deviate from the same mode of punishment that your lordships
have inflicted in the other cases.

My lord, as to this verdict of the jury, by which he is found guilty, taking
under consideration all the circumstances, I am of the same opinion that has
been given by my honorable brethren.

Lord Swinton. My lord, in considering this crime about which your lordships
have heard so much, the more I consider, and the more I turn my mind to it, the
more I am convinced that this Court did right originally in imposing the
sentence that they did impose. My lord, in considering this case, and comparing
the punishment with the crime, I hardly know what punishment is adequate to it.
It was well said by one of the ablest and greatest men that ever lived, that
sedition was like Pandora's box, it contains every evil, it contains, every
vice. My lord, it is said, that he is to be sent among pickpockets, thieves and
robbers, but my lord, this crime is not to be compared with theirs, it
comprehends every sort of crime, murder, robbery, rape, every thing that is
criminal. I think, my lord, the punishment has been proposed is the mildest
that can be inflicted, and I hope will be sufficient to deter others from
committing the same crime.

Lord Dunsinnan. My lord, the crime of which this unhappy man now stands
convicted, is a crime for which, within a few months, two persons have been
tried at that bar. who have been convicted, and upon those convictions, the
court have pronounced the judgment of the law. My lord it would give me great
pleasure if there were any circumstances in the case of this panel that could
distinguish it favorably from those upon which we have had occasion to
pronounce judgment before; but the circumstances of this case tend rather to
aggravate it. My lord, he is one of those persons who came into this country,
for the purpose of exciting civil discord, by inflaming the minds of the
people. We have had an opportunity of seeing that he possesses talents, which
render him exceedingly capable of mischief; the harangue which we heard last
night though addressed to the jury, was I believe rather intended for another
part of this court; we saw that his political principles are extremely
dangerous, and my lord, if there is any other country, which does not inflict
such a punishment for such a crime, I am happy that I live in such a country as
this; and if I were to propose any difference of punishment, it would be rather
to increase than diminish it. I am of opinion, doubtless, that the same
punishment should be inflicted in this case as in the former.

Lord Abercrombie. My lord, a legal objection was stated to the punishment now
proposed; that objection was argued with uncommon ability, by the learned
counsel for the panel, and your lordships gave your judgment upon it. But, my
lords, that legal objecti^^ was grounded upon this, that the punishment was too
severe for the offense of which he stands convicted by the unanimous voice of
his country.

My lords, it has been said, within these walls, that his intentions all along
were innocent, that they were perfectly pure and honorable; and that had the
same crime been committed in England, it would either have passed with
impurity, or with a very small punishment as imprisonment of pillory. My lord,
upon that I shall say a very few words. With respect to the pannel's motives, I
shall for a meant suppose that his intentions were pure and perfectly innocent;
but even considering the case in that view, I must give it as my opinion,
sitting here as a judge* that it would afford no motive for a mitigation of
punishment. My lord, we all know it is a fact, undoubtedly undeniable that a
mistaken principle, either in religion or in politics, has often led the way
with the best of intentions, to commit crimes of the deepest atrocity. My lord,
the history of this country affords many instances and many examples of this
kind; for example, in the case of the powder plot many of the conspirators were
men of character, Sir Everard Digby was one of the most accomplished, one of
the most virtuous men in England, and my lord he was sentenced to die as a
traitor for the part he took in that plot; and on the eve of his execution he
wrote a letter to his wife, in which he expresses himself in those precise
terms: Now for my intention, let me tell you that if I had thought there had
been the least in the plot, I would not have been of it for all the world; and
no other cause drew me to hazard my fortune and life bat zeal to God's religion.

My lord, this letter, written at that fatal period, by a man who was beloved
by every person in Europe, leaves no room to doubt of the sincerity of this
confession. Then my lords, as to this man, who lives at the distance of two
centuries from the commission of that crime, will any person who now hears me
say that the innocence of his intention or the purity of his motives ought to
be urged as a reason against executing that sentence?

My lord, I shall just take the liberty of stating, though I am sorry to give
any opinion upon such a point, upon the most cool and deliberate observations,
were I called to give my opinion upon the point, I would say, that if this
conspiracy, in which the unhappy man at the bar was an active leader, had been
carried into effect; if that conspiracy had been followed with entire success,
there is not a corner of this kingdom in which a degree of misery and
wretchedness must not have followed.

My lord, we have the example of our own times also; I need not remind your
lordships of 1745 and 1715. when many men, who had acted with the best
intention, died the death of traitors.

My lord, I say although the panel could have established by the clearest and
the most satisfactory evidence, that his intentions were, all along perfectly
innocent, and his motives perfectly pure, it would have afforded no ground
whatever for mitigation of punishment; but I am sorry to say that I can
discover no proof of such innocence of intention. My lord, we in this world can
only judge of the intentions of men from their actions; and viewing the actions
of this panel, no man of the least observation can lay his hand upon his heart
and say, that the evidence affords the smallest proof of such purity of motive.

My lord, with regard to the other point, it is our province and our duty to
judge of this and every other case by the law of our country; we have nothing
to do with the law of any other country, and I cannot think that the law of
England would suffer an offense of this magnitude either to pass with impunity,
or be punished with a slighter punishment; and I heartily concur with the rest
of your lordships in the punishment that your lordships have proposed.

Lord Justice Clerk. My lords, in comparing this case with the others I cannot
find any thing that can possibly make it less criminal. My lord, transportation
is, no doubt, a very severe punishment; we consider it as the highest arbitrary
punishment that the laws of this country can inflict; but I think it is no more
than adequate to the offense which has been proved against this panel, and of
which he has been convicted by the verdict of a very respectable jury. My
lords, I feel for the distresses of convicts as much as any man who hears me:
but, my lords, the happiness of the innocent part of mankind requires of us to
punish the guilty and protect the innocent; and we cannot give that protection
to the innocent part of society unless we inflict adequate punishments upon
crimes committed against society.

My lords, in all these cases, I was very sensible that transportation was a
great punishment; but, after considering all the different punishments that the
laws of this country can inflict, I did not see any one punishment we could
inflict which could answer the purpose of checking this evil, unless it was by
inflicting the punishment of transportation alone; any other punishment would
have been a very imperfect one. Simple banishment from this country is not at
all proper; long imprisonment is a thing not known in this country, and very
hurtful to the country as well, because we know a seditious person in prison
may do a great deal of harm. I cannot have the least hesitation in thinking
that the punishment of transportation for fourteen years is the least that we
can inflict in this case.

My lords, we have heard a great deal of the innocence of his intentions; but
it was justly observed by my brother who spoke immediately before me, that
taking his own account of the matter to be just, supposing that he has acted
from principle, and that his motives are pure, I do say that he becomes a more
dangerous member of society than if his conduct was really criminal, and acting
from criminal motives. A man acting from criminal motives is not so dangerous a
member of society as a man who thinks he is acting from principle; for when a
man is so misguided in his principles he overturn^ society and government
itself. I say solus populi suprema lex, and it becomes us, let his intention be
as pure as they possibly can be, to remove that man from society, and put it
out of his power to disseminate these dangerous principles. I don't know
whether his principles are so pure as he professed or not, but if they are, I
think it justifies this punishment just as much as if he had acted from the
worst of motives, and therefore any other punishment would be insufficient.

The Clerk of the Court then read the following SENTENCE:
The Lord Justice Clerk and lords Commissioners of Justiciary having considered
the foregoing verdict, whereby the assize all in one voice find the panel
GUILTY of the crimes libelled: the said lords, in respect to the said verdict,
in terms of an act passed in the 25th year of his present majesty, entitled, An
Act for the more effectual transportation of felons and other offenders, in
that part of Great Britain called Scotland, ordain and adjudge that the said
Joseph Gerrald be transported beyond seas to such a place as his majesty with
advice of his privy council shall declare and appoint, and that for the space
of Fourteen Years from this date, with certification to him if after being so
transported he shall return to and be found at large within any part of Great
Britain, during the said fourteen Years, without some lawful cause, and be
thereby lawfully convicted, he shall suffer death, as in cases of felony,
without benefit of clergy, by the law of England: and ordains the said Joseph
Gerrald to be carried back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, therein to be detained
till he is delivered over for being so transported; for which this shall be, to
all concerned, a sufficient warrant.

(Signed) ROBERT M'QUEEN.

LIST OF EXCULPATORY WITNESSES.
Right Hon. Robert M'Queen, Lord Justice Clerk. Sir Philip Ainslie, Bart. Miss
Charlotte Ainslie, daughter to Sir Philip. Mrs. Watson, alias Rochead, widow of
-- Rochead, Esquire of Inverleith. Mrs. Christian Dundas, sister to the Secretary
of State. Miss Dundas, niece to do. Charles Hay, Esquire Advocate. -- Davidson,
Clerk to Charles Hay, Esquire
Witnesses to prove the charge in the declinature against Lord Justice Clerk.
Dr. Yule. George Sinclair, son to the late Robert Mansou Sinclair, of Bidge
End.
To disprove the papers alleged to have been taken from Charles Sinclair; and
to prove that the Messenger, Lion. had refused to show the warrant, although
Sinclair had frequently desired it, alleging he had orders from the Sheriff
and Procurator Fiscal, not to show it.

John Pringle, Esquire late Sheriff of the County of Edinburg. Harry Davidson, Esquire
Sheriff-substitute.
To prove that they had delivered a paper to Gerrald, out of Charles Sinclair's
papers, which be (Gerrald) claimed as his own, prior to Charles Sinclair's
extra-judicial examination.

George Ross, Clerk, Gazetteer-Office.

To prove that Gerrald was a member of the same Section with himself, and never
once attended a meeting of such Section.

APPENDIX
No. I.
THE case of Bailie was quoted on the same day, by the Lord Advocate in the
House of Commons, and the Solicitor General, in the Court of Justiciary. The
sentence of the privy council was appealed to as decisive, but the case itself
was brought forward by surprise, and has never been fairly stated to the
public. Bailie had informed the Duke of Hamilton by letter, that the Duke of
Queensberry and the Marquis of Annandale (the former Secretary of State, and
the latter President of the Council) had tampered with him privately, to induce
him, by promises of preferment, to accuse the Duke of Hamilton and other
noblemen, of a correspondence with the French Court, and of a conspiracy to
establish the Pretender on the Throne. The Duke of Hamilton communicated the
letter to the Justice Clerk, by whom it was divulged to the privy council, and
on the complaint of the Duke of Queensberry and Marquis of Annandale, Bailie
was convicted for defamation and leasing-making. The sentence of the
privy council, as extracted from its records, is in the following terms:

Parties and their advocates being heard at the bar and removed, the lords of
his majesty's privy council have repelled, and hereby repel the dilators
proponed by the defenders procurators as said is, and have found and hereby
find the within libel relevant to infer an arbitrary punishment, and proven by
the defender's judicial acknowledgment at the bar, that the two letters
libelled on were all his hand-writt and subseryved by him, and therefore have
declared and hereby declare the said David Bailie to he infamous; and have
banished and and hereby banish him forth of the kingdom for-ever; and have also
appointed and hereby appoint and ordain the said David Bailie to be transported
to the West Indies, and to be in prison ay and while he be transported, and
have appointed and ordained and hereby appoint and ordain the said David
Bailie, before he be transported, to be set on the pillory at the Trone, and
there to stand from eleven to twelve o'clock of the forenoon, and that upon
such a day and in such a manner as the said lords of her majesty's
privy council shall think fit; and the said David Bailie being called in did
hear the sentence publicly intimated to him accordingly.

To those acquainted with the history of the period, it will appear extremely
probable, that Bailie was sacrificed to the political friendship of two
powerful families. Queensberry had been baffled and defeated in the preceding
parliament, where he presided as Commissioner, and in which the act of
settlement was ignominiously rejected. To remove and discredit the heads of the
country party, he had actually recourse to a fictitious plot, and employed
Fraser of Beaufort, afterward Lord Lovat, to accuse them of a correspondence
with the Court of St. Germains. (Macpherson's Hist. Vol, ii. p. 284.) Whether
we suppose that Bailie had been tampered with for the same purpose, or with
Lockhart (Memoirs p. 76.) that he was employed by his kinsman Bailie of
Jerviswood to counteract and discredit the Duke of Queensberry's plots, this at
least is certain, that his sentence was carried in council by Queensberry's
party, in opposition to the Marquis of Tweedale's, and that the whole was a
political contest and decision too infamous to constitute a precedent in a
court of justice. See Lockhart.

But their sentence was never carried into complete execution. Lord
Fountainhall, who reports the case, observes, David conceiving himself injured;
for if he had concealed it, then he might have been overtaken for misprision
and not revealing; and now, having discovered it, he is condemned as a defamer
and calumniator, which makes his case hard; he resolved to apply to the
parliament for reviewing and reconsidering the council's sentence as
iniquitous. And, finding, that by the second act of parliament, 2795, citations
during the recess and intervals of parliament are to be issued out by a warrant
from the lords of session, he had prepared a bill to be given in to the lords,
for ordering a reduction to be raised, under their signet, of the council's
sentence, for citing the Duke of Queensberry, etc. to appear before the
parliament, when it shall meet; but when his lawyers came to consider the
clause, they thought it imported a previous cognition and trial before the
summons could be granted, by which the lords were summarily to hear and
cognosce if there was ground for issuing out the summons demanded; and in
regard the session was now rising, and there was no time for taking such a
previous cognition, therefore the giving in of the bill was forborne.
Fountainhall, Vol. ii. p. 228.

The appeal, as Fountainhall afterward observes, was then relinquished, as it
would not stop the execution of the sentence. Whether it was afterward lodged
is uncertain; but in the succeeding parliament Queensberry, when dismissed from
office, joined his strength with the country party, on the express condition
that no enquiry should be made into the pretended Scotch plot. (Macpherson,
304.) To liberate Baillie, who, according to Lockhart, had undergone the
pillory, an act was passed on his petition to parliament, suppressing any
notice of his offense, or his sentence, but ordaining him to be released from
prison on procuring bail for 1000 merks Scotts, to appear, when called, in the
High Court of Parliament. Unprinted Acts of Parl. 1704. The execution of the
sentence was therefore suspended, and he was released in consequence of a
compromise with those who pronounced or obtained the sentence, and who were
conscious that its excessive severity, not to say its illegality, would not
bear the test of a parliamentary examination. He for whose liberation
parliament thus interposed by statute, must have either been reputed innocent,
or the victim of a sentence that exceeded the legal measure of punishment.

The act itself is as follows:

21 July, 1704.
Her majesty's High Court and the Estates of Parliament having heard the
petition of David Bailie, prisoner in the Castle of Stirling, humbly shows
unto them, That whereas the petitioner has been a long time in prison in the
Castle of Stirling and other places, and that it is extremely prejudicial to
his health to continue any longer in prison, he being reduced to that weakness
and ill state of health, that he is scarce able to walk: and therefore humbly
praying, that his grace and the estates of parliament would ordain him to be
set at liberty, he always enacting himself to appear when called, as the said
petition bears; which being considered by her majesty's court and the estates
foresaid, they, by their interlocutor thereon ordained the petitioner to be set
at liberty, he finding caution, when called to appear before the parliament. In
the terms of which interlocutor, and conform to the 6th act of the 9th session
of King William's parliament, William Lord Forrester did before extracting
hereof become bound as cautioner and surety for the said David Bailie,
petitioner that he should, when called, appear before the said High Court of
Parliament, and that under the penalty of 1000 merks Scots money. In respect
whereof her majesty's High Commissioner and the said Estates do ordain him, the
said David Bailie, to be set at liberty in manner foresaid.

No. II. Joseph Gerrald's Prayer, on the forcibly breaking up of the Convention
in Scotland.
O THOU Governor of the universe! we rejoice that all times, and in all
circumstances, we have liberty to approach THY throne; and that we are assured
that no sacrifice is more acceptable to Thee, than that which is made for the
relief of the oppressed. In this moment of trial and persecution, we pray that
thou would be our defender, our counselor, and our guide. O be thou a
pillar of fire to us, as thou wast to our fathers of old, to enlighten and
direct us; and to our enemies a pillar of cloud, of darkness, and confusion.

Thou art thyself the great patron of liberty. Thy service is perfect freedom.
Prosper, we beseech thee, every endeavor which we make to promote thy cause;
for we consider the cause of truth, or every cause which tends to promote the
happiness of thy creatures, as thy cause.

O thou merciful Father of mankind, enable us, for thy name's sake, to endure
persecution with fortitude; and may we believe that all trials and tribulations
of life which we endure, shall work together for good to them that love Thee;
and grant, that the greater the evil, and the longer it may be continued, the
greater good in thy holy and adorable providence, may be produced therefrom --
And this we beg, not for own merits, but through the merits of him who is
hereafter to judge the world in righteousness and mercy.

THE END.
OMNE SOLUM FORTI PATRIA.



JOSEPH GERRALD.

Delegate to the British Convention.


