FABULOUS HISTORIES, DESIGNED FOR THE Amusement and Instruction OF YOUNG
PERSONS.

BY MRS. TRIMMER.

PHILADELPHIA PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM GIBBONS. 1794.

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS SOPHIA.
Madam,
I FEEL inexpressible satisfaction in being allowed to present to a PRINCESS of
your distinguished humanity and sweetness of disposition, this little Work: not
merely on account of the honor it reflects on myself, (of which I am very
sensible,) but from the persuasion that your patronage will give weight to the
Lessons I now attempt to teach; and your example enforce the practice of them.

I do not mean to flatter you, Madam, nor would I on any account suggest to
your mind, an idea unsuitable to your tender years, therefore give me leave to
add, that you must consider yourself as indebted for this good disposition, in
the first place to Divine Providence, and in the next, to the excellent
education which it is your happiness to receive.

If you continue to avail yourself of these advantages you will be a blessing
to your Royal Parents, and an ornament to your country; and from your elevated
station, will be enabled to do much good in the world, by exciting the
emulation of others, of inferior ranks, to imitate your virtues.

That these virtues may increase with your growing years, and that the
aniversary of THIS DAY may, to the end of life, afford you a comfortable
retrospect on the time that has passed, is the fervent wish of,

MADAM, Your Royal Highness's Most obliged, and Most obedient Servant, SARAH
TRIMMER.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT certainly comes within the compass of Christian Benevolence, to show
compassion to the Animal Creation; and a good mind naturally inclines to do so.
But as through an erroneous education, or bad example, many children contract
habits of tormenting inferior creatures, before they are conscious of giving
them pain; or fall into the contrary fault of immoderate tenderness to them; it
is hoped that an attempt to point out the line of conduct, which ought to
regulate the actions of human beings, toward those, over whom the SUPREME
GOVERNOR has given them dominion, will not be thought a useless undertaking:
and that the mode of conveying instruction on this subject, which the author of
the following sheets has adopted will engage the attention of young minds, and
prove instrumental to the happiness of many an innocent animal.

INTRODUCTION.
MANY young Readers doubtless remember to have met with a Book, which gives an
account of a little boy named Henry, and his sister Charlotte, who were
indulged by their Mamma, with walking in the fields and gardens, where she
taught them to take particular notice of every object that presented itself to
their view. The consequence of this was, that they contracted a great fondness
for animals and used to express a wish, that their Birds, Cats, Dogs, etc.
could talk, that they might hold conversation with them. Their mamma, therefore
to amuse them composed the following Fabulous Histories; in which the
sentiments and affections of a good Father and Mother, and a Family of
Children, are supposed to be possessed by a nest of Redbreasts; and others of
the feathered race are, by the force of imagination, endued with the same
faculties: but, before Henry and Charlotte began to read these Histories they
were taught to consider them, not as containing the real conversation of Birds.
(for that it is impossible we should ever understand,) but as a series of
FABLES, intended to convey moral instruction applicable to themselves, at the
same time that they excite compassion and tenderness for those interesting and
delightful creatures, on which such wanton cruelties are frequently inflicted,
and recommend universal Benevolence.

Having given this account of the origin of the following little Work, the
Author will no longer detain her young Readers from the perusal of it, as she
flatters herself, they will find ample instruction respecting the proper
treatment of Animals, in the course of her Fabulous Histories, which now invite
their attention.

FABULOUS HISTORIES.
CHAP. I.
IN a hole, which time had made, in a wall covered with ivy, a pair of
RED-BREASTS built their nest. No place could have been better chosen for the
purpose; it was sheltered from the rain, skreened from the wind, and in an
orchard belonging to a Gentleman who had strictly charged his domestics not to
destroy the labors of those little songsters, which chose his ground as an
asylum.

In this happy retreat, which no idle schoolboy dared to enter, the hen
Redbreast deposited four eggs, and then took her seat upon them; resolving that
nothing should tempt her to leave the nest, till she had hatched her infant
brood. Her tender mate every morning brought her food, before he tasted any
himself, and then cheered her with a song.

At length the day arrived, when the happy mother heard the chirping of her
little ones; pleasing to her ears, as the ^attle of a beloved child, to its
fond parent; with inexpressible tenderness she spread her maternal wings to
cover them, threw out the egg-shells in which they before lay confined, then
pressed them to her bosom, and presented them to her mate, who viewed them with
rapture, and seated himself by her side, that he might share her pleasure.

We may promise ourselves much delight in rearing our little family, said he,
but it will occasion us a great deal of trouble; I would willingly bear the
whole fatigue myself, but it will be impossible for me with my utmost labor
and industy, to supply all our nestlings with what is sufficient for their
daily support; it will therefore be necessary for you to leave the nest
occasionly, in order sometimes to seek provisions for them. She declared her
readiness to take a flight whenever it would be requisite: and said, that there
would be no necessity for her to be long absent, she had in her last excursion
discovered a place near the orchard where food was scattered on purpose for
such birds as would take the pains of seeking it; and had been informed by a
Chaffinch, that there was no kind of danger in picking it up. This is a lucky
discovery indeed, replied he, and we must avail ourselves of it; for this great
increase of family renders it prudent to make use of every expedient for
supplying our necessities! I myself, must take a large circuit, for some
insects that are proper for the nestlings cannot be found in all places:
however, I will bear you compa^y whenever it is in my power. The little ones
now began to feel the sensation of hunger, and opening their gaping mouths for
food; on which their kind father instantly fled forth to seek it for them, and
in turns supplied them all, as well as his beloved mate. This was a hard day's
work, and when evening came on, he was glad to seek repose; therefore, turning
his head under his wing, he soon fell asleep; his mate followed his example;
the four little ones had before fallen into a gentle slumber, and perfect
quietness for some hours reigned in the nest.

The next morning they were awakened at the dawn of day, by the song of
skylark, who had a nest near the orchard; and as the young Redbreasts were
clamorous for food, their father cheerfully prepared himself to renew his toil,
but first requested his mate to accompany him to the place she had mentioned.
That I will do, replied she, at a proper hour, but it is too early yet; I must,
therefore, entreat that you will go by yourself, and procure a breakfast for
us, as I am fearful of leaving the nestlings before the air is warmer, lest
they should be chilled. To this he readily consented, and fed all his little
darlings, to whom for the sake of distinction, I shall give the names of Robin,
Dicky, Flapsy, and Pecksy. When this kind of office was performed, he perched
on an adjacent tree, and there, while he rested, entertained (...) fa^ily with
his melody, till his mate springing (...) the nest, called on him to attend
her; on which he instantly took wing, and followed her to a courtyard,
belonging to an elegant mansion.

No sooner did they appear before the parlour window than it was hastily thrown
up by Miss Harriet Benson, a little girl about eleven years old, the daughter
of the Gentleman and Lady to whom the house belonged.

Miss Harriot with great delight, called her brother to see two Robin
Redbreasts: Her summons was instantly complied with, and she was joined by
Master Frederick, a fine chubby rosy-cheek boy, about six years of age, who as
soon as he had taken a peep at the feathered strangers, ran to his mamma, and
entreated her to give him something to feed the birds with. I must have a great
piece of bread this morning said he, for there are all the Sparrows and
Chaffinches that come every day, and two Robin Redbreasts besides. Here is a
piece for you, Frederick replied Mrs. Benson, cutting a roll that was on the
table; but if your daily pensioners continue to increase, as they have done
lately, we must provide some other food for them, as it is not right to cut
pieces from a leaf on purpose for birds, because there are many children that
want bread to whom we should give the preference. Would you deprive a poor
little hungry boy of his breakfast, to give it to birds? No, said Frederick, I
would sooner give up my own breakfast to a poor boy, than he should go without.
But where shall I get victuals enough for my birds? I will beg the cook to save
all the crumbs in the bread pan, and desire John to preserve all he makes, when
he cuts the loaf for dinner, and those which are scattered on the table-cloth.
A very good sche^^, said Mrs. Benson, and I advise you, my dear, to put it in
execution; for I make no doubt it will answer your purpose if you can ^vail on
the servants to indulge you. I cannot bear to see the least fragment of food
wasted, which may conduce to the support of life in any creature?

Miss Harriet being quite impatient to exercise her benevolence, requested her
brother to remember that the poor birds, for whom he had been a successful
solicitor, would soon fly away, if he did not make haste to feed them; on which
he ran to the window with his treasure in his hand.

When Miss Harriet first appeared, the winged suppliants approached with eager
expectation of the daily handful, which their kind benefactress made it a
custom to distribute, and were supprized at the delay of her charity. They
hopped around the window -- they chirped -- they twittered, and employed all
their little ^arts to gain attention; and were on the point of departing, when
Master Frederick, breaking a bit from the piece he held in his hand, attempted
to scatter it amongst them, calling out at the same time, Dicky! Dicky! On
hearing the wellknown sound of invitation, the little flock immediately drew
near -- Master Frederick held a short contest with his sister, in order to
prevail with her to let him feed all the birds himself; but finding that he
could not fling the crumbs far enough for the Redbreasts, who with the timidity
of Strangers, kept at ^istance, he resigned the task, and Miss Harriet (...)
dextrous hand, threw some of them to the very ^ot where the affectionate pair
stood, waiting for an opportunity of attracting her notice, and with grateful
hearts picked up the portion a^igned them, and in the mean while, the other
birds having satisfied their hunger, successively withdrew, and they were left
alone. Master Frederick exclaimed with rapture, that the two Robin Redbreasts
were feeding! and Miss Harriet meditated a design of taming them, by repeated
instances of kindness. Be sure, my dear brother, said she not to forget to ask
the cook and John for the crumbs; and do not let the least little morsel of any
thing you have to eat, fall to the ground. I will be careful in respect to
mine, and we will collect all that pappa and mamm^ crumble; and if we cannot by
these means get enough, I will spend some of my money in feed for them. -- O,
said Frederick, I would give all the money I have in the world to buy victuals
for my dear, dear birds. Hold, my love, said Mrs. Benson, though I commend your
humanity, I must remind you again, that there are poor people as well as poor
birds. Well, mamma, replied Frederick, I will only buy a little seed then. As
he spoke the last words, the Redbreasts having finished their meal, the mother
bird expressed her impatience to return to the nest; and having obtained her
mate's consent, repaired with all possible speed to her humble habitation,
whilst he tuned his ^elodious pipe, and delighted their young benefactors with
his music; he then soared into the air, and took his flight to an adjoining
garden, where he had a great chance of finding worms for his family.

CHAP. II.
MASTER BENSON expressed great concern that the Robins were gone; but was
comforted by his sister, who reminded him, that in all probability his new
favorites having met with so kind a reception, would return on the morrow.
Mrs. Benson then bid them shut the window, and taking Frederick in her lap, and
desiring Miss Harriet to sit down by her, thus addressed them.

I am delighted, my dear children, with your humane behavior toward the
animal creation, and wish by all means to encourage it. But though a most
commendable propensity, it requires regulation; let me therefore recommend to
you, not to suffer it to gain upon you to such a degree, as to make you unhappy
or forgetful of those, who have a superior claim to your attention: I mean poor
people; always keep in mind the distresses which they endure, and on no account
waste any kind of food, nor give to inferior animals what is designed for
mankind.

Miss H^iet promised to follow her mamma's instructions; but Frederick's
attention was entirely engaged by watching a Butterfly, which had just left the
chrysalis, and was fluttering in the window, longing to try its wings in the
air and sunshine. This Frederick was very desirous of catching, but his mamma
would not permit him to attempt it; because (she told him) he could not well
lay hold of its wings without doing it an injury, and it would be much happier
at liberty. Should you like, Frederick. said she, when you are going out to
play, to have any body lay hold on you violently, scratch you all over, then
offer you something to eat which is very disagreeable, and perhaps poisonous,
and then shut you up in a little dark room? And yet this is the fate to which
many an harmless insect is condemned by thoughtless children. As soon as
Frederick understood that he could not catch the butterfly without hurting it,
he gave up the point, and assured his mamma, he did not want to keep it, but
only to carry it out of doors. Well, replied she, that end may be answered by
opening the window which at her desire was done by Miss Harriet; the happy
insect seized the opportunity of escaping, and Frederick had soon the pleasure
of seeing it on a rose-tree.

Breakfast being ended, Mrs. Benson reminded the young lady and gentleman, that
it was almost time for their lessons to begin; but desired their maid to take
them into the garden before the^ applied to business, whilst she gave some
direction in the family; and Master Frederick, during his walk, amused himself
with watching the Butterfly, as it flew from flower to flower which gave more
pleasure than he could possibly have received from catching and confining the
little tender creature.

Let us now see what became of our Redbreasts, after they left their young
benefactors. The hen as I informed you, repaired immediately to the nest; her
heart fluttered with apprehension as she entered it, and she eagerly called
out, "are you all safe, my little dears?" All safe, my good mother, replied
Pecksy, but a little hungry, and very cold. Well, said she, your last complaint
I can soon remove; but in respect to satisfying your hunger, that must be your
father's task, for I have not been able to bring any thing good for you to eat;
however he will soon be here, I make no doubt. Then spreading her wings over
them all, she soon communicated warmth to them, and they were again
comfortable. In a very short time her mate returned, for he only staid at Mr.
Benson's to finish his song, and refresh himself with some clear water, which
his new friends always kept in the place where they fed the birds, on purpose
for their little pensioners. He brought in his mouth a worm, which was given to
Robin; and was going to fetch one for Dicky, but that his mate reminded him of
their agreement* to divide betwixt them the care of providing for the family.
My young ones are now hatched, said she, and you can keep them warm as well as
myself; take my place therefore and the next excursion shall be mine. I
consent, answered he, with the more pleasure, because I think a little flying
now and then will do you good; but to save you the trouble of a painful search,
I can direct you to a spot, where you may be certain of finding worms enough
for this morning's supply. He then described the place; and immediately on her
quitting the nest entered it, and gathered his young ones under his wings. --
Come, my dears, said he, let us see what kind of a nurse I can make: but an
awkward one, I fear; even every mother bird is not a good nurse; but you are
very fortunate in yours, for she is an exceeding tender one, and I hope you
will make her a dutiful return for her kindness. They all promised him they
would: well, then, said he, I will sing you a song. He did so, and it was a
very merry one, and delighted the nestlings extremely: so that though they lay
a little inconveniently under his wings, they did not regard it, nor think the
time of their mother's absence long; she had not succeeded in the place she
first went to, as a boy was picking up worms to angle with, of whom she was
afraid, and therefore flew farther: but as soon as she obtained what she went
for, she returned with all possible speed; and notwithstanding she had repeated
invitations from several gay birds which she met, to join their sportive
parties, she kept a steady course, preferring the pleasure of feeding little
Dicky, to all the diversions of the fields and groves. As soon as she came near
the nest her mate started up to make room for her, and take his turn of
providing for his family. Once more adieu! said he, and was out of sight in an
instant.

Well, my nestlings, said the mother, how do you do? Very well, thank you,
replied all at once; and we have been very merry, said Robin, for my father has
sung us a sweet song. I think, said Dicky, I should like to learn it. Well,
replied the mother, he will teach it you I dare say: here he comes, ask him. I
am ashamed said Dicky. Then you are a silly bird, replied she. Never be
ashamed, but when you commit a fault; asking your father to teach you to sing,
is not one; and good parents delight to teach their young ones every thing that
is proper and useful. Whatever so good a father sets you an example of, you may
safely desire to imitate. Then addressing herself to her mate, who for an
instant stopped at the entrance of the nest, that he might not interrupt her
instructions. Am I not right, said he, in what I have just told them? Perfectly
so, replied he, I shall have pleasure in teaching them all that is in my power;
but we must talk of that another time. Who is to feed poor Pecksy? Oh! I, I,
answered the mother, and was going in an instant, And so you want to learn to
sing, Dicky? said the father. Well then, I will repeat my song, so pray listen
very attentively; you may learn the notes, though you will not be able to
practice them till your voice is stronger. He then sung with the same
approbation as before.

Robin now remarked that it was very pretty indeed, and expressed his desire to
learn it also. By all means, said his father, I will sing it very often, so you
may learn it if you please. For my part, said Flapsy, I do not think I could
have patience to learn it, it will take so much time. -- Nothing, my dear
Flapsy, answered the father, can be acquired without patience, and I am sorry
to find yours begin to fail you already: But I hope, if you have no taste for
music, that you will give the greater application to things that may be of more
importance to you. Well, said Pecksy, I would apply to music with all my heart,
but I do not believe it possible for me to attain it. Perhaps not replied her
father, but I do not doubt your application to whatever your mother requires of
you, and she is an excellent judge both of your talents, and of what is
suitable to your station in life. She is no songster herself, and yet she is
very clever, I assure you. Here she comes. Then rising to make room for her,
take your seat, my love, said he and I will perch upon the ivy. The hen again
covered her brood, whilst her mate amused her with his singing and
conversation, till evening reminded them of repose; excepting, that each made
alternate excursions, as the appetites of their young ones required.

In this manner several days passed with little variation, the nestlings were
very ^ving, and daily gained strength and knowledge, through the care and
attention of their indulgent parents, who every day visit their friends, Master
and Miss Benson. Frederick had been successful in his application to both the
cook and footman, by whose assistance he obtained enough for his dear birds, as
he called them, without infringing on the rights of the poor; and he was still
able to produce a halfpenny, whenever his papa or mamma pointed out to him a
proper object of Charity.

CHAP. III.
IT happened one day, that both the Redbreasts, who always went together to Mr.
Benson's (because if one had waited for the other's return, it would have
missed the chance of being fed) it happened, I say, that they were both absent
longer than usual, for their little benefactors having been fatigued with a
very long walk the evening before, lay late in bed that morning; but as soon as
Frederick was dressed his sister, who was waiting for him, took him by the
hand, and led him down stairs, where he hastily demanded of the cook the
collection of crumbs reserved for him. As soon as he entered the breakfast
parlour, he ran eagerly to the window, and attempted to fling it up. What is
the cause of this mighty bustle? said his mamma. Do you not perceive that I am
in the room, Frederick? Oh, my birds! my birds! cried he. I understand,
rejoined Mrs. Benson, that you have neglected to feed your little pensioners:
how came this about, Harriet? We were so tired last night, answered Miss
Benson, that we overslept ourselves, mamma. This excuse may satisfy you and
your brother, added the Lady, but I fear your birds would bring heavy
complaints against you were they able to talk our language. But make haste to
supply their present wants; and for the future, whenever you give any living
creature cause to depend on you for sustenance, be careful on no account to
disappoint it; and if you are prevented feeding it yourself, employ another
person to do it for you. But though it is very commendable, and indeed an
obligation to our humanity, to be attentive to your dependants, yet you must
not let this make you forgetful of your duty to your friend. It is customary
for little boys and girls to pay their respects to their papa's and mamma's
every morning, as soon as they see them. This, Frederick, you ought to have
done to me, on entering the parlour, instead of tearing across it, crying out
my birds! my birds! it would have taken you but a very little time to have done
so: however, I will excuse your neglect now, my dear, as you did not intend to
offend me; but I expect that you will so manage the business you have
undertaken, that it may not break in on your obligations. You depend as much on
your papa and me, for every thing you want, as these little birds do on you:
nay more so, for they could supply their own wants, by seeking ^ood in other p^
but children can do nothing toward their support: therefore it is particularly
requisite, that they would be dutiful and respectful to those, whose tenderness
and care are constantly exerted for their bene^. Miss Harriet promised her
mamma, that she would on all occasions, endeavor to behave as she wished her
to do; but I am sorry to say, Frederick was more intent on opening the window,
than on imbibing the good instructions that were giving him: this he could not
effect, and therefore Harriet, by her mamma's permission, went to his
assistance, and the store of provisions was dispensed. As many of the birds had
nests, they eat their meal with all possible expedition; amongst this number
were the Robins, who dispatched this business as soon as they could, for the
hen was anxious to return to her little ones, and the cock to procure them a
breakfast; and having given his young friends a serenade, before they left
their bed chambers, he did not think it necessary to stay to sing any more,
they therefore departed. When the mother-bird arrived at the ivy wall, she
stopped at the entrance of the nest, with a palpitating heart; but seeing her
brood all safe and well, she hastened to take them under her wings. As soon as
she was seated she observed that they were not so cheerful as usual. What is
the matter? said she, How have you agreed during my absence? To these questions
all were unwilling to reply, for the truth was that they had been quarrelling
almost the whole time. What all silent? said she; I fear you have not obeyed my
commands, but have been contending. I desire you will tell me the truth. Robin
knowing that he was the greatest offender, began to justify himself, before the
others could have time to lay an accusation against him.

I am sure, mother, said he, I only gave Dicky a little peck because he crowded
me so, and all the others joined with him, and fell upon me at once.

Since you have begun, Robin, answered Dicky, I must speak, for you gave me a
very hard peck indeed, and I was afraid you had put out my eye. I am sure I
made all the room I could for you; but you said you ought to have half the
nest, and to be master when your father and mother were out, because you are
the eldest^

I do not love to tell tails, said Flapsy, but what Dicky says is very true,
Robin; and you plucked two or three little feathers out of me, only because I
begged you not to use us ill.

And you set your foot very hard upon me, cried Pecksy, for telling you that
you had forgot your dear mother's injunction.

This is a sad story indeed, said the mother. I am very sorry to find, Robin,
that you already discover such a turbulent disposition. If you go on in this
manner, we shall have no peace in the nest, nor can I leave it with any degree
of satisfaction^ As for your being the eldest, though it makes me show you a
preference on all proper occasions, it does not give you a privilege to
domineer over your brother and sisters. You are all equally the objects of our
tender care, which we shall exercise equally amongst you, provided you do not
forfeit it by bad behavior. To show you that you are not master of the nest, I
desire you to get from under my wing, and sit on the outside, whilst I cherish
those who are dutiful and good. Robin, greatly mortified, retired from his
mother; on which Dicky, with the utmost kindness, began to intercede for him.
Pardon Robin, my dear mother, I entreat you, said he, I heartily forgive his
treatment of me, and would not have complained to you, had it not been
necessary for my own justification. You are a good bird, Dicky, said his
mother, but such an offense as this must be repented of before it is pardoned.
At this instant her mate returned with a fine worm, and looked as usual for
Robin, who lay skulking by himself. Give it, said the mother, to Dicky, Robin
must be served last this morning; nay, I do not know whether I shall permit him
to have any victuals all day. Dicky was very unwilling to mortify his brother,
but on his mother's commanding him not to detain his father, he opened his
mouth and swallowed the delicious mouthful. What can be the matter, said the
good father, when he had emptied his mouth surely none of the little ones have
been naughty? But I cannot stop to enquire at present, for I left another fine
worm which may be gone if I do not make haste back.

As soon as he departed, Dicky renewed his solicitations that Robin might be
forgiven; but as he sat swelling with anger and disdain, because he fancied
that the eldest should not be shoved to the outside of his mother's wing,
whilst the others were fed, she would not hear a word in his behalf. The father
soon came and fed Flapsy, and then, thinking it best for his mate to continue
her instructions, he made another excursion; during which Pecksy, whose little
heart was full of affectionate concern for the punishment of her brother, thus
attempted to comfort him.

Dear Robin, do not grieve, I will give you my breakfast, if my mother will let
me. O, said Robin, I do not want any breakfast; If I may not be served first, I
will have none. Shall I ask my mother to forgive you? I don't want any of your
intercessions, replied he, if you had not been a parcel of ill-natured things,
I should not have been pushed about as I am.

Come back, Pecksy, said the mother, who overheard them, I will not have you
hold converse with so naughty a bird. I forbid every one even to go near him.
The father then arrived, and Pecksy was fed. You may rest yourself, my dear,
said the mother, you morning's task is ended. Why, what has Robin done? asked
he. What I am sorry to relate, she replied: Quarrelled with his brother and
sisters! Quarrelled with his brother and sisters! You surprise me: I could not
have suspected he would have been so foolish or so unkind. -- O, this is not
all, said the mother, for he presumes on being the eldest, and claims half the
nest to himself when we are absent, and now is fallen, because he is disgraced,
and not fed first as usual. If that is the case, replied the father, leave me
to settle this business, my dear, and pray go into the air a little, for you
seem to be sadly agitated. I am disturbed, said she, I confess; for after all
my care and solicitude, I did not expect such a sad recompense as this. I am
sorry to expose this perverse bird, even to you, but he resists my efefforts to
reform him. I will do as you desire go into the air a little; so saying, she
repaired to a neighboring tree where she waited with anxious expedition, the
event of her mate's interposition.

As soon as the mother departed, the father thus addressed the delinquent. And
so, Robin, you want to be master of the nest? A pretty master you will make
indeed, who do not know even how to govern your own temper! I will not stand to
talk much to you now, because in your present disposition, you would in all
probability turn a deaf ear to my admonitions; but depend upon it, I will not
suffer you to use any of the family ill, particularly your good mother, and if
you persist in obstinacy, I will certainly turn you out of the nest before you
can fly. These threatenings intimidated Robin, and he also began to be very
hungry as well as cold; he therefore promised to behave better for the future,
and his brother and sisters pleaded earnestly that he might be forgiven and
restored to his usual place. I can say nothing in respect to the last
particular, replied the father, that depends upon his mother; but as it is his
first offense, and he seems to be very sorry, I will myself pardon it, and
intercede for him with his mother, who I fear is at this time lamenting his
obdur^ On this he left the nest to seek for her. Retu^ my dear, said he, to
your beloved family; Robin seems sensible of his offense, and longs to ask your
forgiveness. Pleased at this intelligence, the mother raised her drooping head,
and closed her wings, which hung mournfully by her sides, expressive of the
dejection of her spirits. I fly to give it him said she, and hastened into the
nest. In the mean while Robin wished for, yet dreaded her return. As soon as he
saw her, he lifted up a supplicating eye, and with ^eeble accents (for hunger
concurred with sorrow to make him faint) he chirped, "Forgive me, dear mother,
I will not again offend you." I accept your submission, Robin, said she, and
will once more receive you to my wing; but indeed your behavior has made me
very unhappy. She then made room for him, he nestled closely to her side, and
soon found the benefit of her fostering heat; but the pain of hunger still
remained, yet he had not confidence to ask his father to fetch him any
victuals: but this kind parent waited not for solicitation, for seeing that his
mother had received him into favor, he went with all speed to an adjacent
field, where he soon met with refreshment for him, which with tender love he
presented, and Robin swallowed with gratitude. Thus was peace restored to the
nest, and the happy mother once more rejoiced that harmony reigned in the family

CHAP. IV.
A FEW days after, a fresh disturbance took place. All the little Redbreasts,
excepting Pecksy, in turn committed some fault or other, for which they were
occasi^y punished; but she was of so amiable a disposition, that it was her
constant study to act with propriety, and avoid giving offense; on which
account she was justly caressed by her parents with a greater degree of
kindness. This excited the envy of the others and they joined together to treat
her ill, giving her the title of the Favorite; saying, that they made no doubt
their father and mother would reserve the nicest morsels for their darling.
Poor Pecksy bore all their reproaches with patience hoping that she should in
time regain their good opinion by her gentleness and affection. But it happened
one day, that in the midst of their tauntings their mother unexpectedly
returned, who hearing an uncommon noise among her young ones, stopped on the
ivy to learn the cause; and as soon as she discovered it, made her appearance
at the entrance of the nest, with a countenance that indicated her knowledge of
their procedings, and her displeasure at them. (...) these the sentiments, said
she, that subsist in a family, which ought to be bound together by love and
kindness? Which of you has cause to reproach either your father or me with
partiality? Do we not with the exactest equality, distribute the fruits of our
labors among you? And in what respect has poor Pecksy the preference, but in
that commendation which is justly her due, and which you do not strive to
deserve? Has she ever yet uttered a complaint against you, though from the
dejection of her countenance, which she in vain attempted to conceal, it is
evident that she has suffered your reproaches for some days past. I positively
command you to treat her other wise, for it is a mother's duty to succor a
persecuted nestling! and I will certainly admit her next my heart, and banish
you all from that place you have hitherto possessed in it, if you suffer envy
and jealousy to posses your bosoms, to the exclusion of that tender love which
she as the kindest of sisters, has a right to expect from you.

Robin, Dicky, and Flapsy, were quite confounded at their mother's surprising
them in the midst of their naughty behavior, and Pecksy felt an affectionate
concern that they had incurred the displeasure of so tender a parent; and far
from increasing it by complaining of them, endeavored to soften her anger.
That I have been vexed, my dear mother, said she, is true, but no^ ^o so great
a degree as you suppose; and I am rea^ to believe that my dear brothers and
sister were not in earnest in the severe things they said of me. -- Perhaps
they only meant to try my affections. -- To spare them the trouble of any
future trial, I now entreat them to believe my assurances, that I would
willingly resign the greatest pleasure in life, could I by that means increase
their happiness; and so far from wishing for the nicest morsel, I would content
myself with the humblest fare, rather than any of them should be disappointed.
This tender speech had its desired effect; it recalled those sentiments of
love, which envy and jealousy had for a time banished; each nestling
acknowledged its fault, and having obtained the forgiveness of their mother, a
perfect reconciliation too place, to the great joy of Pecksy, and indeed of all
parties.

All the nestlings continued very good for several days, and no occurrence
happened worth relating: the little flock were soon covered with feathers,
which their mother taught them to dress, telling them, that neatness was a very
essential thing being conducive to health, and also to render them agreeable in
the eye of the world.

Robin was a very strong robust bird, not remarkable for his beauty, but there
was a great briskness in his manner, which covered many defects, and he was
very likely to attract notice. His father judged from the tone of his
chirpings, that he would be a very good song^.

Dicky had a remarkable fine plumage, his breast was of a beautiful red, his
body and wings of an elegant mottled brown, and his eyes sparkled like diamonds.

Flapsy was also very pretty, but more distinguished for the elegance of her
shape, than for the variety and lusture of her feathers.

Pecksy had no outward charms to recommend her to notice; but these defects
were amply supplied by the sweetness of her disposition, which was amiable to
the greatest degree. Her temper was constantly serene, she was ever attentive
to the happiness of her parents, and would not have grieved them for the world,
and her affection for her brothers and sister was so great, that she constantly
preferred their interest to her own, of which we lately gave an instance.

The kind parents attended to them with unremitting affection, and made their
daily visit to Master Miss Benson, who very punctually discharged the
benevolent office of feeding them. The Robin Redbreasts, familiarized by
repeated favors, approached nearer and nearer to their little friends by
degrees, and at length ventured to enter the room and feed upon the
breakfast-table. Miss Harriet was delighted at this circumstance, and Frederick
was quite transported; he longed to catch the birds, but his mamma told him,
that would be the very means to drive them away. Miss Harriet entreated him not
to frighten them on any account, and he was prevailed on to forbear; but could
not help expressing a wish that he had them in a cage, that he might feed them
all day long.

And do you really think, Frederick, said Mrs. Benson, that these little
delicate creatures are such gluttons, as to desire to be fed all day long?
Could you tempt them to do it, they would soon die; but they know better, and
as soon as their appetites are satisfied, always leave of eating. Many a little
boy may learn a lesson from them. Do not you recollect one of your
acquaintance, who, if an apple-pie, or any thing else that he calls nice, is
set before him, will eat till he makes himself sick? Frederick looked ashamed,
being conscious that he was too much inclined to indulge his love of
delicacies. Well, said his mamma, I see you understand who I mean, Frederick,
so we will say no more on that subject; only when you meet with that little
Gentleman, give my love to him, and tell him I beg he will be as moderate as
his Redbreasts.

The cock bird having finished his breakfast, flew out at the window, followed
by his mate; and as soon as they were out of sight, Mrs. Benson continued her
discourse. And would you really confine these sweet creatures in a cage,
Frederick, merely to have the pleasure of looking at them? Should you like to
be always shut up in a little room, and think it sufficient if you were
supplied with victuals and drink? Is there no enjoyment in running about,
jumping, and going from place to place? Do not you like to associate with
little boys and girls? And is there no pleasure in breathing the fresh air?
Though these little animals are inferior to you, there is no doubt but they are
capable of enjoyments similar to these; and it must be a dreadful life for a
poor bird to be shut up in a cage, where he cannot so much as make use of his
wings -- where he is excluded from his natural companions -- and where he
cannot possibly receive that refreshment, which the air must afford to him when
at liberty to soar to such a height. But this is not all, for many a poor bird
is caught and separated from its family, after it has been at the trouble of
building a nest -- has perhaps laid its eggs -- or even hatched its young ones,
which are by this means exposed to inevitable destruction. It is likely that
these very Redbreasts may have young ones, for this is the season of the year
for their hatching; and I rather think they have, from the circumstance of
their always coming together. If this is the case, said Miss Harriet, it would
be a pity indeed to confine them. But why, mamma if it wrong to catch birds,
did you at one time keep Canaries,? The case is very different in respect to
Canaries, my dear, said Mrs. Benson. By keeping them in a cage, I do them a
kindness. I consider them as little foreigners who claim my hospitality. This
kind of bird came originally from a warm climate, they are in their nature very
susceptible of cold and would perish in the open air in our winters: neither
does the food which they feed on grew plentifully in this country; and as they
are always here bred in cages, they do not know how to procure the materials
for the nests abroad. And there is another particular which would greatly
distress them were they to be turned loose, which is, the ridicule and contempt
they would be exposed to from other birds. I remember once to have seen a poor
Canary, which had been turned loose because it could not sing; and surely no
creature could be more miserable. It was starving for want of victuals,
famishing with thirst, shivering with cold, and looked terrified to the
greatest degree; whilst a parcel of Sparrows and Chaffinches pursued it from
place to place, twittering and chirping with every mark of insolence and
derision. I could not help fancying the little creature to be like a foreigner
just landed from some distant country, followed by a rude rabble of boys, who
were ridiculing him because his dress and language were strange to them.

And what became of the poor little creature, mamma? said Miss Harriet. I was
going to tell you, my dear, replied Mrs. Benson. I ordered the servant to bring
me a cage, with seed and water in their usual places; this I caused to be hung
on a tree, next to that in which the little sufferer in vain endeavored to
hide himself among the leaves from his cruel pursuers. No sooner did the
servant retire, than the poor little wretch flew to it. I immediately had the
cage brought into the parlour, where I experienced great pleasure in observing
what happiness the poor creature enjoyed in her deliverance. I kept it some
years, but not choosing to confine her in a little cage, had a large one bought,
and procured a companion for her of her own species. I supplied them with
materials for building, and from them proceeded a little colony, which grew so
numerous, that you know I gave them to Mr. F. to put in his aviary, where you
have seen them enjoying themselves. So now I hope I have fully accounted for
having kept Canary birds in a cage. You have indeed, mamma, said Harriet. I
have also, said Mrs. Benson, occasionally kept Larks. In severe winters vast
numbers of them come to this country from a colder climate, and many perish.
Quantities of them are killed and sold for the spit, and the bird-catchers
usually have a great many to sell, and many an idle boy has some to dispose of.
I frequently buy them, as you know, Harriet, but as soon as the fine weather
returns, I constantly set them at liberty. But come, my dears, prepare for your
morning walk, and afterward let me see you in my dressing room.

I wonder, said Frederick, whether our Redbreasts have got a nest? I will watch
tomorrow which way they fly, for I should like to see the little ones. And
what will you do should you find them out? said his mamma. Not take the nest, I
hope? Why, replied Frederick, I should like to bring it home, mamma, and put it
in a tree near the house, and then I would scatter crumbs for the old ones to
feed them with. Your design is a kind one, said Mrs. Benson, but would greatly
distress your little favorites. Many birds, through fear forsake their nests,
when they are removed, therefore I desire you to let them alone if you should
chance to find them. Miss Harriet then remarked, that she thought it very cruel
to take birds nests. Ah! my dear, said Mrs. Benson, those who commit such
barbarous actions, are quite insensible to the distresses they occasion. It is
very true, that we ought not to indulge so great a degree of pity and
tenderness for such animals, as for those who are more properly our
fellow creatures; I mean men women and children; but as every living creature
can feel, we should have a constant regard to those feelings, and strive to
give happiness, rather than inflict misery. But go, my dear, and take your
walk. Mrs. Benson then left them, to attend her usual morning employments; and
the young Lady and Gentleman, attended by their maid, passed an agreeable half
hour in the garden.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time, the hen Redbreast returned to the nest, whilst her mate took
his flight in search of food for his family When the mother approached the
nest, she was surprised at not hearing as usual the chirping of her young ones;
and what was her astonishment at seeing them all crowded together, trembling
with apprehension! What is the matter, my nestlings, said she, that I find you
in this terror? -- Oh, my dear mother! said Robin, who first ventured to raise
up his head, is it you? Pecksy then revived, and entreated her mother to come
into the nest, which she did without delay, and the little tremblers crept
under her wings, endeavoring to conceal themselves in this happy retreat. What
has terrified you in his manner? said she. Oh! I do not know, replied Dicky,
but we have seen such a monster as I never beheld before. A monster, my dear?
pray describe it. I cannot, said Dicky, it was too frightful to be described.
Frightful, indeed, cried Robin, but I had a full view of it, and will give the
best description I can. We were all lying peaceably in the nest, and very happy
together; I and Dicky were trying to sing, when suddenly we heard a noise
against the wall, and presently a great round red face appeared before the
nest, with a pair of enormous staring eyes, a very large beak, and below that a
wide mouth, with two rows of bones, that looked as if they could grind us all
to pieces in an instant. About the top of this round face, and down the sides,
hung something black, but not like feathers. When the two staring eyes had
looked at us for some time, the whole thing disappeared. I cannot at all
conceive, from your description, Robin, what this thing could be, said the
mother, but perhaps it may come again. Oh! I hope not, cried Flapsy, I shall
die with fear if it does. Why so, my love? said her mother, has it done you any
harm? I cannot say it has, replied Flapsy. Well then, you do very wrong, my
dear, in giving way to such apprehensions. You must strive to get the better of
that fearful disposition. When you go abroad in the world, you will see many
strange objects; and if you are terrified at every appearance which you cannot
account for, you will live a most unhappy life. Endeavor to be good, and then
you need not fear anything. But here comes your father, perhaps he will explain
the appearance which has so alarmed you today. As soon as the father had given
the worm to Robin, he was preparing to depart for another, but to his surprise,
all the rest of the nestlings begged him to stay, declaring that they had
rather go without their meal, on condition he would but remain at home and take
care of them. Stay at home and take care of you! said he. Why is that more
necessary now than usual? The mother then related the strange occurrence that
had occasioned this request. Nonsense, said he -- a monster! -- large mouth! --
long beak! -- I don't understand such stuff. -- Besides, as it did them no
harm, why are they to be in such terror now it is gone? Don't be angry, dear
father, said Pecksy, for it was very frightful indeed. Well, said he, I will
fly all round the orchard, and perhaps may meet this monster. Oh! it will eat
you up! it will eat you up! said Flapsy. Never fear, said he, and away he flew.
The mother then again attempted to calm them, but all in vain, their fears were
now redoubled by apprehensions for their father's safety; however, he soon
returned. Well, said he, I have seen this monster; the little ones then clung
to their mother, fearing the dreadful creature was just at hand. What, afraid
again! cried he; a parcel of stout hearts I have in my nest truly! Why, when
you fly about in the world you will, in all probability, see hundreds of such
monsters, (as you call them) unless you choose to confine yourselves to a
retired life; nay, even in woods and groves you will be liable to meet some of
them, and those of the most mischievous kind. I begin to comprehend said the
mother, that these dear nestlings have seen the face of a man. Even so, replied
her mate^ it is our friend the gardener who has so alarmed them. A MAN! cried
Dicky, was that frightful thing a man! Nothing more, I ^ssure you, answered his
father, and a good man too, I have reason to believe; for he is very careful
not to frighten your mother and me, when we are picking up worms, and has
frequently thrown crumbs to us, when he was eating his breakfast. And does he
live in this garden? said Flapsy. He works here very often, replied her father,
but is frequently absent. O then, cried she, pray take us abroad when he is
away, for indeed I cannot bear to see him. You are a little simpleton, said the
father; and if you do not endeavor to get more resolution, I will leave you in
the nest by yourself, when I am teaching your brothers and sisters to fly and
peck, and what will you do then? for you must not expect we will go from them
to bring you food. Flapsy, fearful that her father would be quite angry,
promised to follow his directions in every respect, and the rest animated by
his discourse, began to recover their spirits.

CHAP. VI.
WHILST these terrible commotions passed in the nest, the monster, who was no
other than honest Joe the gardener went to the house and enquired for his young
master and mistress, having, as he justly supposed, a very pleasing piece of
intelligence, to communicate. Both the young gentleman and lady, who were
accustomed to receive little civilities from Joe, very readily attended him,
thinking he had got some fruit or flowers for them. Well, Joe, said Miss
Benson, what have you to say to us? Have you got a peach or a nectarine? Or
have you brought me a root of Sweet William? No, Miss Harriet, said Joe, but I
have something to tell you, that will please you as much as though I had.
What Is that? What Is that? cried Frederick. Why master Frederick, said Joe, a
pair of Robins have com'd mortal often to one place in the orchard lately; so,
thinks I, these birds have got a nest. So, I watches and watc^es, and at last I
see'd the old hen fly into a hole in the ivy-wall. I had a fancy to set my
ladder and look in, but as master ordered me not to frighten the birds, I staid
till the old one flew out again, and then I mounted, and there I see'd the
little creatures full fledged; and if you and Miss Harriet (...) go with me, I
will show them to you, for the nest -- but a little way from the ground, and
you may easily get up the step-ladder. Frederick was in raptures, being
confident that these were the identical Robins that he was so attached to, and
(like a little thoughtless boy as he was) would have gone immediately with the
gardener, had not his sister reminded him, that it was proper to ask mamma's
leave first, for which purpose she accompanied him into the parlour. Good news!
Good news! mamma, cried Frederick, Joe has found the Robins nest. Has he
indeed? said Mrs. Benson. Yes, mamma, said Miss Harrit, and if agreeable to
you, we should be glad to go along with Joe to see it. And how are you to get
at it, said Mrs. Benson, for I suppose it is some height from the ground? Oh! I
can climb a ladder very well, cried Frederick. You climb a ladder! You are a
clever gentleman at climbing I know, replied his mamma: but do you propose to
mount too, Harriet? I think this rather an indelicate scheme for a lady. Joe
tells me that the nest is a very little way from the ground, mamma, answered
Harriet, but if I find it otherwise, you may ^end on my not getting up. On this
condition I will permit you to go; but pray, ^r Frederick, let me remind you,
not to frighten your little favorites. Not for all the world, said Frederick;
away he skipped, and got to Joe before his sister. We may go! we may go! Joe,
cried he. Stay for me Joe, I beg, said Miss Harriet, who presently joined him.

When the Redbreasts had quieted the fears of their young family, they fed them
as usual, and then, having a little private business, they retired to a tree,
desiring their nestlings not to be terrified if the monster should look in upon
them again, as it was very probably he would do. They promised to bear the
sight as well as they could.

When the old ones were seated in the tree, it is time, said the father, to
take our nestlings abroad. You see, my love, how very timorous they are, and if
we do not use them a little to the world they will never be able to shift for
themselves. Very true, replied the mother, they are now full fledged, and
therefore if you please, we will take them out to morrow: but it will be
necessary for me to prepare them for it, I will therefore return to the nest.
One of the best preparitives, answered her mate, will be to leave them by
themselves a little; therefore we will now take a flight together for a short
time, and then go back. The mother then complied, but not without reluctance,
for she longed to be with her de^ family. Let us now return to the happy party,
who^ we lately left setting off on their visit to the ivy-wall.

CHAP. VII.
AS soon as Joe found that the young gentry, as he called them, had obtained
permission to accompany him, he took Frederick by the hand, and said, come
along, my young master, but at miss Harriet's request, stopped whilst she
fetched her bonnet and tippet. Frederick's impatience was so great, that he
could scarcely be restrained from running all the way, but that his sister
entreated him not to make himself too hot. At length they arrived at the
desired spot; Joe placed the ladder, and his young master, with a little
assistance, mounted it very dexterously: But who can describe his raptures when
he beheld the nestlings! Oh! the sweet creatures, cried he, there are four of
them, I declare! I never saw any thing so pretty in my life! I wish I might
carry you all home! That you must not do, Frederick, said his sister; and I beg
you will come away, for you will either terrify the little creatures, or alarm
the old birds, which perhaps are now waiting som^where near to feed them. Well,
I will come away directly, said Frederick, and so good by, Robins! I hope you
will come soon, along with your father and mother, to be fed in the parlour. He
then, under the conduct of his friend Joe, descended. Joe next addressed Miss
Harriet: now my young mistress, said he, will you go up? As the steps of the
ladder were broad, and the nest was not high, Miss Benson ventured to go up,
and was equally delighted with her brother; but so fearful of terrifying the
little birds, and alarming the old ones, tha^ she would only indulge herself
with a peep at the nest. Frederick enquired how she liked the young Robins?
They are sweet creatures, said she, and I hope we shall soon find means to
invite them to join our party of birds, for they appear to me ready to fly; but
let us return to mamma, for you know we promised her to stay but a little
while; besides we hinder Joe from his work. Never mind that said the honest
fellow, master wont be angry, I am sartain; and if I thought he would, I would
work an hour later to fetch up lost time. Thank you, Joe, replied Miss Harriet,
but I am sure papa would not desire that. At this instant Frederick perceived
the two Redbreasts, who were returning from their proposed excursion, and
called to his sister to observe them. He was very desirous to watch whether
they would return to their ^st, but she wou^d on no account consent to stay,
lest her mamma should be displeased, and lest the birds should be frightened:
Frederick, therefore with reluctance followed her, and Joe attendded them to
the house.

As soon as they were out of sight, the hen-bird proposed to return to the
nest^ she had obse^ved the party, and though she did not see them looking into
her habitation, supposed, from their being so near, that they had been taking a
view of it, and communicated her suspicions to her mate. He agreed with her
that this had probably been the case, and said he now expected to hear a fine
story from the nestlings. Let us return, however, said the mother, for perhaps
they have been terrified again. Well said he, I will attend you then; but let
me caution, you, my dear, not to indulge their fearful dispositions, because
such indulgence will certainly prove injurious to them. I will do the best I
can, replied he, and then flew to the nest, followed by her mate. She alighted
upon the ivy, and peeping into the nest, enquired how they all did? Very well,
dear mother, said Robin. What, cried the father, (who now alighted) all safe?
Not one eat up by the monster? No, father, replied Dicky, we are not devoured,
and yet, I assure you, the monster we saw yesterday has been here again, and
brought two others with him. Two others! what, like himself? said the father: I
thought, Flapsy, you were to die with apprehension if you saw him again? And so
I believe I should have done, had not you, my good father, instructed me to
conquer my fears, Flapsy. When I saw the top of him, my heart began to flutter
to such a degree, that I was ready to faint, and every feather of me shook; but
when I found that he staid but a very little while, I recovered and was in
hopes he was quite gone. My brothers and sister, I believe, felt as I did; but
we comforted one another that the danger was over for this day, and all agreed
to make ourselves happy, and not fear this monster, (...) you had assured us he
was very harmless. However, before we were perfectly come to ourselves, we
heard very uncommon noises, sometimes a hoarse sound, disagreeable to our cars
as the croaking of a raven, and sometimes a shriller noise, quite unlike the
note of any bird that we know of, and immediately after something presented
itself to our view, which bore a resemblance to the monster, but not so
frightful. Instead of being all over red, it had on each side two spots of a
more beautiful hue than Dicky's breast, the rest of it was of a most delicate
white, excepting two streaks of a deep red, like the cherry you brought us the
other day, and between these two streaks we^e rows of white bones, but by no
means dreadful to behold, like those of the great monster; its eyes were blue
and white, and round this agreeable face was something which I cannot describe,
very pretty, and as glossy as the feathers of a Goldfinch. There was so
cheerful and pleasing a look in this creature altogether, that notwithstanding
I own I was rather afraid, yet I had pleasure in looking at it, but it staid a
very little time and then disappeared. Whilst we were puzzling ourselves with
conjectures concerning it, another creature, larger than it appeared before us,
equally beautiful, and with an aspect so mild and gentle, that we were all
charmed with it; but, as if fearful of alarming us by its stay, it immediately
retired, and we have been longing for your and my mother's return, in hopes you
would be able to tell us what we have seen.

I am happy, my dears, said the mother, to find you more composed than I
expected; for as your father and I were flying together in order to come back
to you, we observed the monster, and the two pretty creatures Pecksy has
described; the former is, as your father before informed you, our friend the
gardener, and the others are our young benefactors, by whose bounty we are
every day regaled, and who, I will venture to say, will do you no harm. You
cannot think how kindly they treat us; and though there are a number of other
birds who share their goodness, your father and I are savoured with their
particular regard. Oh, said Pecksy, are these sweet creatures your friends? I
long to go abroad that I may see them again. Well, cried Flapsy, I perceive
that if we judge from appearances we may often be mistaken; who would have
thought that such an ugly monster as that gardener, could have had a tender
heart? Very true, replied the mother; you must make it a rule, Flapsy, to judge
of mankind by their actions, and not by their looks. I have known some of them,
whose appearance was as engaging as that of our young benefactors, who were,
notwithstanding, barbarous enough to take eggs out of a nest and spoil them;
nay even carry away nest and all before the young ones were fledged, without
knowing how to feed them, or having any regard to the sorrows of the tender
parents. Yes, said the mother, last year it was my misfortune to be deprived of
my nestlings in that manner, which occasions my being so timid; the anguish I
suffered for their loss is not to be expressed.

A calamity of the same kind befell me, replied the father, I never shall forget
it. I had been making an excursion into the woods, in order to procure some
delicious morfels for one of my nestlings; when I returned to the place in
which I had imprudently built, (for being young and inexperienced, I did not
foresee the danger of choosing an exposed situation,) the first circumstance
that alarmed me, was a part of my nest scattered upon the ground, just at the
entrance of my habitation; I then perceived a large opening in the wall, where
before there was only room for myself to pass. I stopped with a palpitating
heart, in hopes of hearing the chirpings of my beloved family; but all was
silence. I then resolved to enter; but what was my consternation, when I found
that the nest, which my dear mate and I had with so much labor built, and the
dear little ones, who were the joy of our lives, were taken away; nay, I did
not know but that the tender mother also was taken captive. I immediately
rushed out of the place, distracted with apprehensions of the miseries they
might endure; lamented my weakness, which rendered me incapable of effecting
their rescue; was ready to tear off my own feathers with vexation; but
recollecting that my dear mate might in all probability have escaped, I
resolved to go in search of her. As I was flying along, I saw three boys whose
appearance was far from disagreeable; one of whom held in his hand my nest of
young ones, which he eyed with cruel exultation, whilst his companions seemed
to share his joy.

My dear little creatures, insensible of their fate, (for they were newly
hatched) opened their mouths in expectation of the usual supply, but all in
vain, to have attempted feeding them at this time would have been inevitable
destruction to myself; but I resolved to follow the barbarians, that I might at
least see to what place my darlings were consigned. In a short time the party
arrived at a house, and he who before held the nest, now committed it to the
care of another, but soon returned with a kind of victuals I was totally
unacquainted with; and with this my young, when they gaped for food, were fed:
hunger induced them to swallow it with avidity, but soon after missing the
warmth of their mother they set up a general chi^p of lamentation which pierced
my very heart. Immediately after this the nest was carried away, and what
became of my nestlings afterward I never could discover, though I frequently
hovered about the fatal spot of their imprisonment, with the hope of seeing
them.

Pray, father, said Dicky, what became of your mate? Why, my dear, said he,
when I found there was no chance of assisting my little ones, I pursued my
course, and sought her in every place of our usual resort, but to no purpose:
At length I returned to the bush, where I beheld an afflicting sight indeed, my
dear companion lying on the ground, just expiring! I flew to her instantly, and
endeavored to recall her to life: at the sound of my voice, she lifted up her
languid eyelids and with feeble accents said, And are you then safe, my love?
What is become of our little ones? In hopes of comforting her, I told her they
were alive and well; but she replied, your consolations come too late; the blow
is struck, I feel death approaching. The horror which seized me when I missed
my nestlings, and supposed myself robbed at once of my mate and infants, was
too powerful for my weak frame to sustain. Oh! why will the human race be so
want only cruel! The agonies of death now came on, and after a few convulsive
pangs, she breathed her last, and left me an unhappy widower. I passed the
remainder of the summer, and a dreary winter that succeeded it, in a very
uncomfortable manner; though the natural cheerfulness of my disposition, did
not leave me long a prey to unavailing sorrow: and having paid a proper tribute
to the memory of my first dear mate, I resolved the following spring to seek
another; and had the good fortune to meet with one, whose amiable disposition
has renewed my former happiness: and now, my dear said he, let me ask you what
became of your former companion? Why, replied the hen Redbreast, soon after the
loss of our nest, as he was endeavoring to discover what was become of it, a
cruel hawk caught him up, and devoured him in an instant.

I need not say that I felt the bitterest pangs for his loss; it is sufficient
to inform you that I led a solitary life, till I met with you, whose endearing
behavior has made society again agreeable to me.

Whilst the parent birds were thus relating the history of their past
misfortunes, the young ones listened with the greatest attention; and when the
tales were ended, Flapsy exclaimed, Oh! what dangers there are in the world! I
shall be afraid to leave the nest. Why so, my love? said the mother. Every bird
does not meet with Hawks and cruel children. You have already, as you sat on
the nest, seen thousands of the feathered race, of one kind or other, making
their airy excursions, full of mirth and gaiety. This orchard constantly
resounds with the melody of those who chaunt forth their songs of joy, and I
believe there are no beings in the world happier than birds, for we are
naturally formed for cheerfulness; and I flatter myself, a prudent precaution
will preserve both your father and myself from any future accident. Our parents
were young and unexperienced themselves, and did not give us good advice; but
we know the dangers of the world, and I hope shall be able to point out to you
such rules of conduct as may, if followed, counteract the usual accidents to
which birds are exposed. Instead of indulging your fears, Flapsy, said the
father, summon up all your courage, for tomorrow you shall, with your brothers
and sister, begin to see the world. Dicky expressed great delight at this
declaration, and Robin boasted that he had not the least remains of fear.
Flapsy, though still apprehensive of monsters, yet longed to see the gaieties
of life, and Pecksy wished to comply with every desire of her dear parents. The
approach of evening now reminded them that it was time to take repose, and
turning their heads under their wings, each bird soon resigned itself to the
gentle power of sleep.

CHAP. VIII.
AFTER Master and Miss Benson had been gratified with the sight of the Robin's
nest, they were returning to the house, conducted by their friend Joe, when
they were met in the garden by their papa and mamma, accompanied by Miss Lucy
Jenkins and her brother Edward. The former was a fine girl about ten years old,
the latter a robust rude boy, turned of eleven. We were coming to seek you, my
dears, said Mrs. Benson to her children, for I was fearful that the business
you went upon would make you forget your young visitors. I cannot answer for
Frederick, replied Miss Benson, but indeed, my dear mamma, I would not on any
account have slighted my friends. How do you do, my dear miss Jenkins? said
she, I am happy to see you. Will you go with me into the play-room? I have got
some very pretty new books. Frederick, have you nothing to show Master Jenkins?
O yes, said Frederick, I have got a new ball, a new top, a new organ, and
twenty pretty things; but I had rather go back and show him the Robins. The
Robins! said Master Jenkins, what Robins? Why our Robins, that have built in
the ivy-wall. You never saw any thing so pretty in your life as the little
ones. Oh, I can see birds enough at home, said Master Jenkins; but why did you
not take the nest? It would have been nice diversion to you to toss the young
birds about. I have had a great many nests this year, and do believe I have an
hundred eggs. An hundred eggs! and how do you purpose to hatch them? said Miss
Harriet, who turned back on hearing him talk in this manner. ^tch them Miss
Benson? said he; who ever thinks of hatching birds eggs? Oh, then you eat them,
said Frederick, or perhaps let your cook make puddings of them? No, indeed,
replied Master Jenkins, I blow out the inside, and then run a thread through
them, and give them to Lucy to hang up amongst her curiosities, and very pretty
they look, I assure you. And so, said Miss Harriet, you had rather see a parcel
of empty egg-shells, than hear a sweet concert of birds singing in the trees? I
admire your taste truly! Why, is there any harm in taking birds eggs? said Miss
Jenkins; I never before heard there was. My dear mamma, replied Miss Benson,
has taught me to think, there is harm in every action which gives causeless
pain to any living creature; and I own I have a very particular affection for
birds. Well, said Miss Jenkins, I have no notion of such affections, for my
part. Sometimes, indeed I try to rear those which Edward brings home, but they
are teazing troublesome things, and I am not lucky; to tell the truth I do not
concern myself much about them; if they live they live, and if they die they
die. He has brought me three nests this day to plague me; I thought to have fed
the birds before I came out, but being in a hurry to come and see you, I quite
forgot it. Did you feed them, Edward? Not I, said he, I thought you would do
it; it is enough for me to find the n^^^s. And have you actually left three
nests of young birds at home without victuals! exclaimed Miss Harriet. I did
not think of them, but will feed them when I return, said Miss Jenkins. Oh,
cried Miss Benson, I cannot bear the thoughts of what the poor little creatures
must suffer. Well, said Master Jenkins, since you feel so much for them, I
think, Miss Harriet, you will make the best nurse. What say you, Lucy, will you
give the nests to Miss Benson? With all my heart, replied his sister, and pray
do not plague me with any more of them. I do not know that my mamma will let me
accept them, said Miss Benson, but if she will, I shall be glad to do so.
Frederick enquired what birds they were, and Master Jenkins informed him, there
was a nest of Linnets, a nest of Sparrows, and another of Blackbirds. Frederick
was all impatience to see them, and Miss Harriet longed to have the little
creatures in her possession, that she might rescue them from their deplorable
condition, and lessen the evils of captivity, which they now suffered in the
extreme. Her mamma had left her with her young company, that they might indulge
themselves in innocent amusements without restraint, but the tenderhearted
Harriet could not engage in any diversion till she had made intercession in
(...) of the poor birds, she therefore begged Miss Jenkins would accompany her
to her mamma, in order to (...) it permission to have the birds n^. She
accordingly went, and made her request ^wn to Mrs. Benson, who readily
consented; observing, that though she had a very great objection to her
children's having birds nests, yet she could not deny her daughter on the
present occasion. Harriet, from an unwillingness to expect her friend, had said
but little on the subject, but Mrs. Benson, having great discernment, concluded
that she made the request from a merciful motive, and knowing that Miss Jenkins
had no kind mamma to give her instruction, she thus addressed her:

I perceive, my young friend, that Harriet is apprehensive the birds will not
meet with the same kind treatment from you, which she is disposed to give them.
I cannot think you have any cruelty in your nature, but perhaps you have only
accustomed yourself to consider birds as playthings, without sense or feeling;
to me, who are a great admirer of the beautiful little creatures, they appear
in a very different light; and I have been an attentive observer of them. I
assure you. Though they (...) speak (...) language, each kind has one of its
(...) which is perfectly understood by those of their ow^ (...) and so far
intelligible to us, as to convince (...) they are susceptible of joy, grief,
fear, anger and resentment; and y^ may easily discover that they delight in
ass^ing with those of their own class, and pursue with alacrity the employments
allotted them, from whence we may justly infer, that it is cruel to rob them of
their young, deprive them of their liberty, separate the from their respective
societies, or place them in situations where they are excluded from the
blessings suited to their natures, for which it is impossible for us to give
them an equivalent. Besides, these creatures, insignificant as they appear in
your estimation, were made by God as well as you. Have you not read in your
Testament, my dear, that our savior said, Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy. How then can you expect that God will send his blessing
upon you, if you, instead of endeavoring to imitate him in being merciful to
the utmost of your power, are wantonly cruel to innocent creatures which be
designed for happiness? This admonition from Mrs. Benson, which Miss Jenkins
did not expect made her look very serious, and brought tears into her eyes; on
which the good Lady took her by the hand and kindly said, I wish not to
distress you, my dear, but merely to awaken the natural sentiments of your
heart: Reflect at your leisure on what I have taken the liberty of saying to
you, and I am sure you will think me your friend. I knew your dear mamma, and
can assure you, she was remarkable for the tenderness of her disposition. But
let me not detain you from your amusements; go to your own apartments, Harriet,
and use your best endeavors to make your visitors happy. You cannot this
evening fetch the birds, because, when Miss Jenkins goes it will be too late
^or you to take so long a walk, as you must come back afterward; and I make no
doubt but that to oblige you, she will feed them tonight. Miss Harriet and
Miss Jenkins returned, and found Frederick diverting himself with a hand organ,
which had lately been presented by his good-papa; but master Jenkins had laid
hold of Miss Harriet's dog, and was searching his own pocked for a piece of
string, that he might tie him and the cat together, to see, as he said, how
nicely they would fight: and so fully was he bent on this cruel purpose, that
it was with difficulty he could be prevailed on to relinquish it. Dear me, said
he, if ever I came into such a house in my life, there is no fun here. What
would you have said to Harry Pritchard and me, the other day, when we made the
cats fly? Made cats fly! said Frederick, how was that? Why, replied he, we tied
bladders to each side of their necks, and then flung them from the top of the
house. There was an end of their purring and mewing for some time, I assure
you, for they lay a long while struggling and gasping for breath; and if they
had not had nine lives, I think they must have died; but at last up they
jumped, and away ran scampering. Then out came little Jemmy, crying as if he
had flown down himself because we hurt the poor cats; he had a dog running
after him, who I suppose, meant to call us to task, with his bow, wow; but we
soon stopped his tongue, for we caught the gentleman and drove him before us
into a narrow lane, and then ran hooting after him into the village; a number
of boys joined us, and cried out as we did, a mad dog! a mad dog! On this
several people pursued him with cudgels and broomsticks, and at last he was
shot by a man, but not dead, so others came and knocked him about the head till
he expired. For shame! Master Jenkins, said Miss Harriet, how can you talk in
that rhodomontade manner? I cannot believe any young gentleman could bring his
heart to such barbarities. Barbarities, indeed! why have we not a right to do
as we please to dogs and cats, or do you think they feel as we do? Fiddle
faddle of your nonsense, say I; come, you must hear the end of my story. When
the dog was dead, we carried him home to little Jemmy, who was ready to break
his heart for the loss of him; so we did not like to stand hearing his whining,
therefore we left him and got a Cock, whose legs were tied, and flung at him
till he died. Then we set two others to fig^ting, and fine sport we had; for
one was pecked till his breast was laid open, and the other was blinded; so we
left them to make up their quarrel as they could. After this we picked all the
feathers off a live chicken, and you never saw such a ridiculous little animal
in your life. Then we got some puppies, and drowned them whilst the ^itch stood
by. Oh! how she howled and cried, whilst they struggled on the surface of the
water; and there was no quieting her for several days. Stop! Stop! exclaimed
Miss Harriet; for pity's sake, stop! I can hear no more of your horrid
narrations; nor would I commit even one of those barbarities which you boast of
for the world! Poor innocent creatures! what had they done to you to deserve
such usage? I beg Edward, said his sister, that you will find some other way to
entertain us, or I shall really tell Mrs. Benson of you. What! are you growing
tenderhearted all at once! cried he. I will tell you what I think when I go
home, replied Miss Jenkins. As for poor Frederick, he was drowned in tears; and
Harriet's flowed in a copious stream, with the bare idea of the sufferings of
the poor animals, particularly of the live chicken, and the poor bitch, whose
puppies were drowned in her sight: but Edward was so accustomed to be guilty of
those things without reflection, that there was no making any impression of
tenderness upon his mind; and he only laughed at their concern, and wanted to
tell a long story about an ox that had been driven by a cruel drover till he
went mad: but Miss Benson and his sister stopped their ears. As soon as they
left off doing so, he began another about Bat-fowling; which is a treacherous
custom of going with a lantern by night to the hedges. where birds roost, and
frightening them into a net placed for the purpose. In short, it appeared from
his discourse, that he was acquainted with the whole art of tormenting animals.
At last little Frederick went crying to his mamma, and the young ladies retired
to another apartment, so Master Jenkins amused himself with catching flies in
the window, pulling the legs off from some and the wings from others, delighted
with their extorsions, which were occasioned by the agonies they endured. Mrs.
Benson had some visitors, which prevented her talking of this cruel boy, as she
otherwise would have done, on hearing Frederick's account of him, but she
determined to tell his papa; which she accordingly did some time after, when he
returned home: but this gentleman, so far from reproving his son, applauded him
as a lad of life and spirit, and said he would be fit to go through the world.

Master Jenkins was now disturbed from his barbarous sport by being called to
tea; and soon after that ^as over, the servant came to fetch him and his
sister. Miss Harriet earnestly entreated her friend Lucy to feed the birds
properly, till she should be allowed to fetch them, who promised to do so; for
she was greatly affected with Mrs. Benson's discourse, and then entreated her
brother to take leave, that she might return home; with this he readily
complied, as there were no further opportunities for cruelty.

CHAP. IX.
AFTER her little visitors were departed, Miss Harriet went into the
drawing room, and having paid her compliments, sat herself down, that she might
improve her mind with the conversation of the company. Her mamma perceived that
she had been in tears, of which Frederick before explained the cause. I do not
wonder, my love, said she, that you should have been so affected with the
relation of such horrid barbarities, as that thoughtless boy has, by degrees,
brought himself to practice not only without remorse, but by way of amusement.
However, do not suffer your mind to dwell on them, as the creatures on which he
inflicted them are no longer objects of pity. It is wrong to grieve for the
death of animal (...) we do for the loss of our friends, because they certainly
are not of so much consequence to our happiness; and we are taught to think
their sufferings end with their lives, as they are not religious beings; and
therefore the killing them even in the cruelest manner, is not like murdering a
human creature, who is perhaps unprepared to give an account of himself at the
tribunal of heaven. I have, said a Lady who was present, been for a long time
accustomed to consider animals as mere machines actuated by the unerring hand
of Providence, to do those things which are necessary for the preservation of
themselves and their offspring; but the sight of the learned Pig, which has
lately been shown in London, has deranged these ideas, and I know not what to
think.

If we puzzle our minds for ever, Madam, on the subject, replied a Gentleman,
we shall never be able fully to comprehend the capacities and feelings of
creatures so different from ourselves. That they have not reasonable souls,
like the human race, is evident: but at the same time I think we may plainly
discover, that they have some proportion of intellect, which is even capable of
improvement to a certain degree: this is particularly exemplified in the
instance which Mrs. Franks has just mentioned of the learned Pig. Mere
instinct, I think, would never lead that creature to distinguish one letter
from another, or, which amount^ to the same thing, to comprehend the various
signs by which they are pointed out to him by his keeper. To what a pitch may
Dogs and Horses be improved; nay, every kind of animal that I have had an
opportunity of observing, seems to acquire sagacity, by a familiar intercourse
with rational creatures, yet, after all, they fall short of human reason beyond
comparison.

For my part, replied Mrs. Benson, I find the subject so much above my
comprehension, that whenever my mind is disposed to expatiate on it, I check
the inclination, from an opinion that it is of no consequence to me, whether
animals have intellects or not, and that it is amongst those things which the
Almighty has intentionally concealed from our penetration. That they are in the
power of man, and subservient to his use and pleasure, gives them a sufficient
claim to our compassion and kindness; and whilst I am partly fed and clothed at
the expense of the animal creation, I could not bring myself to inflict wanton
cruelties upon them. On the other hand, as Providence has placed them so much
beneath us in the scale of beings, I should think it equally wrong to elevate
them from their proper rank in life, and suffer them to occupy that share of
attention and love, which is due to our own species only*

You are certainly right, Madam, answered the Gentleman; there are objects
enough for the employment of human reason, without our endeavoring to
penetrate into those things which must for ever remain hidden, unless the
inferior creatures were endued with speech. We can form but very imperfect
ideas even of our own intellectual powers, still less of those of other men;
and the further any creature is removed from us, the less capable are we of
comprehending their natures, as we can only judge, in these matters, by what
passes in ourselves.

Neither you, Sir, nor Mrs. Benson, said Mrs. Franks, mean, I apprehend, to
discourage the study of the natural history of animals. By no means, replied
the latter; for as far as it is open to our view, it is replete with amusement
and instruction. It leads the mind to contemplate the perfections of the
Supreme Being, and also furnishes a variety of useful hints for the conduct of
human affairs. Many important arts have, in all probability, been derived from
them; and the exact regularity with which they discharge the offices of
tenderness and economy, afford examples of real utility to those amongst us,
who are disposed to neglect the duties of humanity. An idle person, for
instance, may be admonished by an Ant or Be, a thoughtless mother by a Hen, an
unfaithful servant by a Dog, and so on, as one of our Poets has elegantly
pointed out in his Fable G^y's Fable of the Shepherd and Philosopher.
. I only mean that we should con^ine our speculations within due bounds, and
not careless animals to the neglect of the human race.

Then you would have condemned a Lady of my acquaintance said the Gentleman,
who has a little Lap-dog on which her happiness totally depends, and to use a
vulgar expression, her very life seems to be wrapped up in his I am sure it is
quite provoking to see a reasonable creature make herself so ridiculous. It is
more than ridiculous, replied Mrs. Benson; it is really sinful. At this instant
the arrival of Mrs. Franks's coach was announced, and she with the Gentlemen
took leave.

As soon as they were gone, pray mamma, said Harriet, what does the learned Pig
do? I had a great desire to ask Mrs. Franks, but was fearful she would think me
impertinent. I commend your modesty my dear, replied Mrs. Benson, but would not
have lead you into such a degree of restraint, as to prevent your gratifying
that laudable curiosity, without which young persons must remain ignorent of
many things very proper for them to be acquainted with. Mrs. Franks would, I am
sure, have been far from thinking you impertinent: Those enquiries only are
thought troublesome, by which children interrupt conversation, and endeavor to
attract attention to their own insignificant prattle; but all people of good
sense and good nature delight in giving them useful information. In respect to
the learned Pig, I have heard things which are quite astonishing in a species
of animals generally regarded as very stupid. The creature was shown for a
sight in a room provided for the purpose, where a number of people assembled to
view his performances. Two alphabets of large letters on card paper were placed
on the floor: one of the company was then desired to propose a word which he
wished the Pig to spell. This his keeper repeated to him, and the Pig picked
out every letter successively with his snout, and collected them together till
the word was completed. He was then desired to tell the hour of the day, and
one of the company held a watch to him, which he seemed with his little cunning
eyes to examine very attentively; and having done so, picked out figures for
the hour and minutes of the day. He showed a number of tricks of the same
nature, to the great diversion of the spectator^. For my own part, though I was
in London at the time he was exhibited, and heard continually of this wonderful
Pig from persons of my acquaintance, I never went to see him; for I am fully
persuaded, that great cruelty must have been exercised in teaching him things
so foreign to his nature, and therefore would not give any encouragement to
such a scheme.

And do you think, mamma, said Harriet, that the Pig knows the letters, and can
really spell words? I think it possible, my dear, for the Pig to be taught to
know the letters one from the other, and that his keeper has some private sign,
by which he directs him to each that are wanted; -- but that he has an idea of
spelling, I can never believe, nor are animals capable of attaining human
sciences, because, for these, human faculties are requisite; and no art of man
can change the nature of any thing, though we may be able to improve that
nature to a certain degree, or at least to call forth to view, powers which
would be hidden from us, because they would only be exerted in the intercourse
of animals with each other. As far as this can be done by familiarizing them,
and showing them such a degree of kindness as is consistent with our higher
obligations, it may be an agreeable amusement, but will never answer any
important purpose to mankind; and I would advise you, Harriet, never to give
countenance to those people who show what they call learned animals; as you may
assure yourself they exercise great barbarities upon them, of which starving
them almost to death is most likely among the number. But, my dear, it is now
time for you to retire to rest, I will therefore bid you a goodnight.

CHAP. X.
EARLY in the morning the hen Redbrest awakened her young brood. Come, my
little ones, said she, shake off your drowsiness, remember this is the day
fixed for your entrance into the world. I desire that each of you will dress
your feathers before you go out; for a slovenly bird is my aversion, and
neatness is a great advantage to the appearance of every one.

The father was upon the wing betimes, that he might give each of his young
ones a breakfast before they attempted to leave the nest. When he had fed them,
he desired his mate to accompany him as usual to Mrs. Benson's, where he found
the parlour window open, and his young friends at breakfast with their papa and
mamma. Crumbs had been, according to custom, strewed before the window, which
the other birds had almost entirely devoured; but the Redbreasts took their
usual post on the tea-table, and the cock bird sung his morning lay; after
which they returned with all posible speed to the nest, for having so important
an affair to manage, they could not be long absent. Neither could their young
benefactors pay so much attention to them as usual, for they were impatient to
fetch the birds nests from Miss Jenkin's; therefore, as soon as breakfast was
ended, they set out on their expedition. Harriet carried a basket large enough
to hold two nests, and Frederick a smaller one for the other; thus equipped,
with a servant attending them, they set off.

Mr. Jenkins's house was about a mile from Mr. Benson's, it was delightfully
situated; there was a beaut^ful lawn and canal before it, and a charming garden
behind; on one side were corn fields, and on the other a wood. In such a
delightful retreat as this, it was natural to expect to find a great many
birds; but, to Miss Harriet's surprise they only saw a few straggling ones here
and there, who fled with the utmost precipitation as soon as she and her
brother appeared; on which she observed to Frederick, that she supposed Master
Jenkin's practice of taking birds nests had made them so shy, and entreated him
never to commit so barbarous an action. She said a great deal to him about the
cruelties that naughty boy had boasted of the evening before, which Frederick
promised to remember.

As soon as they arrived at the house, Miss Jenkins ran out to receive them,
but her brother was gone to school. We are come, my dear Lucy, said Miss
Benson, to claim the performance of Master Jenkin's promise; how are your
little prisoners? O! I know not what to say to you, my dear, said Miss Jenkins,
I have very bad news to tell you, and I fear you will blame me exceedingly,
though not more than I blame myself. I heartily wish I had returned home
immediately after the kind lecture your mamma favored me with yesterday, which
showed me the cruelty of my behavior, though I was then ashamed to own my
conviction. I walked as fast as I could all the way from your house, and
determined to give each of the little creatures a good supper; for which
purpose I had an egg boiled and very nicely chopped; I mixed up some bread and
water very smooth, and put a little seed with the chopped egg amongst it, and
then carried it to the room where I left the nests. But what was my concern,
when I found that my care was too late for the greatest part of them! Every
Sparrow lay dead and bloody, they seemed to have killed each other. Urged I
suppose by extreme hunger, each spent on his unhappy associates those pecks and
blows which were my proper desert. In the nest of Linnets, which were very
young, I found one dead, two just expiring, and the other almost exhausted, but
still able to swallow; to him, therefore, I immediately dispensed some of the
food I had prepared, which greatly revived him; and as I thought he would
suffer with cold in the nest by himself, I covered him over with wool, and had
this morning the pleasure of finding him quite recovered. What, all the
Sparrows and three Linnets dead! said Frederick, whose little eyes swam with
tears at the melancholy tale: And pray, Miss Jenkins, have you starved all the
Blackbirds too? Not all, my little friend, answered Miss Jenkins, but I must
confess that some of them have fallen victims to my barbarous neglect; however,
there are two fine once alive, which I shall, with the surviving Linnet,
cheerfully resign to the care of my dear Harriet, whose tenderness will, I
hope, be rewarded by the pleasure of hearing them sing when they are old
enough. But I beg you will stay and rest yourselves after your walk. Let me see
the birds first, said Frederick. That you shall do, answered Miss Jenkins; and
taking him by the hand, conducted him to the room in which she kept them,
accompanied by Miss Benson. She then fed the birds, and gave particular
instructions for making their food, and declared that she would never be a
receiver of birds nests any more, but expressed her apprehensions that it would
be difficult to wean Edward from his propensity for taking them; however, said
she, he is going as a boarder to a private Academy soon, where I think he will
have better employment for his le^sure hours. Miss Jenkins then took her young
friends into the parlour to her Coverness (for her mamma was dead) who received
them very kindly, and gave each of them a piece of cake and some fruit; after
which Miss Jenkins led them again into the room where the birds were, and very
carefully put the nest, with the poor solitary Linnet, into one basket, and
that with the two Blackbirds into the other. Frederick was very urgent to carry
the latter, which his sister consented to; and then, bidding adieu to their
friend, they set off on their return home, attented by the maid as before.

Well, Frederick, said Miss Harriet, as they walked along, what think you of
birdnesting now? Should you like to occasion the death of so many harmless
little creatures? No, indeed, said Frederick; and I think Miss Jenkins a very
naughty girl for starving them. She was to blame, but is now sorry for her
fault, my dear, therefore you must not speak unkindly of her; besides, you
know, she has no good mamma, as we have, to teach her what is proper; and her
papa is obliged to be absent from home very often, and leave her to the care of
a Governess, who perhaps was never instructed herself to be tender to animals.
With this kind of conversation they amused themselves as they walked, every now
and then peeping into their baskets to see their little birds, which were very
lively and well. They entreated the maid to take them through the orchard,
which had a gate that opened into a meadow that lay in their way, having no
doubt of obtaining admittance, as it was the usual hour for their friend Joe to
work there. They accordingly knocked at the gate, which was immediately opened
to them, and Frederick requested Joe to show him the Robins nest. But before we
proceed to this part of our History, we must return to the Redbrests, whom we
left on the wing, flying back to the ivy-wall, in order to take their young
ones abroad.

CHAP. XI.
AS the father entered the nest, he cried out, with a cheerful voice, Well, my
nestlings are you all ready? Yes, they replied. The mother then advanced, and
desired that each of them would get upon the edge of the nest. Robin and Pecksy
sprang up in an instant, but Dicky and Flapsy being timorous, were not so
expeditious. The hearts of the parents felt a rapturous delight at the
advantageous view they had now of their young family who appeared to be strong,
vigorous, and lively: and, in a word, endued with every gift of nature
requisite to their success in the world. Now, said the father, stretch your
wings a little, Robin, and flutter them a little in this manner, (showing him
the way) and be sure to observe my directions exactly. Very well said he; do
not attempt to fly yet, for here is neither air nor space enough for that
purpose. Walk gently after me to the wall, now hop and perch upon this branch,
and as soon as you see me fly away, spread your wings and exert all the
strength you have to follow me. Robin acquitted himself to admiration, and
alighted very safely on the ground. Now stand still, said the father till the
rest join us: Then going back, he called upon Dicky to do the same as his
brother had done; but Dicky was very fearful of fluttering his wings, for he
had a great deal of cowardice in his disposition, and expressed many
apprehensions that he should not be able to reach the ground without falling,
as they were at such a great height from it. His father who was a very
courageous bird, was quite angry with him. Why you foolish little thing, said
he, do you mean to stay in the nest by yourself and starve? I shall leave off
bringing you food, I assure you. Do you think your wings were given to be
always folded by your sides, and that the whole employment of your life is to
pick your feathers, and make yourself look pretty? Without exercise you cannot
long enjoy health; besides you will soon have your livelihood to earn, and
therefore idleness in you would be the height of folly; get up this instant.
Dicky, intimidated by his father's displeasure, got up, and advanced as far as
the branch from which he was to descend; but here his fears returned, and
instead of making an effort to fly, he stood flapping his wings in a most
irresolute manner, and suffered his father to lead the way twice without
following him. This good parent, finding he would not venture to fly, took a
circuit unperceived by Dicky, and watching the opportunity when his wings were
a little spread, came suddenly behind him, and pushed him off from the branch.
Dicky, finding himself in actual danger of falling, now gladly str^ed his
pinions, and upborn by the air, gently descended to the ground, so near the
spot where Robin stood, that the latter easily reached him by hopping. The
mother now undertook to conduct Flapsy and Pecksy, whildst the father staid to
take care of the two already landed. Flapsy made a thousand difficulties, but
at length yielded to her mother's persuasions, and flew safely down. Pecksy
without the least hesitation, accompanied her, and by exactly following the
directions given, found ^he task much easier than she expected. As soon as they
had a little r^vered from the fatigue and fright of their first essay at
flying, they began to look around them with astonishment. Every object on which
they turned their eyes excited their curiosity and wonder. They were no longer
confined to a small nest, built in a small hole, but were now at full liberty
in the open air. The orchard itself appeared to them a world. For some time
each remained silent, gazing around, first at one thing, and then at another:
at length Flapsy cried out, what a charming place the world is! I had no
conception it was half so big! And do you suppose then, replied the mother,
that you now behold the whole world? I have seen but a small part of it myself,
and yet have flown over so large a space, that what is at present within our
view appears to me a little inconsiderable spot, and I have conversed with
several foreign birds, who informed me that the country they came from was so
far distant, that they were many days on their journey hither, though they flew
the nearest way, and scarcely allowed themselves any resting time. Come, said
the father, let us proceed to business, we did not leave the nest merely to
look about us. You are now, my young ones, safely landed on the ground, let me
instruct you what you are to do on it. Every living creature that comes into
the world has something allotted him to perform, and therefore should not stand
an idle spectator of what others are doing. We small birds have a very easy
task in comparison of many animals I have had an opportunity of observing,
being only required to seek food for ourselves, build nests, and provide for
our young ones till they are able to procure their own livelihood. We have
indeed enemies to dread; Hawks and other birds of prey will catch us up, if we
are not upon our guard; but the worst of foes we have are those of the human
race; though even among them Redbrests have a better chance than many other
birds, on account of a charitable action which a pair of our species are said
to have performed to a little boy and girl Alluding to the ballad of the
children of the wood.
who were lost in a wood where they were starved to death. The Redbreasts I
mentioned saw the affectionate pair hand in hand, stretched on the cold ground,
and would have fed them had they been capable of receiving nourishment; but
finding them quit dead, and being unable to bury them, resolved to cover them
with leaves. This was an arduous task, but many a Redbreast has since shared
the reward of it, and I believe that those that do good to others, will always
meet with a recompense some way or other. But I declare I am doing the very
thing I was reproving you for -- chattering away when I should be minding
business. Come, hop after me, and we shall soon find something worth having.
Fear nothing, for you are now in a place of security; there is no Hawk near,
and I have never seen any of the human race enter this orchard, but the
monsters who paid you visits in the nest, and others equally inoffensive. The
father then hopped away, followed by Robin and Dicky, whilst his mate conducted
the female part of the family. The parents instructed the young ones in what
manner to seek for food, and they proved very successful, for there were a
great number of insects just at hand. Dicky had the good fortune to find four
little worms together, but instead of calling his brothers and sisters to
partake of them, he devoured them all himself. Are you not ashamed you little
greedy creature? cried his father, who observed his selfish disposition, What
would you think of your brothers and sisters, were they to serve you so? In a
family, every individual might to consult the welfare of the whole, instead ^f
his own satisfaction. It is his own truest interest ^o do so. A day may come
when he who has now sufficient to supply the want of his relations, may stand
in need of assistance from them. But setting aside selfish considerations,
which are the last which ever find place in a generous breast, how great is the
pleasure of doing good, and contributing to the happiness of others! Dicky was
quite confounded and immediately hopped away, if possible to find something for
his brother and sister, that he might regain their good opinion.

In the mean while Robin found a caterpillar, which he intended to take for
Pecksy; but just as he was going to pick it up, a Linnet, who had a nest in the
orchard, snatched it from him and flew away with. Inflamed with the most
furious rage. Robin ad^^nced to his father, and entreated he would fly after
the Linnet and tear his heart out. That would be taking violent revenge indeed,
says his father. No, Robin, the linnet has as great a right to the caterpillar
as you or I; and in all probability. has many little gaping mouths at home
ready to receive it. But, however this may be, I had, for my own part, rather
sustain an injury than take revenge. You must expect to have many a scramble of
this kind in your life; but if you give way to a resentful temper, you will do
yourself more harm than all the enemies in the world can do you; for you will
be in perpetual agitation from an idea, that every one who does not act in
direct conformity to your wishes, has a design against you. Therefore, restrain
your anger that you may be happy; for believe me, peace and tranquillity are the
most valuable things you can possess. At this instant Pecksy came with a fine
fat spider in her mouth, which she laid at her mother's feet, and thus
addressed her: Accept, my dear parent, the first tribute of gratitude which I
have ever been able to offer you. How have I formerly longed to ease those
toils which you and my dear father endured for our sakes; and gladly would I
now release you from farther fatigue on my account, but I am still a poor
unexperienced creature, and must continue to take shelter under your wing. All
my power to assist you shall however be exerted, and I will hop as long as I am
able to procure provisions for the family. The eyes of the mother sparkled with
delight; and knowing that Pecksy's love by a refusal would be disappointed she
eat the spider, which the dutiful nestling had so affectionately brought her,
and then said -- How happy would families be, if every one like you, my dear
Pecksy, consulted the the happiness of the rest, instead of turning their whole
attention to their own interest. Dicky was not present at this speech, which he
mi^ht have considered as a reflection on his conduct; but he arrived as it was
ended, and presented Pe^ksy with a worm, like those he had himself so greedily
eaten. She received it with thanks, and declared it w^ ^y welcome from his
beak. Certainly, (...) the mother, fraternal love stamps a value on the most
trifling presents. Dicky felt himself happy in having regained the good opinion
of his mother and obliged his sister, and resolved for the future to be
generous.

The young Redbreasts soon after all collected together near the gate which led
into the meadow, when they were suddenly alarmed with a repetition of the same
noises which had formerly so terrified them in the nest; and Robin, who was
foremost beheld to his very great amazement, Master and Miss Benson, the maid
who attended them, and Joe the gardener, who having opened the gate, was, at
the request of his young Master and Mistress, conducting to the ivy wall.
Robin, with all his courage, and indeed he was not deficient in this
qualification was seized with a great tremor; for if the view he had of the
face of these persons had appeared so dreadful to him as he sat in the nest,
what must it now be, to behold their full size, and see them advancing with he
thought, gigantic strides, toward him! He expected nothing less than to be
crushed to death with the foot of one of them; and not yet having attained his
full strength, and never having raised himself in the air, he knew not how to
escape; therefore chirped so loudly, as not only to surprise his brother and
sisters, and bring his father and mother to enquire the meaning of his cry, but
also to at^ the attention of Master and Miss Benson -- what chirping is that?
cried the latter -- It was, cried the maid, the cry of a young bird, was it not
one of those in the baskets? No, said Frederick, the noise came that way,
pointing to some current trees. -- My birds are very well, and so is my Linnet,
replied Harriet -- Frederick then set down his charge very carefully, and began
looking about the place from whence he supposed the noise proceeded, when to
his great joy he soon discovered the Redbreasts and their little family. He
called eagerly to his sister, who was equally pleased with the figh^ Frederick
then stooped down to take a nearer view of them, by which means he directy
fronted Robin who, as soon as the young gentleman's face was on a level with
his eyes recollected him, and called to his brothers and sisters, told them
they need not be afraid. Miss Benson followed her brother's example, and
delighted the little flock with a sight of her benign countenance. She heartily
lamented having nothing with which to regale her old favorites and their
family, when Frederick produced from his pocket a piece of biscuit which they
crumbled and scattered. Miss Benson recollecting that her mamma would expect
her at home, and that the birds in the basket would be hungry, persuaded her
brother to take up his little load and return; they therefore left the
Redbreasts enjoying the fruits of their bounty.

CHAP. XII.
WHEN the happy birds had shared amongst them the acceptable present made by
their young benefactors, the mother reminded her mate that it would be proper
to think of returning to the nest. If the little ones fatigue themselves too
much with hopping about, said she, their strength will be exhausted, and they
will not be able to fly back^ True, my love, replied her mate, gather them
under your wings a little, as there is no reason to apprehend danger here, and
then we will see what they can do. She complied with his desire, and when they
were sufficiently rested, got up, on which the whole brood instantly raised
themselves on their feet. Now Robin, cried the father, let us see your
dexterity at flying; come, I will show you how to raise yourself, O! you need
not take that trouble, said the conceited bird, as I flew down, I warant I know
how to fly up: then spreading his wings, he attempted to rise, but in so
unskilful a manner, that he only shuffled along upon the ground. That will not
do, however, cried the father, shall I show you now? Robin, persisted in it
that he stood in no need of instruction, and tried again; he managed to raise
himself a little way, but soon tumbled headlong. His mother then began
reproving him for his obstinacy, and advised him to accept his father's kind
offer of teaching him. You may depend on it, Robin, said she, that he is in
every respect wiser than you, and as he has had so much practice, he must of
course be expert in the art of flying; and if you persist in making your own
foolish experiments, you will only commit a number of errors, and make yourself
rediculous; I should commend your courage, provided you would add prudence to
it; but blundering on in this ignorant manner, is only rashness. Let him alone,
let him alone, said the father; if he is above being taught he may find his own
way to the nest, I will teach his brother. Come, said he, Dicky, let us see
what you can do at flying upwards, you cut a noble figure this morning when you
flew down. Dicky, with reluctance, advanced; he said he did not see what
occasion they had to go back to the nest at all; he should suppose they might
easily find some corner to creep into, till they were strong enough to roost in
trees, as other birds did. Why you, said the father, are as ridiculous with
your timidity, as Robin with his conceitedness. Those who give way to
groundless fears, generally expose themselves to real dangers; if you rest on
the earth all night, you will suffer a great deal from cold and damp, and may
very likely be devoured whilst you sleep, by rats and other creatures that go
out in the night to seek for food; whereas, if you determine to go back to the
nest, you have but one effort to make; for which, I will venture to say, you
have a sufficient degree of strength, and then you will lie warm, safe, and
quiet* however, do as you will. Dicky began to think it was his interest to
obey his father, and said he would endeavor to fly up, but was still fearful
he should not be able to effect it. Never despair, replied his father, of doing
what others have done before you. Turn your eyes upwards, and behold what
numbers of birds are at this instant soaring in the air. They were once all
nestlings, like yourself. See there that new-fledged Wren, with what courage he
skims along? Let it not be said, that a Redbreast lies grovelling on the earth,
whilst a Wren soars above him! Dicky was now ashamed of himself, and inspired
with emulation: therefore, without delay, spread his wings and his tail; his
father with pleasure placed himself in a proper attitude before him, then
rising from the ground, led the way, and Dicky, by carefully following his
example, safely arrived at the nest, which he found a most comfortable resting
place after the fatigue of the morning, and rejoiced that he had a good father
to teach him what was most conducive to his welfare.

The father having seen him safe home, returned to his mate, who during his
short absence, had been endeavoring to convince Robin of his fault, but to no
purpose; he did not like to be taught, what he still persuaded himself he could
do by his own exertions; she therefore applied herself to Flapsy. Come my dear,
said she, get ready to follow me when your father returns, for the sun casts a
great heat here, and the nest will be quite comfortable to you. Flapsy dreaded
the experiment; however, as she could not but blame both Robin's and Dicky's
conduct, she resolved to do her best; but entreated her mother to inform her
very particularly how to proceed. Well then, said the tender parent, observe
me. First bend your legs, then spring from the ground as quick as you can,
stretching your wings as you rise, straight out on each side of your body;
shake them with a quick motion, as you will see me do, and the air will yield
to you, and at the same time support your weight; which ever way you want to
turn, strike the air with the wing on the contrary side, and that will bring
you about. She then rose from the ground, and having practiced two or three
times repeatedly, what she had been teaching, Flapsy at length ventured to
follow her, but with a palpitating heart; and was soon happily seated in the
nest by the side of Dicky, who rejoiced that his favorite sister was safely
arrived.

The mother bird now went back to Pecksy, who was waiting with her father till
she returned; for the good-parent chose to leave the female part of his family
to the particular management of their mother. Pecksy was fully prepared for her
flight, for she had attentively observed the instruction given to the others,
and also their errors; she therefore kept the happy medium betwixt self-conceit
and timidity, indulging that moderated emulation, which ought to possess every
young heart; and resolving that neither her inferiors nor equals should soar
about her, she sprang from the ground, and with a steadiness and agility,
wonderful for her first essay, followed her mother to the nest, who now rested
herself, waiting with impatience for the arrival of Robin and her mate; but
Robin disappointed her hopes, for he sat sulky; though convinced that he had
been in the wrong, he would not humble himself to his father; who therefore
resolved to leave him a little while, taking his stand, however, on a adjoining
tree that he might be at hand to assist him should he repent of his folly: as
soon as Robin found himself deserted, instead of being sorry, he gave way to
anger and resentment; -- Why, cried he, am I to be treated in this manner, who
am the eldest of the family, whilst all the little darlings are fondled and
carressed? but I don't care, I can get to the nest yet, I make no doubt; he
then attempted to fly, and after a great many trials, at length got up in the
air, but knew not which way to direct his course; and sometimes turned to the
right, and sometimes to the left; now he advanced forwards a little, and now,
fearing he was wrong, came back again: at length quite spent with fatigue, he
fell to the ground and bruised himself a good deal; stunned with the fall, he
lay for some minutes without sense or motion, but soon revived; and finding
himself alone in this dismal condition, the horrors of his situation filled him
with dreadful apprehensions, and the bitterest remorse. Oh! cried he, that I
had but followed the advice and example of my tender parents, then had I been
safe in the nest, blessed with their kind caresses, and enjoying the company of
my dear brother and sisters! but now I am of all birds, the most wretched!
never shall I be able to fly, for every joint of me has received a shock which
I doubt it will not recover. Where shall I find shelter from the scorching sun,
whose piercing rays already render the ground I lie on intolerably hot? What
kind beak will supply me with food to assuage the pangs of hunger which I shall
soon feel? By what means shall I procure even a drop of water to quench that
thirst which so frequently returns? Who will protect me from the various tribes
of barbarous animals which I have been told make a prey of birds? Oh! my dear,
my tender mother, if the sound of my voice can reach your ears, pity my
condition, and fly to my succor. The kind parent waited not for farther
solicitation, but darting from the branch on which she had been a painful
eyewitness of Robin's fall, she instantly stood before him. I have listened,
said she, to your lamentations; and since you seem convinced of your error,
will not add to your suffering by my reproaches; my heart relents toward you,
and gladly would I afford you all the assistance in my power: but alas! I can
do but little for your relief; however, let me persuade you, to exert all the
strength you have, and use every effort for your own preservation; I will
endeavor to procure you some refreshment, and at the same time contrive means
of fixing you in a place of more ^ecurity and comfort, than that in which you
at present lie. So saying, she flew to a little stream which flowed in an
adjacent meadow, and fetched from the brink of it, a worm which she had observ^
(...) angler to drop as she perched on the tree; with this she immediately
returned to the penitent Robin, who received the welcome gift with gratitude.
Refreshed with this delicious morsel, and comforted by his mother's kindness,
he was able to stand up, and on shaking his wings, found that he was not so
greatly hurt as he apprehended; his head, indeed, was bruised, so that one eye
was almost closed, and he had injured the joint of one wing so that he could
not possibly fly: however, he could manage to hop, and the parent bird
observing that Joe the gardener was cutting a hawthorn hedge, which was near
the spot, desired Robin to follow her; this he did, though with great pain. Now,
said she, look carefully about, and you will soon find insects of one kind or
another for your sustenance, during the remainder of the day, and before
evening I will return to you again. Summon all your courage, for I make no
doubt you will be safe whilst our friend continues his work, as none of those
creatures which are enemies to birds will venture to come near him. Robin took
a sorrowful farewell, and the mother flew to the nest. You have been absent a
long time, my love, said her mate, but I perceived that you were indulging your
tenderness toward that disobedient nestling, who has rendered himself unworthy
of it; however, I do not condemn you for giving him assistance, for had not you
undertaken the task, I would myself have flown to him, instead of returning
home; how is he, likely to live and reward your kindness? Yes, said she, he
will, I flatter myself, soon perfectly recover, for his hurt is not very
considerable; and I have the pleasure to tell you, he is extremely sensible of
his late folly, and I dare say will endeavor to repair his fault with future
good behavior: this is pleasing news indeed said he. The little nestlings
delighted to hear their dear brother safe, and convinced of his error;
expressed the utmost joy and satisfaction, and entreated their father to let
them descend again to keep him company; to this he would by no means consent,
because, as he told them, the fatigue would be too great; and it was proper
that Robin should feel a little longer the consequences of his presumption:
tomorrow, said he, you shall pay him a visit, but today he must be by
himself: on this they dropped their request, knowing that their parent was the
best judge what was proper to be done; and not doubting, but that his affection
would lead him to every thing that was conducive to the real happiness of his
family: but yet they could not tell how to be happy without Robin, and were
continually perking up their little heads, fancying they heard his cries; both
the father and mother frequently took a peep at him, and had the satisfaction
of seeing him very safe by their friend Joe the gardner. But it is time to
enquire after Master and Miss Benson.

CHAP. XIII.
THIS happy pair arrived at the house soon after they left the Redbreasts, and
communicated every circumstance of their expedition to their kind mamma; who
hearing their little prisoners in the basket chirp very loudly, desired they
would immediately go and feed them; which they gladly did, and then took a
short lesson. Mrs. Benson told Miss Harriet that she was going to make a visit
in the afternoon, and should take her with her, therefore desired she would
keep herself quite still, that she might not be fatigued after the walk she had
had in the morning; for though she meant to go in the coach, it was her
intention to return on foot, as the weather was so remarkably fine. The young
lady took great care of the birds, and Frederick engaged, with the assistance
of the maid, to feed them during her absence. Miss Benson was then dressed to
attend her mamma. Mrs. Addis, to whose house they were going, was a widow lady;
she had two children, Master Charles a boy of twelve years old at school, and
Miss Augusta about seven at home. But these children were quite strangers to
Miss Benson. On entering the hall, the young lady took notice of a very
disagreeable smell, and was surprised with the appearance of a parrot, a
paroquet, and a macaw, all in most elegant cages. In the next room she came to,
were a squirrel and a monkey, which had each a little house neatly ornamented.

On being introduced into the drawing room she observed in one corner a lap dog
lying on a splendid cushion; and in a beautiful little cradle, which she
supposed to contain a large wax doll, lay, in great state, a cat with a litter
of kittens. In vain did Miss Harriet look for Mrs. Addis's children, for
neither of them appeared. After the usual compliments of salutation were over,
I have, said Mrs. Benson, taken the liberty of bringing my daughter with me,
madam, in hopes of inducing you to favor us in return, with the company of
Master and Miss Addis. You are very obliging, Madam, answered the lady; but
indeed I never take my children with me, they are so rude; on the contrary, I
am obliged to keep the boy almost continually at school, for he is so cruel to
my dear little precious creatures, that there is no bearing him at home; and as
for Augusta, it will be time enough some years hence for her to go a visiting.
I am sorry to hear you say this, madam, said Mrs. Benson, but hope my daughter
will at least be indulged with seeing Miss Addis today, or I shall think you
are displeased at my bringing Harriet here. This in reality was the case, and
Mrs. Benson percieved it, for the lady looked very cross; however, she could
not refuse having her daughter come into the drawing room, as her guest so
particularly desired it. Miss Harriet was very curious to examine the varius
animals which were collected together by this extraordinary lady; but as her
mamma never suffered her to run about when she accompanied her to other
people's houses, she sat down and kept quite still, only glancing her eye first
to one part of the room, and then to the other, as her attention was
successively attracted. Mrs. Addis rang the bell, and ordered that Augusta
might come to her. The footman, who had never before received such a command,
(for Mrs. Addis only saw the child in the nursery) stared with astonishment,
and thought he had mistaken it. However, on his mistress's repeating, "that the
little girl was to be brought down," he went to tell the nursery-maid to take
her. What new fancy is this? said she, Who would ever have thought of her
wanting the child in the drawing room? I have no stockings clean for her, not a
frock to put on but what is all to pieces; I wish she would spend less on her
cats, and dogs, and monkies, and then her child might appear as she ought to
do. I will not go up stairs, Nancy, said the child, mamma is so cross to me. But
you must, said Nancy; besides, there is a pretty young lady come to see you;
and if you will go like a good girl, you shall have a piece of sugared bread
and butter for your supper, and you shall carry the doll which your good-mamma
gave you, to show your little visitor. These bribes had the desired effect, and
Miss Augusta went into the drawing room; but instead of entering it like a
young lady, with a genteel curtsey, she stopped at the door, hung down her
head, and looked like a little simpleton. Miss Benson was so surprised at her
awkwardness* that she did not know what to do, and looked at her mamma; who
said, Harriet, my love, cannot you take the little lady by the hand and lead her
to me? I believe she is afraid of strangers. On this Miss Harriet arose to do
so; but Augusta, apprehensive that she would snatch her doll away, was going to
run out, only she was not able to open the door. Mrs Benson was quite shocked
to see how sickly, dirty, and ragged this child was, and what a very vulgar
figure she made, for want of instruction; but Mrs. Addis was so taken up at
that instant with the old lap-dog, which had, as she thought, fallen into a
fit, that she did not mind her entrance; and before she perceived it, the child
went up to the cradle in order to put her doll into it; and seized one of the
kittens by the neck, the squeaking of which, provoked the old cat to scratch
her, and this made her cry and drop the kitten on the floot. Mrs. Addis seeing
this, flew to the little beast, endeavored to sooth it with caresses, and was
going to beat Augusta for touching it, but Mrs. Benson interceded for her;
though she could scarcely gain attention, Mrs. Addis being so greatly agitated.
Tea was now ordered, and Miss Augusta being urgent to go to her maid, Mrs.
Benson thought it best she should be indulged; and therefore said, she was sure
Harriet ^ould not desire to detain her against her inclinations: and Augusta
was dismissed by her mamma, without so much as one tender kiss or kind
expression!

The tea things being set, the footman came in with the urn, which employing
both his hands, he left the door open; and was, to the great terror of Miss
Harriet, and even of her mamma too, followed by the monkey they saw in the
hall, who having broke his chain, came to make a visit to his lady: she, far
from being disconcerted, seemed highly pleased with his cleverness. O my sweet
dear p^g, said she, are you come to see us? Pray show how like a gentleman you
can behave: just as she had said this, he leaped upon the tea-table, and took
cup after cup, and threw them on the ground, till he broke half the set; then
jumped on the back of his mistress's chair, and tore the cover of it; in short,
as soon as he had finished one piece of mischief, he began another; till Mrs.
Addis' though vastly diverted with his wit, was obliged to to have him caught
and confined; after which she began making tea, and quietness was for a short
time restored. But Mrs. Benson, though capable of conversing on most subjects,
could not engage Mrs. Addis in any discourse, but upon the perfections of her
birds and beasts; and a variety of uninteresting particulars were related,
concerning their wit or misfortunes. On hearing the clock strike seven, she
begged Mrs. Bensons's excuse; but said she made it a constant rule, to see all
her dear darlings fed at that hour, and entreated that she and the young lady
would take a turn in the garden in the meanwhile. This was very unpolite, but
Mrs. Benson desired she would use no ceremonies with her, and was really glad
of the respite it gave her from company so irksome: and Miss Harriet was happy
to be alone with her mamma: she, however, forbore to make any remarks on Mrs.
Addis, because she had been taught, that it did not become young persons to
censure the behavior of those who were older than themselves. The garden was
spacious, but overrun with weeds; the gravel-walks were so rough for want of
rolling, that it was quite painful to tread on them: and the grass on the lawn
so long, that there was no walking with any comfort, for the gardner was almost
continually going on some errand or another for Mrs. Addis's darlings; so Mrs.
Benson and her daughter sat down on a garden-seat, with an intention of waiting
there till Mrs. Addis should summon them. Miss Harriet could not refrain from
expressing a wish that it was time to go home; to which Mrs. Benson replied,
that she did not wonder at her desire to return, but, said she, my dear, as the
world was not made merely for us, we must endeavor to be patient under every
disagreeable circumstance we meet with. I know what opinion you have formed of
Mrs. Addis, and should not have brought you to be a spectator of her follies,
had I not hoped that an hour or two passed in her company would afford you a
lesson which might be useful to you through life. I have before told you, that
our affections toward the inferior parts of the creation should be properly
regulated; you have, in your friend Miss Jenkins and her brother, seen
instances of cruelty to them, which I am sure you will never be inclined to
imitate; but I was apprehensive you might fall into the contrary extreme, which
is equally blameable. Mrs. Addis you see, has absolutely transferred the
affection she ought to feel for her child, to creatures who would really be
happier without it. As for puss who lies in the cradle in all her splendour, I
will engage to say, she would pass her time pleasanter in a basket of clean
straw, placed in a situation where she could occasionally amuse herself with
catching mice. The lap dog is, I am sure, a miserable object, full of deseases,
the consequences of luxurious living. How enviable is the lot of a spaniel,
that is at liberty to be the companion of his master's walks, when compared
with his! Mr. Pug I am certain would enjoy himself much more in his native
wood. And I am greatly mistaken, if the parrots, etc. have not cause to wish
themselves in their respective countries, or at least divided into separate
families, where they would be better attended; for Mrs. Addis, by having such a
number of creatures, has put it out of her power to see properly with her own
eyes to all. But come, let us go back into the house, the time for our going
home draws near, and I wish not to prolong my visit. Saying this she arose, and
with her daughter went into the the drawing room, which opened into the garden;
the other door which led to the adjoining apartments was not shut, and gave
them an opportunity of hearing what really distressed Mrs. Benson, and
perfectly terrified the gentle Harriet. "Be gone, wretch," says Mrs. Addis, "be
gone this instant, you shall not stay a moment longer in this house." "I hope,
Madam, you will have the goodness to give me a character; indeed and indeed, I
fed Poll, but I believe he got cold when you let him stand out of doors the
other day." "I will give you no character I tell you, so depart this instant.
Oh my poor, dear, dear creature! I fear you will never recover; John, Thom,
here run this instant to Perkins the bird-catcher, perhaps he can tell me what
to give him;" then bursting into a flood of tears, she sat down and forgot her
guests* Mrs. Benson thought it necessary to remind her, that she was in the
house, and stepped to the door to ask what was the matter. Mrs. Addis
recollected herself sufficiently, to beg pardon for neglecting to pay attention
to her, but declared, that the dreadful misfortune that had befallen her, had
made her insensible to every thing else. What can the matter be? said Mrs.
Benson. Have you heard of the death of a dear friend; has your child met with
an accident! Oh! no, said she, but dear Poll is taken suddenly ill; my dear
Poll which I have had these seven years, and I fear he never will recover. If
this is all, madam, said Mrs. Benson, I really cannot pity you, nor excuse your
behavior to me: for it is an instance of disrespect which I believe no other
person but yourself would show me, and I shall take my leave of your house for
ever: but before I go, permit me to say, that you act in a very wrong manner,
and will certainly feel the ill effects of your injustice to your
fellow creatures, in thus robbing them of the love you owe them, to lavish it
away on those who are really sufferers by your kindness. At this instant the
footman entered to inform Mrs. Benson that her servant was come, on which,
accompanied by Miss Harriet, she, without further ceremony, left Mrs. Addis to
compose herself as she could.

As they walked along, both Mrs. Benson and her daughter continued silent, for
the former was greatly agitated, and the latter quite in consternation at what
had lately passed, but their attention was soon awakened by the supplication of
a poor woman, who entreated them to give her some relief, as she had a sick
husband and seven children in a starving condition; of which, she said they
might be eyewitnesses, if they would have the goodness to step into a barn
hard by. The invitation of wretchedness never was given in vain to Mrs. Benson:
her heart was ever awake to the tender feelings of humanity; and taking her
daughter by the hand, and desiring the servant to stop for her, she followed
the woman, who conducted her to the mansions of real woe, where she beheld a
father, surrounded with his helpless family, whom he could no longer supply
with sustenance; and he himself, though his disease was subdued, was almost on
the point of expiring, for want of some reviving cordial. How come you to be in
this condition, good woman? said Mrs. Benson to his wife, surely you might have
obtained relief before your husband was reduced to such extremity? Oh! my good
Lady, said the woman, we have not been used to beg, but to earn an honest
livelihood by our industry: and never till this sad day, have I known what it
was to ask charity: and the first time I could bring myself to do it, I made
application at the only great house in this village, where I made no doubt
there was abundance. I told my dismal tale to a servant, and begged she would
make it known to her mistress; but she assured me it was in vain to come there,
for her Lady had such a family of cats, dogs, monkies, and all sorts of
creatures, that she had nothing to spare for poor people; at the same instant I
saw a poulterer bring a rabbit and a fowl, which I found were for the favorite
cat and dog. This discouraged me from begging; and I had determined to die
before I would ask again; but the sight of my dear husband and children in this
condition, drives me to it. Well, comfort yourself, said Mrs. Benson, I will
take care of you all. Come to my house tomorrow morning. and we will see what
we can do; in the mean time here is something for a present supply. Mrs. Benson
then departed, as she was fearful of walking late. Miss Harriet was greatly
affected with this scene, and could no longer help exclaiming against Mrs.
Addis. She is deserving of great blame, indeed, said Mrs. Benson; but I have
the pleasure to say, such characters as here is are very uncommon, I mean in the
extreme; though there are numbers of people who fall into the same fault in
some degree, and make themselves truly ridiculous with their unnatural
affections. I wish you, whilst your mind is young, to guard it against such a
blamable weakness. Miss Harriet assured her mamma, that she should never forget
either Mrs. Addis or the lesson she had received on the subject, and then
expressed her satisfaction that they had met the poor woman. I rejoice
sincerely, said Mrs. Benson, that I was fortunate enough to be in time to
assist this poor wretched family, and hope, my love, you will out of your own
little purse, contribute something tomorrow toward their relief. Most
willingly, said Harriet, they shall be welcome to my whole store. They kept
taking on this subject till they arrived at home. Little Frederick, who sat up
an hour beyond his time, came out to meet them, and assured his sister that the
birds were well and fast asleep. I think, said she, it is time for you and I to
follow their example; for my part, with my morning and evening walk together, I
am really tired, so shall beg leave to wish you a good night, my dear mamma;
papa, I suppose will not be at home this week. No, my dear, nor the next, said
Mrs. Benson, for he has many affairs to settle in the West. I am rather
fatigued also, and shall soon retire to rest.

CHAP. XIII.
WE will now return to Robin, whom we left under the protection of Joe the
gardener, though the honost fellow did not know of his guardianship, and
continued his work without perceiving the little cripple, who hopped and
shuffled about, pecking here and there whatever he could meet with. When he had
been for some time by himself, his mother made him another visit, and told him
she had interceded with his father, whose anger was abated, and he would come
to him before he went to rest. Robin rejoiced to hear that there was a chance
of his being reconciled to his father, yet he dreaded the first interview;
however, as it must be, he wished to have it over as soon as possible; and
every wing he heard beat the air, he fancied to be that of his offended parent.
In this state of anxious expectation he continued almost to the time of
sunsetting, when, of a sudden, he heard the well-known voice to which he used
to listen with joy, but which now caused his whole frame to tremble; but
observing a beam of benignity in that eye, in which he looked for anger and
reproach, he cast himself in the most supplicating posture at the feet of his
father, who could no longer resist the desire he felt to receive him into
savor. Your present humility, Robin, said he, disarms my resentment; I gladly
pronounce your pardon, and am persuaded you will never again incur my
displeasure; we will therefore say no more on a subject which gives so much
pain to both of us. Yes, my dear, my too indulgent father, cried Robin, permit
me to make my grateful acknowledgements for your kindness, and to assure you of
my future obedience. The delighted parent accepted his submission, and the
reconciliation was completed. Robin now felt himself greatly relieved; but on
his father's asking him what he intended to do with himself at night, his
spirits sunk again, and he answered, He did not know. Well, said the father, I
have thought of an expedient to secure you from cold at least. In a part of the
orchard, a very little way from hence, there is a place belonging to our friend
the gardener; there I have sheltered myself from several storms, and I am sure
it will afford you a comfortable lodging; so follow me, before it is too late.
The old bird then led the way, and his lame son followed him; when they arrived
they found the door of the tool-house open, and as the threshold was low, Robin
managed to get over it. His father looked carefully about, and at last found,
in a corner, a parcel of shreds, kept for the purpose of nailing up trees.
Here, Robin, cried he, is a charming bed for you, let me see you in it, and
call your mother to have a peep, and then I must bid you good night; so saying
away he flew, and brought his mate, who was perfectly satisfied with the
lodging, provided for her late undutiful, but now repentant son; but reminded
by her mate that if they staid longer they might be shut in, they took leave,
telling Robin they would visit him early in the morning. Though this habitation
was much better than Robin expected, and he was ready enough to own, better
than he deserved, yet he deeply regretted his absence from the nest, and longed
to see again his brother and sisters; however, though part of the night was
spent in bitter reflections, fatigue at length prevailed ove^ anxiety, and he
fell asleep. The nestlings were greatly pleased to find that Robin was likely
to escape the dangers of the night, and even the anxious mother at length
resigned herself to repose. Before the sun showed his glorious face in the
east, every individual of this affectionate family were awake; the father with
impatience waited for the gardener's opening the tool-house* the mother
prepared her little ones for a new excursion. You will be able to descend with
more ease, my dears, today, than you did yesterday, shall you not? O yes,
mother, said Dicky, I shall not be at all afraid; nor I, said Flapsy. Say you
so? then let us see which of you will be down first. Come, I will show you the
way. On this with gradual flight, the mother bent her course to a spot near the
pla^e where Robin lay concealed; they all instantly followed her, and surprised
their father, who having seen Joe, was every instant expecting he would open
the door; at length to the joy of the whole party the gardener appeared, and
they soon saw him fetch his sheers and leave the tool-house open: on this the
mother proposed that they should all go together and call Robin. There they
found him in his snug little bed: but who can describe the happy meeting? who
can find words to express the raptures which filled every little bosom? When
the first transports subsided, I think, said the father, it will be best to
retire from hence; if our friend returns, he may take us for a set of thieves,
and suppose that we came to eat his seeds, and I should be sorry he should have
an ill opinion of us. Well, I am ready, said his mate, and we, cried the whole
brood: they accordingly left the tool-house, and hopped about among the current
bushes. I think, said the father, that you who have the full use of your limbs,
could manage to get up these low trees, but Robin must content himself on the
ground a little longer. This was very mortifying, but there was no one to blame
excepting himself: so he forbore to complain, and assumed as much cheerfulness
as he could; his brother and sisters begged they might st^y with him all day,
as they could do very well without going up to the nest; to this the parents
co^^^ted.

At the usual hour of visiting Mrs. Benson's teatable, the affectionate pair
took their morning's flight, and found the young Gentleman and Lady with their
mamma. They had been up a long time for Frederick had made his bed chamber a
lodging for the birds, who had awakened both him and his sister at a very early
hour, and they rose with great readiness to perform the kind office they had
imposed on themselves. The two blackbirds were perfectly well, but the Linnet
looked rather drooping, and they began to be apprehensive they should no^ raise
him, especially when they found he was not inclined to eat. As for the
blackbirds, they were very hungry indeed; and their young benefactors not
considering that when fed by their parents, young birds wait some time between
every morsel, supplied them too fast, and filled the ircrops so full, that they
looked as if they had great wens on their necks; and Harriet perceived one of
them gasping for breath. Stop, Frederick, said she, as he was carrying the quil
to its mouth, the bird is so full he can hold no more; but she spoke too late;
the little creature gave its eyes a ghastly roll, and fell on one side
suffocated with abundance. Oh! he is dead! he is dead! cried Frederick; he is
indeed, said Miss Benson, but I am sure we did not design to kill him; but it
is some satisfaction to think we did not take the nest. This consideration was
not enough to comfort Frederick, who began to cry most bitterly. His mamma
hearing him, was apprehensive he had hurt himself, for he seldom cried unless
he was in great pain: she therefore hastily entered the room to enquire what
was the matter, on which Miss Harriet related the disaster that had happened.
Mrs. Benson then sat down, and taking Frederick in her lap, wiped his eyes, and
giving him a kiss, said, I am sorry, my love, for your disappointment but do
not afflict yourself, the poor little thing is out of its pain now, and I fancy
suffered but for a short time. If you keep on crying so, you will forget to
feed your flock of birds, which I fancy by the chirping I heard from my window,
are beginning to assemble. Come, let me take the object of of your distress out
of your sight, it must be buried: then carrying the dead bird in one hand, and
leading Frederick by the other, she went down stairs. Whilst she was speaking,
Miss Harriet had been watching the other Blackbird, which she had soon the
pleasure to see perfectly at his ease. She then attempted to feed the Linnet,
but he would not eat. I fancy, Miss, said the maid, he wants air. That may be
the case indeed, replied Miss Benson; for you know, Betty, this room which has
been shut up all night, must be much closer than the places birds build in.
Saying this she opened the window, and placed the Linnet near it, waiting to
see the effect of the experiment, which answered her wishes, and she was
delighted to behold how the little creature gradually smoothed his feathers,
and his eyes resumed their native luster; she once more offered him food, which
he took, and was quite recovered. Having done all in her power for her little
orphans, she went to share with her brother the task of feeding the daily
prisoners, which being ended, she seated herself at the breakfast table by her
mamma. I wonder, said Frederick, who had dried up his tears, that the Robins
are not come. Consider, replied his sister, that they have a great deal of
business to do, now their young ones begin to leave the nest: they will be here
by and by, I make no doubt.

Whilst she was speaking the servant entered, and said the poor woman was at
the gate, who was ordered to attend there in the morning. Mrs. Benson desired
she might come up. Well, good woman, said the benevolent lady, how does your
husband do this morning? Thanks to your goodness, Madam, and the blessing of
God, quite cheery.

Well, said the Lady, I am happy to find you in better spirits than you were
last night, and do not doubt you will do very well. I will order some meat and
bread to be sent you every day this week, and will also assist you in clothing
the children. Harriet's eyes glistened with benevolence at seeing the woman,
whose distress had so greatly affected her, thus comforted; and slipping her
purse, which contained seven shillings, into her mamma's hand, begged she would
take it for the woman. You shall, my dear, said Mrs. Benson, have the pleasure
of relieving her yourself, give this half-crown to her. Miss Harriet, with a
delight which none but the compassionate can know, extended the hand of
charity. The woman received her benefaction with grateful acknowledgments; and
praying that the Almighty might shower down his choicest blessings on this
worthy family, respectfully took leave and returned to her husband, who every
hour gathered strength.

She was scarce gone out of the room, when the Redbreasts entered, as I before
related. The sight of them perfectly restored Frederick's cheerfulness; and
after they were departed he requested his mamma, that he and Harriet might go
again to the orchard, in hopes of seeing the young Robins. That you shall do,
Frederick, said she, upon condition that you continue a very good boy; but as
yesterday was rather an idle day with you, you must apply a little closer
today; and Harriet has a great deal of business to do, therefore you must wait
till evening, and then perhaps I may go with you. Frederick was satisfied with
this promise, and took great pains to learn to read and spell. He repeated by
heart all the hymns and other little things he had been taught; and Miss Benson
applied herself to a variety of different lessons with great assiduity, and
performed her task of work entirely to her mamma's satisfaction.

CHAP. XIV.
AS soon as the old Redbreasts left their little family, in order to go to Mr.
Benson's, Pecksy, with great solicitude, began to ask Robin where he had hurt
himself, and how he did? Oh! said he, I am much better; but it is a wonder I am
now alive, for you cannot think what a dreadful fall I had. With turning about
as I did in the air, I became quite giddy, so could not make the least exertion
for saving myself as I was falling, and came with great force to the ground;
you see how my eye is still swelled; but that is nothing to what it was. My
wing is the worst, and still gives me a great deal of pain; observe how it
drags on the ground: but as it is not broke, my father says it will soon be
well; and I hope it will be so, for I long to be flying, and shall be glad to
recieve any instructions for the future. I cannot think how I could be so
foolishly conceited, as to suppose I knew how to conduct myself without my
father's guidance.

Why, said Pecksy, young creatures like us, certainly stand in need of
instruction, and ought to think ourselves happy in having parents who are
willing to take the trouble of teaching what is necessary for us to know. I
dread the day, when I must quit the nest and take care of myself. Flapsy said,
she made no doubt they should know how to fly, and peck, and do every thing
before that time; and for her part, she longed to see the world, and to know
how the higher ranks of birds behaved themselves, and what pleasure they
enjoyed; and Dicky declared he formed the same wishes, though he must confess,
he had great dread of birds of prey; Oh! said Flapsy, they will never sieze
such a pretty creature as you Dicky, I am sure: why if beauty can prevail
against cruelty, you will also be secure, my sweet sister, replied he, for your
delicate engaging shape must plead in your behalf.

Just as he had finished his speech, a hawk appeared in sight, on which the
whole party was siezed with a most uncommon sensation, and involuntarily threw
themselves on their backs, screaming with all their might; and at the same
instant the cries of numbers of little birds besides, echoed through the
orchard. The Redbreasts soon recovered, and rising on their feet, looked about
to see what was become of the cause of their consternation; when they beheld
him high in the air, bearing off some unhappy victim, a few of whose feathers
fell near the young family, who on examining them found they belonged to a
goldfinch; on which Pecksy observed, that it was evident these savages paid no
attention to personal beauty. Dicky was so terrified he knew not what to do,
and had thought of flying back to the nest; but after Robin's misfortune, was
fearful of offending his father; he therefore got up into a currant-bush, and
hid himself in the thickest part of the leaves. Flapsy followed him, but Robin
being obliged to keep on the ground, Pecksy kindly resolved to bear him company.

In a few minutes their parents returned from Mr. Benson's, and found the two
latter pretty near where they had left them; but missing the others, the mother
with great anxiety enquired what was become of them? Robin then related how
they had been frightened with a hawk* and whilst he was doing so, they returned
to him again.

I am surprised, said the father, that a Hawk should venture so near the spot
where the gardener is at work. O, said Pecksy, we have not seen him since you
left us; then I dare say he is gone to breakfast, replied the mother; and this
was the case, for they at this instant saw him return with his shears in his
hand, and soon pursue his work. Now you will be safe, cried the father; I shall
therefore stay and teach you to fly in different directions, and then your
mother and I shall make some little excursions, and leave you to practice by
yourselves; but first of all let me show you how to get water, for I fear you
must be very thirsty. No, said they, we have had several wet worms and juicy
caterpillars, which have served us both for victuals and drink, Robin is very
quick at finding them. There is nothing like necessity to teach birds how to
live, said the father; I am glad Robin's misfortunes have been so beneficial to
him. What would have become of you, if you had not exerted yourselves as I
directed? said the mother; you would soon have died, had you continued to lie
on the scorching ground. Remember from this instant as long as you live, that
it is better to use means for your own relief, than to spend time in fruitless
lamentations.

In respect to Hawks, said the father, they are frightful creatures to be sure;
but there are very few of them in comparison of most other birds, and they can
take but one at a time, therefore it is a very great chance whether any of you
is that one; your best way will be to keep as near to houses as you can, and
make yourselves familiar with mankind, and I think you will be in little
danger. By the way, let me observe, how greatly indebted you are to this good
gardener, whom I hope you no longer call a monster. Oh no! said Flapsy, he is a
dear good creature. But I was going to say, cried the father, that at any rate,
it would be wrong to make your life unhappy with appre^^nsions; you cannot keep
Hawks away by fearing them; and it is possible, you may never see another;
besides what thousands escape, in comparison of the ^ew they devour! But come
along, Dicky, Flapsy and Pecksy, there is water so near, that Robin can hop so
far: he then conducted them to a pump, from whence Joe watered the garden, and
under its spout, they found an ample supply of that delightful element, more
acceptable to them than the most costly wine would have been.

Here they staid some time, and were greatly amused; still so near the
gardener, that they regarded themselves as under his protection. The parents
flew up into a tree, and there the father entertained his beloved mate and
family with his cheerful music; and sometimes they made various airy excursions
for examples to their little ones, who all longed to be able to imitate them.
In this manner the day passed happily away, and early in the evening Flapsy,
Pecksy, and Dicky, were conducted to the nest; they mounted in the air with
much more case than the preceding day, and the parents instructed them how to
fly to the branches of some trees which stood near to the ivy-wall.

In the mean time they had left Robin by himself, thinking he would be safe,
whilst the gardener was mowing some grass; but what was the grief of both
father and mother when they returned, and could neither see nor hear him. The
gardener too was gone, they therefore apprehended that a cat or rat had taken
him away and killed him, yet none of his feat^^rs were to be seen; with the
most anxious search, they explored exery recess in which they thought it
possible for him to be, and strained their little voices till they were ho^rse
with calling him, but all in vain; the tool-house was locked; but had he been
there, he would have answered: at length quite in despair of finding him, with
heavy hearts they returned to the nest; a general lamentation ensued, and this
lately happy abode, was now a region of sorrow. The father endeavored to
comfort his mate and surviving nestlings, and so far succeeded, that they
resolved to bear their loss with patience.

After a mournful night, the mother left the nest early in the morning,
unwilling to relinquish the hope which still remained, of finding Robin again^*
but, having spent an hour in this manner, she returned to her mate, who was
comforting his little ones.

Come, said he, let us take a flight, if we sit lamenting here for ever it will
be to no purpose* the evils which befall us must be borne, and the more quietly
we submit to them the lighter they will be. If poor Robin is dead, he will
suffer no more; and if he is not, so much as we fly about, it is a chance but
we get tidings of him; suppose these little ones attempt to fly with us to your
benefactors? If we set out early and let them rest frequently by the way, I
think they may accomplish it. This was very pleasing to every one of the little
ones, for they longed to go thither, and accordingly it was determined that
they should immediately set out, and they accomplished the journey by easy
stages; at length they all arrived in the court, just after the daily
pensioners were gone.

Now, said the father, stop a little, and let me advise you Dicky, Flapsy, and
Pecksy, to behave yourselves properly; hop only where you see your mother and
me hop, and do not meddle with any thing, but what is scattered on purpose.
Stay, father, said Dicky, my feathers are sadly rumpled, and so are mine, said
Flapsy. Well, smooth them then, said the father, but don't stand finicking for
an hour. Pecksy was ready in an instant, but the others were very tedious, so
their father and mother would wait for them no longer, and flew into the
window; the others directly followed them, and to the inexpressible
satisfaction of Master Benson alighted on the tea-table, where they met with a
very unexpected pleasure; for who should they find there, as a guest, but the
poor lost Robin! The meeting was, you may be (...), a happy one for all
parties, and the transports it occasioned, may be easier conceived (...)
described.

The father poured forth a loud (...) of gratitude; the mother chirped, she
bowed her head, clapped her wings basked on the tea-table, joined her beak to
Robin's, then touched the hand of Master Frederick. As for the young ones, they
twittered a thousand questions to Robin, but as he was unwilling to disturb his
father's song, he desired them to suspend their curiosity to another
opportunity. But it is now time to satisfy yours, my young readers and
therefore I shall inform you by what means Robin was placed in this happy
situation.

CHAP. XV.
YOU may remember that master Frederick obtained from his mamma a promise that
when the business of daily instruction was finished, he and his sister should
go into the orchard in search of the Robins; as soon, therefore, as the air was
sufficiently cool, she took them with her, and arrived just after the parent
birds had taken the young ones back to the nest. Robin was then left by
himself, and kept hopping about, and fearing no danger, got into the middle of
the walk. Frederick descried him at a distance, and eagerly called out, there is
one of them, I declare; and before his mamma observed him, he ran to the place,
and clapped his little hand over it, exulting that he had caught it. The
pressure of the hand hurt Robin's wing, who sent forth piteous cries; on which
Frederick let him go, and said, I will not hurt you, you little thing.

Miss Harriet, who saw him catch the bird, ran as fast as possible to prevent
his detaining it; and perceived that as Robin hopped away he was lame, on which
she concluded that her brother had hurt him; but on Frederick's assuring her
that his wing hung down when he first saw him, Mrs. Benson said it was most
likely he was lamed by some accident, which prevented his going with the others
to the nest: and if that is the case, said she, it will be humane and
charitable to take care of him. Frederick was delighted to hear her say so, and
asked whether he might carry it home? Yes, said his mamma, provided you can
take him safely. Shall I carry him Madam? said Joe, he can lie nicely in my
hat. This was an excellent scheme, and all parties approved of it; so Frederick
took some of the soft grass which was mowed down, to put at the bottom and poor
Robin was safely deposited in his vehicle which served him for a litter; and
perceiving into what hands he was fallen, he inwardly rejoiced, knowing that he
had an excellent chance of being well provided for, as well as of seeing his
dear relations again. I need not say that great care was taken of him, and you
will easily suppose he had a more comfortable night than that he had passed in
the shed.

When Master and Miss Benson arose the next morning, one of their first cares
was to feed the birds, and they had the pleasure to see all their nestlings in
a thriving condition: both the Linnet and Blackbird now hopped out of their
nests to be fed, to the great diversion of Master Frederick: but this pleasure
was soon damped by an unlucky accident; for the Blackbird being placed in a
window which was open, hopped too near the edge, and fell to the ground, where
he was snapped up by a dog, and torn to pieces in an instant. Frederick began
to cry as before; but on his sister's reminding him, that the creature was past
the sense of pain, he restrained his tears, and turned his attention to the
Linnet, which he put into a cage that he might not meet the same sat. He then
went to feed the flock and to enquire after Robin, whom Mrs. Benson had taken
into her own room, lest Frederick should handle and hurt him; to his great joy
he found him much better, for he could begin to use his injured wing. Frederick
was therefore trusted to carry him into the breastfast parlour, where he placed
him as has been already described.

For some time the young Redbreasts behaved very well; but at length Dicky,
familiarized by the kind treatment he met with, forgot his father's
injunctions, and began to hop about in a very rude manner; he even jumped into
the plate of bread and butter; and having a mind to taste the tea, hopped on
the edge of a cup, but dipping his foot in the hot liquor, he was glad to make
a hasty retreat, to the great diversion of Master Frederick. Flapsy took the
freedom of pecking at the sugar, but found it too hard for her tenden beak. For
these liberties their mother reproved them, saying, she would never bring them
with her again, if they were guilty of such rudeness, as to take what was not
offered to them. As their longer stay would have broke in on a plan which Mrs.
Benson had concerted, she rung her bell, and the footman came to remove the
tea-things; on which the old birds, having taken leave of Robin, and promised
to come again the next day, flew out at the window, followed by Dicky, Flapsy,
and Pecksy. Robin was safely deposited in a cage, and passed a happy day, being
often allowed to hop out in order to be fed.

The parent birds alighted in the court, and conducted their little ones to the
water which was set out for them, after which they all returned to the nest;
here the young ones rested till the afternoon, and then their parents took them
out in order to show them the orchard.

CHAP. XVI.
YOU have not yet, said the father, seen the whole extent of this place, and I
wish to introduce you to our neighbors. He then led the way to a peartree, in
which a Linnet had built her nest. The old Linnets seemed much pleased to see
their friends (...) Readbreasts, who with great pride introduced their little
family to them. My own nestlings are just ready to fly, said the hen Linnet,
and I hope will make acquaintance with them; for birds so well instructed as, I
make no doubt, your offspring are, must be very desirable companions. The
little Readbreasts were quite delighted with the hopes of having some agreeable
friends; and the old ones replied, that they had themselves received so much
pleasure from social friendship, that they wished their young ones to cultivate
the same.

They then flew on to a cherry-tree, in which were a pair of Chaffinches in
great agitation, endeavoring to part one of their own brood and a young
Sparrow, who were engaged in a furious battle; but all in vain, neither of the
combatants would desist, till the Chaffinch dropped dead to the ground. His
parents were greatly shocked at this accident, on which the cock Readbreast
attempted to comfort them with his strains; but finding them deaf to his music,
he begged to know the cause of the quarrel, which had had so fatal a
conclusion? O! answered the hen Chaffinch, my nestling is lost through his own
folly. I cautioned him repeatedly not to make acquaintance with Sparrows,
knowing they would lead him into mischief; but no remonstrance would prevail.
As soon as he began to peck about, he formed a friendship with one of that
voracious breed, who undertook to teach him to fly and provide for himself; so
he left his parents and continually followed the Sparrow, who taught him to
steal corn, and other things, and to quarrel with every bird he met; I expected
to see him killed continually. At length his companion grew tired of him, and
picked a quarrel, which ended as you have seen. However, this is better than if
he had been caught by men, and hung up, as I have seen many a bird, for a
spectacle, to deter others from stealing. Let me advise you my young friends,
said she, addressing herself to the little Redbreasts, to follow your parents
directions in every respect, and avoid bad company. She then, accompanied by
her mate, flew back to her nest, in order to acquaint the rest of her family
with this dreadful catastrophe, and the Redbreasts took another flight.

They alighted on the ground, and began pecking about, when all of a sudden
they heard a strange noise, which rather alarmed the young ones. Their father
desired them to have no fears, but follow him; he led them to the top of a high
tree, in which was a nest of Magpies. They had the day before, made an
excursion round the orchard, and were conversing on what they had seen, but in
such a confused manner, that there was no such thing as understanding them; one
chattered of one thing, and one of another. In short, all were eager to speak,
and none inclined to hear.

What a set of foolish ill-bred little creatures are these, said the cock
Redbreast; if they would talk one at a time, what each says might afford
entertainment to the rest; but by chattering all together in this manner, they
are quite disagreeable. Take example from them, my nestlings, and avoid the
fault which renders them so ridiculous.

So saying, he flew on, and they soon saw a Cuckoo, surrounded by a number of
birds, who had been pecking at her till she had scarce a feather left upon her
breast, while she kept repeating her own dull note, Cuckoo! Cuckoo!
incessantly. Get back again to your own country, said a Thrush; what business
have you in ours, sucking the eggs, and taking the nests of any birds you meet
with? Surely it would be sufficient, could you have the privilege of building
for yourself, as we do who are natives; but you have no right to seize upon our
labors, and devour our offspring. The Cuckoo deserves his fate, said the hen
Redbreast. Though I am far from bearing enmity to foreign birds in general. I
detest such characters as his. I wonder mankind do not drive Cuckows away; but
I suppose it is on account of their being the harbingers of summer.

How different is the character of the Swallow; he comes here to enjoy the
mildness of the climate, and confers a benefit on the land by destroying many
noxous insects. I rejoice to see that race sporting in the air, and have had
high pleasure in conversing with them; for as they are great travelers, they
have much to relate. But come let us go on.

They soon came to a hollow tree, peep into this hole, said the cock bird to
his young ones, they did so, and beheld a nest of young Owls. What a set of
ugly creatures, said Dicky; surely you do not intend to show your frightful
faces to the world! Did ever any one see such dull eyes, and such a frightful
muffle of feathers?

Whoever you are that reproach us with a want of beauty, you do not show your
own good sense, replied one of the little Owls. Perhaps we may have qualities
which render us as amiable as yourselves. You do not appear to know that we are
Night, and not Day birds. The quantity of feathers in which we are muffled up,
are very comfortable to us when we are out in the cold; and I can show you a
pair of eyes, which, if you are little birds, will frighten you out of your
wits; and if I could fly, I would let you see what else I could do. He then
drew back the film which was given him, that the strong light of the day might
not injure his sight, and stared full at Dicky, who was struck with
astonishment.

At that instant the parent Owl returned, and seeing a parcel of strangers
looking into her nest, she set up a screeching, which made the whole party take
wing. As soon as they stopped to rest, the ^ock Redbreast, who was really
frightened as well as his mate and family, recollected himself, and cried out,
Well, Dicky, how did you like the Owl's eyes (...) fancy they proved brighter
than you expected* but had they even been as ugly as you supposed, it was very
silly and rude in you to notice it. You ought never to censure any bird for
natural deformities, since no one contracts them by choice; and what appears
disagreeable to you, may be pleasing in the eyes of another. Besides, you
should be particularly careful not to insult strangers, because you cannot know
their deserts, nor what power they may have of revenging themselves. You may
think yourself happy if you never meet one of these Owls by night, for I assure
you they often feed upon little birds like us; and you have no reason to think
they will spare you, after the affront you have given them. But come, let us
fly on.

They soon alighted on a tree, in which was a Mock-Bird, The Mock-Bird is
properly a native of America, but introduced here for the sake of the moral.
who, instead of singing any note o^ his own, kept successively imitating those
of every bird that inhabited the orchard, and this with a view of making them
ridiculous. If any one had any imperfection in his singing, he was sure to
mimic it; or if any was particularly attentive to the duties of his station, he
ridiculed him as grave and formal. The young Redbreasts were excessively
diverted with this droll creature: but their father desired them to consider,
whether they should like to hear him mimic them? Every one agreed, that they
should be very angry to be ridiculed in that manner. Then, replied the father,
neither encourage nor imitate him. The Mock-Bird hearing him, took up his
notes, "Neither encourage nor imitate him," said he. The cock Redbreast on this
flew at him with fury plucked some feathers from his breast, and sent him
screaming from the place. I have made you sing a Natural note at last, said he,
and hope you will take care how you practice Mimickry again. His mate was sorry
to see him disturb his temper, and ruffle his feathers, for such an
insignificant creature; but he told her it was particularly necessary as an
example to his nestlings, as Mimickry was a fault to which young birds were too
apt to incline; and he wished to show them the danger they exposed themselves
to in the practice of it.

The whole Redbreast family rested themselves for some time; and whilst they
sat still, observed a Chaffinch flying from tree to tree, chattering to every
bird he had any knowledge of; and his discourse seemed to affect his hearers
greatly, for they perceived some birds flying off in great haste, and others
meeting them; many battles and disputes ensued. The little Redbreasts wondered
at these circumstances; at length Pecksy enquired the meaning of the bustle.
This Chaffinch, replied the father, is a Telltale; it is inconceivable the
mischief he makes. Not that he has so much malice in his nature, but he loves
to hear himself chatter; and therefore every anecdote he can collect he tells
to all he meets, by which means he often raises quarrels and animosities;
neither does he stop here, for he frequently invents the tales he relates.

As the Redbreast was speaking, the Chaffinch alighted on the same tree. O, my
old friend, said he, are you got abroad in the world again? I heard the Linnet
in the pear tree say, you were caught stealing corn, and hung up as a
spectacle, but I thought this could not be true; besides, the Blackbird in the
cherry-tree told me, that the reason we did not see you as usual was, that you
were rearing a family, to whom, he said, you were so severe, that the poor
little creatures had no comfort of their lives.

Whatever you may have heard, or whatever you may say, is matter of
indifference to me, replied the Redbreast; but as a neighbor, I cannot help
advising you to restrain your tongue a little and consider, before you
communicate your intelligence, whether what you are going to say has not a
tendency to disturb the peace of society.

Whilst he was thus advising him, a flock of birds assembled about the tree; it
consisted of those to whom the Chaffinch had been chattering, who having come
to explanation with each other, had detected his falsities, and determined to
expel him the orchard; which they did, with every mark of contempt and
ignominy: all the Redbreasts joined in the pursuit, for even the little ones
saw his character in a detestable light, and formed a determination to avoid
his fault. When the tell-tale was gone, the party which pursued him alighted
all together in the same walk, and amongst them the Redbreasts discovered many
of their old friends, with whom they now renewed their acquaintance, knowing
they should soon be released from family cares; and the young ones passed a
happy day in this cheerful assembly: but at length the hour of repose
approached, when each individual fled to his resting place; and the Redbreasts,
after so fatiguing a day, fell asleep.

Let us leave them to enjoy the comfort of the nest, and enquire after their
young benefactors.

CHAP. XVII.
AS soon as breakfast things were removed at Mrs. Benson's, she informed her
son and daughter, that she intended to take them with her to Farmer Wilson's,
where she made no doubt they would pass a happy day; and desired them to go and
get equipped for the journey, whilst she dressed herself. The young folks
obeyed without hesitation, and having given their maid very strict injunctions
to feed Robin and the Linnet, they attended mamma to the coach; and after a
delightful ride arrived at the farm-house, where they were received with the
utmost respect by Mrs. Wilson.

Farmer Wilson was a very worthy man, possessed of a great share of natural
good sense and benevolence of heart. He had, by his industry acquired
sufficient to purchase the farm he lived on, and had a fair prospect of making
a comfortable provision for a numerous family, whom he brought up with the
greatest care, and taught them all to be merciful to the cattle which were
employed in his business.

His wife was a mo^ amiable woman, and had received a good education from her
father, who was formerly curate of the parish. This good man had strongly
implanted in his daughter's mind the Christian doctrine of UNIVERSAL CHARITY,
which she exercised, not only toward the human species, but also extended it
to poultry, and every living creature which it was her province to manage.

Mrs. Benson knew that her children would here have an opportunity of seeing
many different animals treated with propriety; and it was on this account that
she took them with her, though she, herself complied with an invitation she had
received the day before, and visited these good people from a motive of sincere
respect.

As soon as they were seated, Mrs. Wilson regaled her young friends with a
peace of nice cake, made by her daughter Betsy, a little girl of twelve years
old, who sat by, enjoying with a secret delight, the honor which the young
Lady and Gentleman did to her performance. It happened fortunately to be a cool
day, and Mrs. Benson expressed a desire to walk about and see the farm.

In the first place, Mrs. Wilson showed her the house, which was in every
respect very neat, and in complete order. She then took her guest into her
dairy, which was well stored with milk and cream* butter and cheese. From hence
they went to the the poultry-yard, where the little Bensons were excessively
delighted indeed; for there were a number of cocks and hens, and many broods of
young chickens, besides turkies and Guinea hens.

All the fowls expressed the greatest joy at the sight of Mrs. Wilson and her
daughter Betsy; the cocks celebrated their arrival by loud crowing; the hens
gave notice of their approach by cackling, and assembled their infant train to
partake of their bounty; the turkies and Guinea fowls ran to meet them; a
number of pigeons also alighted from a pigeon-house. Betsy scattered amongst
them the grain which she carried in her lap for that purpose, and seemed to
have great pleasure in distributing it. When their young visitors were
satisfied with seeing the poultry fed, Mrs. Wilson showed them the hen-house,
and other conveniences provided for them, which were excellently calculated to
make their lives comfortable; and then opened a little door, which led to a
meadow, where the fowls were often indulged to ramble and refresh themselves.
On seeing her approach this place the whole party col^cted, and ran into the
meadow, like a troop of the ^ol-boys into their play-ground.

You, Mrs. Wilson, and your daughter, must have great amusement with these
pretty creatures, said Mrs. Benson. We have indeed, Madam, and great profit
too; for they furnish us with a vast number of eggs and chickens, not only for
our own use, but for the market also. And can you prevail on yourself to kill
these sweet creatures? said Miss Benson. Indeed, Miss I cannot, said Mrs.
Wilson, and never did kill a chicken in my life; but it is an easy matter to
find people capable of doing it; and there is an absolute necessity for some of
them to die, for they breed so fast, that in a short time we should have more
than we could possibly feed: but I make it a rule to render their lives as
happy as possible, and never shut them up to fatten any longer than I can help,
use no cruel methods of cramming them, nor confine them in a situation where
they can see other fowls at liberty; neither do I take the chickens from the
hen till she herself deserts them, nor set hens upon duck eggs. I often regret,
said Mrs. Benson, that so many lives should be sacrificed to preserve ours; but
we must eat animals, or they would at length eat us, at least all that would
otherwise support us.

Whilst this conversation passed, Master Frederick had followed the fowls into
the meadow, where the Turkey cock, taking him for an enemy, had attacked him,
and frightened him so much, than he cried out for help: Betsy Wilson ran to his
assistance, and soon calmed his fears.

The farmer's wife next proposed (but with many apologies for offering to take
them to such a place) to show them her pig-sties. The name of pig-stye
generally conveys an idea of nastiness, but whoever had seen those at Farmer
Wilsons, would have had a very different one. They were neatly paved, and
washed down every day; the troughs in which they fed were frequently scoured,
and the water they drank was always sweet and wholesome. The pigs themselves
had an appearance of neatness which no one could have expected in such kind of
animals; and though they had not the ingenuity of the learned pig, there was
really something intelligent in their gruntings, and a very droll arch
expression in the eyes of some of them. They knew their benefactors, and found
means of testifying their joy at seeing them; which was increased when a boy,
whom Mrs. Wilson had ordered to bring some bean-shells, emptied his basket
before them. Now a contest ensued who should have the largest share, and each
began pushing the other aside, and stuffing as fast as he could, lest they
should have more than himself.

Miss Benson said she could not bear to see such greediness. It is indeed,
replied Mrs. Benson, very disagreeable, even in such creatures as these, but
how much more so in the human species, and yet how frequent is this fault
amongst children in particular? Pray look at these pigs, Frederick, and tell me
if you never remember to have met with a little boy who eat strawberries as
these pigs do bean-shells? Frederick's cheeks at this question were covered
with conscious blushes; on which his mamma kindly kissed him, and said, she
hoped he had seen enough of greediness today to serve him for a lesson as long
as he lived.

In a separate stye was a sow with a litter of young pigs. This was a very
pleasing sight indeed to Master Frederick, who longed to have one to play with;
but Mrs. Wilson told him it would make the sow very angry; and her gruntings
would terrify him as much as the turkey-cock had done; on which he dropped his
request, but said he should like to keep such a little creature.

If it would always continue little, Frederick, said Mrs. Benson, it would do
very well; but it will perhaps grow as large as its mother, and what shall we
do then? Familiarized by the kind treatment which I am sure you would give it,
we should have it following you into the parlour, and perhaps run grunting
after you into your bedchamber. I knew myself an instance of a person who
nursed up a suck pig, which actually ran after her to church, and became the
most troublesome thing you can conceive.

I suppose your hogs are very profitable as well as your poultry, Mrs. Wilson?
Yes, Madam, replied she, we cure a good deal of bacon and pickle a quantity of
pork; we sell a great many sucking pigs, so that we are well paid for keeping
them; and I never suffer them to be neglected in any particular, and have the
pleasure of thinking, few pigs are happier than mine. But I fear, Ladies, you
will be tired with staying here, will it be agreeable to you to take a walk in
the garden? With all my heart, said Mrs. Benson.

Mrs. Wilson then conducted her guests in the garden, which abounded with all
kinds of vegitables for the table, quantities of fruits, and a variety of
flowers. Master Frederick longed to taste some of the delecacies which
presented themselves to his eye, but he had never been taught to gather fruit
or flowers without leave, nor to ask for any; however, Mrs. Wilson, with his
mamma's permission treated him and his sister with some fine apples and pears,
which Betsy gathered and presented in cabbage leaves, and then took them to a
shady arbor, where they sat and enjoyed their feast. After which they went to
see the bees, who were at work in glass hives.

CHAP. XVIII.
THIS sight of the bees was a great entertainment, not only to the children,
but to Mrs. Benson also, who was excessively pleased with the ingenuity and
industry with which these insects collected their honey and wax, formed their
cells, and deposited their store. She had, by books, acquired a knowledge of
the natural history of bees, which enabled her to examine their work with much
greater satisfaction, than she would have received from the sight of them, had
she been only taught to consider them only as little stinging creatures, whom
it was dangerous to approach. This is quite a treat to me indeed, said she to
Mrs. Wilson, for I never before had an opportunity of seeing bees at work in
glass hives. Why, Madam, said the good woman, few will be at the expense ^f
them; and indeed my neighbors laugh at me, ^d call me very whimsical and
extravagant for in^ulging myself with them: but I find my account in keeping
bees thus, even upon a principle of economy: for as I do not destroy them, I
have greater numbers to work for me, and more honey every year than the last,
notwithstanding I feed my bees in winter. I have made acquaintance with the
queen of every hive, who will come to me whenever I call her, and you shall see
one of their majesty's if you please.

On this she called in a manner to which the inhabitants of the hive they were
looking at, were accustomed to, and a large be soon settled on her hand: in an
instant after she was covered from head to foot with bees. Mrs. Benson was
quite terrified, lest they should sting, and Frederick ran crying away; but
Mrs. Wilson assured them that the little creatures would not do any mischief,
if no one attempted to catch them. Bees are in their natural dispositions very
harmless creatures, I assure you Master Benson, said she; though I own they
will certainly sting little boys who endeavor to catch them in order to suck
their bag of honey, or take out their sting; but you see that though I have
hundreds about me, and even on my face and arms, not one offers to do me an
injury: and I believe the wasps seldom sting but in their own defense. She then
threw up her hand, which the queen be regarded as a signal of dimission, and
flew away in great state, surrounded by her guards, and followed by the rest of
her subjects, each ready to lose his own life in defense of here is.

There is something very wonderful, said Mrs. Benson, in the strong attachment
these little creatures have to their sovereign, and very instructive to. I wish
our good King could see all his subjects so closely united in his interest!
What say you, Frederick, would you fight for King? Yes mamma, if papa would --
That I assure you, my dear, he certainly would do, if there were occasion, as
loyally as the best Be in the world; and I beg you will remember what I now
tell you as long as you live: That it is your duty to love your King, for he is
to be considered as the father of his country. But, mamma, said Frederick, it
is the Queen that the Bees love, and we have a queen too. Yes, my dear, we have
so; and I believe her majesty is as much honored by her subjects as a queen
be in her hive, though she has not so full a command over them, for it is a
king that governs England as your papa governs his family, and the queen is to
be considered as the mother of the country. But before we take our leave of the
bees, let me observe to you, my dears, that several instructive lessons may be
taken from their example. If such little insects as these perform their daily
tasks with so much alacrity, surely it must be a shame for children to be idle,
and to fret because they are put to learn things which will be of the utmost
consequence to them in the end; and which would indeed conduce to their present
happiness, would they but apply to them with a willing mind.

Science of various kinds presents itself to the human race, as the different
flowers offer themselves to bees; and nothing is wanting to extract the sweets
but an application of those faculties of which they are by nature possessed. As
the industrious be flies successively to every fragrant plant within his
reach, so do you, my dear children, go from one branch of knowledge to another:
but observe, the be does not fly giddily from flower to flower, merely to take
a transient view of its beauties, he rests on each, till he has obtained all
that will answer his purpose: imitate him in this particular also, and be not
hurried on, by vain curiosity, from book to book, so as to gain only a
superficial knowledge in the different parts of your education; but remember,
that the be applies the materials he collects to purposes valuable to himself,
and to the community to which he belongs.

But come, Mrs. Wilson, we must, if you please, think of retiring from this
place; for if we stay here much longer, we shall not have time to enjoy the
pleasures you have in reserve for us. On this Mrs. Wilson said, she was ready
to wait on them

As they walked along, Miss Benson took notice of a variety of beautiful
insects, and Frederick so far forgot himself, as to run after a moth and catch
it; but his mamma obliged him to let it go immediately. Don't you think, Mrs.
Wilson, said she, that it is very wrong to let children catch butterflies and
moths? Indeed, I do, Madam, replied the good woman. Poor little creatures, what
injury can they do us by flying about? In that state at least they are harmless
to us. Caterpillars and snails, it is true, we are frequently obliged to
destroy, on account of their devouring fruit and vegetables; but unless they
abound so as to be likely to do a real injury, I never let them be meddled
with. I often think of my good father's maxim, which was, "Never to take away
the life of any creature, unless it was necessary for the benefit of mankind."
"Whilst there is food and room enough in the world for them and us, let them
live and enjoy the blessings they were formed for," he would say.

When I was a little girl, said Mrs. Benson, I had a great propensity to
catching flies and other insects, but my father had an excellent microscope, in
which he showed me a number of different objects, by this means I learnt, that
even the minutest creatures might be as susceptible of pain as myself; and I
declare I cannot put any thing to death, without fancying I hear its bones
crack, and that I see its blood gushing from its veins and arteries; and so far
from having a pleasure in killing even the disagreeable insects which are
troublesome in houses, I assure you I cannot do it myself nor see it done
without pain; and yet they certainly may be considered as enemies, and an such
we have a right to destroy them.

To be sure, Madam, said Mrs. Wilson, for without cleanliness we could not
enjoy health. It goes against me to demolish a fine spider's web, and yet they
make a house look very dirty, but I seldom have any in mine, for I took care,
when I first came to live in it, to destroy the nests, and the old spiders,
finding there was no security for their young ones here, have forsaken the
house; and I am inclined to think, that the same vigilance in respect to other
disagreeable insects, would have the same effec^.

Doubtless, said Mrs. Benson; but pray tell me, do you destroy the web^ of the
garden spiders also? Not unless there are so many as to be troublesome and
disagreeable, replied Mrs. Wilson. I should not myself like to have the fruits
of my industry demolished, nor my little ones taken out of my arms, or from
their warm beds, and crushed to death. I am of opinion, said Mrs. Benson, that
it would be a good way to accustom one's self, before one ^ls any thing, to
change situations with it in imagination.

For instance, if I accidentally disturb an ant's nest, instead of crushing the
little creatures with thoughtless inhumanity, as a set of insignificant atoms,
I can fancy them appearing to me of the same magnitude a microscope would show
them, and one of them addressing me in this manner: -- "Step aside, I entreat
you, and let me and my associates pass in safety, that we may repair the
mischief you have done to our city. The magazine of corn is fallen in, and I
fear my dear parents are buried in the ruins; I hear the lamentations of my
mate for the danger of our little ones; and beheld (...) of my dear friends,
whom you have trod upon, in the agonies of death. Why do you treat with such
barb^rity a set of innocent beings, who have never wilfully done you the least
injury? Do we ever sting the human race but in our own defense? Do you really
want the fruit we eat? And ^an the small quantity of corn we hoard up, be
missed from your plentiful stores? Is it not misfortune enough for us, that we
are the prey of birds, but must mankind, to whom thousands of us would not
afford even a single meal, destroy us for sport? Oh! rather ye, whose hearts
are alive to the sentiments of humanity, plead our cause to the thoughtless
part of your own species, and as lords of the creation, drive away from us
those natural enemies, which you may see darting down to devour us! if you love
your own offspring think of ours; if you would be prosperous in your own
occupations, protect those who afford a lesson of industry, which the wisest of
mankind has recommended to your serious consideration.

Indeed, Madam, said Mrs. Wilson, I have often wished that poor dumb creatures
had somebody to speak for them; many an innocent life would then be saved,
which is now destroyed to no end.

Well, said Harriet, I am sure I shall never kill any thing, without first
magnifying it in my mind, and thinking what it would say for itself if able to
speak. Then, my dear, I will engage for you, replied her mamma, that you will
put but very few creatures to death: but in order to have a proper notion of
their form, and to be capable of making these ideal speeches, you must study
Natural History; from whence you will learn, how wonderful their construction
is; how carefully and tenderly the inferior creatures provide for their young;
how ingenious their various employments are; how far they are from harboring
malice against the human species; and how excellently they are informed and
instructed by their great Creator, for the enjoyment of happiness in their
different classes of existence, which happiness we have certainly no right
wantonly to disturb. Besides, it is really a meanness to destroy any creature
merely because it is little; and in children, particularly absurd to do so; for
upon this principle, they must themselves expect to be constantly ill-treated:
though no animal stands more in need of tenderness than they do for many years,
from the time of their coming into the world; and even men and women might
expect to be annihilated, by the power of the great CREATOR.

Neither do I know how we can precisely call any thing great or little, since
it is only so by comparing it with others. An ant or fly may appear to one of
its own species, whose eyes are formed to see those parts which we cannot
discover without glasses, as considerable as men and women do to each other:
and to creatures of the dimensions of a mite, one the size of an ant doubtless
looks formidable and gigantic. I therefore think that it is but justice to view
insects with microscopic eyes, before we commit cruel devastations among them.

During this conversation Master Frederick kept running about making choice of
flowers, which Betsy Wilson gathered and formed into nosegays for his mamma,
and himself.

CHAP. XIX.
THE next place Mrs. Wilson took her guests to was a farm-yard, in which was a
large horse-pond. Here her young visitors were delighted with the appearance of
a number of geese and ducks; some were swimming in the water, some diving, and
others rooting in the mud to see what fish or worms they could find.

It appears strange to me, said Miss Benson, that any creatures can take
delight in making themselves so dirty; and yet, said Mrs. Benson, how many
children do the same, without having any excuse for it? The ducks and geese
grub about so in search of the necessaries of life; but I have seen boys do it
merely for diversion, and sometimes at the hazard of their lives.

Very true, Madam, said Mrs. Wilson; my little Neddy had like to have been
drowned, no longer ago than last Monday. He is a little venturesome rogue, and
runs through thick and thin when pleasure is in view; but I fancy he will not
hunt ducks about any more: for my part, I do not like any of my children should
make sport of teazing animals. I wish every creature I keep to enjoy happiness
to the day of its death, and when it must be killed, to have it dispatched by
the quickest means possible.

Have you any fish here? said Frederick. I believe none of any consequence,
Sir; the ducks and geese would take care that none should grow to any
considerable size; but there are plenty in a pond which you will see in the
next field, and I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you, at dinner eat of
some perch which were caught there. Sometimes we catch fine carp and tench, but
only with nets; for neither my good man nor I can bear the cruel diversion of
angling; nor do we allow our children to follow it from a notion that it
hardens the heart, and leads to idleness.

Pray, mamma, said Miss Harriet, is it right to catch fish? I should think, as
they live in water, and we upon land, we have no ^siness with them. You would
wish every one then, my dear, to keep to their own element? Your sentiment is a
good one in many respects, but it must not be extended so far as to forbid the
catching of fish. Man has dominion over fish, as well as over beasts and fowls,
and many of them are excellent food for mankind; and the astonishing increase
of them shows that they are designed to be so; for were all that are spawned to
grow to full size, there would soon be more than our ponds, or even than the
sea itself would hold, and they would be starved; therefore there are the same
reasons for our feeding on them as on poultry, but we should be very careful to
dispatch them as quickly as possible.

Some people are cruel enough to roast lobsters alive, whose cries I have been
told are dreadful to hear; and others will flay eels alive, then put them
without their skins into a pail of cold water, and afterward cut them in
pieces, and throw them into a drying pan of boiling fat, where sometimes every
separate piece will wreath about in agony. Thus each poor fish suffers as many
deaths as it is divided into pieces. Now, Harriet, this cannot be right,
however authorized by custom; therefore I hope you will never suffer such
things to be done in your kitchen when you keep house, but always give orders
that your lobsters be put into boiling water, which kills them soon, and that
your eels are knocked on the head before they are skinned. This is dreadful
enough, though little in comparison of what they suffer by the other methods.

Oh! mamma, said Harriet, you make me even shudder; I do not believe I shall
ever desire to eat eels; I shall be ready to make speeches for every piece as
it lies in a dish before me. But pray tell me, is it cruel to kill frogs and
toads? Ask Mrs. Wilson, my dear, she has more to do with such reptiles than I
have. Why, Miss, replied Mrs. Wilson, I am very singular in regard to such kind
of creatures; and though I by no means like to have them in my house, I do not
make an outcry, and condemn every one to a violent death which is accidentally
found in my cellars, or other places; on the contrary, I generally see it
thrown into a ditch at some distance to take its chance. There are many birds
and waterfowl that feed on young frogs and toads, which will in general keep
them from multiplying, so as to be nuisances to us; and it is time enough for
us to take arms against them, if there happens to be a very extraordinary
increase of them. My good man is as particular in respect to moles; if he finds
them in his garden, or any other part of his grounds where they can do
mischief, he has them killed, but never suffers them to be molested when they
are harmless. Neither does he hunt, or permit any one belonging to him to hunt
after snakes; for he says, that if they are not disturbed, they will not come
from their haunts to annoy us; and to kill, for the sake of killing, is cruel.

Pray, Mrs. Wilson, said Frederick, do your sons ever go a birds nesting? They
had better not let me know it, if they do, said she. No, Sir, I hope I have not
a child amongst my family capable of such barbarity. In the course of the
summer they generally have young birds to nurse, who fall out of the nest, or
lose their parents, but are seldom lucky enough to raise them; and we have only
one in a cage which they reared last summer. Yet we have plenty of singing; for
the sweet creatures, finding they may enjoy themselves unmolested in the trees,
treat us with their harmony from morning to night, of which you had a specimen
in the garden. Sparrows, indeed, my husband is under the necessity of
destroying, for they are such devourers, they would leave him but little corn
to carry to market if he did not shoot them; but he never kills the Crows,
because they are very serviceable in picking up grubs, and other things
injurious to farmers: we only set a little boy to watch our new-sown grain, who
keeps making a noise, which effectually frightens them. O! said Frederick, I
nurse young birds too. I have got a Linnet and a Robin Redbreast, and feed an
hundred beside.

Mrs. Wilson smiled, and turning away to Mrs. Benson, said, Now, Madam, we
will, if you please, return to the house, for I fancy by this time dinner is
nearly ready, and my husband and sons are about coming home.

Mrs. Benson was a little tired with her ramble, and was really impatient to
see Farmer Wilson and the rest of his amiable family. When she drew near the
house she was met by the worthy man, who gave her a most cordial welcome, and
said he was proud to see so much good company. Nancy, the eldest daughter, to
whom the mother had entrusted the care of inspecting the additional cookery
which she had ordered, and who for that reason was not to be seen in the
morning, now made her appearance, dressed with the most perfect neatness;
health blooming in her cheeks, and cheerfulness and good humor sparkled in her
eyes. With this engaging countenance she easily prevailed on Master Frederick
to let her place him by her on the table, round which the two other visitors,
and the master and mistress of the house, and the rest of their offspring,
consisting of Thomas, a fine youth of eighteen, four younger boys, and little
Betsy, were soon seated.

The table was covered with plain food, but by the good management of Nancy,
who had made an excellent pudding, an apple-pye and some delicious custards, it
made a very good figure; and Mrs. Benson often afterward declared, that she
never enjoyed an entertainment so much. It was considerably heightened by the
happy countenances of the whole family. The father who was a jocose man said a
number of droll things, which diverted his little visitors very much, and soon
after dinner he begged leave to depart, as he was sheep-shearing; but said, he
thought the young gentlefolks might be diverted with the sight, so invited them
to pay him a visit in the field, and left Joe and Neddy to conduct Master
Frederick.

CHAP. XX.
THE young farmers were rather shy at first, being afraid their guests would
laugh at their country talk; but when they observed how politely they behaved
to their sisters, they entered into conversation, and told Master Benson an
hundred particulars about animals, with which he was before unacquainted; and
he in return told them all he knew about the Redbreasts and other pensioners.
They then showed him a pretty cat with kittens, and a bitch with two young
puppies; the latter were kept in a kennel, and the cat in a stable where they
were well supplied with food. As Frederick knew that his sister was remarkably
fond of cats, he stepped back to call her to look at these, which with her
mamma's permission, she was greatly pleased to do, and longed to have the
kittens to nurse. When she returned, she enquired whether the dogs and cats
were ever permitted to come into the house? Not whilst they have young ones,
said Mrs. Wilson, for they make a great deal of dirt and are very troublesome
at that time; but when puss has brought up her family, which is designed for
the stable, she shall be admitted amongst us again; for she is a very useful
creature, and deserves to be well treated, but I do not suffer my children to
handle her; I think it looks very ugly for any one to be all over scratches.
Daphne is admitted to a greater share of familiarity; she is very faithful, and
extremely good-natured, but we never feed her in the house, for there is no
doing so without greasing the floors.

I am of opinion, said Mrs. Benson, that a difference should be made between
our treatment of cats and dogs. There is something very savage in the nature of
the former; and though they certainly are deserving of our kindness on account
of their usefulness, yet they cannot make themselves so agreeable as dogs.
There is something really very formidable in their talons and teeth; and when
enraged, a cat is no better than a little tygress. Besides, where there not
danger to one's self nursing cats, there is no doing it without injury to one's
linen; for when puss is best pleased, she generally tramples with her talons
unsheathed, by which practice many a nice apron has been torn. And even the
cleanliness of cats is injurious, for they usually have recourse to corners of
chairs, in order to rub the dirt from their talons. Many people have a great
dread of this animal, and on that account it should not be used to come into
rooms in which a variety of company is received.

As for dogs, they are in general so very sociable, grateful and pleasing, that
they seem formed to be the humble companions of mankind; and if kept in proper
order, may be familiarized with safety; but then they should be well educated
and taught to know their distance. And as there are different species of them,
we should make a prudent selection, and not introduce into the house great
mastiffs or tall gray hounds; neither must we indulge those we domesticate to
too great a degree, for in that case they will become as troublesome as cats.

Mrs. Benson now expressed her desire to see the sheep-shearing; on which Mrs.
Wilson and her daughter conducted her and Miss Harriet to the field, where they
arrived at the conclusion of the operation; and a very pleasing fight it was to
behold these happy creatures, who lately waddled under a heavy, heating load,
relieved from their burden, leaping and frisking with delight, whilst the
accumulated wool seemed, as it lay, to promise comfortable clothing for many a
naked wretch among the human species, who, destitute of such a supply would be
in danger of perishing with cold in the ensuing winter. Miss Harriet observed
the innocent countenances of the sheep and lambs, and said she thought it was a
thousand pities to kill them. It is so, my dear, said her mamma, but we must
not always indulge our feelings too far in respect to animals which are given
us for food; all we have to do is to avoid barbarity. It is happy for them that
they have no apprehension of being killed, and therefore enjoy life in peace
and security to the very last; and when the knife is lifted to their throats,
are ignorant of its destination: and when the fatal blow is once struck, a few
struggles put an end to their pain for ever. But come, Mrs. Wilson, will you
favor us with a sight of your cows. With pleasure, Madam, they are by this
time driven up to be milked. She then conducted her visitors toward the
farm-yard.

Perhaps, Madam, said Mrs. Wilson, as they walked along, the young Lady and
Gentleman may be afraid of horned cattle? I believe, replied Mrs^ Benson, I may
venture to say, that Harriet has no unreasonable fears of any living creature;
it has been my endeavor to guard the minds of my children against so
distressing a weakness; but whether Frederick's heart has acquired fortitude
enough to enable him to venture near so many cows, I cannot tell. O yes, mamma,
cried Frederick, I would sooner get up and ride into the farm-yard on the horns
of one of them, than run away. Well, we shall soon put your courage to the
proof, said Mrs. Benson; so come along, Sir.

As for my children, said Mrs. Wilson, they are remarkably courageous in
respect to animals; all the creatures belonging to us are very harmless and
gentle, which is the natural consequence of kind treatment, and no person need
be afraid of walking in any part of our grounds: but it is difficult to
persuade some people that there is no danger, for they are apt to imagine, that
every loose horse they see will gallop over them, and that every creature with
horns will gore and toss them. Very true, replied Mrs. Benson; and I have known
many as much afraid of a toad, a frog, or a spider, as if certain death would
be the consequence of meeting them; when if these persons would but make use of
their reason, they would soon be convinced that such fears are ill-grounded.
Frogs and toads are very harmless creatures, and so far from offering an injury
to any human being they may chance to meet, hop away with all possible
expedition, from a dread of being themselves destroyed; and the spiders drop
suddenly down, with a view of their own preservation only; and therefore it is
highly ridiculous to be afraid of them. Horses and oxen are much more
formidable creatures; they certainly could do us a great deal of mischief, if
they were conscious of their own superior strength; but Providence has wisely
ordained that they should not be so; and having given mankind dominion over
them, has inplanted in their nature an awe and dread of the human species,
which occasion them to yield subjection to the Lords of the creation, when they
exert their authority in a proper manner. It is really a very wonderful thing,
Mrs. Wilson, to see a fine lively horse submitting to the bit and harness, or a
drove of oxen quietly marching under the direction of one man!

Pray, mamma, said Harriet, what do you mean by saying, that man is LORD of the
Creation? Are all brutes subject to every man? I cannot comprehend how this can
be. I will endeavor to explain it to you, my dear, said Mrs. Benson, the next
time we read the Bible toget^er; at present, I have only time to inform you,
that the dread of mankind, which pervails so generally amongst the inferior
creatures, does not exist in so high a degree as to render every individual
animal afraid of every individual man; but the human species, that is to say
all mankind together, have an undoubted superiority and dominion: and there is
no species of animals which if collected together, mankind could not subdue;
for though inferior to many of them in strength, men vastly exceed them in
number, and having the use of reason, can employ a variety of means to conquer
them: and I make no doubt, but was the experiment possible, to assemble each
individual species, in opposition to the whole race of mankind, which exist at
one time upon the earth, or even an unequal number of them, the dread and fear
which is instinctive in their natures, would operate so powerfully on the
hearts of the most ferocious of them, as to prevent their attempting any
contest.

It is observable, and shows at once the goodness and wisdom of our great
CREATOR, that those creatures, which are the most useful to us, are the easiest
tamed; and yield, not only singly, but in flocks, to mankind, nay even to boys.

From what I have said you must perceive that it is a great weakness for a
human being to be afraid of animals.

By this time the party were advanced pretty near to the farm-yard, and
Frederick espied one of the cows peeping over the gate; on which with a
countenance expressive of fear, he hastily ran toward his mamma and asked her,
whether cows could toss people over gates and hedges? I will not answer so
silly a question, Frederick, said she; pray look again, and you will percieve
that it is impossible for such large heavy creatures to do so; and these
enclosures are made on purpose to confine them within proper bounds. But did
not you boast just now, that you could ride on the horns of one of them? That I
shall not require you to do, for it would very likely make the creature angry,
because cows are not accustomed to carry any loads upon their heads; neither
would I allow you to run after them with a stick, or to make any attempt to
frighten them; but if you approach as a friend, I make no doubt you will be
received as such; so summon your courage and attend us, the cows will not hurt
you, I can assure you.

Neddy Wilson then began laughing from the idea that a boy should be afraid of
a cow! which made Frederick ashamed of himself; and quitting his mamma's gown,
by which he had held fast whilst she was speaking, he laid hold of Neddy's
hand, and declared his resolution to go as near the cows as he would. I will
not take upon me to say, that his little heart was perfectly free from
palpitation; but that lay in his own bosom, where none could discover its
feelings but himself; so let us give him credit for as much courage as we can,
and acknowledge him to be a noble little fellow, in thus trusting himself
amongst a number of horned cattle.

CHAP. XXI.
THE whole party now entered the farm-yard, where they saw eight fine cows,
fat, sleek, and beautifully clean, who yielded several pails of rich milk, the
steam of which, added to the breath of the cows, cast a delightful fragrance
around. Mrs. Wilson then entreated her company to return to the house, where
tea was provided, and a delicious syllabub.

The farmer now came back, and refreshed himself with a cup of ale, which was
very comfortable after the fatigues of the day.

I have had, said Mrs. Benson, great pleasure in viewing your farm, Mr. Wilson,
which appears to me to afford all the desirable comforts and conveniences of
life, and I most sincerely wish a continuance of your prosperity. If it is not
an impertinent question, pray tell me, did you inherit it from your father, or
was it purchased with the fruits of your own industry?

Neither my wife nor I have led an idle life, I assure you, Madam, replied the
farmer; but, next to the blessing of heaven, I think myself in a great degree
indebted to my cattle for my good success. My father left me master of a little
farm, with a few acres of land well cropped, three horses, two cows, six sheep,
a sow and pigs a jack-ass, and a few poultry; these have gradually multiplied
to what you now see me possess, besides numbers that I have sold, and I have
had fine crops of hay and corn: so that every year I laid by a little money,
till I was able to purchase this farm, which is as good a one as any man should
desire.

There is something so uncommon in hearing a farmer attribute part of his
success in life to his cattle, that I should be obliged to you, Mr. Wilson,
said the Lady, if you would account to me for this circumstance. Most readily,
Madam, said he.

When I was a very young man, I heard a fine sermon from the pulpit, preached
by my dear wife's father, on the subject of showing mercy to brutes. which made
a great impression on my mind; and I have ever since acted toward all dumb
creatures, as I would to mankind, upon the principle of doing as I would be
done by. I always consider every beast that works for me as my servant, and
entitled to wages; but as the^ cannot use money, I pay them in things of more
value to them; and make it a rule, except in cases of great necessity, (when
corn or hay, for instance, is likely to be spoiled) to let them enjoy rest on
the Sabbath Day. I am very cautious of not letting any beast work beyond its
strength, and always give them their food in due season; nor do I ever suffer
them to be beat or cruelly used. Besides giving them what I call their daily
wages, I indulge them with all the comforts I can afford them. In summer, when
the business of the day is over, my horses enjoy themselves in good pasture;
and in winter they are sheltered from the inclemencies of the weather in a warm
stable. If they get old, I contrive some easy task for them; and when they can
work no longer, let them live without it, till age and infirmities make their
lives burdensome to themselves, when I have them put to as easy a death as
possible. Though my cows and sheep do not work for me, I think them entitled to
recompense for the profit I receive from their milk and wool, and endeavor to
repay them by the kindest usage: and even my jack-ass finds mercy from me; for
I could not bear to see such a useful creature ill treated; and as for my dogs,
I set great store by them on account of their fidelity.

These are very excellent rules indeed, Mr. Wilson, and I wish they were
generally followed; for I believe many beasts suffer a great deal from the
ill-treatment inflicted on them, the horses in post-chaises and hackney-coaches
in London particularly. Yes, Madam, said the farmer, I have heard so and could
tell you such stories of cruelties exercised on brutes in the country, as would
quite shock you: and have seen in my own family such an instance of the
ill-effects of neglecting them, as has confirmed me in the notions I learnt
from the good sermon I told you of.

I have a brother, whom I at present maintain; my father gave him an equal
portion with myself, but neither he nor his wife were industrious, nor had they
any feeling for dumb creatures. He trusted the care of his horses to his
plough-boys, who used to ride them about, let them go without water, and
frequently neglect both to feed and clean them; and indeed, he himself grudged
their victuals; so they grew leaner and leaner, and at last were really killed
with hard work and hard living. His cows were kept so badly in the winter, that
they soon lost their milk; and he calves they had, for want of proper
management, died; as did the cows themselves in a short time afterward. The
sheep got a distemper, which soon put an end to them. His pigs being kept in
the most dirty way in the world, and sometimes without food for two days
together, got hide-bound and full of vermin; and his poultry dropped off with
the roup and other disorders, till he had none left. The jack-ass used to be
put to hard drudgery in his own service, or let out to draw a sand-cart: this
excessive labor, with scarcely time allowed him to seek a scanty living
amongst thistles and hedges, soon put an end to him. These losses my brother
had no means to repair, for without cattle he could not cultivate his farm and
was soon reduced to poverty; and were I not to maintain him, he must be a
beggar; for through want of air and exercise he lost his health, and is now
incapable of working. His wife died some years before of an illness, which was
the consequence of indolence and inactivity.

I am much obliged to you for your story, Mr. Wilson, said Mrs. Benson, and
hope my children will never forget it; for it certainly is a duty to extend our
clemency to beasts and other animals. Nay, we are strictly commanded in the
scriptures to show compassion to the beasts of others, even to those of our
enemies: surely, then, those which are our own property, and work for us, have
a particular claim to it. There is one custom which shocks me very much, and
that is pounding the cattle; I fancy, Mr. Wilson, you do not practice that
much? Why, Madam, replied he, I should much rather pound the owners of them,
through whose neglect or dishonesty it generally happens that horses trespass
on other people's land. If any beast accidentally gets into my grounds, I send
it home to its owner, for it certainly is no wilful fault in the creature to
seek the best pasture it can find; but if I have reason to suppose his owner
turned him in, I then think myself obliged to do what the law directs in that
respect: but though it is a secret I am obliged to keep from my neighbors, I
may safely confess to you, Madam, that I have not the heart to let a poor beast
starve in a pound. As there are no Courts of Justice in which they can seek
redress, I erect one for them in my own breast, where humanity pleads their
cause. I wish they had such an advocate in every breast, Mr. Wilson, said the
Lady: but my watch reminds me that we must now take our leave, which I do with
many thanks to you and Mrs. Wilson, for your kind entertainment and good cheer,
and shall be happy to return your civilities at my own house, and pray bring
your whole family with you.

She then desired her son and daughter to prepare for their departure.
Frederick was grown so intimate with little Neddy, that he could scarcely be
prevailed on to leave him, till he recollected Robin and the Linnet.

As they returned in the coach, Mrs. Benson remarked, that Farmer Wilson's
story was enough to make every one who heard it careful of their live stock for
their own sakes; but, said she, the pleasure and advantage will be greatly
increased, if it is done from a principle of humanity as well as interest. Miss
Benson answered, that she hoped she should neither treat animals ill, nor place
her affections on them too strongly. That, my dear, replied her good mamma, is
the proper medium to be observed. The speech you made for the ant, mamma, said
Harriet, has scarcely ever been out of my head since: I should like to hear
what you could say for every live creature we see. I had need have strong
lungs, my dear, to perform such a task as that, replied Mrs. Benson. I shall,
on all proper occasions, be ready to lend my tongue to the dumb, and to speak
for those who cannot utter their own sorrows and injuries.

In a short time they arrived at home. The maid, to whose care the birds have
been entrusted, gave a good account of her charge; and Miss Harriet and Master
Frederick went to bed in peace, after a day spent with so much pleasure and
improvement.

CHAP. XXII.
THE next morning the Redbreasts attended as usual, and Robin was still better,
but his father began to fear he would never perfectly recover from his
accident; however, he kept his apprehensions to himself, and suffered the
little ones to entertain their lame brother with a relation of what they had
seen the day before in the orchard. Frederick and Harriet were so diverted with
the chattering and chirping of the little things, that they did not miss the
parents song. When the young ones had staid as long as she thought right, the
hen-Redbreast summoned them away, and all took leave of Robin, who longed to go
with them, but was not able. The father reminded him, that he had great reason
to rejoice in his present situation, considering all things; on which he
resumed his cheerfulness, and giving a sprightly twitter, hopped into Master
Frederick's hand, which was spread open to receive him. The rest then flew
away, and Miss Harriet and her brother prepared for their morning task.

The Redbreasts alighted as usual to drink in the court yard, and were
preparing to return to the orchard, when Flapsy expressed a desire to see a
little about the world; for she said it would be very mopish to be always
confined to the orchard, and Dicky seconded her request. Pecksy replied, that
however her curiosity might be excited, she had known so much happiness in the
nest, that she was strongly attached to the paternal spot, and could gladly
pass her life there. The parents both commended her contented disposition; but
her father said, that there was nothing blamable in the inclination Dicky and
Flapsy discovered for seeing the world, provided it was kept within due bounds,
he would readily gratify it: then asking if they were sufficiently refreshed,
took wing, and led the way to the neighboring grove, where he placed his
little tribe amongst the branches of a venerable oak.

Here their ears were charmed with a most enchanting concert of music. On one
tree a Blackbird and a Thrush poured forth their strong melodious notes; on
another a number of Linnets joined their sweet voices: exalted in the air, a
Sky-Lark modulated his delightful pipe; whilst a brother of the wood, feated on
a cool-refreshing turf, made the grove re-echo with his melody; to these the
Nightingale joined his enchanting lay. In short, not a note was wanting to
complete the harmony.

The little Redbreasts were so exceedingly charmed, that for a while they
continued listening with silent rapture; at length, Dicky exclaimed, how happy
should I be to join the cheerful band, and live for ever in this charming
place! It is, replied his mother, a very pleasant situation, to be sure; but
could you be sensible of the superior advantages, which as a Redbreast, you may
enjoy by taking up your abode in the orchard, you would never wish to change
it; for my own part, I find myself so happy in that calm retreat, that nothing
but necessity shall ever drive me from it. Pecksy declared that though she was
much delighted with the novelty of the scene, and charmed with the music, she
now felt an ardent desire to return home; but Flapsy wished to see a little
more first.

Well, said the father, your desire shall be gratified; let us take a circuit
in this grove, for I wish you to see every thing worth observation in every
place you go to; and not to fly about the world, as many giddy birds do without
the least improvement from their travels. On this he spread his wings as the
signal of departure, which his family obeyed.

Observing a parcel of boys creeping silently along, stop, said he, let us
perch on this tree, and see what these little Monsters are about. Scarcely were
they seated, when one of the boys mounted an adjacent tree, and took a nest of
half-fledged Linnets, which he brought in triumph to his companions.

At this instant, a family of thrushes unfortunately chirped, which directed
another boy to the place of their habitation; on which he climbed, and eagerly
siezed the little unfortunate creatures. Having met with so much success, they
left the grove to exult, at their own homes, over their wretched captives, for
ever separated from their tender parents; who soon came back, laden with the
gain of their labor, which they had kindly destined for the sustenance of
their infant broods.

The little Redbreasts were now spectators of those parental agonies which had
been formerly described to them; and Pecksey cried out, Who would desire to
live in this grove, who had once experienced the comforts of the orchard? Dicky
and Flapsy were desirous to depart, being alarmed for their own safety. No,
said the father, let us stay a little longer -- now we will go on. They
accordingly took another flight, and saw a man scattering seed upon the ground.
See there, said Dicky, what fine food that man throws down; I dare say he is
some good creature who is a friend ^o the feathered race; shall we alight and
partake of his bounty? Do not form too hasty an opinion, Dicky, said the
father; watch here with me a little while, and then do as you think proper. All
the little ones stretched out their necks, and kept a curious eye fixed on the
man. In a few minutes, a number of Sparrows, Chaffinches, and Linnets
descended, and began to regale themselves; but in the midst of the feast, a net
was suddenly cast over them, and they were all taken captive. The man, who was
a bird catcher by profession, called to his assistant, who brought a cage
divided into a number of small partitions, in which the Linnets and Chaffinches
were separately deposited. In this dismal prison, where they had scarcely room
to flutter, were those little creatures confined who lately poured forth their
songs of joy, fearless of danger. As for the Sparrows, their necks were wrung,
and they were put in a bag together. The little Redbreasts trembled for
themselves, and were in great haste to take wing. Stay, said the father, Dicky
has not yet made acquaintance with this friend of the feathered race. No, said
Dicky, nor do I desire it; defend me, and all who are dear to me, from such
friends as these! Well, said the father, learn from this instance, never to
form an hasty judgment, nor to put yourself into the power of strangers, who
offer you favors you have no right to expect from their hands.

Indeed, my love, said the mother bird, I am very auxious to get home; I have
not lately been used to be long absent from it, and every excursion I make
endears it to me. O, the day is not half spent, replied her mate; and I hope,
for the gratification of the little ones, you will consent to complete the
ramble. Come let us visit another part of the grove; I am acquainted with its
inmost recesses. His mate acquiesced, and they proceeded on their journey.

At length, the father hastily called out, Turn this way! turn this way! The
whole party obeyed the word of command, and found the good effects of their
obedience; for in an instant they saw a flash of fire, a thick smoke followed
it, and immediately they ^ard a dreadful sound, and saw a young Redstart (...)
bleeding to the ground, on which he struggled just long enough to cry, Oh! my
dear father! why did I not listen to your kind admonitions, which I now find
too late, were the dictates of tenderness! and then expired.

The little Redbreasts were struck with consternation at this dreadful
accident; and Pecksy, who recovered the soonest, begged her father would inform
her by what means the Redstart was killed. He was shot to death, said he; and
had you not followed my directions, it might have been the fate of every one of
you: therefore, let it be a lesson to you, to follow every injunction of your
parents with the same readiness for the future. You may depend upon it, our
experience teaches us to foresee many dangers, which such young creatures as
you have no notion of; and when we desire you to do, or forbear any thing, it
is for the sake of your safety or advantage; therefore, Dicky, never ^stand
enquiring, as you sometimes have done, and asking, Why we tell you to do so and
so? For had that been the case now, you, who were in a direct line with the
gunner, would have been inevitably shot.

They all said they would observe implicit obedience. Do so, said he; but in
order to do this, you must also remember to practice, in our absence, what we
enjoin you when present. For instance, some kinds of food are very prejudicial
to your health, which we would not on any account, let you taste when we are
by: these you must not indulge in when away from us, whatever any bird may say
in recommendation of them. Neither must you engage in any dangerous enterprise,
which others, who have natural strength or acquired agility, go through with
safety; nor should you go to any places which we have pointed out as dangerous,
nor join any company which we have forbid you to make acquaintance with. This
poor Redstart might have avoided his fate; for I heard his father, when I was
last in the grove, advise him not to fly about by himself, till he had shown
him the dangers of the world. Pecksy answered that she know the value of
parental instruction so well, that she certainly would treasure up in her heart
every maxim of it; and the others promised to do the same: but, said Flapsy, I
cannot understand the nature of the accident which caused the death of the
Redstart. Neither can I explain it to you, my dear, said the father; I only
know that it is a very common practice for some men to carry instruments, from
which they discharge what proves fatal to many a bird; but I have, by attentive
observation learnt how to evade the mischief. Whenever I go from the orchard, I
always get upon a high tree and look all around me; if I see any gunners I take
a different course (the thickness of the underwood prevented my discovering him
who shot the Redstart.) I also carefully avoid associating with those birds,
which do mischief to the property of mankind, for those that join with thieves
and ravagers deserve, and must justly expect to share their fate: let me
therefore advise you to be particularly careful to keep proper company, and
gain an honest character, as it will ensure you the good opinion of others. But
come, let us descend, as we may do it with safety, and refresh ourselves a
little, and then will see if we cannot find a place where you may have
amusement, without being exposed to such dangers as attend the inhabitants of
woods and groves. Are you sufficiently rested to take a pretty long flight? O
yes, cried Dicky, who was quite eager to leave the spot, in which, a short time
before, he had longed to pass his life; the rest joined in the same wish, and
every wing was instantly expanded.

CHAP. XXIII.
THE father led the way, and in a very short space of time he and his family
arrived at the estate of a Gentleman, who, having a plentiful fortune,
endeavored to collect all that was curious in art and nature, for the
amusement of his own mind, and the gratification of others. He had a house like
a palace furnished with every expensive rarity; his gardens, to which the
Redbreasts took their flight, were laid out in such a manner as to afford the
most delightful variety to the eye. Amongst other articles of taste were an
aviary and a menagery. The former was built like a temple, enclosed with brass
wire; the frame-work was painted green and ornamented with carving gilt; in the
middle a fountain continually threw up fresh water, which fell into a basin
whose brink was enamelled with flowers; at one end were partitions for birds
nests, and troughs containing various kinds of seed, and materials for building
nests; this part was carefully sheltered from every inclemency of weather, and
numbers of perches were planted in different parts of the aviary, and it was
surrounded by a most beautiful shrubbery.

A habitation like this, in which all the conveniences of life seemed to be
collected, where abundance was supplied without toil, where each gay songster
might sing himself to repose in the midst of ease and plenty, safe from the
dangers of the woods, appeared to our young travelers desirable beyond all the
situations in the world, and Dicky expressed an earnest desire to be admitted
into it. Well, said the father, let us not determine hastily, it will be
advisable first to enquire whether its inhabitants are really happy, before
you make interest to become one of the number; place yourself by me in this
shrub, and whilst we rest ourselves we shall have an opportunity of observing
what passes.

The first bird that attracted their notice was a Dove, who sat cooing by
himself in a corner in accents so gentle and sweet, that a stranger to his
language would have listened to him with delight; but the Redbreasts, who
understood their import, heard them with sympathetic concern.

"Oh, my dear, my beloved mate," said he, "am I then divided from you for ever?
What avails it, that I am furnished here with all the elegancies and luxuries
of life? Deprived from your company, I have no enjoyment of them; the humblest
morsel, though gained with toil and danger, would be infinitely preferable to
me if shared with you. Here I am shut up for the remainder of my days, in
society for which I have no relish, whilst she, who has hitherto been the
beloved partner of all my joys, is for ever separated from me! In vain will
you, with painful wing, pursue your anxious search in quest of me! never, never
more, shall I bring you the welcome refreshment; never shall I hear your
soothing voice, and delight in the soft murmurs of the infant pair, which you
hatched with such care, and nursed with such tenderness! No, my beloved
nestlings, never will your wretched father be at liberty to guide your flight
and instruct you in the duties of your station!" Here his voice faultered, and
overcome with bitter reflection, he resigned himself a prey to silent sorrow.

This Dove is not happy, however, said the hen Redbreast to her mate, and no
wonder: but let us attend to the notes of that Lark. His eyes were turned up
toward the sky, he fluttered his wings, he strained his throat, and would to a
human eye, have appeared in raptures of joy; but the Redbreasts perceived that
he was inflamed with rage. "And am I to be constantly confined in this horrid
place?" sang he. "Is my upward flight to be impeded by bras and wires? Must I
no longer soar toward that bright luminary, and make the arch of heaven
resound with my singing? shall I cease to be the herald of the morn, or must I
be so in this contracted sphere? No, ye partners of my captivity, henceforth
sleep on, and take ignoble rest and may you lose in slumbers the remembrance of
past pleasures! O cruel and unjust man! is it not enough that I proclaim the
approach of day, that I soothe your sultry hours, that I heighten the delight^
of evenings, but must I, to gratify your unfeeling wantonness, be secluded from
every joy my heart holds dear, and condemned to a situation I detest? Take your
delicious dainties, reserve your flowing stream for those who can relish them,
but give me liberty. But why do I address myself to you who are heedless of my
misery?" Here casting an indignant look around, stopped his song.

What think you now, Dicky, said the Redbreasts, have you as high an idea of
the happiness of this place, as you conceived on the first view of it? I cannot
help thinking still, replied Dicky, that it is a charming retreat, and must be
very comfortable to have every thing provided for one's use. Well, said the
father, let us move, and observe those Linnets who are building their nest.
Accordingly they flew to a tree, whose branches formed a part of the shelter of
the aviary, where they easily heard, without being observed, all that passed in
it.

"Come," said one of the Linnets, "let us go on with our work, and finish the
nest; though it will be rather a melancholy task to hatch a set of little
prisoners. How different was the case when we could anticipate the pleasure of
rearing a family to all the joys of liberty? Men, it is true, now, with
officious care, supply us with the necessary materials, and we may make a very
good nest; but I protest I had much rather be at the trouble of seeking them.
What pleasure have we experienced in plucking a bit of wool from a sheep's
back, in searching for moss, in selecting the best feather where numbers were
left to our choice, in stopping to rest on the top of a tree, which commanded
an extensive prospect, in joining a choir of songsters whom we accidentally met
-- But now our days pass with repeated sameness; variety, so necessary to give
a relish to all enjoyment, is wanting. Instead of the songs a joy we formerly
heard from every spray, our ears are constantly annoyed with the sound of
mournful lamentations, transports of rage, or murmurs of discontent. Could we
reconcile ourselves to the loss of liberty, it is impossible to be happy here,
unless we could harden our hearts to every sympathetic feeling."

"True," said his mate; "yet I am resolved to try what patience, resignation,
and employment will effect; and hope, as our young ones will never know what
liberty is, they will not pine as we do for it." Saying this she picked up a
straw, her mate followed the example, and they pursued their work.

At this instant a hen Goldfinch brought forth her brood, who were full
fledged. Come, said she, my nestlings, use your wings; I have taught you to fly
in all directions. She saying, the little ones divided one flew upwards; but
emulous to out do a little Sparrow, which was flying in the air above the
aviary, he hit himself against the wires of the dome, and would have fallen to
the bottom, but that he was stopped by one of the perches.

As soon as he recovered, "Why cannot I soar as I see other birds do? said he.
"Alas!" cried the mother, "we are in a place of confinement; we are shut up and
can never get out; but here is food in abundance, and every other necessary."
"Never get out?" exclaimed the whole brood, "then adieu to happiness!" She
attempted to sooth them, but in vain.

The little Redbreasts rejoiced in their liberty, and Dicky gave up the desire
of living in the aviary, and wished to be gone. Stop, said the father, let us
first hear what those Canaries are saying.

The Canaries had almost completed their nest. "How fortunate is our lot,"
said the hen bird "in being placed in this aviary! How preferable is it to the
small cage we built in last year? Yes," replied her mate; "yet how comfortable
was that in comparison to the still smaller ones in which we were once
seperately confined. For my part, I have no wish to fly abroad, for I should
neither know what to do, nor where to go; and it shall be my endeavor to
inspire my young ones with the same sentiments I feel. Indeed, we owe the
highest gratitude to those who make such kind provision for a set of
foreigners, who have no resources but their bounty; and my best lays shall be
devoted to them. Nothing is wanting to complete the happiness of this place,
but to have other kinds of birds excluded. Poor creatures! it must be very
mortifying to them to be shut up here, and see others of their own kind
enjoying freedom. No wonder they are perpetually quarrelling; for my part, I
sincerely pity them, and am ready to submit to the occasional insults and
affronts I meet with out of compassion.

You now concieve, Dicky, said the cock Redbreast, that this place is not, as
you supposed the region of perfect happiness; you may also observe, that it is
not the abode of universal wretchedness. It is by no means desirable to be shut
up for life, let the place of confinement be ever so splendid; but should it at
any time be your lot to be caught and imprisoned, which may possibly be the
case, adopt the sentiments of the Linnet and Canary Bird: employment will pass
away many an hour that would have been a heavy load if spent in grief and
anxiety; and reflections on the blessings and comforts that are still in your
power, will lessen your regret for those which are lost. But come, pick up some
of the seeds which are scattered on the outside of the aviary, for that is no
robbery, and then I will show you another scene.

As soon as they had regaled themseves with the superfluities of the feathered
captives, they took their flight to a different part of the garden, in which
was a menagery.

The menagery consisted of a number of pens, built round a grass plat; in each
was a pan of water, a sort of box, containing a bed or nest, a trough for food,
and a perch. In every pen were confined a pair of birds, and every pair was
either of a different species, or distinguished by some beautiful variety
either of form or plumage. The wooden bars which were put in the front, were
painted partly green and partly white, which dazzled the sight at the first
glance, and so attracted the eyes, that there was no seeing what was behind
without going close up to the pens.

The little Redbreasts knew not what sight to expect, and begged their parents
to gratify their cucuriosity. Well, follow me, said the father; but I believe
we must alight upon the cross-bars, or you will not be able to examine the
beauties of these fowls. They did so, and in the first pen was a pair of
Partridges. The size of these birds so greatly exceeding their own, astonished
them all; but notwithstanding this, the amiable Pecksy was quite interrested
with their modest gentle appearance, and said, she thought no one could ever
wish to injure them. True, Pecksy, replied the father, they have from the
harmlessness of their disposition, a natural claim to tenderness and
compassion; and yet I believe there are few birds who meet with less; for I
have observed that numbers share the same fate as the Redstart, which you saw
die in the grove. I have myself seen many put to death that way. For a long
time I was excessively puzzled on account of this fatality, and resolved, if
possible to gratify my curiosity. At length I saw a man kill two and take them
away. This very man had shown me great kindness, in feeding me, when I first
left my father's nest; so I had no apprehension of his doing me an injury, and
resolved to follow him. When he arrived at his own house I saw him deliver the
victims of his cruelty to another person, who hung them up together by the legs
in a place which had a variety of other dead things in it, the sight of which,
shocked me exceedingly, and I could stay no longer. I therefore flew back to
the field in which I had seen the murder committed; and in searching about
sound th nest belonging to the poor creatures in which were several young ones
just hatched, who in a short time were starved to death. How dreadful is the
fate of young animals who lose their parents before they are able to shift for
themselves! and how dutiful ought those to be, to whom the blessing of parental
instruction and assistance is continued!

When the next morning arrived, I went again to see after the dead Partridges,
and found them hanging as before; and this was the case the day after; but the
following morning I saw a boy stripping all their feathers off. As soon as he
had completed this horrid operation, a woman took them, whom I ventured to
follow, as the window of the place she entered stood open; where to my
astonishment, I beheld her twist their wings about, and fasten them to their
sides, then cross their legs upon their breasts, and run something through
their bodies. After this she put them before a place, which glowed with a
brightness something resembling the setting sun, which, on the woman's
retiring, I approached, and found intolerably hot; I therefore made a hasty
retreat; but resolving to know the end of the Partridges, kept hovering about
the house; and at last looking into a window, I saw them smoking hot, set
before the man who murdered them, and was accompanied by several others; all of
whom eyed them with as much delight, as I have seen any of you discover at the
sight of the finest worm or insect that could be procured. In an instant after
this, the poor Partridges were divided, limb from limb, and each one of the
party present had his share, till every bone was picked. There were some other
things devoured in the same manner: from which I learnt, that men feed on birds
and other animals, as we do on those little creatures which are destined for
our sustenance, only they do not eat them alive. Pray, father, said Dicky, do
they eat Redbreasts? I believe not, replied he; but I have reason to suppose
they make many a meal on Sparrows, for I have beheld vast numbers of them
killed.

At this instant their attention was attracted by one of the Partridges in the
pen, who thus addressed his mate.

"Well, my love, as there is no chance for our being set at liberty, I think we
may as well prepare our nest, that you may deposit your eggs in it. The
employment of hatching and raising your little ones will, at least, mitigate
the wearisomeness of confinement, and I promise myself many happy days yet; for
as we are so well fed and attended, I think we may form hopes that our
offspring will also be provided for; and though they will not be at liberty to
range about as we formerly did, they will avoid many of those terrors and
anxieties to which our race are frequently exposed it one season of the year in
particular." "I am very ready to follow your advice," said the hen Partridge,
"and the business will soon be completed, for the nest is in a manner made for
us, it only wants a little adjusting; I will therefore set about it
immediately, and will no longer waste the hours in fruitless lamentations,
since I am convinced, that content will render every situation easy, in which
we can enjoy the company of our dearest friends, and obtain the necessaries of
life." So saying, she retired into the place provided for the purpose on which
she was now intent, and her mate followed, in order to lend her all the
assistance in his power.

I am very glad, said the hen Redbreast, that my young ones have had an
opportunity of seeing such an example as this. You now understand what benefit
it is of to have a temper of resignation; more than half the evils of life, I
am well convinced, arise from fretfulness and discontent; and would every one,
like these Partridges, try to make the best of their condition, we shall hear
but few complaints; for there are much fewer real than imaginary misfortunes.
But come, let us take a peep into the next pen. Here they beheld a pair of fine
Pheasants, who were quietly picking up some grain that was scattered for them;
from which might be inferred, that they had, like the Partridges, reconciled
themselves to their lot. The little Redbreasts were much pleased with the
beauty of the cock bird; but as there was no conversation to be heard here,
their parents desired them to fly on; as pleasures, by which the eye only was
amused, were not deserving of long attention.

They accordingly hopped to the next partition, in which were confined a pair
of penciled Pheasants. Flapsy was quite ^elighted with the elegance of their
form, and the beauty of their plumage, and could have staid the whole day
looking at them; but as these birds were also tame and contented, nothing
further could be learnt here, than a confirmation of what the Partridges had
taught. Our travelers therefore proceeded still farther, and found a pair of
gold Pheasants. Their splendid appearance struck the young Redbreasts with
astonishment, and raised such sentiments of respect, that they were even
fearful of approaching birds, which they esteemed as so much superior to
themselves: but their father desiring they would never form a judgment of birds
from a glittering outside, placed his family where they had an opportunity of
observing, that this splendid pair had but little intrinsic merit. They were
proud of their fine plumage, and their employment was walking backwards and
forwards to display it; and sometimes they endeavored to push through the bars
of their prison, that they might get abroad to show their rich plumage to the
world, and exult over those who were, in this respect, inferior to them. How
hard, said one of them, is it to be shut up here, where there are no other
birds to admire us, and where we have no little ugly creatures to ridicule.

If such are your desires, said the hen Redbreast, I am sure you are happier
here than at liberty; for you would by your proud affected airs, excite the
contempt of every bird who has right sentiments, and consequently meet with
continual mortification, to which even the ugliest might contribute.

Pecksy desired to know if all fine birds were proud and affected? By no means,
replied her mother; you observed the other two pair of Pheasants, who were, in
my opinion nearly equal to these for beauty and elegance. How easy and
unassuming are they, and how much are their charms improved by the graces of
humility! I often wonder that any bird should indulge itself in pride. What
have such little creatures as we to boast of? The largest species amongst us is
very inferior to many animals we see in the world, and man is lord over the
greatest and strongest even of these. Nay, man himself has no cause to be
proud; for he is subject to death as well as the meanest creature in the world;
as I have had opportunities to observe. But come, the day wears away, let us
view the other parts of this enclosure.

On this the father conducted his family to a variety of pens, in which were
different sorts of foreign birds, of whom he could give but little account;
therefore would not suffer his young ones to stand gazing at them long, lest
they should imbibe injurious notions on them: especially when he heard Dicky
cry out, as he left the last pen, -- I dare say that Stork is a very cruel
voracious creature; I make no doubt but he would eat us all one after the other
if he could get at us. Take care, Dicky, said the father, how you form an ill
opinion of any one on slight grounds. You cannot possibly tell what the
character of this Stork is, merely from his appearance; you are a stranger to
his language, and cannot see the disposition of his heart. If you give way to a
suspicious temper, your own little breast will be in a state of constant
perturbation; you will absolutely exclude yourself from the blessings of
society, and will be shunned and despised by every bird of every kind. This
Stork, whom you thus censure, is far from deserving your ill opinion. He would
do you no harm, and is remarkable for his filial affection. I saw him taken
prisoner. He was carrying his aged father on his back, whom he had for a long
time fed and comforted: the weight of his precious burden impeded his flight;
and being at length wearied with it, he descended to the ground to rest
himself, when a cruel man, who was out on the business of bird catching, threw
a net over them, and then seized him by the neck. His poor father, who was
before worn out with age and infirmities, unable to bear this calamity,
therefore fell from his back and instantly expired. This Stork, after casting a
look of anguish on his dear parent, which I shall never forget, turned with
fury on his persecutor, whom he beat with his wings with all the strength he
had; but it was in vain to contend with a being so much more powerful than
himself, and, in spite of all his exertions, he was conveyed to this place. But
come, let us pick up a little refreshment, and then return to the orchard.
Saying this, he alighted on the ground, as did his mate and her family, where
they met with a plentiful repast in the provisions which had been accidentally
scattered by the person, whose employment it was to bring food for the
inhabitants of the menagery. When they had sufficiently regaled themselves, all
parties gladly returned to the nest, and every heart rejoiced in the possession
of liberty and peace.

CHAP. XXIV.
FOR three successive days nothing remarkable happened, either at Mr. Benson's
or the Redbreasts nest. The little family came daily to the breakfast-table,
and Robin daily recovered from his accident, though not sufficiently to fly
well; but Dicky, Flapsy, and Pecksy continued so healthy, and improved so fast
that they required no further care; and the third morning after their tour to
the grove, etc. they did not commit the least error. When they retired from the
parlour into the courtyard, to which Robin accompanied them, the father
expressed great delight, that they were at length able to shift for themselves.
And now a wonderful charge took place in his own heart. That ardent affection
for his young, which had hitherto made him, for their sakes, patient of toil,
and fearless of danger, was on a sudden quinched* but from the goodness of his
disposition, he still felt a kind of solicitude for their further welfare;
therefore called them around him, and (...) addressed them.

"You must be sensible, my dear young ones, that from the time you left the
egg-shell, till the present instant, both your mother and I nourished you with
the tenderest love. We have taught you all the arts of life which are necessary
to procure you subsistence, and preserve you from danger. We have shown you a
variety of characters in the different classes of birds; and pointed out those
which are to be imitated, and those which are to be shunned. You must now shift
for yourselves; but before we part, let me repeat my admonition, to use
industry, avoid contention, cultivate peace, and be contented with your
condition. Let none of your own species excel you in any amiable quality, for
want of your endeavors to equal the best; and do your duty in every relation
of life, as we have done ours by you. Prefer a calm retirement to the gay
scenes of levity and dissipation, for there the greatest degree of happiness is
to be found. You, Robin, I would advise, on account of your infirmity, to
attach yourself to Mr. Benson's family, where you have been so kindly
cherished."

Whilst he thus spoke, his mate stood by, who finding the same change beginning
to take place in her own breast, she viewed her family with tender regret; and
when he ceased, cried out, "Adieu ye dear objects of my late cares and
solicitude! may ye never more stand in need of a mother's assistance! Though
nature now dismisses me from the arduous task, which I have long daily
performed, I rejoice not, but would gladly continue my toil, for the sake of
its attendant plaisures. Oh! delightful sentiments of maternal love, how can I
part with you? Let me, my nestlings, give you a last embrace." Then spreading
her wings, she folded them successively to her bosom, and instantly recovered
her tranquillity. E^ch young one expressed its grateful thanks to both father
and mother, and with these acknowledgements filial affection expired in their
breasts; instead of which, a respectful friendship succeeded. Thus was that
tender tie dissolved, which had hitherto bound this little family together; for
the parents had performed their duty, and the young ones had no need of f^rther
assistance.

The old Redbreasts having now only themselves to provide for, resolved to be
no longer burdensome to their benefactors; and after pouring forth their
gratitude in the most lively strains, they took their flight together,
resolving never to separate. Every care now vanished, and their little hearts
felt no sentiments but these of cheerfulness and joy. They ranged the fields
and gardens, sipped at the coolest springs, and indulged themselves in the
pleasures of society, joining their cheerful notes with those of other gay
choristers, who animate and heighten the delightful scenes of rural life.

The first morni^g that the old Redbreasts were missing from Mrs. Benson's
breakfast-table, Frederick and his sister were greatly alarmed for their
safety* but their mamma said, she was of opinion that they had left their
nestlings; as it was the nature of animals in general to dismiss their young,
as soon as they were able to provide for themselves. That is very strange,
replied Miss Harriet; I wonder what would become of my brother and me, were you
and papa to serve us so? And is a boy of six, or a girl of eleven years old,
capable of shifting for themselves? said her mamma. No, my dear child, you have
need of a much longer continuance of our care than birds and other animals; and
therefore GOD has ordained that parental affection, when once awakened, should
always remain in the human breast, unless extinguished by the undutiful
behavior of the child.

And shall we see the old Redstreasts no more? cried Frederick. I do not know
that you will, replied Mrs. Benson, though it is not unlikely that they may
visit us again in the winter; but let not their absence grieve you, my love,
for I dare say they are very safe and happy.

At that instant the young ones arrived, and met with a very joyful reception.
The amusement they afforded to Master Benson, reconciled him to the loss of
their parents; but Harriet declared, she could not help being sorry that they
were gone. I shall, for the future mamma said she, take a great deal of notice
of animals; for I have had much entertainment in observing the ways of these
Robins I highly approve your resolution, my dear, said Mrs. Benson, and hope
the occasional instruction I have at different times given you, has furnished
you with general ideas respecting the proper treatment of animals. I will now
inform you upon what principles the rules of conduct I prescribe to myself on
this subject are founded.

I consider that the same almighty and good GOD, who created mankind, made all
other living creatures likewise; and appointed them their different ranks in
the creation, that they might form together a community, receiving and
conferring reciprocal benefits.

There is no doubt that the Almighty designed all beings for happiness,
proportionable to the faculties he endued them with; therefore whoever wantonly
destroys that happiness, acts contrary to the will of his Maker.

The world we live in seems to have been principally designed for the use and
comfort of mankind, who, by the Divine appointment, have dominion over the
inferior creatures; in the exercise of which, it is certainly their duty to
imitate the supreme Lord of the Universe, by being merciful to the utmost of
their power. They are endued with reason, which enables them to discover the
different natures of brutes, the faculties they pos^ess, and how they may be
made serviceable to the world; and as beasts cannot apply these faculties to
their own use in so extensive a way, and numbers of them (being unable to
provide for their own sustenance) are indebted to men for many of the
necessaries of life, men have an undoubted right to their labor in return.

Several other kinds of animals, which are sustained at the expense of mankind,
cannot labor for them; from such they have a natural claim to whatever they
can supply toward the food and raiment of their benefactors; and therefore
when we take the wool and milk of the flocks and herds we take no more than our
due, and what they can very well spare; as they seem to have an over-abundance
given them, that they may be able to return their obligations to us.

Some creatures have nothing to give us but their own bodies: these have been
expressly destined, by the Supreme Governor, as food for mankind, and he has
appointed an extraordinary increase of them for this very purpose; such an
increase, as would be very injurious to us if all were suffered to live. These
we have an undoubted right to kill* but we should make their short lives as
comfortable as possible.

Other creatures seem to be of no particular use to mankind, but as they serve
to furnish our minds with contemplations on the wisdom, power and goodness of
GOD, and to exhilarate our spirits by their cheerfulness; these should not be
wantonly killed, nor treated with the least degree of cruelty, but should be at
full liberty to enjoy the blessings assigned them; unless they abound to such a
degree, as to become injurious, by devouring the food which is designed for
man, or for animals more immediately beneficial to him, whom it is his duty to
protect.

Some animals, such as wild beasts, serpents, etc. are in their natures
ferocious, noxious, or venomous, and capable of injuring the health, or even of
destroying the lives of men, and other creatures of a higher rank than
themselves: these, if they leave the secret abodes which are allotted them, and
become offensive, certainly may with justice be killed.

In a word, my dear, we should endeavor to regulate our regards, according to
the utility and necessities of every living creature with which we are any way
connected; and consequently should prefer the happiness of mankind to that of
any animal whatever. Next to these (who being partakers of the same nature with
ourselves, are more properly our fellow creatures) we should consider our
cattle and domestic animals, and take care to supply every creature that is
dependant on us with proper food, and keep it in its proper place after their
wants a^ supplied, we should extend our benevolence and compassion as far as
possible to the inferior ranks of beings; and if nothing farther is in our
power, should at least refrain from exercising cruelties on them. For my own
part, I never willingly put to death, or cause to be put to death, any creature
but when there is a real necessity for it; and have my food dressed in a plain
manner, that no more lives may be sacrificed for me, than nature requires for
my subsistence. But I fear I have tired you with my long lecture, so will now
dismiss you.

Whilst Mrs. Benson was giving these instructions to her daughter, Frederick
diverted himself with the young Robins, who having no kind parents now to
admonish them, made a longer visit than usual; so that Mrs. Benson would have
been obliged to drive them away, had not Pecksy on seeing her move from her
seat, recollected that she and her brother and sister had been guilty of an
impropriety; she therefore reminded them that they should no longer intrude and
led the way out at the window; the others followed her, and Mrs. Benson gave
permission to her children to take their morning's walk before they began their
lessons.

CHAP. XXV.
AS the old Robins, who were Hero and Heroine of my tale, are made happy it is
time for me to put an end to it: but my young readers will doubtless wish to
know the sequel of the history, I shall therefore inform them of it in as few
words as possible.

Miss Harriet followed her mamma's precepts and example, and grew up an
universal Benefactress to all people, and all creatures, with whom she was any
ways connected.

Frederick was educated upon the same plan, and and was never known to be cruel
to animals, or to treat them with an improper degree of fondness: he was also
remarkable for his benevolence, so as to deserve and obtain the character of a
GOOD MAN.

Miss Lucy Jenkins was quite reformed by Mrs. Benson's lecture, and her
friend's example; but her brother continued his practice of exercising
barbarities on a variety of unfortunate animals, till he went to school, where
having no opportunity of doing so, he gratified his malignant disposition on
his school-fellows, and made it his diversion to pull the hair, pinch, and
teaze the younger boys; and by the time he became a man had so hardened his
heart, that no kind of distress affected him, nor did he care for any person
but himself; consequently, he was despised ^y all with whom he had any
intercourse. In this manner he lived for some years; at length, as he was
inhumanly beating and spurring a fine horse, merely because it did not go a
faster pace than it was able to do, the poor creature, in its efforts to evade
his blows, threw his brabarous rider, who was killed on the spot.

Farmer Wilson's prosperity increased with every succeeding year, and he
acquired a plentiful fortune, with which he gave portions to each of his
children, as opportunities offered, for settling them in the world; and he and
his wife lived to a good old age, beloved and respected by all who knew them.

Mrs. Addis lost her parrot, by the disorder with which it was attacked whilst
Mrs. Benson was visiting at the house, and before she had recovered the shock
of this misfortune, as she called it, her grief was renewed by the death of the
old lap-dog* About a year afterward her monkey escaped to the top of the
house, from whence he fell and broke his neck. The favorite cat went mad, and
was obliged to be killed. In short, by a series of calamities, all her dear
darlings were successively destroyed. She supplied their places with new
favorites, who gave her a great deal of fatigue and trouble.

In the mean while her children grew up, and having experienced no tenderness
from her, they scarcely knew they had a mamma; nor did those who had the care
of their education inculcate that her want of affection did not cancel their
duty, they therefore treated her with the utmost neglect, and she had no friend
left. In her old age, when she was no longer capable of amusing herself with
dogs, cats, parrots, and monkies, she became sensible of her errors, and wished
for the comforts which other parents enjoyed, but it was now too late, and she
ended her days with sorrow and regret.

This unfortunate Lady had tenderness enough in her disposition for all the
purposes of humanity; and had she placed it on proper objects, agreeably to
Mrs. Benson's rule, might have been, like her, a good wife, mother, friend, and
mistress, consequently, respectable and happy. But when a child, Mrs. Addis was
(under an idea of making her tender hearted) permitted to lavish immoderate
fondness on animals, the care of which engrossed her whole attention, and
greatly interrupted her education; so that, instead of studying natural
history, or other useful things, her time was taken up with pampering and
attending upon animals, which she considered as the most important business in
life.

Her children fell into faults of a different nature. Miss Addis being, as I
observed in a former part of this history, left to the care of servants, grew
up with very contracted notions. Amongst other prejudices, she imbibed that of
being afraid of spiders, frogs, and other harmless things; and having been bit
by the monkey when it escaped, as I before related, and terrified by the cat,
when it went mad, she extended her fears to every kind of creature, and could
not take a walk in the fields, or even in the street, without a thousand
apprehensions. At last, her constitution, which from bad nursing was very
delicate, was still more weakened by her continual apprehensions; and a rat
happening to run across the path, as she was walking* she fell into sits, which
afflicted her, at intervals, during the remainder of her life.

Master Addis, as soon as he became sensible of his mother's foible, conceived
an inveterate hatred to animals in general, whom he regarded as his enemies;
and thought he was avenging his own cause when he treated any with barbarity.
Cats and dogs, in particular, he singled out as the objects of his revenge,
because he considered them as his mother's greatest favorites: and many a one
fell an innocent victim to his mistaken ideas.

The parent Redbreasts visited their kind benefactors the next winter; but as
they were flying along one day, they saw some crumbs of bread, which had been
scattered by Miss Lucy Jenkins, who, (as I observed before) had adopted the
sentiments of her friend, in respect to compassion for animals, and resolved to
imitate her in every excellence. The Redbreasts gratefully picked up the
crumbs, and, encouraged by the gentle invitation of her looks, resolved to
repeat their visits; which they accordingly did, and found such an ample
supply, that they thought it more advisable to go to her with their next
brood, than to be burdensome to their old benefactors, who had a great number
of pensioners to support: but Master and Miss Benson had frequently the
pleasure of seeing them, and knew them from all their species by several
particularities, which so long an acquaintance had given them the opportunity
of observing.

Robin, in pursuance of his father's advice, and agreeably to his own
inclinations, attached himself to Mr. Benson's family, where he was an
exceeding great favorite. He had before, under the conduct of his parents,
made frequent excursions into the garden, and was, by their direction* enabled
to get up into trees, but his wing never recovered sufficiently to enable him
to make long flights: however, he found himself at liberty to do as he pleased,
and therefore, during the summer months commonly passed most of his time
abroad, and roosted in trees, but visited the tea-table every morning; and
there he usually met his sister Pecksy, who took up her abode in the orchard,
where she enjoyed the friendship of her father and mother. Dicky and Flapsy,
who thought their company too grave, flew giddily about together. In a short
time they were both caught in a trap-cage, and put into the aviary, which Dicky
once longed to inhabit. Here they were at first very miserable; but after a
while, recollecting their good parent's advice, and the example of the Linnets
and Pheasants, they at length reconciled themselves to their lot, and each met
with a mate with whom they lived tolerably happy.

From the foregoing examples, I hope my young readers will select the best for
their own imitation, and take warning by the rest, otherwise my histories are
written in vain.

Happy would it be for the animal creation, if every human being, like good
Mrs. Benson, consulted the welfare of inferior creatures, and neither spoiled
them by indulgence, or injured them by tyranny! Happy would mankind be, if
every one, like her, acted in conformity to the will of their Maker; by
cultivating in their own minds, and those of their children, the divine
principle of UNIVERSAL BENEVOLENCE!

FINIS.

