AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Principles and Tendency OF CERTAIN PUBLIC MEASURES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, No. 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET. M DCC
XCIV.

TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IN the spirit of truth, and not of adulation, does the following performance
solicit your attention. Nor is its hope of acquiring some share of your
countenance diminished, by the circumstance of your not having in an official
character withheld your signature, from several of the measures investigated.

A responsibility in the chief magistrate, for the effects of every legislative
act -- an avowal, that unforeseen consequences, however mischievous, ought to
be submitted to, for the sake of consistency in error -- that experiment in
search of truth, is to be rejected; are positions to which a liberal and
enlightened mind will never accede.

Your general assent to laws ought to be ascribed to republican principles, and
not to an indiscriminate approbation of their contents. To yourself therefore,
as well as to every other citizen, remains entire the invaluable birthright of
freedom in the re-examination of public measures. For surely the right and
duties of a citizen cannot be absorbed by official functions.

Whilst, under the influence of republicanism, you have cautiously checked the
will of the people, you have also reserved your negative power, to be exerted
on great and momentous occasions, for the preservation of their rights. Such an
occasion occured in a direct attempt upon the principles of representation, the
defeat of which sufficiently evinces, that you cannot approve of the indirect
means by which these principles have been so much more deeply wounded, than
that attempt contemplated. Can it then be delusion to cherish a hope, that
assaults directed against the vital organ of popular government, are destined
to be defeated by the same laudable vigilance?

THE AUTHOR.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRINCIPLES AND TENDENCY OF CERTAIN PUBLIC MEASURES.
SECTION I. -- NO FREE GOVERNMENT OR THE BLESSINGS OF LIBERTY CAN BE PRESERVED
TO ANY PEOPLE, BUT BY A FREQUENT RECURRENCE TO FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.
THE state of politics at all times, ought to attract the attention of a
nation, jealous of its liberty, lately purchased at the expense of much blood
and treasure. To what more important subject, can a portion of our attention
and enquiries be applied? Private immorality, is often confined to the
destruction of an individual, whilst political immorality will ruin a nation.
When the honest and unsuspicious, are falling into the snares of the selfish
and cunning, it behooves all possessed of a single sympathetic spark, to sound
the alarm; and when an alarm is sounded, temerity and folly only, will have to
deplore the want of prudence and caution.

National watchfulness is the only preservative of liberty. A patriot
magistracy hardly appears to gladden the historic page, once in a century.
Shall Americans then rely on a phenomenon to guard their rights? Fanaticism
alone will fondly wait for a miracle. Or shall we call in the aid of plain and
unerring arithmetic, from whence to extract a rule for our conduct. Calculate.
How many bad kings for one good one are recorded in history? Ascertain this,
and the result exhibits the exact chance for freedom, held by the tenure of a
blind and implicit reliance on the integrity of the magistracy.

If to be watchful at all times, is a necessary effort of national prudence,
the precept is pronounced by the tongue of liberty to be indispensable, at an
epoch of experiment. Corrupt morals in a state of infancy, forebode a
licentious manhood, and a wicked old age. -- By giving a proper tone to a young
government, and rooting an administration in the sound principles of political
morality, happiness will be acquired for ourselves and our posterity. By
sparing the rod, we may spoil the child. Like an ill weed which grows apace, it
will soon become too strong for correction, and instead of being a blessing, it
will turn out a curse to its parents.

To leave the allegory. As a bad form of government, may by means of a good
administration, produce national happiness, so a good form of government, may
be abused into an engine of fraud and corruption. Mischievous precedents, or
innovations upon the constitution, are matured by time into municipal
regulations, or fundamental rules. Antiquity will begin to show its silvered
locks, and under the disguise of sanctity, will lay hold of the first
admissible moment to entrench itself behind the bulwark of prescription. Custom
will be arrayed against reason. Prejudice, interest, ridicule, invective,
authority and power, will appear as auxiliaries to the former; whilst the
latter will have no ally, except argument, and must also assume the unpleasant
language of reformation. Combating with such odds, a defeat would be almost
inevitable, and afflicting would be the sensations of honest men in the
reflection, that by their supineness they have betrayed the most sacred
deposit, instead of transmitting it unimpaired to posterity.

Every acquisition is infallibly lost by inattention. -- Liberty, though
inestimable, is the most difficult to preserve. It is incapable of being
secured by bars and bolts, and is therefore constantly exposed to the pillages
of interest. It is a general indivisible property, whence few feel a particular
obligation or interest, to be militant under its banner. It is committed to the
custody of magistrates, but in the end they seldom fail to betray their trust,
unless awed by the social jurisdiction. Are magistrates enraptured with her
beauties, and jealous lest others should participate in her charms? Or do they
detest a deity, who bestows liberally upon all, because it is her character to
bestow impartially?

The assaults upon the virtue of men in power, if facts can be ascertained from
effects, must be hard to withstand. But many brilliant examples exist, proving
that they are not irresistible. A frequent and firm national enquiry into the
measures of government, will check political vice, and reward political virtue.
The ardour of honesty will be awakened. What incitement to patriotism exists,
if the good and bad -- the honest and knavish -- the benevolent and
misanthropic, are deposited by national supineness in one common oblivious
receptacle? Self interest, chicanery, peculation, and not public esteem, will
shapen the administration. Magistrates will provide such a recompense as they
love, and when sordid passions are to be gratified, and are their own carvers,
what degree of moderation is to be expected? The wheat can only be separated
from the chaff by sifting. Laziness in politics is like laziness in
agriculture. It will expose the soil to noxious weeds. The wholesome plants
will shrink from a state of indiscriminate amnesty, and disdaining a
dishonorable society, will leave the field in the possession of tares and
thistles.

If these principles are political axioms, whence happens it, that the
direction in which the American government is moving, has hardly attracted the
public notice of the particular states, or of private individuals? Is this
direction invariably right? Is it universally satisfactory? Have interest,
ridicule or invective, deprived truth of her articulating powers? Or is the
browbeaten by power or authority?

That this universal satisfaction does not exist, is exhibited by almost every
private company. It is often asserted that the administration is driving at
monarchy -- that the legislature is corrupt -- and that the constitution has
been more deliberately broken, than it was formed.

These assertions are alarming. They deserve investigation. The national mind
is moved, and must be satisfied. Show it the good or harm which awaits the
community, that it may either rejoice in the one, or repel the other.

The conclusion of a Presidential revolution, is a proper period from whence to
look back. Let us consider whether the retrospect exhibits encouragement to
proceed, and to what ultimate point the same direction will probably lead us.

Will you, reader, accompany me in such reflections? Ye sovereign states, will
you contribute your contingents of investigation? It may obviate a necessity
for contingents of another nature, upon some occasion, which may not be very
distant.

SECTION II. -- THE PRINCIPLES OF THE INVESTIGATION.
BUT before we proceed it is proper to form a political compass to guide our
course. If political principles exist -- if the rights of man, are words of
real meaning; if there are none favored of heaven, with an inscription of
supremacy on their foreheads, surely there can be no difficulty in selecting a
few simple axioms, beyond the reach of polemical artifice, and containing a
degree of internal evidence, compelling indubitable conviction.

Unhappily we dare not rely entirely on the constitution of the United States.
That has indeed a consolation, in not having been treated worse than the holy
scriptures. Political and religious heresy, being of kindred families, will act
from similar motives. Neither will ever want a text to defend its usurpations
upon orthodox principles either human or divine, because neither have in view
the public good. And self interest is the most industrious principle
imaginable, in hunting out casuistical arguments and distinctions, to delude
mankind into a state, the most favorable for its designs. It would be
difficult for instance, for a man of understanding, whose only motive was the
common good, to find in the constitution, a single expression which
contemplated the erection of banks, or other corporations. For corporations are
only deeds of gift, or of bargain and sale, for portions of valuable common
rights; and parts may be disposed of until the whole is distributed among a few
individuals. But yet, political heresy, views of interest, and a union of
talents and industry, may puzzle, perplex and mislead, even a sound head, and a
good heart. Hence arises an argument for avoiding so broad a theoremic basis,
as the constitution of the United States.

A selection of plain, though great principles, resulting from the constitution,
as the theorems to guide our investigations into the objects and designs of the
administration, is the only remaining alternative. Without a test for truth,
self interest and innovation, by their wily artifices, will slip out of our
grasp. Or by assuming new and harmless forms, they may withdraw themselves from
the view, even of an investigating eye.

Are not the following propositions unquestionable?

1. That the constitution contemplates a republican form of government, flowing
from and depending on the people; and that a mode of administration,
destructive of such dependence, and introductory of monarchical ingredients,
innovates upon and subverts the constitution. 2. That Congress can impose taxes
for the common defense and general welfare, of the United States, but not for
the benefit of individuals or their own private emolument. 3. That the right of
legislation, resided, and yet resides in the people of the United States. 4.
That this right is periodically delegated by election to their representatives.
5. That the right of election is a substance and not a form, and that a
legitimate representation, implies an existing operative principle, in the
representing, impelling them for the good of the represented. 6. That whenever
this principle ceases to exist, government is converted into an usurpation.
Let these positions constitute the text. Compare with it strictly the ensuing
commentary. Consider if the arguments are conformable and apposite. Without
much reflection we assent to propositions, self evidently true, but a
composition of reasonings, deducing political effects from political causes,
and trying measures by the test of principle, require consideration. If
conviction would flash in upon our minds, when a public mischief was barely
named, argument would be superfluous. And yet too ready an assent, leaves the
mind unprepared to repel the deceitful efforts, which will be made to delude
it; whereas a conviction, resulting from a deliberate investigation is hard to
shake. The following performance solicits nothing, but a circumspect
consideration. Conscious of human weakness, it presumes not to set up for
infallibility; and in exerting its own privilege of thinking, only designs to
induce others to think also. Conscious too of political purity, a detection of
its errors will give it pleasure, whilst it will cling to its truths with
principled fidelity.

SECTION III. -- THE BANK OF THE UNITED STATES CONSIDERED.
THE bank of the United States, is the master key of that system, which governs
the administration. It could unlock a depository of secrets, which would, if
exposed, reflect much light upon the subject. But we are confined to the
information to be extracted from the law itself, and its obvious effects;
premising however, that secrets enacted by law, are secret laws. They operate
upon the ignorant, and punish the innocent; and are as inevitable, as the
stroke of death. An institution, the object of which is gain, would not have
studiously legalised the privacy of its transactions, unless that privacy had
begotten gain. The value to some, of being in the secret, is precisely the
amount of a fraudulent loss inflicted upon others, who are not so.

It is about to be proved, that a design for erecting aristocracy and monarchy,
is subsisting -- that a money impulse, and not the public good, is operating on
Congress; and that taxes are imposed upon motives, other than the general
welfare. The leading evidence evincing these assertions, is to be extracted
from the bank scheme, which was contrived, proposed, and modelled by the
Secretary of the Treasury, and therefore it is selected as the first subject of
investigation.

The business of banking, is simply a reiterated exchange of obligations for
the payment of money. A. gives his bond to B. and receives B's bond in
exchange. But A. pays B. an interest, whereas B. pays A. none. A. is the
community, B. is the bank. How must this traffic end?

This idea requires illustration. In a barter of two commodities, two interests
only are concerned, although each of these interests may be compounded of many
individuals. Thus buyer and seller comprise many persons, though they consist
of but two classes. All those who deal with the bank, constitute one class, and
the stockholders, or proprietors of the bank, another. The dealers deposit
their bonds or notes carrying an interest, and receive in exchange the bonds or
notes of the stockholders, carrying no interest. And the difference between
receiving an interest out of paper, whilst it pays none on similar paper,
constitutes the great ground of profit to the bank.

The scheme represents the idea of a perpetual rotation, depositing a profit at
every revolution. It might have been compared to a species of hazard, called
the A. B. C. table, except that the latter proposes to the adventurers some
chance to win; whereas the bank can never lose. The table bets with its
gamblers upon every revolution 100 to 102, so that in forty revolutions, the
adventurers bet two to one. Yet a chance for winning exists. But in that
respect the comparison fails. The bank is perpetually betting 100 to 106, the
wager is always drawn, and the bank receives the six in every hundred, by way
of forfeit.

Suppose two persons were every moment in the year exchanging bonds, one paying
an interest of six per centum, and the other not, how would matters stand when
a settlement took place? The gain acquired by one, would be precisely similar
to that which constitutes the dividend of banks. In a private case, it would be
called a gross device, to evade the statutes of usury; and yet the enactors of
those statutes have legalised the same device in the erection of banks, and
thus subject the whole community to that which would be a (...) upon an
individual.

The bank evidently constitutes one class, and those who deal with it another.
It evidently appears that the bank must gain. This gain necessarily implies a
loss, because the traffic is of an unproductive nature. It Is a traffic in
ideas, not in substances. But it is not so easy to discern upon whom this loss
falls. And this is a difficulty, which the favorers of the artifice have taken
care to promote, because a detection upon this point would blow up the
contrivance.

And yet a small portion of reflection must get over it. The misfortune must
fall upon somebody. The immediate dealers with the bank must bear it, or they
are reimbursed by those who deal with them. Therefore the loss must fall upon
the whole community, or a part of it. What defense of the institution would it
be, to say, that it selects a devoted few for annual ruin, whilst it spares the
great mass of the community? If the monster is to be fed on human labor, it
would be fair to determine the victim by lot, as to resort to a decoy.

But it would be unjust to impeach the bank of an imposition, not palliated by
the subterfuge, "that those imposed on are able to bear the loss." To this
species of palliation, it is certainly entitled. For if the loss necessarily
resulting from the traffic, had fallen exclusively on the immediate
adventurers, inevitable and speedy ruin must have ensued from the enormous
profit of the bank; and the destruction of some would have deterred others from
adventuring within the reach of this devouring monster. A contrary effect is
clearly observable; and therefore the immediate dealers must, by some
circuitous operation, obtain a reimbursement. Hence the bank may certainly
boast, that the evils she dispenses, like the contents of Pandora's box, are
pretty equally distributed.

Though it might redound to our amusement to trace this operation, it would
contribute but little to our edification. The conclusion will be better evinced
by a few strong lines, than by an assemblage of the most diversified
colorings. The gain is made. The loss cannot fall on the immediate gamblers,
for two reasons. They are not ruined, nor do they work. Gain can never arise
out of nothing, because it is substantial. It must therefore be the product of
labor, and labor only; and that which produces the gain, must of course bear
the loss. The gamblers themselves are only the brokers between the bank and
those who really suffer by the institution. Brokers add nothing to the
commodity. They carry on the traffic between their employers to a great amount
for a profit. If they made no profit, they would cease to pursue the
profession. The immediate receivers of the bank paper, circulate it
identically, or virtually, among their principals, who pay both their profit,
and the gain of the bank. This gain flows in upon the bank in numberless
devious streams, supplied by the whole community. These streams, unless thus
supplied, would have become dry, because they would have exhausted a few unfed
reservoirs. But they appear to be inexhaustible, and therefore they must arise
from the labor of the community, which is the only inexhaustible, ever running
fountain of wealth.

The principals of these brokers, are the original sellers of whatever labor
produces, and the consumers of the wares the brokers deal in. This definition
includes the whole agricultural, mechanical, professional and mercantile
interests of the community, unconcerned in the device. And upon this aggregate
must fall the gain so regularly collected by the bank.

Without perplexing ourselves, to trace out the various modes, by which the
first dealers with the bank are reimbursed from the wealth of this aggregate,
it may not be amiss to select one, the features of which are so gross and
prominent, as not easily to be forgotten.

The system throws into a few hands, a monopoly of the bulk of the circulating
medium. If a man could monopolize any necessary article of commerce, he would
gain, by borrowing money at six per centum to effect such an object. In the
event, he would not lose this interest. The profits resulting from his
monopoly, would reimburse it manifold. The interest, as well as his profit,
would be reimbursed by those upon whom the monopoly operated. Can any monopoly
be more diffusive in its operations, than that of the great bulk of the
circulating medium.

Such a monoply is a kind of general search warrant for wealth, silently
penetrating, and constantly extracting from, the most secure funds. The profits
of the national labor, are in the situation of a treasure, gradually
diminished by secret and continual thefts.

SECTION IV. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
THE powers of a weapon ought to be thoroughly understood, before we venture to
try its edge. -- A bank is a machine of such wonderful and cunning
contrivances, that we must be content to proceed much farther in our enquiries,
before we shall comprehend its mechanism, or be able to form a competent
judgment of its effects.

If the reasonings of the last section are just, we are forcibly impelled to an
awful idea. The reader has already exclaimed, that the profits of the bank are
obviously an indirect tax upon the community. He is right, and it is impossible
for the most cunning argumentative delusion to refute the assertion.

Can the pecuniary necessities of a government be supplied by any possible
contrivance, which will not operate as a tax? If an answer is given in the
affirmative, divulge, we reply, the glorious secret for mankind, by which they
may enjoy all the benefits of good government, without paying for them. If in
the negative, we thus proceed:

The capital of the United States' bank is ten millions, of which the United
States own two. The dividend is eight per centum per annum. This alone is an
annual income of 800,000 dollars, of which 160,000 belong to the nation. The
whole dividend, though but an article of the income, is considerably more than
sufficient to defray the whole expense of the civil government. If it was the
property of the continent, it would be thus applied, and in such an event,
would the government be carried on, without any expense to the community?

Except for the unaccountable infatuation which exists upon the subject,
arguments, as to this point, would appear puerile. Because positions, evidently
true, require no proof.

If the whole profits of the bank had been raised and applied for public use,
as a part really are, it must be admitted, that it would have been an indirect
tax, until it is proved, that government possess a faculty of supporting
itself, by paper slight of hand, without burthening the community.

It then occurs to demand, whether the nature of the contribution is altered as
to the payers, by a transmutation of those who receive the tribute? Is it the
less a tax upon the community, because it is received by an individual
corporation, consisting of a few private persons, many of them foreigners?

But suppose we borrow one of those newly invented expressions, conveying no
determinate idea, and calculated to deceive: And instead of calling the bank
act a tax law, baptize it thus, "a law exercising a faculty of government." It
must yet be confessed, that it is a very valuable faculty. It is worth to the
bank of the United States, an annuity, more than sufficient to defray the whole
expense of civil government, and to all the banks now operating, an income
probably equivalent to the public expenses, both ordinary and extraordinary.

But whatever is its value, it was undoubtedly a public property, because the
legislature in exercising this faculty, were public, and not private agents.
The conveyance then of this faculty by law, was a gift or bargain and sale, of
so much public property to private persons. If the former, it bestowed upon
them gratuitously, an immense revenue, which can only arise from the common
stock of wealth; if the latter, it sells in a ratio of 800,000 dollars annually
of faculty, for the privilege of having 160,000 dollars of the same faculty,
annually restored. In either view, the measure was a public folly, and a
private gain.

The public possess a great variety of valuable faculties. In parcelling them
out among an aristocracy, whom we see growing up as if by the power of magic, a
disposition by portions, would have been less grievous than to give them all
away at once. The faculties of some cities, counties, and even states, bestowed
upon private corporations, would yet have left others in possession of their
rights and privileges. And it would have been more excusable for the
legislature of a great nation, to have prostituted the public interest in a few
particular instances, than to constitute itself the bawd-general, for supplying
the insatiable lust of an aristocracy. The attempt of Appius upon Virginia, was
more tolerable, than a general aristocratical invasion of the national
chastity. And yet, preferring death to prostitution, her bright example aroused
the Roman spirit, and the virtue of a simple maid, restored the liberty of a
whole people.

The public faculties are the offsprings of labor. -- Leaving therefore
unmeaning terms, which may mislead or perplex us, we will resume expressions,
which convey a determinate idea.

Bank stock is public debt. It is public debt of the worst kind, since it bears
an enormous and incomputable interest, as will hereafter be shown. Nothing but
a tax can pay this interest, unless it is proved that the interest on the
funded debt, might have been paid without a tax. And if this could be proved,
then it would be replied, that the faculty ought to have been dedicated to that
use.

The bank might have been sold to public creditors in lieu of interest. If the
price had been ten millions of six per cents, and the profits eleven per
centum, the purchasers would have made a good bargain, supposing they had
deposited ten millions more of actual specie, as stock upon which to circulate
paper. But if they could have circulated ten millions of paper, upon a deposit
of not more than one million of specie, as the bank probably does, the bargain
would have been a good one, reducing the profit even to eight per centum. --
Such a softening measure, is stated as illustrating the perniciousness of the
contrivance, and not as allowing that it would have been a sufficient ground of
justification. Where is the merit of a system of finance, which uses public
property to increase, and not to diminish the public burdens?

Bank stock is public debt of the most ruinous kind, and yet no consideration
was paid, really or nominally for it. If the legislature had presented the bank
proprietors with ten millions of funded debt, in lieu of this faculty, the
community would have been great gainers, because the profit accruing from the
gift, could not have exceeded an average of between four and five per centum.
If twenty millions had been so presented, even that would have been better for
the community, because the profit would not only have been as low as the gain
made by the bank, but it would have been known and limited -- it might have
been provided by tax-laws equalizing the burden -- it would have been subject
to redemption -- and above all, it would not have committed a depredation upon
the fundamental principles of representation.

Had so much public debt been honestly, and not artificially accumulated, it
must have been earned by labor, which would have produced a general
distribution of it, obviating an exorbitant accumulation of wealth in a few
private hands.

But an effect, which was a leading motive for the contrivance would then have
been defeated. Its chief design was to make the rich, richer; and the poor,
poorer. And thus I prove it.

Money and credit, or an equivalent for them, were to be deposited as the only
mode of acquiring bankstock. The poor had neither to deposit, the rich
possessed both. An exclusion of the one, and a preference of the other, though
not expressed, was evidently designed, because it unavoidably resulted from the
nature of the contrivance. And the effect answers the design. A portion of the
rich class of citizens, are the proprietors of the device, whilst labor
supports it. An annuity to a great amount, is suddenly conjured up by law,
which is received exclusively by the rich, that is the aristocracy. Will it not
make them richer? It is paid out of labor, and labor in all countries falls
on the poor. Will it not make this class poorer? and do such effects tend to
correct the principles of either?

Suppose a religious society should be exclusively incorporated, and by hook or
crook provided with an ample revenue, payable from the labor of all such
societies. Would it not become an established church, and would it not
impoverish and eventually swallow up all others? A political sect, thus
incorporated, and thus provided for, will have a political tendency, of a
nature precisely similar. No distinction exists between the causes, and none
therefore will appear in the effects. And if it be said, that our political
rights are not worth preserving, let it be remembered that they are the sole
guardians of religious liberty.

If the aristocratical sect, thus incorporated, had actually deposited specie
in their bank, it would yet have remained in their own custody, and under their
own direction; for the corporation manages its own concerns. Even in this
event, labor would have been taxed, to pay to the rich an exorbitant usurious
interest, for their own money, in their own pockets, and at their own disposal.
But usury upon actual money, was too slow a process for effecting a vast
disproportion of wealth. The contrivance is calculated to bestow upon the rich,
interest upon the amount of their credit, not of their cash. Bank-paper is
circulated to an amount, far beyond a deposit in money. It rests upon an idea
called credit. And all interest gotten for this surplus of paper, beyond a
specie deposit, is paid by labor to the rich, because they have, what the poor
ardently wish for; and therefore they ought not to be taxed for wanting it,
since this precludes even a hope of such an acquisition.

How delusive is a comparison between bank-debts, and private loans? The latter
must consist of money or money's worth, and without one, debts between
individuals cannot be created; the former may be created, though the bank
possesses neither money or money's worth, and a banker may live upon the labor
of others during his whole life, if he can conceal the fraud of his being a
bankrupt. The latter are limited within reasonable bounds, because they are
founded on real wealth, which cannot be even doubted by impressing
hireoglyphicks upon paper; the former may be infinitely multiplied by a
printing press, and are unlimited so long as the nation is able to pay six
pounds specie, for every hundred pounds of idea, which a bank may be pleased to
emit. In the latter case, something is given for something; in the former, the
community pays something for nothing.

But a feature of this monstrous contrivance is now to be disclosed, which
exposes the partiality of administration to a moneyed interest, and its real
design, beyond a remnant of doubt.

This same worshipful aristocracy, favored of government, for the bulk of
their bank-stock, were not even obliged to deposit money. Public securities
carrying an interest of six per centum, for three fourths of the whole amount,
are by law receivable as a deposit. If actual specie had been locked up in the
vaults of the bank, to be occasionally counted by public authority, a semblance
of an excuse might have been made, by urging, that the interest of the money
thus deposited, was lost. But paper certificates are deposited as a fund upon
which to circulate other paper certificates. These are gaining of the public a
never (...) interest, whether kept by the body corporate, or the individuals
composing the body corporate. What an unheard of degree of political iniquity
is here disclosed? To the six per centum paid by government on seven millions
five hundred thousand dollars of the public debt, is superadded by ministerial
contrivance, the customary profit gained by a bank, and the unusual
acquisitions, amassed by this particular scheme. Legislative power itself
cannot ascertain, to what these amount. If they extend only to six per centum,
then twelve per centum is received out of the public labor, by
certificate-holders to the amount of 7,500,000 dollars, some of whom may
possibly possess no other merit, but the fraud of having purchased them of the
true owners, by concealing their knowledge of the ministerial designs.

A deposit of paper, as a fund on the credit of which to issue other paper, is
a ruinous feature, exhibited in no other scheme of the sort extant, except that
of the United States. Hence the poor compensation to the public, of locking up
specie in the bank ready for an urgency, in lieu of that taken out of
circulation, though pretended, does not exist. Instead of supporting the credit
of government, government must support the credit of the bank. For if the
credit of the government wavers, public paper cannot support the credit of the
bank. When government shall need help, the bank will need it also; nor can the
political evils resulting from being completely stripped of the substantial means
of defense, be alleviated by unlocking a hoard of paper certificates. If the
bank had really collected the specie into its vaults, government would have
been rendered dependent on a private corporation, for the means of national
defense. If the bank should disapprove of defense, it would withhold the means.
Thus it would have become the arbiter of peace and war, and in case a
combination of foreign potentates, should endeavor to impose on America a
government of king, lords, and prelates, what would have been the arbitrament
of a class, from whence those materials must have been taken?

Banking in its best view, is only a fraud, whereby labor suffers the
imposition of paying an interest on the circulating medium; whereas if specie
only circulated, the medium would in passing among the rich, often lie in the
pockets of the aristocracy without gaining an interest. But the aristocracy, as
cunning as rapacious, have contrived this device, to inflict upon labor a tax,
constantly working for their emolument, whilst they also retain the chief use
of the cash, and seldom part with its custody.

The Venitian nobility one day in a year, convert their palaces into gaming
houses, reserving and exercising the privilege of cheating the citizens with
false dice, who are on that occasion indiscriminately admitted. Worthy Venitian
aristocracy! Three hundred and sixty-five times more worthy than those, who
grow rich by means of a political cheat, diurnally revolving, and inevitable by
prudence itself.

SECTION V. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
THE profits of the bank are then a tax upon the community. But a miserable
excuse for this public imposition is urged, in the assertion that it is
voluntary. The effects are the same, whether it is paid willingly or
unwillingly. Labor is deprived of its hard earned fruits. A portion of these
is gotten from it, and bestowed upon ease and affluence. The loss is the same,
whether a daring robber, extorts your property with his pistol at your breast,
or whether a midnight thief secretly filches it away. Are my misfortunes
palliated, because I cannot unravel the fraud by which they were brought upon
me?

A wise nation and an honest man, will view with contempt an apology, founded
in a distinction between secret fraud and open violence.

Miserable as the excuse is, it is not true. Labor which pays the tax, has no
volition, or even agency in the transaction. It being established by law,
labor must pay it of necessity, because the law enables the rich, to transmute
the circulating coin of the nation, to their own paper money, bearing an
interest.

The immediate dealers with the bank, do not pay the tax, as has been proved.
If reimbursement had not followed their advance of it, inevitable ruin must
have ensued, and a general bankruptcy of the dealers, would have annihilated
the traffic.

A corporation of merchants, and of the rich, possessing an unlimited monopoly
of the great mass of the circulating medium, can raise or diminish the price of
all commodities, and in this enormous power is contained an unlimited scope,
not only for reimbursement, but for profit. Now, labor produces, and pays for
the consumption of all commodities, and out of commodities both the
reimbursements and profits arises. The bank is a close party in this
monopolising conspiracy, because its own interest is combined with the designs
of the immediate dealers, by two indissoluble links. 1st. They are the
collectors of the tax the bank receives. 2d. Without reimbursement they would
fail; an instant loss would thence fall upon the bank, and the crafts-men would
in future loose also, the gain of printing pictures for the Ephesians.

Even a lottery has ever been considered by the British parliament, as an
article of the ways and means for raising a national revenue. The purchase of a
ticket is really voluntary, but this was never urged as an excuse for bestowing
its annual product on a corporation, or for excluding it from the catalogue of
taxes.

If the fact had supported the excuse, it might have been illustrated by a
comparison. When the Pope was selling his paper indulgencies over all Europe,
did it not operate as a tax? Did it not enrich the church and impoverish the
laity? And was the fraud justifiable, because it was voluntarily submitted to;
If so, let us join in one general condemnation of our ancestors, for ridding
themselves of the imposition. If not, shall we tolerate a political papacy,
which is eternally selling its paper indulgencies to our ruin, and their own
emolument! Especially as it is easier to detect a fraud, pretending to be the
dispenser of temporal advantages, than to explode a promise of eternal
happiness. The priesthood in both cases put on mystery, the vail of
priestcraft, and in both call in the aid of excommunication. In one an opponent
was branded with the epithet of heretic, and excluded from the pale of the
church; in the other, antifederal is vociferated, drowns argument, and excludes
from civil offices.

But the falsehood of the excuse will appear, from an assimilation of the bank
tax to the impost. The merchants who advance the impost, do not pay it.
Reimbursement, and often with a profit on the advance, is received by them from
labor. Is the impost a voluntary or a necessary tax? The bank-tax is higher
upon the capital, than the impost. The capitals of all the banks now operating,
probably exceed the whole amount of foreign articles imported, and their annual
profits, the whole amount of the annual impost. Had the mercantile interest
exclusively borne the burden of the impost, would it not have been unjust and
ruinous? Does this interest bear a heavier tax, without complaint or ruin? If
not, who does? Both constitute national burdens indistinguishable in their
effects, for neither can be paid but by a national effort; yet more than half
of the total is received by private individuals. If no occasion for the impost
had existed, could it constitutionally have been imposed for twenty years, and
bestowed upon private persons, for the blessed national purpose of creating an
aristocracy?

All taxation is limited by the ability of the nation to pay. Ability is
labor. Whatever of it fruits beyond its sustenance, labor can spare, is
ability. An honest policy leaves to labor which earned it, as much of this
ability, as is not rendered indispensable by a real national necessity. A
dishonest policy comprises its principles in its motto. It exclaims "A national
debt is a national blessing," and it filches all it can get. In private life,
an individual is deservedly detested, who grinds the face of the poor, for the
purpose of buying power, influence or splendor. Airy trifles, weighed against
moral rectitude! What can be said of a policy, which grinds a nation for such
objects? It says for itself, "A nation cannot pay too much for an aristocracy."

Can a minister create a national ability to pay taxes, by paper slight of
hand, or cunning contrivances? If he can, such taxes may not fall on labor. If
he can, a poor nation may pay as much as a rich one, or more if its minister is
most cunning. If he can, taxation has no boundary, but may be multiplied as
indefinitely as human artifice. Then the best conjurer is the wisest minister,
and it would be right to collect all the tumblers, slight of hand men, and
shifters of cups and balls in the nation, into an academy or corporation, for
the instruction of a diplomatic corpse, who will be matter of astonishment in
the present times, and of wonder in future ages.

Suppose it had been proposed to Great Britain, when she commenced the
subjugation of America, to erect a debt in the very same mode, equal to the
present amount of circulating bank-paper in America, to have bestowed upon her
a monopoly of the circulating medium -- and to have invested her with the
profits of the contrivance to all eternity. Would not Great Britain have closed
with the proposition? Would not the profits of the banking business have been
to her a conquest? What did she fight for? Tribute. If it had been paid in this
way, would it not have impoverished America, and enriched Britain? Is not this
the direct operation of a tribute? America has defeated a nation, but is
subdued by a corporation. She defended her property against open violence, to
be cheated of it by private fraud. She was too hard for her enemies, but a
junto of false friends are too hard for her. The bank without a pretense of
claim upon the community, has found means to occupy the station precisely,
which Great Britain was striving to fill.

And if America had submitted to pay a tribute to Britain, such a mode of
raising it, would have been the worst possible tax, which could have been
imposed. No check upon the quantity of paper circulated would have existed,
except the extent of the national ability to pay for it; and the tax might have
been secretly increased, by increasing this paper. So stands the tax paid to
the corporation. Its books are placed by law beyond the reach of legislative
inspection, and an entire union of interests, among every member of the junto,
is a motive strong enough to produce an increase of the tax, and a concealment
of its extent.

The people have not entrusted the Senate of the United States, with a power of
originating money-bills, from a jealousy in the tender case of taxation,
against the least degree of aristocratical ascendency. But this aristocratical
corporation, containing no representative feature, can increase or diminish a
tax at pleasure, without the assent or knowledge of the people. They possess
this important legislative power, subject to one only restraint. The quantity
of paper is unavoidably limited by the national ability to pay for it. How came
this limit to exist, if the profits of the bank arose out of paper slight of
hand, and were not burdensome upon the national ability? Skepticism itself,
will no longer deny that they are a tax.

Is this a system of national charity? To filch from the poor principalities
for the rich, whence princes themselves naturally sprout up. Is the religion of
revelation, or the religion of nature, acting as it does by an hidden impulse
upon the mind, satisfied with such charity? Is the tribute due to Caesar, or are
the scanty, uncertain, occasional donations of ostentation, a reimbursement for
a permanent and growing oppression? Is the conscience of this system satisfied,
by the substitution of hard gotten private alms, of a penny for each pilfered
pound, in the place of political justice, which filches nothing?

The maxim "that an individual had better suffer a misfortune, than a whole
community," is reversed, since the community is sacrificed for the emolument of
a few individuals. Morals and maxims withdraw from the defense of the
contrivance, and a misconstruction of the scripture which says, "unto every
one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance, but from him that
has not, shall be taken away even that which he has," is the only remaining
subterfuge.

SECTION VI. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
AND yet its continuance shall not be commensurate with the frauds of a bank. I
would not impose on my readers an endless task. It is only designed to select
and exhibit so many of its mischiefs as will illustrate the administration. For
this a pamphlet will suffice, whereas a simple vocabulary of its tricks and
sins would fill a volume.

The contrivance is now to be exhibited in a point of view yet more alarming.
It Is the summit of a climax, sufficient to strike a whole community with
consternation.

If a number of the members of Congress are stock-holders, or bank directors,
then an illegitimate interest is operating on the national legislature -- then
the bank has seduced away from their natural and constitutional allegiance,
the representatives of the states -- and then, even foreigners -- our late most
malignant and inveterate enemy -- have obtained an influence on our national
councils, so far as they have obtained bank stock. The English who could not
conquer us, may buy us. Foolish English, to expend an hundred millions in
fighting for the power of legislation, when a twentieth part of the money, will
peaceably obtain it by purchase! But you have seen your error, whereas we are
entering into ours.

But suppose for argument sake, that a majority of such members did not exist.
It is owing only to the curtesy of the scheme, since in addition to the
stockholders, the bank could elect all its directors out of Congress, of which
it regularly gives us six samples, three in each house. And more it would
elect, if more it needed, for there is no constitutional or legal restraint
upon its occasions. To what an humble station has the American legislature
dwindled down, within four years of its creation; its independency is held by
curtesy of a corporation: And an administration will call itself federal, and a
lover of liberty, when it has destroyed its fundamental principle.

An exclusive private interest, too often outweighs a common public obligation.
What we can enjoy alone we value most, and are most eager to attain. Each man's
share of liberty, is held in so general a partnership, that it is often
disregarded, under a stronger inducement. It cannot be deposited in a vault,
nor will it produce him an enormous annuity in hard money.

Hence when paper men get into Congress, or members are metamorphosed into
paper men after they get there, it is obvious that they will be influenced by
their personal private interest, producing them an immense profit in cash,
rather than the public good. If the latter suffers, they will consider their
own acquisitions in money, as a kind of boot, compensating them abundantly for
their portions of the common loss. One partner may thrive and the rest be
ruined. And upon such principles it is, that exclusions from the legislature
are justified.

That an abundance of paper men have been in Congress, can never be denied. An
unnatural alliance exists between certificate and stockholders; unnatural, as I
shall take occasion to show. But the interposition of a third power will often
reconcile contradictions, and a sovereign has been known to manage two
kingdoms, of different languages.

The public money is lodged in the bank. The higher the taxes are, the more of
this money is therein deposited. The more of this money is deposited in the
bank, the more paper the bank can circulate on its credit, and the greater will
be its profits. If the bank will stick by a minister, a minister may stick by a
bank. The amount of taxes and loans are proposed by the minister's estimates.
When these get into Congress, they meet with a great number of paper men, who
have a private interest in the accumulation of public burdens, and thus escape
the strict discussion, to be expected from unbiassed representatives. If a
minister should in this way douceur the bank and member-stockholders, the bank
and such members may in some other douceur him and his friends. Occasional
accommodations of money, operating to acquire an influence in Congress, may be
easily obtained by means of a good understanding, and a good understanding is
easily formed between good friends, united by the strongest of all ties --
mutual support.

And mutual support is necessary. The egregious impositions of a bank, cannot
expect a long continuance, but by the help of ministerial influence; and
ministerial influence rests, for its support, on paper evolutions. They are
partners in a game, knowing each other's hands, and playing into them. Let us
win the public money, says the bank, and you shall certainly win an aristocracy
out of the stockholders. Besides you may scatter the public money in the bank
and its branches, from Boston to Charleston, so that it never can be counted;
perplex your statements, so that nobody can understand them, and we can always
bring you off without detection, by boasting of an intuitive knowledge, or
inward light, making the whole matter as pellucid as the meridian sun. Our
votes in Congress count as well as others.

It is to be observed, that possibilities are here stated. When facts are
asserted, they result from the statute book, or are of public notoriety.
Apprehensions are hazarded, for the purpose of submiting it to the public mine,
whether it will remain exposed to the most imminent danger, or rid itself of so
disquieting a situation, by subjoining new checks for the recovery of violated
rights, and the restraint of unconstitutional designs. Such would be only an
exposition of the constitution, which never contemplated a system striking at
the root of liberty.

A nation risks too much, by laying heaps of public wealth in the way of her
servants, which they may take up, and put in their pockets, without being seen,
and without account. Such trials of integrity, involve too serious and fatal
consequences for national amusement.

A part of the paper system, as the minister has publicly announced,
contemplated the introduction of foreigners into the American speculations --
Consider the effect of this. Paper men get into Congress, and govern the
legislature -- The bank governs the paper men -- A majority of stockholders
govern the bank -- And foreigners may constitute this majority -- Therefore
foreigners may guide the legislature of America. Every great national question
may be influenced by them. Is a treaty to be made respecting commerce or
territory -- are regulations concerning trade under consideration -- or is a
proposition for abolishing banks and stockjobbing to be decided upon, and a
British influence may possibly give the casting vote in every question. If the
question should relate to a war with Britain, the public situation would be
absolutely farcical. Specie being expelled by bank paper, a war could not be
carried on, but by the help of such paper. A majority of the stock may be held
by British subjects, who would be more likely to embarrass public measures, by
demanding the debt due to the bank, into which the nation is already plunged,
than to furnish the means of attacking themselves. What a train of humiliating
reflections are suggested by this idea? Forbear to indulge your grief. Let an
effeminate impression be suppressed by a manly resolution, to lend your aid in
destroying a system, by which even Britain may be better represented in
Congress, and have more influence in the great question of peace or war, than
any single state.

The paper system possesses more than a presidential or tribunitial veto. These
were only powers of prevention, or suspension. Whereas the paper system in its
majority, has acquired that tempting power, for which Britain wasted her blood
and treasure in vain, "of binding us in all cases whatsoever."

Pause reader, and awfully recollect, that the government is in the hands of
speculators. Is an inordinate love of money, a proper principle for legislators
or magistrates of any kind? Does history record the benefits which such a
political principle has procured for mankind? What author has celebrated this
new species of government -- this money-cracy? What ought to be the predominant
principle of a politician? Ought the chief spring of government, to derive its
movements from the engine of corruption itself, or from the immutable
principles of moral rectitude?

SECTION VII. -- THE FOREGOING FACTS APPLIED TO THE PRINCIPLES OF THE
INVESTIGATION.
BUT it is necessary to unload the memory, before we proceed farther, by an
application of the facts which have been disclosed and impressed, to the text
which was selected as a guide for our enquiries.

It was assumed as a position, "That the constitution contemplates a republican
form of government, flowing from, and depending on the people, and that a mode
of administration destructive of such dependence, and introductory of
monarchical ingredients, innovates upon, and subverts the constitution."

Now let me ask, whether an aristocracy, is not only an ingredient, but the
harbinger of monarchy? In this view it is unimportant to decide, whether the
profits of the bank, are actually a tax upon the people or not. It is enough
for our purpose, that the institution tends to accumulate great wealth in the
hands of a few individuals; and that it is only calculated for the admission of
the rich. Nor is it necessary here to contend, that it acts with double force,
in continually reducing the poor, whilst it is exalting the rich.

Let me further demand, what constitutes a real aristocracy? Names, or wealth
united with exclusive privileges. America recoils against titles. A
consciousness of this, has arrested a proposition in the Senate for their
introduction, which, it is said, came from a member of Virginia, in violation
of the sentiment of that state, and remains yet, to be decided upon when
occasion shall be ripe. Though the Senate did not dare to pass it, they could
not bear to reject it. Is it not puerile to spurn at the shadow, whilst we
erect by law the substance? Which is most to be dreaded; titles without wealth,
or exorbitant wealth without titles? Have the words, prince, lord, highness or
protector, a magical influence upon our minds, or can they lay a spell upon our
exertions? The most honorable and best earned title existing (and to the
propriety even of this, I do not mean to subscribe) is that of the Cincinnati.
This title does neither influence the legislature, nor plunder labor. Who are
most to be dreaded, the nominal or real lords of America? It is evident that
exorbitant wealth constitutes the substance and danger of aristocracy. Money,
in a state of civilization is power. If we execrate the shadow, what epithet is
too hard for an administration, which is laboring to introduce the substance?
The shadow is an ugly, yet harmless picture, fit only to frighten children; the
fell monster itself is good cause of alarm to men. In a land of liberty, the
picture disgusts, though incapable of doing mischief, and is therefore
excluded. Shall we consult our sensations, and yet neglect our safety? Whilst
the constitution inhibits a nobility even nominally, are its principles
permissive of its erection in reality? Does it reject the term "murder," and
yet allow the crime to be perpetrated?

A democratic republic is endangered by an immense disproportion in wealth. In
a state of nature, enormous strength possessed by one or several individuals,
would constitute a monarchy, or an aristocracy -- in a state of civilization,
similar consequences will result from enormous wealth. But the deity seems to
have indicated his will in favor of liberty, by equalizing the one, and
limiting the other. The acquisitions of an honest industry can seldom become
dangerous to public or private happiness, whereas the accumulations of fraud or
violence, constantly diminish both. And providence visibly expresses its
disapprobation of such attempts, by raising up an extravagant heir to dissipate
ill-gotten and disproportionate wealth; a natural effect, of which
aristocracies are so sensible, that they constantly counteract it by artificial
regulations, establishing perpetuities.

Tyrants and slaves -- an aristocracy enormously rich, and a peasantry
wretchedly poor, approximate in morals. Is it from a society thus composed,
that the blessings of political morality are expected to result? The
composition is stealing upon us like death. The bank is the time of the body
politic. It will lead it immaturely to the decrepitude of old age, and desert
it in the hour of dissolution. Is this a direction for a wise people to proceed
in? If the community will madly press forward to this goal, the sooner she
arrives the better; there Phoenix-like she will expire, with a consolatory hope
that a sounder offspring will arise out of her ashes.

A minister intoxicated with influence, will exclaim, "Public debt is a public
blessing," for taxes are an incitement to industry. Where does the constitution
contemplate an influential character in the person of a Secretary of the
Treasury, entitling him to prescribe to Congress political dogmas? Or whence
arises the right of the federal government, to apply stimulants to industry?
Does the constitution invest it with such a power; if so, what is become of the
liberty of labor? A whore will administer provocatives to lust, by the rule of
her own insatiable appetite, and not the ability of her paramour; and when his
strength and health are exhausted, will desert him with contempt. Did labor
intend to plan itself under the whip of an avaricious, insatiable, and
luxurious aristocracy?

Labor, in the erection of a government, after deducting the necessary expense
of supporting it, designed to secure safety to itself, in the enjoyment of its
own fruits. The stimulating system frustrates this object, and changes
government into its master, brandishing the lash of legislation, and leaving to
labor what measure of sustenance it pleases. Instead of the owners sparing to
government, government spares to the owners. The system it is true, will make
men less industrious in the preservation of liberty. An urgent pressure for
food and raiment, is unlikely to instill into the mind the liberal sentiments of
freedom. A beast of burden is more remarkable for its patience than its
spirit. An aristocracy, therefore have good reason to exclaim "a national debt
is a national blessing," and in pursuance of their maxim, to create one that is
fictitious, payable to themselves out of the hard earned fruits of labor. To
them it is a mine, yielding gold without work. By loading labor with
stimulants, a coinage for their use is continually proceeding, and a tame and
broken spirited submission to the imposition, will be effectually secured.

A nation oppressed by debt, real or fictitious, is a nation of slaves.

The plebians of this age are too wise to be individually cozened by the
patricians, so that the latter are obliged to create a fictitious debt, by the
help of law, imposing generally upon the former, both an usurious and compound
interest. It is time to retreat to the sacred mount, if no other expedient is
left, and there assert the rights of justice.

But perhaps benevolence is at the bottom of this banking contrivance, and
though the aristocracy are spurring up labor to industry, by large annual
draughts from its product, they may entertain a secret purpose of making an
unexpected restoration of these draughts to the true owners. A surprise so
agreeable, would create a day of jubilee, and perhaps the community, in its
hour of good humor, might present the several banks with a continuation of
their charters, provided they would thenceforward pay all the expenses of
government. -- But what a degree of prodigality would it be, to farm out a
revenue for half its annual product?

The second proposition assumed, was, "that Congress can impose taxes for the
common defense and general welfare of the United States, but not for the
benefit of individuals, or their own private emolument."

Although in applying the facts to the first proposition, it was not necessary
to assert, that the profits of the bank are substantially a tax, yet we must
now recollect the arguments urged to prove it, and rely that they have left on
the mind of the reader an indelible conviction.

And then it follows, that the most alarming infringement of the constitution,
in the most dangerous and tender point, exists in the bank law.

To those recollected, subjoin another argument. Banks, all confess, banish
specie. It is the nature of specie to equalize itself throughout the commercial
world, and therefore whatever is banished from any country, creates a necessity
pro tanto. This necessity can only be supplied by some substitute, and bank
paper is with us the only substitute. The nation therefore, by the contrivance,
is compelled either to suffer the necessity or resort to the substitute. If the
loss resulting from the want of a circulating medium, is greater than the price
demanded by the bank for its paper, people are impelled by the motive of
interest to buy it. A want is artificially created, producing an alternative,
consisting, on both sides, of evil; the bank calculating, that of (...) evils,
the least would be chosen. When all the circulating specie is banished, the
nation must pay for the whole of its circulating medium. If a part, they must
pay for so much as will supply that part. In proportion as a bank can inflict
on the community, the misfortune of losing its circulating specie, will its
profit accumulate. A total loss, the depth of misfortune to the one, is the
summit of prosperity to the other. In an affair of the utmost national
consequence, the interest of a corporation, and the interest of the nation, are
precisely in opposition, and the affair is managed exclusively by the
corporation. So long as there is specie enough for the national occasions, bank
paper will bear no price, or but little can be sold. Is not a pressing need, a
tax? An impost is founded on a need for imported articles. Home manufactures or
forbearance, may evade it. Which will press most, the need for imported
articles, or for a circulating medium, and how is the latter to be evaded?

Life and property, are the two great objects of human solicitude. Government
seldom delights in human blood, and hence our safety on that score. But its
bowels often yearn for human wealth. Checks against this unhappy inclination,
are considered as the most important, and are the most numerous in our
constitution. It exhibits a degree of caution, amounting to suspicion.

Of what avail are these checks, if they are to be evaded by mere names?
Instead of using the word "tax," the word "bank," is resorted to. Suppose the
title of the law had been, An act for raising an annual supply of money for
public purposes, by the establishment of a bank. Would the money raised have
been a tax? Or, suppose the law had been entitled, An act for taxing the
community by the establishment of a bank, and dividing the money so raised,
among sundry members of Congress, and certain other individuals therein named.
This title precisely fits the law as it stands, and as it operates.

What then has become of the constitution? The raising of money is the essence
of a tax law; this act raises money, possessing the essence, though not the
name. Sundry members of the legislature who impose the tax, receive a portion
of it, and private individuals the residue. How does this redound to the common
defense, or general welfare of the United States?

In a stamp act, the word "tax," might be avoided, and that contrivance might
be as constitutionally resorted to, for the emolument of Congress and company.

And if a deposit should be necessary, permit me to suggest an admirable hint.
By the bank law, three fourths of the deposit, might consist of certificates,
which are evidences of a deposit, heretofore made for public service. When a
deposit of these is made in the bank, an evidence is received of this second
deposit. Let this second evidence be deposited, as stock in the stamp-office,
and a third evidence taken out. Erect a new contrivance, where this third
evidence may be deposited as stock also, and so on ad infinitum. For the one
fourth specie deposited in the bank, the proprietors do not probably now gain a
profit, of above cent. per cent. Whereas one or two other depositories of
evidence as stock, will produce an appreciating effect, the reverse of the
depreciating operations during the late war. Or the idea will be better
exemplified, by reminding my readers of doubling the grains of corn, for every
nail on a horse's shoe. This similitude will fit at both ends. It exhibits the
stock necessary to set out with, and also the gainfulness of such operations.

SECTION VIII. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
IT was farther assumed, that the right of legislation resided and yet resides,
in the people of the United States. That this right is periodically delegated
by election to their representatives. That the right of election is a substance
and not a form, and that a legitimate representation implies, an existing
principle, operating upon the representing, impelling them for the good of the
represented. And that whenever this principle ceases to exist, government is
converted into an usurpation.

Can you possibly, reader, comprehend a difference between the good of bank
directors and stock holders, and the good of the community? Are the burdens
and profits of this corporation, the burdens and profits of the nation? May
not the good of the one, be the harm of the other? And may not a stockholding
bank-directing member of Congress, legislate har^^^^ (...) the one, that he may
share in the good with the other?

Reasoning, to prove self evident propositions, though apparently superfluous,
may yet be necessary by way of parapet, to defend them against the assaults of
overbearing wealth and power.

The constitution, thoroughly impressed with the opinion, that a similitude of
interests, of burdens, of benefits, and even of habits, between the people and
their representatives, was essentially necessary for the maintenance of
liberty, and the dispensation of civil happiness, resorts to numerous
precautions for its attainment.

Having this end in view, it prescribes,

1. That no person shall be a representative, who has not been seven years a
citizen of the United States.

2. That each representative, must be an inhabitant of the state in which he is
chosen.

3. That the representation shall be in proportion to numbers.

4. That no representative shall be appointed to any office created, or the
emoluments whereof have been increased, during the period for which he was
elected; and that no person holding an office shall be a representative.

The purpose of these fundamental rules, was to secure a legitimate
legislature, by excluding every species of undue influence then foreseen.

The idea of a bank, does not appear to have been contemplated or discussed in
the minutest degree by the convention which framed the constitution. And not a
trace of such an idea, is to be found in the instrument resulting from their
deliberations.

Those who argue in favor of the constitutionality of the corporation, are
reduced to the narrow ground of asserting, that a power is tacitly implied,
conflicting and subverting the most fundamental principles, earnestly and
loudly expressed.

Constructive powers, are like constructive treasons. Have we secured our lives
against the latter, and left our property, which supports life, exposed to the
former?

From the bank contrivance, the following infractions of the clearest
constitutional principles, obviously ensue.

1. Members of Congress may vote for the erection of a gainful project, and be
the receivers of the gain.

2. They may impose a tax on the community or a a part of it, and instead of
sharing in the burden, share in the plunder.

3. The higher and more unnecessary the taxes and loans are, the more public
money will be deposited in the bank, and the greater will be the profit of the
bank-members of Congress, who nevertheless vote for taxes and loans.

4. A member of Congress, debauched by a profitable banking interest, ceases to
be a citizen of the Union, or an inhabitant of the state which chooses him, as
to the purposes of the constitution. He becomes a citizen, and inhabitant of
Carpenters Hall.

5. Being a member of a corporation, consisting chiefly or in part of
foreigners, he is more under the influence of foreigners, than of those who
elected him.

6. The constitution aims at a real representation of the states in proportion
to numbers, making no provision for members from corporations; and yet if the
members of this corporation keep their seats in congress, it is moderate to
assert that it will be better represented than any state. For surely it will be
admited, that a man possesses as much fidelity to his own interest, as to the
interest of his constituents. And hence the evident struggle in the
constitution to secure a common interest.

7. The bank can only gain its representation, by seducing the representatives
of the states from their natural allegiance; thus a state may be deprived of
the whole or a part of her representation, and the apportionment according to
numbers is defeated. It would be better to allow the bank members, than to
permit it to plunder the states of their several quotas.

8. It was evidently designed, that the Senate as judges of impeachments,
should be constitutionally preserved in a state of impartiality. Impeachments
originate in the house of representatives, and the crimes to be restrained by
this process, will mostly be comprised in a misapplication of public money. But
if those who are to inquire into such misapplications, to impeach, and to
decide upon impeachments, may in consequence of banking and paper systems, be
gainers by the misapplications, it is obvious that the check provided by this
article of the constitution, upon a species of criminality, so dangerous as to
have attracted the particular attention of a general convention, is entirely
defeated. If accomplices are to set enquiries on foot, -- to accuse -- and to
decide, no prophetical spirit is necessary to foresee the decision. Can a
contrivance be constitutional, by which a judiciary, the power of which extends
even to the punishment of undefined crimes, may be influenced out of its
integrity and independence? The fountain of justice ought to be pure and
incorrupt. An influence which may sway a fearful tribunal, not only for the
acquital of the guilty, but for the condemnation of the innocent, was never
contemplated by the constitution. Bank directors, stock holders, and a paper
interest, may be more likely by their judgments to disqualify honest patriots
from holding, "any office of honor, trust or profit under the United States,"
who shall obstruct peculations from public labor in any shape, than to remedy
frauds favoring a monied interest in general, and accruing to their own
emolument in particular. A tribunal, which may try a president, ought to be as
free from suspicion, as Caesar's wife.

But leaving an endless enumeration of constitutional violations, we will
adventure a general observation; that the contrivance is a vehicle of undue
influence, operating sensibly, and often irresistibly, upon almost every
important question which can occur in Congress. It remains with the community
to decide whether the impulse tends to their good, and whether, if it does not,
government is not converted into an usurpation, in one of its most essential
qualities?

Members of Congress, who are also members of the bank, are under a triple
bondage. If they displease the minister, he may not only lessen the trade in
public money, which the bank now monopolises, but he may remove the money to
another place of deposit, and he may refuse the institution his supporting
influence, when its constitutionality is questioned. The minister is by law,
let into a considerable portion of bank secrets. This knowledge is a conjurer's
wand, with which the spirits may be raised or exorcised, just as the magician
pleases. Such representatives, whilst they are making laws to govern a nation,
are themselves liable to laws enacted by a corporation; for the bank can make
bye laws. And if the national laws do not please the corporation, it may
revenge itself through the medium of its bye laws, upon the national
representatives for enacting them. But a collision of this kind is not likely
to happen, as a common interest guides the corporation collectively and
individually. A third master, the public interest presents itself. It does not
offer the influential elastic, which the others can liberally bestow, and is to
maintain a combat at the odds of two to one. No bondage is so seldom rebelled
against, as one which produces money. Mankind daily sell their best services
and exertions, and the highest bidder is usually the purchaser.

The bank realizes the doctrine of transubstantiation upon a member of
Congress. He goes one thing, and by administering to him quantum sufficit of
paper, he is converted to another. A transubstantiated or virtual legislature,
was just what the English designed to impose on America. In what part of the
constitution is a doctrine sanctioned, which justifies the epithet of rebel,
bestowed during the war by the enemy, upon those who opposed such a legislature?

If the bank -- the paper system -- and the minister, can influence a majority
of the members of Congress, or even a single member, where are such
representatives of the states, as are clearly contemplated by the constitution?
Against the evil not a single check exists. Influence is a courtly term for
corruption. It is never necessary to induce a national representation, to
pursue the national good. And although it is only used, for the purpose of
obtaining exclusive benefits for the few at the expense of the many, yet the
few, counting upon the reconciliation to abuses, produced by habit, will soon
begin to insinuate, that influence, alias, corruption, is an indispensable
attribute of good government.

Even school boys ridicule and contemn the corruption which guides the British
parliament, according to the will of a minister. They have sufficient
penetration to discern, that the system is a cheat, exhibiting the picture of
liberty, in lieu of the substance. Compare the two cases, and point out, if you
can, a difference.

Ancient and modern tyranny have resorted to different modes for effecting the
same end. The former, unpractised in the arts of dissimulation, used open
violence. The latter, skilful in deception, has changed the old system, and
resorts to the wily tricks of private influence. One depended upon downright
fighting, and an action in the open field, generally proclaimed the tyrant; the
other prefers the generalship of fiscal ambuscade, and the tyrant is often
concealed from public view, long after he is despotic. A defeat could only
destroy the one, but a detection may overset the other. Search, and you will
inevitably find a present acting usurpation; for if the proceedings of
government are inconsistent with the principles of the constitution, there is
nothing to justify them.

Slavery, when imposed by ancient ambition, was softened by a military
generosity of disposition; but from the modern sordid, money-loving meanness of
mind, what melioration can be expected?

SECTION IX. -- THE FUNDING SYSTEM.
IT has passed, irrevocably passed. Being compounded of materials originally
honest, and consisting at this time in a great measure of such materials, it is
probably impossible to unravel and remedy the intermediate fraud.

It remains however an indelible hieroglyphic of the principles and designs of
administration, and in that view deserves to be decyphered.

The person who framed the system, was certainly capable of contemplating, and
of guiding its effects. Had a motive of impartiality and public good presided
at its formation, the several states, the commercial, the agricultural,
mechanical and professional interests, all of which are too busily engaged in a
variety of useful occupations, to hunt out ministerial secrets, would have been
plainly forewarned of the design, and publicly cautioned to preserve their
paper property. But this would have violated the ministerial designs. It would
have obviated the contemplated intention, of erecting an enormous aristocracy
or monied interest, because the public debt, like other property, would have
remained considerably dispersed.

It was and is the fashion of thinking, that a public debt unequally held,
gives permanency and weight to government. That is, to use plain terms, it will
enable government to control the will of the people, by counterbalancing it
with the weight of wealth. The constitution is compiled upon a principle
precisely in opposition to this idea. The sovereignty of the people gave it
birth, and it acknowledges their parental authority. This is a design of a few
individuals, exclusively to appropriate to themselves the management of the
national offspring, that they may change its nature, and debauch its affections
from the great object of its political duty. It is an attempt to transplant the
constitution from democratic ground, in which it might flourish, to an
aristocratical soil, in which it must perish.

And hence the funding system. It was so contrived as to enable speculators and
monied men, to defraud the great bulk of the community of their paper property.
As to transfer it, from those who earned it, to those who pilfered it, either
by suggesting falsehoods or concealing truths. As to concentrate it in a few
hands, so that it could be applied with impression, and possess activity as a
political machine. And as to leave the true owners, by way of retribution for
their property, a burdensome tax.

Speculators could calculate events in Congress. They had leisure to pry into
accounts. They could even interpret the silence of a minister by watching
indications. Silence, was a negative consecration of the uninformed multitude
to the lust of rapacity. A general, taking a city, condemns it to be plundered,
if he does not actively interpose for its protection.

The nation, but just emerged from the unforeseen misfortunes of paper money,
are suddenly overwhelmed by the ruin of a paper policy. The accidental
brilliancy of paper acquisitions, gave the hint for a system. It set out with
the plausible pretense of curing an evil, and it applies a worse evil. As if
fire would cure a burn. The wounds suffered by individuals, from paper money,
were healing; but an accidental misfortune is now converted into a system, by
which a few individuals speculate on a nation; the old wounds are made to bleed
afresh, and new ones are indiscriminately inflicted.

Of this system, the assumption is a striking feature. For this there was no
general petition from the people. No urgency pressed it. But it favored the
object of administration. State debts sold at a low rate, and therefore might
easily be monopolized. To dissolve all money relationship, between individuals,
and the separate states, would on the one hand diminish the state power, and
tend to consolidation, and on the other create an undue influence, by which the
consolidated power might be managed.

If the payment of public debts had been an object, accident had already
effected, that which such a motive would have dictated. Congress possess the
power of indirect, and the States that of direct taxation. Hence the public
debt could have been diffused upon the resources of the nation, so as to have
been less burdensome upon an exclusive branch of those resources, by leaving
the States respectively to provide for State debts. And an impost might have
been equivalent to those of the union.

A recurrence to direct taxation by Congress, will swallow up the little
sovereignty, now left to the once sovereign individual States; and every
accumulation of the debts of the union, is an impulse toward that end.

Hence all assumptions, and hence the enormous loans which have been
negociated. In the power of money, is the confidence of administration placed.
By assuming all money negociations, a face of business, and activity, will be
bestowed on the Federal government. The exclusive payment of debts, and
imposition of taxes, will exhibit it as the only political object, to interest
the attention of individuals; whilst the state governments will become only
speculative commonwealths, to be read for amusement like Harrington's Oceana,
or Moore's Utopia. Without pulsation, without elasticity they will dwindle
gradually into a tale that has been told, and their parts will crumble and
dissipate, like a corporation of beavers, whose waters have been drained away.

Does this system comport with the constitution, where it guarantees to each
State a republican form of government: If the term "form," means shadow, it
does; but if the guarantee extends to substance, we may boldly assert, that it
does not.

A money system may be called the natural enemy of State constitutions -- of
State laws -- of State police (for we dare not aspire to an higher expression)
and of State dispositions. Accumulations of enormous wealth in a few hands, by
legal legerdemain, is destructive of that equality among citizens, which the
State constitutions contemplate -- is worse than limited sinecures, which they
reprobate -- defeat the effects of State laws for the division of property in
cases of intestacy -- and wound our feelings, by converting our equals of
yesterday, into our lords of tomorrow. A few dwarfs are suddenly metamorphosed
into giants, by a paper necromancy, and the rest of the community whom it makes
more dwarfish, both really and comparatively, are enchanted by siren notes,
into an insensibility of their danger.

If many individuals in four years, have acquired from 100,000 to 1,000,000 of
dollars, how much will they gain in twenty years? What has been, and will be
the impression upon the community? Which is most to be deplored; Great Britain,
oppressed for the support of her royal brood, or America, fleeced by her brood
of speculators?

A lineament of the system, is also exhibited in the sinking fund. Even its
name was a fraud upon the community. It ought to have been denominated "the
raising fund," for it was designed to raise the price of certificates. It is
the pap of paper, upon which the child was to subsist, until it was old enough
to be weaned. This artifice is so gross, that it will at once be seen through a
few plain facts.

The sinking fund was erected in 1790, consisting of about 1,300,000 dollars,
which the minister then reported, as a surplus of revenue, beyond the public
occasions. Less than 1,000,000 of it had been applied in January 1793; between
which time, and the erection of the fund, nearly that sum was expended in
periodical purchases of certificates. In 1790 also, the minister commenced the
borrowing of money in Holland, and drawing it to this country, without law, and
without the sanction of the President; by which means, continued even to the
present year, moneys have been obtained to a much greater amount, than the
whole sinking fund.

Apply to these facts, the following questions.

If the surplus of revenue existed, why was the money borrowed, and drawn
illegally hither from Holland? If not, why was the fact officially asserted?
How was the debt sunk, by the erection of a fund, producing the necessity of
incuring a new debt, to a greater amount than the fund itself? If sinking the
debt was the simple object, why is it that the sinking fund has not been sooner
applied? Does the paying interest in Holland for moneys to replace this fund,
whilst the fund is lying dead here at a loss of interest, contribute toward
sinking the debt? Was the minister so wide of the truth, when he called the
sinking fund "a surplus," as to have been obliged to divert both that, and
moneys borrowed, for the prescribed purpose of paying the French debt, to
current governmental occasions? or were no certificates to be purchased?

But if keeping up, or raising the price of certificates be considered as the
primary object, all these difficulties are solved. The occasional recurrences
to the sinking fund are explained. And the ministerial financierings, shrink to
political artifices, which incurred an enormous national expense, in the
purchase of the aristocratical desideratum. Artifices, turned into laws, by an
illegitimate legislature.

The resemblance between monarchical or aristocratical contrivances, and the
administration of the government, is not lessened, by playing off upon America,
the English bubble of a sinking fund. When theirs was established, their debt
was moderate, but since this species of fund has been operating, it has
swelled to above three hundred millions of pounds sterling. Under the operation
of our sinking fund, the public debt, has been continually accumulating also,
and a proportional augmentation, will undoubtedly in less than a century,
enable us to contend with England itself, for the first rank among the
honorable society of national spendthrifts.

The era when the government began to act, was the moment of least suspicion.
At that unwary moment, an usurping system could be most safely introduced, and
precedents for expounding the constitution established, which might be
afterward quoted. Relying upon the unlimited national confidence which then
existed, the system dictated an attempt to bind future legislatures, and to
secure perpetually to the nation the blessing of a public debt, by rendering a
great proportion of it irredeemable. The constitution limits the power of
Congress "to the payment of the debts of the United States," and whilst the
echo of the mandate is yet vibrating in our ears, the funding system declares
that they shall not be paid. What barrier, will not rapacity and ambition
overleap?

Funding, banking, assuming, loaning, have compiled a fiscal and political
perplexity. The fiscal, which could most easily have been explained, since
figures can exhibit an account of money, is not even understood by the members
of Congress. And the political, though better understood, is still a capital
auxiliary toward the general obscurity. Perplexity in money statements is
ground enough for suspicion. Detection would expel suspicion to make room for
certainty. And the want of simplicity in politics, is ever a badge of design.

The funding system was intended to effect, what the bank was contrived to
accelerate.

1. Accumulation of great wealth in a few hands. 2. A political moneyed engine.
3. A suppression of the republican state assemblies, by depriving them of the
political importance, resulting from the imposition and dispensation of taxes.
And hence the tone of this instrument also, in its several vibrations,
harmonizes with the perilous design, radically to destroy the constitution, and
to erect upon its ruins an usurpation, not sanctioned by the national will, or
acknowledging the fundamental principle; that the people are the only
legitimate fountain of civil government.

SECTION X. -- THE REMEDY.
TO determine whether a remedy to these threatening evils is necessary or not,
the inquiry ought to be brought to the following simple point. Whether America
is now governed according to the system of the constitution, or the system of
an administration.

This latter system is indeed a riddle, but its effects furnish the solution.
By its fruits shall it be known. Effects are the language in which a political
design speaks, and furnish a construction, surpassing professions in veracity,
as far as the permanency of things, exceeds that of words.

If the constitution meditates the producing of great inequality of wealth
among citizens -- the enriching of a favored few at the public expense -- the
imposition of an enormous tax for private benefit, and not for the general
welfare -- the establishment of corporations, with gainful rights and
privileges, which necessarily diminish the general stock of rights and
privileges, from whence they are deducted -- the transferring of the paper
property of the citizens into a few hands without value received -- the
erection of a fund, under a pretense of sinking the public debt, whereas its
true design was to raise the value of that very paper, thus filched from the
real owners, at the public expense -- the rendering the debt of the United
States irredeemable by law -- the giving to foreigners an immense, indirect and
secret influence over our national counsels -- and above all, the introduction
of a monied and undue influence into the legislature; an influence which
subsists at the public expense, instead of being actuated by the public good;
if the constitution meditates such designs, then the point is determined one
way, and it must be conceded that America is governed according to the
constitution; if it does not, candor will acknowledge, that America is governed
according to a system of an administration.

To come at the truth, search our political scripture, consider it text by
text, and discover where these designs have been so covertly concealed, as to
have escaped the penetration of every convention which sifted and considered
the instrument; and as to remain a monument of a treasonable intention in the
general convention, to deceive and impose upon their constituents.

If we rely on the united integrity and wisdom of America, we shall reject
overstrained constructions, tending to impeach these qualities, and seek for
the plain and consistent meaning.

After having ascertained the principles of the constitution, let it be
considered, whether the system of the administration may not be overturned, and
the constitution still remain unhurt? If so, is not that system a violation of
the constitution?

Then it ought to be destroyed. America has assumed a character upon the
theater of the world, which honor -- fame and political philosophy, call upon
her to support. She is the inventor of principles, asserting the equal rights
of man, and exploding king-craft, priestcraft, nobility-craft and
minister-craft. It is incumbent upon her to prove by example, that her theory
is practically sound. Otherwise she betrays mankind, after having constituted
herself the vindicator of their rights. Instead of honor, she will then
deserve reproach; and her future fame will be that of a general Arnold for
instance, who has betrayed the cause he undertook to defend, and deserted over
to the enemy he engaged to defeat.

A division of power among king, lords, and commons, is setting out in
government with an allotment of parties. It is providing the materials for
civil dissension. Power will fluctuate like wealth, if it is proposed as the
subject of controversy among three contending interests. And every fluctuation
must disorder the fanciful idea of the balance. A precise equipoise among these
three interests, from which only the public good is expected to result, could
not exist above a moment in an age. Whereas by taking the people as the only
genuine and legitimate fountain of power, and by avoiding legal artifices
producing an inequality of wealth or privileges, we escape the black train of
evils recorded in history, as having been in most ages and governments,
engendered by combinations of nobles to oppress the people; and by more
justifiable combinations of the people to reduce the nobles. Evils, which are
the natural effect of the whimsical balancing notion, and which invariably end
in despotism. Nobility is the cause of these evils, and of course the seed of
tyranny.

As a rivalship for power, is the uniform consequence of three branches of
government, it must inevitably destroy the balance, and produce a continual
political fermentation. And the contest will not be allayed by reflecting, that
those for whose good the scheme is said to have been invented, are sure of
being degraded to the despicable state of a mere tool, to be used by ambition
and artifice, for the attainment of their own selfish purposes.

The people are the natural body politic; king, lords and commons, are
artificial structures. Those who favor art at the expense of nature, consider
the people as a mere mass of matter, upon parts of which they exert a plastic
political-craft, and form a sort of intaglio. The residue of the mass is
considered only as a storehouse of materials, to mend, patch, and support the
selected or secreted parts, as they happen to impair each other by their
collisions.

King, lords and commons are a fleet, consisting of an admiral ship, first
rates and frigates, and the people are the forests, out of which this fleet is
built and repaired; to be cut, hacked and hewed, as the occasions of the fleet
shall require. Further by way of accommodating myself to those poising ideas;
the people in such a system, may be likened to a balance master, staggering
about with a ladder upon his chin, a chair mounted on the ladder, and a sword
on the chair. Can the equilibration be long sustained? Instead of such
mountebank pantomimes, is it not advisable, lest they fall upon you, to slip
from under them, and so let all three fall to the ground. And then, a natural
position, which only can produce stability, may be resumed.

This balancing whim has been tried by many nations, and if all have failed
either to find or maintain the balance, it is time to conclude, that it is an
attempt to put fetters on air, or a search after the philosopher's stone. That
it is founded in speculation and not in principle. That the idea of forming a
government by the help of a pair of scales, constructed for weighing power, is
more fanciful than solid. And that the multiplied examples of those who have
failed, ought to deter the slightest degree of prudence, from renewing an
experiment, invariably unsuccessful.

By adhering to the idea, that the people are the only genuine fountain of
power, a constitution is immortal; for if a change is made in its parts by the
public will, it only proves that this fundamental principle continues
unimpaired. Such would be a plain constitution, not poisoned by the drugs of a
speculating policy. A change of times, temper, and circumstances, may often
require a change of political regulations. By clinging to this simple
principle, a peculiar situation may be gratified, without internal commotion;
whereas a mixed principle -- a political salmagundi, is seldom brought back to
its primitive parts but by a civil war.

Who is to superintend the political tripod? If a member of it is from time to
time to adjust the weights, he will be for ever filching from the other two, to
add to his own scale. Thus the equilibrium is lost and then the effects of the
machine are wide of every calculation.

The perplexity of this mechanism requires frequent repairs, and yet its
delicacy makes it unsafe to mend it. Whereas from simplicity, both strength and
duration, are most likely to result.

The precise adjustment of these balances, is an attainment, surpassing human
intellectual powers, as far as the precise ascertainment of the true religion.
As to both, no two persons would hardly agree in every particular, and when
there are as many opinions as there are men, what is the chance for stumbling
on the right? Sincerity in political (...), will not render its consequences to
society less baneful.

The doctrine of the graces -- the graces, may be perpetually rung in our ears,
but conveying no perspicuous idea, the manners it will produce can never be
foreseen; and if one in a thousand succeeds, all he acquires is a species of
ceremonious tinselled frippery of gesture of little worth either to himself or
others; whereas a deportment, founded in moral rectitude, is the basis of
individual happiness, and the dispenser of blessings to others. The balances --
the balances, are the graces -- the graces of government. They are a confused
assemblage of notions, conveying no distinct idea, and composed by the rule of
fancy. The principle, that the people are the only legitimate fountain of
power, and of course the only safe corrector of its abuse, is a political
guide, surpassing the one in point of public safety, as far as true morality
exceeds the other in respect to private manners.

Obvious is the vanity of an expectation, that one equal constituent member of
a government, is a sufficient and safe check upon two others; as is the folly
of depositing all social and natural rights, under a steward-ship, as
unrestrained, as if the proprietors had traveled into a far country. Whether
is it most likely, that one member will enter on the perilous undertaking of
controuling the wicked designs of the other two, or that motives of interest
and safety should dictate to all, the policy of a triple alliance? The example
of Great Britain carries this idea beyond conjecture.

Can the majority of the people design to oppress? Does history exhibit such a
case? The writers in favor of monarchy are reduced to the miserable shift, of
substituting the mobs of cities in the place of nations, in order to conjure up
the idea of a popular despotism, which cannot, as America is situated, exist.
The many have no motive to oppress the few. Temptations to fraud are in an
inverse proportion, to the multitude who are sharers in the plunder, and the
diminution of the booty to be divided. A combination of the great bulk of the
community, to erect a despotism over an inconsiderable number of individuals,
though it would not exhibit the extreme case, of a tyrannic nation, domineering
over one man, would yet present the ridiculous object, of an hundred persons,
owning a single slave.

But whither are we going? Did America fight for a revolution of dominating
families, or of principles? If of principles define and compare them with the
sentiments now avowed, by words, in books, in newspapers, and by actions, all
evincing a concerted design. Seriously concerted as the design is, I will
believe that America is not sufficiently regenerated, for the introduction of
king, lords and commons. She yet knows well, that established religions --
bishops -- tithes -- and standing armies, being scions of the same stock,
inevitably sprout up together with aristocracy.

The people are the only safe guardians of their own liberty, and the social
jurisdiction, the only impartial corrector of unconstitutional political
designs.

SECTION XI. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
THE people are the only safe guardians of their own liberty. The component
parts of government are the creatures of the constitution. A subjection of the
creator to the created, is a reversal of the course of nature. The constitution
is a limitation to legislative power. It insulates arbitrary designs, and
continually pronounces, "thus far shall thou go." But suppose a legislature
should go further. Is the veto abortive? Is it only an empty echo of a nation's
last dying words? or is it to be enforced and by whom?

Without legislative encroachment or connivance, no infringement upon the
constitution can happen. The laws will act upon and restrain individuals, by
the enforcement of the courts of justice; but the constitution only can act
upon the legislature, by the enforcement of the social jurisdiction. The laws
being competent to every other object of good government, the constitution must
have been exclusively designed for the case, to which it is now applied. Until
a violation of the principles of the constitution appears, no occasion for
resorting to the remedy exists; and when it does appear, to assert that there
is no mode of getting at the remedy, or that the body presupposed by the
violation, to be vitiated, are yet to enforce it upon themselves, is making the
constitution a dead letter.

Therefore if liberty is a national object, the nation itself must watch over
the constitution, preserve it from violation, and supply its defects, or admit
it to be the Lethe of the community, producing an entire forgetfulness of the
rights of man.

The national judgment or will may be brought to act in two modes, without
recurring to a general convention.

1. By cautiously electing members of Congress, of a similarity of interests --
of burdens -- of benefits -- and of habits with the electors. For an unbiassed
judgment upon good information, will correct political abuses, and invent new
checks against their repetition.

2. Through the organs of state legislatures.

The first will operate slowly. The people may be deceived by professions, and
a representative though sound at first is sometimes debauched. But yet as the
people when informed, are almost invariably right, and as a representative is
often firm, it deserves the most sedulous attention.

The second is a security for liberty of the happiest texture which could have
been devised.

The state legislatures are the people themselves in a state of refinement,
possessing superior information, and exhibiting the national suffrage in the
fairest and safest mode.

They are annual conventions, subject to no undue influence, not participating
of loaves and fishes, and actuated by the motive of public good.

Holding their power by an annual tenure, they are frequently accountable to
the people, often changed, and incapable of forming combinations for their
private emolument, at the public expense.

Being more immediately within the view of their constituents, should they
misinterpret the doings of the national government, or misrepresent the public
mind, a detection, or a contradiction, would be almost instantaneous.

As electors of senators, they constitute a chief link connecting the general
and state governments, through which the conduct of the former may be better
understood, and the will of the people reacted; so as to fill up in some
measure, the great space between Congress and the people.

They may operate decisively upon the general government, by constituting the
senate according to a republican standard.

And finally the state legislatures have at least as good a right to judge of
every infraction of the constitution, as Congress itself.

The alarming mode of thinking avowed by the aristocracy, that they are only
responsible to God and their own consciences, instead of weakening the
argument, is an additional reason for clinging to every means, tending to
produce an effectual responsibility in the members of Congress, to the
constitution, and to the people who made it. Whilst the avowal goes to the
subversion of every principle of liberty -- to the annihilation of the
constitution -- and is in fact a rebellion against the first principles of
liberty, the act of shutting the senate doors accords with the doctrine, and
exhibits one of its effects, by obstructing the evidence upon which a
responsibility can only be enforced. If a jurisdiction is compelled to decide
upon incomplete evidence, a power to impose such a necessity, instead of being
amenable to that jurisdiction, is superior to it; and by concealing a part,
assumes a right of withholding the whole testimony. Of what avail is a right
of decision, when the grounds upon which to exert human reason and reflection,
are withheld either completely or partially?

A disavowal of every species of responsibility to social obligations, is a
disavowal of all claim to social confidence.

SECTION XII. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
UNCONSTITUTIONAL designs have been demonstrated; the corrective power is
found; and it now remains to specify the remedies.

The natural interest of every country, ought exclusively to legislate. A
complete transfer of this power to an artificial interest, is a thorough
legislative corruption. A partial transfer, is a legislative taint. The natural
interest of a country includes whatever may subsist, without the direct aid of
municipal law, as agriculture, commerce, manufactures and arts. An artificial
interest, whatever is immediately created by law. As public debt, public
officers, and private banks.

If this idea is not a principle of the constitution, and a necessary (...) for
the preservation of liberty, upon what grounds were public officers excluded
from Congress, and a variety of precautions introduced for the purpose of
preventing an undue influence from creeping into that body? No admission of an
artificial interest into the legislature, is recognized by the constitution,
and unless the principle of the exclusion, and not the examples adduced, is
considered as fundamental (the gift of prescience not having presided at the
formation of the constitution) then the legislative branch may evade it without
restriction, by creating an artificial interest not foreseen or contemplated,
and bestowing upon it a legislative influence.

For example. Congress impose taxes and borrow money. The higher the tax, and
the more they borrow, the more they may receive as stock-holders. Which
violates the principle of the constitution most sorely, the case it states, of
excluding a member because he receives a fixed salary as an officer of
government; or the case unforeseen, of a member's receiving uncertain and
unlimited gain from the public labor, and in part from the public purse,
depending on his own vote?

Again. Public moneys are to be accounted for to Congress. Suppose they should
be employed in favoritism to the bank, or in keeping up the price of
certificates. Will certificate or stock-holders, who receive the money, be very
inexorable in detecting and punishing such a misapplication? Or being bound by
numberless ties of the strongest interest, in the closest alliance with a
minister of finance, is not an explanatory and enlightening effect upon their
minds rather to be expected, if incomprehensible accounts of public moneys
should be exhibited.

It is the chief principle of the constitution, that the natural, and not an
artificial interest, should be represented in the legislature. They are usually
in opposition to, if not at enmity with, each other; because the latter
constantly subsists upon the former. Therefore the latter, ought to be limited
and restrained by the simple rule of the public good. But if it legislates, it
is subjected to no restraint or limitation.

Slavery is only a domination of an artificial, over the natural interest of a
nation. In whatever shape that artificial interest appears, the effect is the
same. And if the artificial interest possesses a power of erecting itself, and
of legislating to preserve and support itself, the nation is already enslaved.

Public creditors and stock-holders ought to be excluded from Congress, upon
the same principle as public officers are excluded, because all may acquire
public moneys by their own votes, and the acquisitions of the two former being
behind the curtain, are most to be apprehended. Would such characters have been
fit persons to form a constitution for America, and if not, are they proper
guardians, of that which they could not have been entrusted to enact?

Suppose for instance, whilst the funding and assumption laws were under
discussion, members of Congress had held paper, the value of which was to be
greatly enhanced by funding and assuming. Would such members have been
impartial judges of the propriety of these measures? or of the proposition to
make some retribution to the original holders for their loss, leaving still to
the purchasers a handsome gratuity? Could not members of Congress upon that
occasion have been interwoven by speculators, with their projects? Or whilst
the questions were under consideration, if members had drawn the wages paid by
their country for impartiality, and invested them in the purchase of a personal
interest on one side of the question, could a greater degree of legislative
corruption have been conceived? When the bank law was before Congress, were
certificate holders impartial legislators, since an effect of it, was to
increase the interest on 7,500,000 dollars of certificates, from six to at
least twelve per centum?

Illustrations resulting from an actual state of things, and drawn from laws,
so important in their consequences, enable us to look forward for future
effects, upon better grounds than conjecture, and bring the question to this
issue. Ought Congress to decide upon the most important national regulations,
from motives of public good, or ought they to be governed, or even biassed by
those of private interest?

Natural deafness would be considered as an unanswerable objection to a
candidate for a seat in Congress, and yet it would be preferable to an
artificial deafness, as far as an equal chance of doing right, is preferable to
an automaton member, whose motions are governed by a secret impulse, when that
impulse is self-interest.

Laws then ought to be made by the natural or general interest of a nation, and
every artificial, local and particular interest, ought to depend upon the
justice and integrity of that which is natural or general, because of this
every individual participates, whereas a few persons only are concerned in the
others; because the smaller the number, and the more exclusive the interest,
the greater the temptation to injustice and partiality; because national
confidence in the important matter of legislation, can only reside in the
nation itself; and because, when a power to legislate, is the offspring of
legislation and not of the constitution, legislation which gave, can resume the
power, can transfer it from one exclusive interest to another, and can cause
political principles, intended to be made constitutionally permanent, to
fluctuate. The power of legislation, by the several paper laws, is in fact and
substance (for we are regardless of form) transferred from the nation to a
paper junto. And if the bank and certificate artificial interests, were in a
state of warfare, legal transfers of this power, and fluctuations of political
principles, would presently exemplify the objects of a legislative power,
flowing in fact, though not in form, out of legislation.

If this is not the principle of exclusions from the legislature, upon what
basis do they rest? Admiting it to be so, is not the artificial, exclusive,
private paper interest completely embraced by it?

When such an interest seduces a part of the representatives of the general or
national interest, into its views or designs, liberty is dangerously wounded;
but when a majority of such representatives is thus seduced, liberty is
theoretically annihilated.

An unanswerable illustration of this doctrine results from the recollection,
that the paper interest is transitory. It is a bird of passage, regardless of
climes, incapable of national feelings -- of national attachments -- or of that
amor patriae, which is the most tender pledge of legislative kindness. Instead
of possessing permanency, it may connect itself occasionally with French,
Spanish, Dutch, or English politics. Are these such supports as the
constitution solicits? And what must be the views of an administration, which
has selected an itinerant, unfeeling visitant, as the guardian of its designs?
Of the public good, paper is a most unnatural guardian. It is a rapacious
calculator of interest, whose conscience is seared by its acquisitions and its
hopes. In Congress, it is an inexorable creditor, with an execution or a deed
of trust in its hand, ready to seize and sell -- with a power to borrow money
for its own purposes, at any loss to the debtor -- and able to perplex its
demands and add to its usury, by sly tricks or legislative contrivances.

Hence the depositing of certificates in the national bank, by which the paper
more than doubled interest -- hence the enormous loans made of the bank,
carrying interest, whilst it possessed and used an enormous sum of public
money, carrying no interest -- hence the continual foreign loans, whilst the
nation is amused with a sinking fund, with compliments to the trade of
financiering, and with official recommendations from the minister, conveyed
through the purest channel, to commence the discharge of the public debt -- and
hence that assemblage of contrivances, placing the people in a state of utter
darkness, as to the disposition of their money.

If we tempt men's desires, by hopes of boundless acquisitions, the constant
incitements of private interest, will leave no interval of time or reflection,
to be appropriated to the public good; a reflection, out of which, if it is
just, arises a strong argument for expelling every species of private undue
influence out of Congress, that the attention of this body may be bent to the
national welfare.

The expulsion of paper men out of Congress would bring these observations to
the test of an impartial legitimate legislature. Is such an event desirable?
Anticipate it, and behold its effects. If the paper interest would be expelled
from Congress -- if the incorporating usurpation, and all constructive
contrivances, violating republican principles, would be restrained -- if any
other misconstrued or doubtful expressions in the constitution would be
explained, and new securities for liberty devised -- and if simplicity in the
finances would be enforced; such decisions would prove the truth and justness
of my arguments. I challenge the aristocracy to submit to this fair and honest
trial. A decision by paper in its own favor, is no proof at all. If they
shrink from so unexceptionable a proposition, and will continue both judge and
jury in their own cause, it can only flow from a consciousness, which will not
escape the notice of the community, in considering whether real reforms are
desirable, and whether it will stop at imaginary anticipations of its wishes.
Such a legislature would also repeal the bank law.

What! exclaims the appalled aristocracy, will you also invade rights of
private property, as by law established? Yes, If they are interdicted by the
principles of the constitution, they are wrongs, and not rights.

This subject deserves a further examination. It may illustrate and unravel the
unconstitutional designs of a monarchical faction.

We hear on all hands of the sacredness of private property, held by
legislative sanction; of the inviolability of legislative faith; and it is even
asserted, that Congress ought never to repeal a law, by which they have
bestowed a valuable boon upon an individual. Congress have themselves plainly
expressed their suffrage in favor of these doctrines, by pledging the public
faith, that the exclusive privileges of the bank shall be enjoyed for twenty
years unrivalled, and by making a portion of the public debt irredeemable, in
virtue of their constitutional power to redeem. It is evident that these
doctrines are invented to prop the laws, and the laws grounded in a
contemplation of the doctrines. Whence both the doctrines and the laws are
clearly ascribable to a common source.

A legislature influenced by private motives, will exalt legislative sanctions,
and debase constitutional barriers. Those who invent wrongs for their own use,
will also invent doctrines to support those wrongs.

Combining the doctrine and laws, they engender a direct claim by the
legislature, of a power to usurp upon the rights of the nation, Provided, the
depredation is sold or given to an individual or a corporation. It is a
doctrine which prostrates every constitutional fence, devised, or capable of
being devised for the preservation of liberty and property, at the feet of a
legislature. They may parcel out public property and public rights, which are
the only wares they deal in, until none worth having remain. They may endow an
aristocracy at the national expense, and if the inviolability of legislative
faith is to obviate a reclamation, then the aristocracy is perpetual. Congress
may even distribute among their bastards the revenues of cities, countries or
states in perpetuity, through the medium of paper, banks, coals, or any
necessary of life; and an example for it is to be found in a system, which is
obviously the polar star of the politics of government. Nay they may divide the
fruit of the national labor among themselves, not for twenty years only, but
for ever. The limitation of the bank tax was merely arbitrary; and if the
inviolability of legislative faith, is to sanction the contrivance for twenty
years, a precedent exists for conveying the whole national ability to a single
corporation, in tail successional, for all eternity.

This legal immutability, supposes constitutional mutability. Congress are
mounted by it to a pre-eminence over a national convention. It goes to the
preservation of legal wrongs, beyond a revolution itself. It is an assumption
of a power, not actually possessed by any existing generation of mankind, and
which the nation itself could not bestow even on a general convention. It
renders constitutional rights violable, by asserting that legal rights are
inviolable; thus in a manner repealing political gospel, by form of law. And is
indeed a doctrine so replete with evil and absurdity, as to have been avowed
but seldom, since the times of the Medes and Persians.

But the Medes and Persians were more consistent than Congress. Immutability
was a concomitant of their laws universally. Whereas with us the whole doctrine
is monopolised by those, who can strip the nation of its wealth or rights by
form of law. Laws of this kind are called deeds, and the sign, seal and deliver
of Congress, closes the conveyance for ever. As if all laws did not in some way
affect private persons. As if to secure the nation individually, they must be
plundered collectively. As if it was a consolation to a man, whom you are about
to destroy on one score, to declare him safe as to another.

The constitution empowers, Congress to make laws, not to make deeds.
Mutability is attached to legislation. Otherwise each successive Congress would
have its power narrowed by the preceding, though derived from the same source,
and held by the same tenure. To keep faith to the bank law, we must be guilty
of a breach of faith to the constitution.

To return more immediately to the subject. The constitution in the fifth
article, recognizes the state legislatures, as state conventions, and Congress
as a general convention. Congress, united with two thirds of the state
legislatures, may alter the constitution. Contemplated, as they are in this
important instance, as the organs of the people, can it be improper for them to
make known the public will, or to reconsider emendations of the constitution,
of which they are ultimately to judge? The power of forcing Congress, by the
mandate of two thirds, immeasurably transcends a mere recommendation.

A genuine, impartial, unadulterated legislature, would fairly consider, and
impartially determine questions of a national magnitude, exceeded by none.
Therefore, the remedies presenting themselves are;

1. In all elections, to exclude paper men of every denomination, and also
every species of artificial interest created, or to be created.

2. To compile the Senate by a republican standard.

3. To recommend, through the medium of state legislatures, explanations of the
constitution, according with its spirit -- its construction when adopted -- its
unstrained construction now -- and with republican principles.

SECTION XIII. -- THE SUBJECT OF THE BANK RESUMED.
IT is resumed to evince the integrity of the observation, intimating the
existence of numerous frauds in this contrivance, not yet adduced.

National wealth, and national rights, tottering on the brink of perdition,
irresistibly solicited our first attention; and all possible haste was made to
exhibit their danger, without distracting the public attention, by compelling
it to view the Proteus in too great a variety of shapes.

This important duty being discharged, it may not be amiss to continue our
enquiries concerning the public or private morality of this institution.

The bank may buy and sell lands including their capital to the amount of
15,000,000 of dollars. But if they exceed their capital, who is to know it?
They are not to disclose the extent of their landed estate, even to the
minister; and no power, can require such a disclosure of them. If an excess is
discovered, and could be proved, which is almost impossible, no penalty is
subjoined or forfeiture incurred; and the effect of such a discovery would have
been easily frustrated, had a forfeiture followed it, by a fraudulent exercise
of the power to sell. In this view the bank law is a statute of mortmain, and
the lands of the community may be gradually swallowed up by a corporation,
which does not propose in exchange for them, either political or eternal
salvation. Perpetuities of landed estates, devolving by succession, are
established, to the discouragement of commerce and industry; to the
impoverishment of the laity; and to the aggrandisement of the bank mililitant
ministry. It is an incorporated feudal tenure, and the community is subjected
to homage and fealty, for their circulating medium, as well as their lands.

The bank dividends are not to be coextensive with the real profits, but are to
be regulated by the directors. Hence the extent of the imposition is concealed
from the public. The community lose the chance of having all they pay thrown
back into circulation, by the extravagance or luxury of individuals. An
accumulating fund, which may make the corporation richer than the nation, and
of course more powerful, is a branch of the scheme. It may constantly retain,
what the nation alone supplies. Thus the amusements of mathematicians, in
calculating the effects of compound interest, are to be realized at the
national expense; and a fund is secured for extending the mortmain business, or
with which to buy a new charter at the end of twenty years by public or private
negociations, if the bank should not then have members enough in Congress to
give it to itself. The body corporate can either extend or diminish its
profits. This is a kind of lash capable of being applied to their refractory
bodies natural, either in or out of Congress, to whip them in, to the
incorporated measures. The supremacy of the body politic over its members is by
this means effectually established, and a united impetus secured to it. In this
part of the scheme is also to be discerned an unnecessary precaution, as
experience has evinced, in case things should go badly. In this event, the
corporation by its directors, had nothing to do, but to declare an exorbitant
dividend, and then to sell out individually to the unwary, the bank stock, thus
enhanced in price.

The debts are not to exceed 10,000,000 of dollars, over and above the money
deposited in the bank for safe-keeping, and over and above 5,000,000 worth of
lands. Difficult as it is to ascertain what may be the stock, property and
debts of the bank by law, yet no penalty exists for enforcing obedience to the
law, except that if the bank incurs debts beyond 10,000,000, they shall
actually pay them. The profit of the bank arises out of paper, money, or debts,
bearing no interest. Where is the penalty of paying L100, and receiving L106
for so doing? The traffic of the bank is under no limitation, but the national
ability to bear it. The partial power of inspection, conferred upon a member of
the coalition, by way of national security, might have been exemplified by a
common proverb, except for the indelicacy of the terms.

Why does the law hold out an idea of limiting the acquisitions of the bank? If
they are honest, to limit them was unjust; if dishonest, it should acquire
nothing. If the gain came from abroad, it was restraining a national good; but
if the restraint admits that it was to come out of the nation, it is a tax when
not a penny was due, and not a penny of public money could Congress bestow, in
liberality to the rich. If the gain was not like to be so enormous, as to
endanger the commonwealth, it required no limitation, If it was, why erect a
mischief in order to restrain it -- why extend it so enormously -- or why
restrain it with fetters of sand? This pretense of a limitation tells a tale.
It confesses that the gain is enormous -- that it is paid at the public expense
-- and that the contrivance contains some lurking mischief.

But the law provides that the bank may lend to government to any amount. Its
acquisitions in this mode are rendered indefinite, if any definition could
before have been discerned. And here the contrivance, expanding its views,
exhibits an unlimited scope of designs, and contemplates a direct operation on
government itself. Bank people in Congress, may in this case, vote that
government should make unnecessary loans of themselves, for the purposes of
extending their capital -- increasing their profits -- and acquiring an
influence. The eagerness to put this part of the system into a train, has
already explained its objects. Two millions four hundred thousand dollars have
been already borrowed by government of the bank upon interest, and a further
loan of 800,000 dollars was sanctioned at the last Congress, although above
1,300,000 dollars of public money was at that time lying dead in sundry banks.
By a similar trick, the bank of England has indissolubly connected itself with
that government, and a perpetual renewal of its charter is insured. Although
its dividends have never been lower than five and an half per centum, it has
also gotten more than cent. per cent. on its capital in a government debt.
Great as this property is, it is far outstripped by the American bank, as will
presently be shown. In that country, an enormous profit, and an undue
legislative influence, have flowed from the contrivance. In this, the use of
similar means, clearly indicates an intention to attain similar ends. With this
difference, that our institution exceeds enormity itself.

The twenty five bank directors may be paid by the corporation much or little
as they choose; and whether paid or not, the whole of them may be taken out of
the Senate, which consists of thirty members. Even the president of the United
States may be chosen, and act as a bank director. In what part of the
constitution is the flaw to be found, permiting infractions of its own
principles, so egregious? If bank directors serve the bank without wages,
whilst they demand wages of the nation, their affection for or interest in the
one, must be greater that their affection for, or interest in, the other. And
if wages are their object, they will be proportioned to their earnings.
Something beyond, "Well done those good and faithful servants," will be
expected for doubling the talents.

The intimation that the profits of the bank are extravagant, deserves an
exposition by items. Premising, that a person out of the secret, is confined to
such items only, as are of public notoriety, so that those of a private nature,
will remain uncalculated.

Three fourths of the bank deposit, are to consist of certificates, and one
fourth of specie. Suppose L100 thus deposited. The dividend at the end of the
year was was eight per centum. The L75 of certificates were gaining an interest
of six per cent per annum, so that the whole profit is made out of the L25
specie, which is all the person making the deposit loses the use of. Upon this
sum the profit in one year is above thirty per centum. But the bank began to
operate when only one fourth of the stock subscribed was deposited, four
instalments of six months each being allowed, and yet the dividends have been
made upon the total stock subscribed. Hence only L12 10 0. actual cash for each
L100 stock, was deposited during the whole of the first year, and this received
and usance of L8, as regulated by the directors, exclusive of the gain in
lands, debts, speculations, and loans for the incorporated benefit. Are not the
talents doubled? and may not the bank exclaim, "Well done thou good and
faithful servants?"

Though the six per centum upon certificates, constituted a portion of the
total gain, made by the corporation, yet there was gain enough to constitute
the dividends, exclusive of this six per centum.

It would hardly be asserted, that the profit of a bank, favored of
government, would be only two per centum, supposing the stock to have consisted
of specie, so as not to get an interest, both by circulating paper on its
credit, and also as a debt due by government.

But the fact should not rest upon a supposition which can be denied.

Exclusive of the dividends, and all other gains, the bank had already lent to
government on the first of January 1793, 2,400,000 dollars, for which it was
then receiving interest.

Therefore the profits, supplying not only this loan, but also the dividends,
it follows obviously, that the interest upon the certificates was more than
doubled at the national expense; and consequently that the 7,500,000 dollars of
public debt deposited, was instantaneously conjured up by what is called
financiering skill and federation, to between fifteen and thirty millions.

The precise amount cannot be ascertained, because both the item of lands
acquired, and that important article of private debts due to the bank, are left
out of the calculation; both being of a secret nature.

As the republic did not deposit her two millions of stock, all the specie of
the whole bank subscription, supposing every shilling paid, amounted to
2,000,000 of dollars; and out of it the directors have not only made a dividend
of eight per centum on 10,000,000 which is a gain of 800,000 dollars per annum,
but have also lent the government 2,400,000 dollars. The talents are trebled in
two years. It is not said, that the bank had sold its certificates previous to
January 1793.

The capital of the bank of England was L10,000,000 sterling. It has only been
able to lend to that government from its institution, about L.12,000,000, and
its dividends have long been as low as five and an half per centum. The specie
capital of the United States bank was only 2,000,000 of dollars, and in less
than two years, it lent 2,400,000 to government, and divided eight per centum
on 10,000,000. How far, arithmeticians, does the copy outstrip the original?

Did or did not the bank lend to the public 2,000,000 in actual specie, to
deposit for the public stock. If it did, ignorant as we are of the other items
of profit, its enormity is sufficiently evinced. If it did not, the republic
was defrauded in a variety of ways.

1. Had actual cash been borrowed elsewhere and deposited, the bank might have
extended its business, to the increase of the profits, of which the public
would have received a fifth part; whereas 60,000 dollars are now annually paid
for no advantage, four-fifths of which are divided among the private
subscribers.

2. The credit of the bank rests upon the credit of the republic, as to
7,500,000 dollars of certificate stock, and whilst individuals are depositing
the credit of the republic for three-fourths of their subscriptions, the
republic is prohibited from depositing her own credit, for any proportion of
hers.

3. Further, although the credit of the bank rests upon the credit of the
government, yet the government is made to borrow 2,000,000 of bank credit,
which itself erected, sustains and can annihilate, and for these nothings, to
pay annually 60,000 somethings. When this is done upon an assertion, "that the
credit of the bank is necessary to support the credit of the nation," precisely
the reverse of the truth, may it not be pronounced, that there is verity in the
charge, "that the public good is sacrificed to this institution."

4. But that which carries the imposition to the most extravagant degree, is,
that the public (if the bank did not lend actual cash) pays interest for the
credit of the bank, whilst the bank pays none, for the money of the public. The
secretary reported, that on the 1st of January 1793, 1,229,517 dollars 20
cents, of public money, in the bank of the United States, exclusive of 614,593
dollars 2 cents, which he reported to be due for bills drawn for foreign loans,
negociated by that bank; and exclusive of 158,778 dollars 25 cents, deposited
in other banks. And on that day the public was paying interest to the bank of
the United States for 2,400,000 dollars.

If the bank advanced this large sum to the public in actual cash, whilst it
was hourly lending to individuals also, it must either have been drained of its
cash, or its profits must have exceeded imagination; it is therefore probable,
that it was discounting from the use of the 1,229,517 dollars 20 cents of
public money, whilst it was receiving interest of the public. If it lent only
2,000,000 of credit, and laid out the 2,000,000 of cash which it ought to have
lent in certificates, and deposited the certificates as a fund upon which to
circulate paper, what would be the annual gain upon the same 2,000,000? Answer.
60,000 dollars interest for the credit lent, 60,000 for the certificates
bought, and 120,000 for 4,000,000 of paper circulated on the deposit. Excluding
the idea of certificates, eighteen per centum per annum is paid. The resources
of no body must be very great. I acknowledge that one fifth of these gains
constitute an article of those resources.

Let the fact be either way, the enormity of the imposition is evinced by less
than a moiety of the items. Suppose we had the rest? It is not surprising, that
the public, thought one fifth owners of the machine, are allowed no directors.
For what would come of it, if the whole secret was known?

And this is a contrivance for erecting "an active capital." It is indeed an
apposite expression. In activity it is a perpetual motion, collecting wealth
for an aristocracy, and impoverishing all other classes of the community. How
does the filching annually an enormous sum from their capitals, to constitute
annual dividends for a few rich individuals, and to erect an incorporated
monster, secretly and constantly ingulphing real property, and national
resources, in the abyss of perpetuity, favor agriculture, commerce or
manufactures?

It would be better for the community, if such contributions were thrown into
the sea. Though the property would be lost, liberty would be preserved. Now its
wealth fosters its natural enemy, whilst the general welfare is impoverished,
and the common strength, disabled. The sinew of defense is transfering to
those, from whom we have most cause to fear offense. And the dust of a few new
terms, interspersed with the jargon of a system, whose principle is perplexity,
and whose design is treachery, is expected to hide from the public view, the
ambuscade which lurks behind.

The bank having the monopoly of the bulk of the circulating medium, may
occasionally increase or diminish the quantity. It may diminish the quantity,
thus enhance its value, and purchase with its own paper, certificates or other
property, which are depreciated, in the same proportion, as the medium is
appretiated. It may then increase the quantity of this circulating medium,
lessen its value, appretiate certificates or other property of course, and then
sell a portion of the same certificates or other property, to take in the paper
which the whole cost. If the law prohibiting this incorporated traffic in
certificates, could even discover the fact, yet the traffic would still have
open to it, the endless list of whatever is valuable. And the individual
members are not even nominally restrained.

This is a complete commercial despotism. Every merchant is secured beyond the
reach of government, and yet the bank can ruin almost any merchant, without
even a power in government to save him. A respectable class of citizens, are
thus cajoled by a few of its members, who enjoy some exclusive fruits from the
contrivance, into an approbation of the most unrestrained species of indirect
and secret power over their property; whilst the same men would spurn at the
same thing, if exhibited in a simple incorporated society, for enriching or
impoverishing, whomsoever it might please the directors. Honesty, industry, and
punctuality, are no longer a security for success. Profit is to be made by
superior cunning and intrigue in finding out bank secrets. The profits of trade
will no longer be an honorable compensation, for supplying the mutual wants of
distant nations. They will consist chiefly of mean pilferings from our next
neighbors. The reputable and useful society of merchants, will dwindle into a
dishonest association of speculators, for tricking each other, as well as the
whole community, of their money, by a trade in ideas.

The circulating medium is the soul and food of commerce. A corporation,
possessing a power over the soul, can animate, or annihilate the body at
pleasure. By withholding its food, they may starve commerce; by glutting it,
they may produce a mercantile plethora. A foreknowledge of these effects, is an
unlimited power of taxation. In a civilized society, the circulating medium, is
also the soul of agriculture, arts and manufactures. All the faculties of the
nation are subject to the regimen of an incorporated quackery, instead of
pursuing a natural impulse, in search of their own subsistence. If the
physician was honest, yet an artificial regimen in a state of health, produces
debility, and hastens dissolution; but when his fees depend on the irregularity
of his prescriptions, and when he is a mere Hiccius Doccius of a fellow, he
will soon destroy the soundest constitution.

A monopoly of the circulating medium, is an universal power of embargo, over
trade, agriculture, and manufactures, deposited in the hands of a few private
citizens. In what place does the constitution contemplate such a power, and if
the place can be found, why does it so cautiously devise checks restraining
government within certain limits, whilst this power, so greatly transcending
any right devolved upon government itself, is left uncontrolled?

Suppose a monopoly of gold was bestowed on one corporation -- of silver on
another -- of the English and French trades on others; proceeding to parcel out
all the branches of trade, agriculture, arts, and almost sciences, among so
many similar ministerial contrivances. It might enrich the members of the
several corporations, but the public would exclaim, trade is ruined -- the
national happiness is destroyed. And yet such a system would be more just than
the bank contrivance, in being more general -- in producing some little
competition -- and in being less an engine of political designs and legislative
corruption. The monopoly of the circulating medium involves a monopoly of all
these objects. The bank has a flush of trumps, with palm, the knave, at their
head, which loos the rest of the community; and if it does not seize the whole
stake at one grasp, it is on account of the obvious impolicy of destroying the
hen which lays the golden eggs.

The little specie left by the system in circulation, is only a kind of small
change, or a sort of permissive bank alms, as it pays them no tax, and is too
inconsiderable in its amount, to impugn a single important effect, flowing from
the monopoly of the circulating medium.

The calamities of the last war, resulting from the banishment of specie by a
paper medium, were probably equivalent to those produced by the sword. The
banking contrivances are rapidly reducing us again, to the same ruinous and
miserable situation.

SECTION XIV. -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
THE tax paid to the bank as inevitably falls upon labor ultimately, as the
impost does; nor has labor in either case the smallest chance of exerting any
degree of volition; it can only exert its industry, to pay a debt imposed upon
it by law, which it must necessarily discharge.

The whole gross value of the exports from the United States, for twelve months
previous to October 179^, was 17,371,551 dollars. This was the product of
labor, exclusive of its food. And out of this amount must be deducted the
freight, commissions, clothing, tools, liquors, and other necessaries, which it
must pay for. Conjecture that an annual profit is made by labor beyond its
annual needs, even of 8,000,000. One days profit requires four day's work.
Taking these data, and narrowing the profit of the bank down to its simple
annual dividend, labor must toil at least forty-nine days in each year to
raise the dividend of the bank of the United States, amounting to 800,000
dollars. And if the profits of all the banks amount to 2,000,000 annually,
labor must toil ninety-one days every year to pay them. Recollect that the
present annual expenditure of the nation, interest, and the expenses of
government included, exceeds 5,000,000 of dollars, and then consider the
present state of labor. Suppose a law was proposed, a necessary effect of
which would be, that a few rich men should work ninety-one days in the year for
the rest of the community. Both the oppression and the gain would (...)
finitely contracted. But the principle would remain unchanged, though the case
would be altered greatly for the better. If the profit made by labor extended
even to 10,000,000 annually, the bank of the United States would be receiving
eight per centum annually, in its dividends only, out of this profit. And if
the capitals of this, and the other banks, extend to 17,371,551 dollars, and
their dividends amount to eight per centum upon an average, then labor pays
that enormous interest to banks, upon the gross amount of her exports. But if
we add to the dividends, every other item of profit, and allow the community a
maintenance, it is within bounds to conjecture, that forty per centum upon her
nett profit, is annually paid by the community to the several banks.

And what compensation do the banks make to the community for those enormous
gains and exclusive privileges? Have they made a bushel of wheat or a horn
tooth comb? Actual specie is but a representative of real wealth. But it is
equivalent thereto, because it can transfer real wealth to us from a foreign
nation; whereas bank paper can neither increase our exports, or pay for our
imports, since its currency is local. The bank is therefore an incorporation of
sinecures, quartered upon labor, and may be justly styled, the Irish
establishment of America.

Debt is service or labor, and service or labor is slavery. And so is slavery
defined in the fourth section of the constitution. For money being the
representative of labor, and the only medium by which debt can be paid, the
creditor is in fact the master of the debtor, for the quantum of service or
labor, necessary to discharge that debt. If so, the United States are by the
bank contrivances, placed precisely in the situation of a slave, who has
purchased of his master about four day's freedom in each week; because for more
than one day in each week, they owe service to the bank of the United States,
and for about two days, to the several banks now operating. How improperly then
do we speak? Instead of saying, "the bank of the United States," it would be
more proper to say, "the United States of the bank."

And the law enacts that we shall be the United States of the bank for twenty
years. During so long a lease without impeachment of waste, the tenant will
either ruin the estate, or provide for the purchase in fee. If the product of
the estate, and not its improvement, had not been the object, wherefore were
other tenants excluded? This wise exclusion of partners in spoiling the nation,
evinces the truth of the line of argument I have adopted by disclosing the
design of the contrivance.

The law of primogeniture and first fruits is revived. The bank is the first
born of legislation, with an intail for 20 years, and more than a chance for
the reversion in fee. Or it is rather an heir apparent, in possession of the
regency, on account of the parent's idiocy.

A pretense of rendering some compensation to the community, for its
pre-eminent powers, and exorbitant acquisitions, was necessary to lull enquiry
into a comatose state. And therefore it is alleged that the institution enables
merchants to extend commerce, to give better prices for commodities, and to
encourage industry. And England is resorted to, as an example proving these
allegations.

Merchants are brokers, honorable and useful, whilst adhering to a steady line
of commerce, and supplying the wants of a nation, but pernicious and dangerous,
whilst speculating indiscriminately on foes and friends for the acquisition of
wealth, and aspiring to exclusive previleges and prerogatives.

They are of a class unproductive, and therefore if capitals are to be raised
at the public expense, it would be more beneficial to commerce, to bestow them
on agriculture or manufactures, which alone create the real fund for an
extension of commerce, for the purpose of enabling them to make lasting and
productive improvements. Taking from the productive class therefore, to bestow
upon the unproductive is inverting the course of nature, when an extension of
commerce is the object.

A reaction of these capitals as an incitement to industry, cannot be a
permanent effect from a bank. The quantity of paper which can be circulated, is
limited by the national ability to pay for it, and the employment it can find.
Specie is liable to the latter limit only, and therefore more specie than
paper, can find employment in a nation, because for specie there is nothing to
pay. If a member of the commercial world, possesses specie sufficient for its
occasions, and banks are established which emit paper equal in amount to this
specie, the latter must depart for want of employment. If more paper is emited,
a momentary and unnatural spur may be given to industry, at the commencement of
the operation; but it would be fleeting and transitory, for the instant the
true level of circulating medium has regulated itself, things at best, would
subside to their usual course. But they will sink lower, because the community
having exchanged specie for paper, has lost a long string of advantages
possessed by the former over the latter; and because worsted as it is in
numberless ways by the exchange, labor will moreover be burdened with an
interest of six per centum on the amount of the circulating paper, whereas the
national labor paid nothing for specie. How completely is such a community
jockeyed?

Again. Lasting improvements can never be produced by bank contrivances, on
account of the rapidity with which bank paper, whilst it is alive, is passed
from hand to hand. Lasting and productive improvements in manufactures and
agriculture, require the use of a capital for several years, because profit
from labor flows in slowly. And such capitals our banks never furnish. The
contrivance is only adapted for sudden speculations; to favor a quick and
rapid succession of good bargains; and to enable the bank to gain compound
interest, by renewing its paper three or four times a year. The medium for such
a traffic being local also, the gain resulting from it must not only be filched
from citizens, but instead of producing, it must obstruct lasting improvements,
and discourage, by impoverishing, industry. And merchants, from an honorable
profession, will be converted in a set of contemptible gamblers.

Suppose two or three large states, Massachusetts and New York, or Virginia and
North Carolina, for instance, should destroy banks, and inhibit the circulation
of all bank notes by making it felony; would not such states become a reservoir
for the specie of the union? And would not the effects be so sorely felt by the
sister states, as soon to destroy the banking systems throughout the union? The
United States, as a member of the commercial world, will speedily occupy a
similar pre-eminent station, over sister nations, by abolishing banks. For
specie will ever flow, where it can find employment.

In lieu of this system is substituted a corporation of rich men, possessing a
power of expelling the only universal medium of commerce, of substituting a
local medium in its stead, having a monopoly of this local medium, and thus
completely enabled to regulate the price of every species of produce. The lower
this produce can be bought, the higher are their gains; because those who buy
bank paper at a premium, cannot pay the premium, and must cease to deal at the
paper shop, unless they can sell it at a higher price than they gave. The bank
sells the commodity by wholesale, and are paid a wholesale profit. The dealers
will then retail it, getting an advance upon the whole first cost, and since
the commodity will not do for transportation, the nation as the only consumers,
pay this double profit. Will the bank exert the power of regulating the price
of labor, for the purpose of raising it; and is a monopoly a good substitute
for a competition? Reflect. Can the bank cause the price of produce or of
paper, to fluctuate? What must be the effect of this power? and compare the
price of wheat in 1789, when there was a partial and local scarcity in France,
with the price of the same article in 1792, when a general European scarcity
and warfare united to enhance it. Not forgetting that many of these
contrivances, have been erected in the interim.

The truth is, that the price of our exports abroad, and not the banking
operations at home, can only enhance their value. Out of that price must be
deducted, freight, profit and commission; and to these deductions are
superadded the dividends and other profits of banks. Will deductions raise the
price?

Mercantile or speculating people can only borrow of the bank, because of its
short credit; and to lend to others, so as to aid lasting improvements or
encourage industry, is never a purpose of those who deal in bank paper. In no
state does the legal interest for money exceed six per centum, and this
interest must be paid to the bank; therefore no person will borrow of the bank
to lend again, when he can gain nothing. In all states, where the legal
interest is still lower, a loss would obviously ensue. As would also be the
case, wherever that is the legal rate; because the bank, by calling in loans
several times a year, manages to gain more than six per centum per annum, which
being a shift to evade, would not in a private case be tolerated by, a statute
of usury. Therefore bank paper is a proper medium for sudden strokes at good
bargains only. These strokes fall upon citizens only, and constitute a mode for
the encouragement of industry, novel and incomprehensible to those who receive,
but clear and conspicuous to those who inflict the stroke.

Labor is burdened with a compound interest on this bank medium, under the
pretenses of encouraging industry, and furnishing a capital for improvement,
which are obviously deceitful and fallacious. If labor had received the loans
of the bank, and had thus escaped the gain which it pays to those who do, yet
it must have paid the bank profits. The dividends are eight per centum,
exclusive of other great acquisitions before stated. Can agriculture or
manufactures afford to pay such an interest for a capital? The returns made by
lasting improvements, bear no similtude to those of speculating rogueries. Who
will lend for the purpose of encouraging industry, or to aid lasting
improvements, at five per centum, when by investing his money in bank stock, he
will certainly gain above eight per centum; Private loans are thus annihilated,
and no substitute for the attainment of such objects proposed. A rate of bank
profit, exceeding the rate of legal interest, must draw the national money to
this vortex of imposition.

Banks are money brokers, receiving exorbitant commissions. A kind of
treasurers of the whole circulating medium, receiving annually of the nation,
among whom it circulates, above six per centum on its amount. In less than
seventeen years, they gain the entire total. Enough to support at least a seven
years war, with 20,000 men constantly in the field. What an alarming idea?
Suppose government and the bank should coalesce, and form a treaty with some
foreign potentate, to destroy what they have already united to infringe? Are
usurpations more easily corrected in a state of maturity, than at their
commencement?

It is pleasant to observe the dilemma to which Congress are reduced by the
contrivance. The constitution, in terms framed from a consideration of the
mischiefs heretofore produced by paper mediums, strives most carefully to
interdict them in future. In dealing out power to Congress relative to a
currency, it permits that body "to coin money;" and in restraining the power of
the states, it prohibits them from " coining money, emitting bills of credit,
or making any thing a tender but gold and silver." In not giving the power of
establishing a paper currency to the one, and in taking it expressly from the
other, the constitution designed to secure the society against the frauds and
vices of paper tricks. That circulating paper medium of every kind was intended
to be inhibited, is obvious from the distinction, between such a medium, and
making any thing a tender. Both are separately condemned; and the medium,
though unaccompanied with the tender, is expressly forbidden. The tender is
indeed an aggravation of that which is mischievous without the tender. The
states being restrained from establishing a paper currency, could not empower a
corporation to do it. They could not bestow, what they did not possess. But,
alas! poor Congress! having broken the constitution themselves, they are
obliged to wink upon its flagrant breach by most of the states, which have,
without any bad intention, followed their baneful example. With grief must
Congress suffer their twenty years monopoly to be broken in upon, and snacks of
the national plunder to fall to the share of rival corporations. It must
however be confessed, that the contest is unequal, since the good things
redounding from the public purse, are exclusively enjoyed by the purse bearers.
Had the states gone into the system of their own head, and not as blind
transcribers of the example set by the higher powers, we should have heard
clamourings, which could not now be uttered by a party of the chorus.

Ignorant as we are of the effects of banking in England, it is necessary to
take some notice of an example quoted in favor of the contrivance. Bold
assertions may be hazarded, when the proof is beyond our reach; and therefore
the quotation. But if England may be likened unto a seigniory possessed of
profitable estates, pouring into its lap their products in constant streams of
wealth -- if the riches of the East and West Indies roll into her treasury --
if she is the tax gatherer of Ireland and Scotland -- if she shares in the
fisheries -- if she is almost unrivalled in manufactures and unequalled in
commerce -- if her laboring class of citizens are industrious and her soil
exuberant, why is her prosperity (if she is prosperous) attributed to her
banking contrivances. Whilst a glare of imaginary prosperity is painted by
terms, the offsprings of invention, to tempt the nation, a productive cause
equally false is credited for it, to mislead us. If effects, bearing a faint
resemblance, to the high colorings in which they are depicted, do exist, they
are accounted for by an unseen speculating influence, without resorting to a
single obvious cause.

On the contrary, suppose we were to consider the poor rates, and the rate of
luxury in England, as the expositors of banking schemes. Redundant wealth and
pinching want, would turn out to be the effects in parcelling out the
necessaries of life; and tyranny and slavery the division they make, of what
they term, "civil rights." Nothing could have deprived the English (the nation
not the court) of enjoying diffusively their exclusive advantages, but a system
constantly pillaging from labor, to aggrandize wealth. Unless, therefore,
America is languishing for a peasantry, wretchedly poor, and an aristocracy
luxuriously rich and arrogantly proud, this English precedent has been
unfortunately adduced, and more unfortunately pursued.

But to consider how the bank will affect liberty at its extremities, when it
has struck at its heart, by corrupting the legislature itself, is really
superfluous. It is therefore time to dismiss the subject.

Subjoining, that the public wealth is pillaged to the extent of the national
ability, and that no food for speculation remains, except the public territory.

If those who have pledged this territory for the redemption of the debt, by
legislative faith, should now pervert the arms and treaties of the nation, to
the breaking of this faith, for the purpose of acquiring principalities out of
the national territory for themselves -- If those who call themselves federal,
should league with Indians and foreigners, to remove the land marks of union,
and to revoke a fundamental stipulation for the security of independency
itself, it would both explode their professions, and prove the justness of my
arguments.

SECTION XV. -- THE PRESENT STATE OF PARTIES CONSIDERED.
FROM a collision of parties truth flashes forth, and the community is the
great arbiter between them. Parties are counsel on opposite sides, capable, by
argument and reasoning, of enlightening, or by buffoonery, sophisms and
perplexity, of insulting the judge. A song in the place of an explanation, or
farcical newspaper ebullitions, instead of definitions and illustrations, must
awaken the idea of a merry Andrew, entertaining a mob by his tricks and
grimace, whilst his accomplices are picking their pockets.

A party however must signify, a confederation of individuals for the private
and exclusive benefit of themselves, and not for the public good. If then the
object of this confederation is in conflict with the public good, those who
oppose it, deserve rather the appellation of "a band of patriots," than the
epithet of "a party," they are not contending for the benefit of a part, but of
the whole community.

It is of importance to the community to discern, what interest falls within
this definition of a party, and what line of politics, as excluded by it, is
entitled to their confidence.

And first let us find out the design of those who disapprove of the measures
of administration. Are they in search of loaves and fishes? If so, let the
community demand, what those loaves are? The possessors of them can best tell.
Legal salaries of office are too moderate to constitute an object for avarice,
or to be a fund for those enormous acquisitions, which have not escaped the eye
of America. Is the favor of administration lucrative, or in any mode
beneficial? Tell us, in what way, and to what extent, ye who know, that we may
discern the undue selfish influence, operating upon those who complain of its
measures.

If the government is already a government of loaves and fishes, then the
necessity of an immediate reformation is admitted, because time sanctifies
abuses; if not, the motives which actuate those who are striving to prevent its
becoming so, must be pure and patriotic.

The bank, it is asserted, is unconstitutional -- that it is a burdensome and
fraudulent tax -- that it impoverishes all classes of the community, except a
selected few -- that it subverts the principles of representation -- and that
with other measures of administration, it proceeds unerringly and infallibly to
aristocracy and monarchy. Now what exclusive interest can a party, southern or
northern, compounded of States or individuals, have in defeating such designs?
There is no difficulty in discerning an interest of immense magnitude, and of
an exclusive nature, residing in a party, for supporting a contrivance, of so
gainful a nature.

Can a majority of the people of a single state, Massachusetts for instance, be
interested in the support of measures, for amassing wealth in a few hands, and
levelled at the fundamental principles of civil liberty?

The agricultural, professional, and mechanical interests of the community, at
whatever point of the compass they reside, are so obviously in the same
predicament, that it is necessary to disclose the arts, by which they have been
disunited.

1. Public abuses combine for mutual support, and the greatest will be selected
as the patron of the rest. Hence not only stock-holders themselves, but public
officers who wish for higher salaries -- paper men and speculators, who will
gain by an increase of the public debt, and by the dissipation of the finances
-- and all who languish after aristocracy and monarchy, have enlisted under the
auspices of a chief. And hence the industrious and vociferous cry, in favor of
the measures of the administration. A list of stock and certificate holders
would explain it, to be the voice of private interest, and not of impartial
approbation.

2. A party will receive with open arms recruits of every character. Among
others the old tories are most cordially enlisted. They naturally fall to
those, who are gaining by intrigue, what they fought for in vain. They are
gratifying their passions without any expense to their principles. A victory,
after a defeat, is the more pleasing, as being a retalliation.

3. In this most worshipful society, an endeavor is made to associate the
President. The associates assume the character of being the supporters, of that
which they are undermining, because they know his attatchment to the
constitution and good government. By geting possession of the fortress, whilst
the commandant is unsuspicious of the fraud, it will be more easy to betray it
to an enemy, or sieze it for themselves. They style themselves "federalists,"
though it is obvious that they disregard the constitution, in its principles,
as well as letter. The artifice is stale; the Neros and Caligulas of Rome, were
perpetually vociferating the terms "republic and republican," long after the
government was despotic.

4. Honest men, when deceived, are the best supporters of knavery; hence the
party, by a demarcation of fallacious interests, is striving to convert that
cordial union, which was founded in times of distress -- cemented by mutual
sufferings, and sealed by compact, into the most inveterate enmity. And a
concord of hearts, habits -- and of interest, which really exists between the
great bulk of the citizens of every state, is the devoted victim of
machinations, designed to enrich and aggrandize a few. The aristocratical
interest is a kind of flying squadron, whose object it is to divide the great
mass of the people, by a geographical line, and to cajole one division, that it
may live at free quarter on the labor of both.

5. The party boast of the present flourishing condition of our country, and
ascribe it to their own politics. Honesty though devoid of modesty, would have
confessed, that peace, industry, and an increased population, rather than paper
contrivances, were the real grounds of national prosperity. Causes, which in
many European countries, have so far surmounted political oppressions, as to
exhibit a high degree of agricultural and mechanical improvement. But by
adducing an argument from a parallel between the present times, and times of
war, it is confessed, that a sufficient degree of similitude exists to bear a
comparison. It is admitted, that the community which is warring against
monarchy and aristocracy, armed with paper only, does indeed occupy a
situation, preferable to a necessity of fighting against the same enemies,
armed with the instruments of death.

6. The party call themselves the government, and then demand of the public a
confidence in the magistracy. Had they demanded a critical investigation of
their conduct, it would have been a better proof of integrity. But faith, and
not truth, is their political motto. King craft, like religions established by
law, substitutes mystery in the place of knowledge. It depends, not upon an
enlightened conviction, but upon a blind idolatry. Confidence or faith, is most
clamourously insisted on, when it is least merited. Watchfulness, and not
confidence, is inculcated by the constitution. But if an uninformed faith is
still demanded, let us know with precission, how far it is to go -- how many
arguments it ought to refute -- how many proofs it can smother -- and how much
mischief it can justify. And the blindest faith may perhaps discover, that it
is already time to open its eyes and look about.

7. An unnatural alliance between stock and certificate holders has been
effected; unnatural so far excepted, as certificates are deposited as bank
stock. By this means a real debt is interwoven with an artificial debt. A
constitutional demand is linked in brotherhood, with an unconstitutional
contrivance. A just claim upon the public ability is rendered precarious, by
burthening that ability with an unjust and exorbitant tax. Real creditors are
decoyed into a belief, that the best means of securing themselves, is to impose
on their debtor a debt to a vast amount, founded upon fiction, but yet secured
by a mortgage in the nature of a rent charge for twenty years. Those who have
the security of the present constitution, are seduced into measures, subversive
of constitutional sanctions, and if they succeed, they destroy their own
security. In short, a combination with a party, whose existence is precarious,
has been preferred to an union with the whole community, whose will is law.

8. It is even pretended, that the community do not feel their taxes; and
inferred, that not feeling they do not pay them. A state of political apathy is
most dangerous to liberty. If the community can only judge by their feelings,
it is better to bring them to their sensibility, through the medium of their
understandings, than to leave them in such a state of stupefaction, until their
natural, as well as their political arteries, are pierced by the goads of
despotism. And if they are insensible of the impost, because it operates only
on consumers of imported articles; yet they will certainly feel the bank tax,
which is moreover an excise upon labor in every article it produces.

9. A great merit is claimed by the aristocracy, on account of their being
addicted to an, "energetic government." What latitude is concealed under this
general expression, cannot be discovered. Judging by the extent to which they
have already pushed their designs, we may fairly construe it thus; "a power to
suppress discontent and commotion, excited by oppression, and to sustain the
oppression." For when did a government want energy to do justice, in times of
peace and prosperity? "Submit quietly and peaceably to to the blessings of an
energetic government," is the language of the king of Prussia, whilst he is
marching an army into Poland, for the purposes of plunder and despotism.

When these arts are exploded, those who by intrigue and deception, have really
formed themselves into a powerful party, will turn out by right and nature, to
be a mere junto, operating upon a whole society, for their own selfish
purposes. And however their leader, like a young prince, may be flattered with
the tongue of interest into a good opinion of himself; and though his
dependants may at first pass him upon the world for prodigious parts and
astonishing integrity; yet manhood in the one, and the effects of the other's
policy, will often unmask the deception, and exhibit them as prodigies of
another sort.

Raising up an aristocracy, and severing the community into the two orders of
nobles and people, is providing a faction to teize and torment the public mind,
by perpetual tricks and artifices, for appropriating to themselves the purse
and power of the nation. This scheme has operated, and is yet operating. The
wealth already amassed by specious frauds, has produced visibly its natural
effects, by corrupting those principles of moderation and republicanism, which
are the only pledge of public liberty and private happiness.

What can the people of any state gain by aristocratical and paper
representatives? Decency and cunning in government, is the utmost possible
acquisition. Will a soul be so foolish, as to trust in a band and surplice for
salvation, or a body so insane, as to rely for health in a full-bottomed wig?
And will a soul, a body, or a nation be consoled by the reflection, that it is
destroyed secundum artem.

And what can the author gain by success? If he is poor, what is his object? If
rich, what influences him? If he is an officer of government, will he gain
preferment? If not, does he propose to erect an office for himself? Does he
favor national profusion? Or is economy the language of public rapacity? Will
despotism contend for liberty, and legal equality? Do his arguments inlist him
with a party, struggling for exclusive gains; or is he telling a salvation of
which he can only participate with the community in general? Is he not
laboring to defend the constitution against the most fatal attacks, and are
not the remedies proposed of a general, and not a local nature? Whilst he
deplores his want of ability and information, equal to a task, which no one
else has undertaken, and solicits a correction of his errors, he boldly
asserts, that he is actuated by no unchaste design, and that he has written in
the spirit of truth.

An administration without a maxim, would be like a ship without a rudder. From
the effects of the contrivance, and not from its professions, is this governing
maxim to be collected. Of the following maxims select the most apposite.
Honesty is the best policy? Simplicity and knowledge preserve liberty. Divide
and conquer. A public debt is a public blessing.

The model of Nebuchadnezzar's image seems to be the idol of administration;
but although the head was of gold, and the feet of clay, let it be remembered,
that the clay contained a mixture of iron, and that one common catastrophe
humbled the gold itself to the dust.

The natural interests, and the honest politics of the nation will unite, and
prevent the erection of an image, which all must fall down and worship. The
attempt to set it up, violates the constitution, and therefore federalism will
be strenuous to defend its own work. And even antifederalism will join in the
good cause, since the principles it professes are also violated. The artifices
of a party, foment a disunion between them, in order to dupe and to use both.

ERRATA.
Page 9, for be fair read be as fair

12, for possess read possesses

16, for doubted read doubled

20, for loose read lose

21, for it fruits read its fruit

31, for plan read place


