TRIALS OF ROBERT WATT AND DAVID DOWNIE.

THE TRIALS AT LARGE OF ROBERT WATT, AND DAVID DOWNIE, FOR HIGH TREASON, AT THE
SESSION OF OYER AND TERMINER, AT EDINBURGH, August 27, September 3d, and
September 5th 1794. AT WHICH THEY WERE BOTH FOUND GUILTY, AND SENTENCED TO BE
HANGED, DRAWN, AND QUARTERED, On the 15th October.

TAKEN IN SHORT HAND By an ENGLISH BARRISTER.

NEW YORK: Printed by TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN, 358 Pearl-street. M.DCC.XCIV.

TRIAL, etc.
AUGUST, 27, 1794.
THIS day the Court met, when ROBERT WATT was put to the bar, in order to be
arraigned.

Mr. Knapp, Clerk of Arraigns, called upon the prisoner by his name, and
desired him to hold up his right hand, which he did. Mr. Knapp then read the
bill of indictment which the Grand Jury had found against him to the following
purport:

It charges the said Robert Watt not having the fear of God in his heart, nor
weighing the duty of his allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the
investigation of the devil, as a false traitor against the King, his supreme,
lawful, and undoubted Sovereign, and wholly withdrawing the cordial love and
due and true obedience, fidelity, and allegiance, which every true and faithful
subject ought to bear toward him, and wickedly, maliciously, and traitorously
devising, contriving, and intending to break and disturb the peace and
tranquillity of the kingdom, and to change, subvert, and overthrow the
Government happily established therein, and to usurp, assume, and take upon
himself, together with other false traitors, the power of Government within the
kingdom, and to excite, move, and raise Rebellion against the King, within this
kingdom, to depose and put down the King from the Royal state, title, power,
and government of the kingdom, and him to death to put and bring. With having
maliciously, wickedly, and traitorously met, consulted, conspired, and agreed
to cause and procure meetings to be held within this kingdom, under the name of
Conventions, for the purposes of usurping and assuming the powers and
government of legislation, in, for, and over the kingdom, of effecting an
alteration in the mode of electing Members of Parliament, or obliging the King
against his will, to change certain laws relating to the administration of the
kingdom, of raising an insurrection, of obliging the King to adopt certain laws
which they wished, of consulting concerning the seizing upon the Castle of
Edinburgh by force, with pikes, guns, battle-axes, etc. and also upon the
Excise Office and Banks, of seizing upon the Lord Justice Clerk, Lords of
Justiciary and Session, and Lord Provost of Edinburgh, of agreeing to be aiding
in these conspiracies, and of instigating other persons to assist him in
carrying the same into execution; of buying and procuring to be made, diverse
pikes, spears, battle-axes, etc. for the above purposes, of raising and
levying, and causing to be raised and levied, money for the purpose of arming
himself and his associates with writing and publishing wicked addresses,
advising the subjects of the King to subscribe money, employing John Fairley to
distribute the same, and to persuade the people to give assurances to him of
support, to inform of how many they might depend upon, to persuade the people
to send money to David Downie, and to purchase pikes, etc. for the purpose of
arming themselves, and with employing William Brown and Robert Orrock to make
pikes, etc. and cause them to be made for the above purposes, and which when
made were concealed in the house of the said Robert Watt.

After the indictment was read over, Mr. Knapp asked Mr. Watt what he had to
say to it, and whether he was guilty or not guilty? To which the prisoner
replied, Not Guilty.

Mr. Knapp. How will you be tried?


Prisoner. By God and my Country.


Mr. Knapp. God grant you a good deliverance.


Lord Justice Clerk asked the Counsel for the prisoner if he had any motion to
make?

Mr. Archibald Fletcher said, that he wished Mr. Robert Cullen to be appointed
senior Counsel to assist him in the defense of Mr. Downie, in place of Mr. John
Clerk.

This the Court agreed to.

Mr. Robert Hamilton, Counsel for Mr. Watt, said, that as he observed a person
of the name of Kennedy in the list of witnesses against his client, and as he
understood he would be a very material witness for the prisoner, he wished to
know from the Counsel for the Crown whether Kennedy was to be brought forward.

Mr. Anstruther, for the Crown, said, that every exertion had been used, both
in England and Scotland to get hold of Kennedy, but hitherto without effect.

Mr. Hamilton then suggested the propriety of delaying the trial till Kennedy
could be found; but this Mr. Anstruther opposed, assuring the Counsel for the
prisoner, that if they would inform where Kennedy was, they should not be
deprived of his evidence; for that if the King's Counsel knew where he was, Mr.
Anstruther promised to have him brought forward.

Mr. Fletcher then suggested that it would be proper to have it fixed which of
the prisoners should be first brought to trial.

The Lord Advocate said, Mr. Watt was the person first meant to be tried.

The Court then adjourned till Wednesday next.

SEPTEMBER 3.
Mr. Knapp, Clerk of Arraigns, proceeded to call the Jury, several of whom, in
consequence of the peremptory challenge which the English law affords, the
prisoner objected to; at last a jury of twelve citizens were sworn in and
impannelled.

Mr. Knapp recapitulated to the Jury the heads of the indictment,
particularizing the different over-acts of treason of which the prisoner was
accused.

Mr. Dundas then rose, and opened the pleadings, by addressing the Jury on the
part of the prosecution. He said, that as the Clerk of Arraigns had read the
substance of the indictment, it would be unnecessary for him to recapitulate it
fully. He would only notice, that it stated the Defendant having held a private
correspondence for the purpose of procuring and establishing a meeting called a
Convention, under the pretense indeed of obtaining a Reform, but really for the
purpose of usurping the powers of government, though they sometimes said it was
to obtain a redress of their supposed grievances. The indictment also charges
him with having assisted in procuring arms, which no doubt were to be employed
against the government of the country; and finally the prisoner has consulted
on measures to overawe the legislature, and endanger the person of the King.

Mr. Anstruther said, It is my duty to lay before you the state of the charge
which the Counsel for the Crown now bring against the prisoner at the bar -- He
remarked, that such had been the peace the happiness, and the prosperity of
this country, and the Constitution under which we live, that the law of treason
lives only in our remembrance; nor have we seen an instance of its exercise for
half a century. He said, he would shortly state what the law is, and what are
the crimes which constitute a breach of it.

I profess not, said he, to possess those powers of oratory, for which some are
so famed, but, if I did, I should abstain from exercising them on the present
occasion; for, I know I should ill perform that duty I owe to my sovereign,
whom I serve, if I attempted to inflame your passions, or mislead your
judgment, against the person now at the bar. I shall, therefore, give you a
plain simple statement.

Mr. Anstruther then stated, that at the time of the Union of England and
Scotland, it was judged proper that the law of treason should be the same in
both countries; for as it was then brought about that we should have one
Sovereign, to whom we owed the same allegiance and duties, it was therefore
determined, that in this respect we should have the same law; and gentlemen,
give me leave to remind you, it was a beneficent act that extended the English
law of treason to this country, for that existing here before that period was
infinitely more severe. The law of treason lies in little compass, and it has
existed in England since Edward III. and was reduced to a certainty, which has
little varied since that period.

It states three species of treason; compassing and imagining the death of the
King; levying war against him; and adhering to his enemies; and whoever is
guilty of these, is guilty of treason.

The offense charged is compassing and imagining the death of the King. The act
charges not the offense done, but the intention of the person, viz. that of
compassing the death of the King. The law has been careful, because the law
knows the danger of allowing such intention to be carried into effect; but
while the law is thus scrupulous in preserving the life of the King, it is
equally careful in preserving the life of the subject; and though it says
compassing and imagining, yet it is not upon loose grounds, for the act of
Edward specifies the manner to be by open deed.

An overt act is the mean used to effectuate the purpose of mind; but though
you have thus heard of con^^^sing and imagining the death of the King, you are
not to suppose I must state a direct act of attempting to poison or destroy the
King. I must prove to you the means which the person has used to obtain his
end; but, as I wish you to take no construction of mine, therefore I will lay
before you the opinion of the most celebrated Judges upon the law of treason.
Here Mr. Anstruther stated a variety of law authorities. One author, he
observed, says the law is not confined to direct attacks on his life, but to
the means whereby the life of the Sovereign may be endangered: that therefore,
entering into measures to get his person into custody are overt-acts, because
they are means whereby his life may be endangered. If I can bring any thing, by
which the King's person and life were endangered, I call that high treason.
Lord Chief Justice Hale says, if the conspiracy be what must induce it, that is
compassing the death of the King. So, if a conspiracy is proved against the
prisoner, which would have endangered the life of the King, that is what this
Judge defines high treason.

If I make out a charge against the prisoner, that he intended levying war
against the King, to force him to do a particular thing, that is compassing the
death of the King; for, as a learned Judge says, he that fights against the
King, must know that it puts his person in danger; or, if I show a design,
which cannot be carried without evident danger to the King, it will be your
duty to find the crime of treason. If a conspiracy be formed to levy war
against the three estates of the kingdom, how can that be carried on without
endangering the life of his Majesty? -- It is an overt act of treason wherever
the design cannot be carried into effect without apparent danger to the King.
Justice Hale says, a conspiracy to levy war against the King, however disguised
under pretense of rectifying abuses, casting down enclosures, etc. must be
compassing the death of the King, for, it is said, he that endeavors to
conquer the King, cannot intend less than taking away his life.

Now, Gentlemen, I have no scruple to say, that the King's Council will prove
that the prisoner had entered into a conspiracy to conquer the King, by levying
war to force him to redress supposed grievances; and meetings to consult about
overawing the King, and levying war, is an overt act of high treason. I will
lay before you the means used by the prisoner to accomplish his end; and if I
prove it a conspiracy against the King, it is high treason.

In a case brought before Justice Coke, it was said there was no war levied,
and therefore the conspiracy to levy war was not high treason. If there be a
design to restrain his Majesty by a consultation to levy war, then it is high
treason. In the reign of George I. in the case of Lair, it was agreed, that a
conspiracy to levy war was not high treason; but the judge said, the law is,
that a consultation to levy war against the King in an overt act of high
treason.

A conspiracy to levy war has many times been indicted as an overt act of high
treason. Here Mr. Anstruther stated a case of conspiracy, and of the publishing
a paper proposing to seize the Tower of London and his Majesty's Ministers,
which was considered as high treason, although compassing the death of the King
was not mentioned in the indictment.

The fact I mean now to try, after having thus stated the law, is such a
conspiracy or design upon the part of the prisoner, as might have put the
King's life in danger. This is not a small conspiracy of a few individuals in
an obscure corner, but it is a conspiracy arisen from small beginnings, under
the appearance of seeking legal measures, urged on by persons circulating
seditious papers, and by seditious societies here and elsewhere, and agreeing
to a design to be carried into execution, which would have deluged this country
with blood. Such is the conspiracy charged against the prisoner.

You know, Gentlemen, there have been various societies who assumed to
themselves the names of "Friends of the People." Their first pretended object
was Reform by Petition; but whether they wished to obtain their cause or be
denied I know not; but their petition, however, did not meet success. Soon
after, a new scheme took place, and the first beginning of their plan will be
found in a letter sent to this country by Hardy, secretary to a London society,
where he says, "our petition has been rejected; our minds therefore must be
turned to some other plan and more effectual means." To this Skirving returned
an answer, and pointed out his plan, in which he foretells the downfall of
Government. Then they turned their eyes toward a Convention; and no wonder
they did so, as they had seen the effects of a Convention in another country. A
variety of letters point out distinctly that this Convention was not to
petition Parliament, but to act by their own authority. Now if I can prove that
the design was to supersede and annual the Government of this country, and
control all its powers, I will certainly make out a case of high treason.

Soon after this a body met at Edinburgh, who were afterward joined by
delegates from England, and took the title of British Convention. If you think
their views were pure and constitutional, there is no harm; but if otherwise,
that their intentions were illegal, and to carry their plans by force, then it
is neither more nor less than a plan to supersede the Government and
Legislature of this country, and set aside the King. One part of the
instructions by the Corresponding Society in London to Margarot were to resist
the Legislature of the country in case they should do a particular act, viz. to
stop certain meetings of the people. This then is clearly a conspiracy to
resist King, Lords, and Commons.

This society was divided into sections and divisions, and took the cant names
which are used in the Convention of France. It may be said, what harm in using
French phrases? This may abstractedly be true, but you, Gentlemen, are to judge
of the plans and views of men by all that you see them do. Various motions were
made and discussed in this Convention; some for petitioning for Reform, etc.
but from the moment they assumed the name of the British Convention, all idea
of petitioning Parliament was laid aside; and when it was even mentioned they
passed to the order of the day, which was setting aside the question
altogether, and therefore I cannot but infer that some other mode was intended.
And indeed they soon after agreed to certain resolutions, too bold even for
this society to publish. Among others they resolved to pay no attention to any
Act of Parliament which they thought should militate against the people, and
continue to meet and resist till compelled by superior force to desist. Every
delegate was instructed on his return home, to explain to his constituents the
necessity of electing a delegate, and establishing a fund for another
Convention in cases of emergency. Now I will show you the prisoner agreeing to
this resolution, and endeavoring to carry it into effect. This Convention was
indeed dispersed by the Chief Magistrate of this city, a gentleman whose
honorable, upright, and steady conduct, has justly obtained for him the
approbation of all good men; but soon after a proposal was again made for
calling another Convention in England. The first meeting for calling this
Convention was held at the Globe Tavern, London, where it was resolved, to call
a Convention to rule for themselves, and to have no connection with Parliament;
for say they, they must have a convention to obtain a redress from these
plunderers and oppressors. And who were those oppressors but the estates of the
kingdom -- King, Lords, and Commons, whom they thus meant to supersede in all
their functions?

Their next meeting was held at the Chalk Farm, where they came to sundry
resolutions: among others they declare, that certain acts of Parliament they
will not obey, nor submit to. -- These resolutions clearly demonstrate, that
they meant to supersede the Senators of the nation, whom they call the packed
Representatives of the People in Parliament, and take the government upon
themselves. If you shall be of opinion that they meant to do so, you cannot
doubt but their object was to destroy completely the Constitution of this
Country. I may be told what is all this to the prisoner; but it is necessary I
should show you, first, that there was such a plan, and then show, that the
prisoner, was concerned; and his concern in this affair astonishes me the more,
because about two years ago, the prisoner pretended to be a zealous friend to
Government, and had some communication with an illustrious character, who
filled the office of Secretary of State. -- To that respectable character he
wrote, saying, he would be happy to give information respecting the Societies
of the Friends of the People, and any other communications that might be
serviceable to Government. To this letter, an answer was returned, stating that
such information as should be useful to Government, would be thankfully
received. After this, he had some correspondence with my learned friend, the
Lord Advocate, who being subpoened by the prisoner, will, when called upon,
give a proper account of what transactions took place. The correspondence, I
believe, continued down to the middle of last year. Some applications were made
by the prisoner to my learned friend; what were the nature of these
applications I will leave with his lordship to say when he is called on. --
Prior to the ceasing of this correspondence, however, the prisoner had refused
to become a member of one of these societies, and certainly was not a member of
the British Convention; and unless I prove that he acceded to another
Convention, and couple him with a conspiracy in this country, he must be
acquitted of that part of the charge.

But, gentlemen, you know it is not necessary that I prove every act charged,
if I prove one act it is sufficient. If I prove he took certain means to effect
the purpose of his mind, I then prove the conclusion of treason against him. --
After the dispersion of the British Convention, several members formed
themselves into Committee for the purpose of carrying on the very views of that
meeting. Of this committee, the prisoner was a member, and one of its purposes
was to select delegates to another convention in England.

This convention had also for its object to meet till opposed by force, and to
collect a fund for supplying delegates. The prisoner moved for a committee of
Union to collect the sense of the People, and convene another British
Convention, He may indeed state, that he had a peaceable meeting in view; but I
shall show my evidence that such could not be his object; because he acceded to
the resolution of opposing force, and to meet till dispersed by force, and to
call another convention, such as I have described a treacherous meeting, to
overturn the Government. This convention seems to have taken great care of its
members; its second resolution says, the "will of the constituent is the
constituent, therefore, if the representative is attacked, it is the duty of
the constituent to defend him by nature, reason, and honor."

There was another Committee formed, of which Watt was also a member, called
the Committee of Ways and Means. This was a secret committee; they kept no
book, and committed nothing to writing. It was to transact all the money
matters of the Friends of the People, and collect funds for what they called
the Great Cause. This Society was also to correspond with the Societies, who
are to inform their committee what number of patriots they could depend upon,
and such as would spare no pains in promoting the Great Cause. This committee
consisted of five persons only, to whom all the societies were to entrust their
money, and every concern. Upon one occasion, this committee met to answer
Hardy's letter, when Watt was present; and this I couple him both with the
first British Convention and the one to be called.

The next act of this committee was an attempt to seduce the Fencibles in this
kingdom, and excite commotion among the soldiers. To effectuate this, they
circulated among the soldiers lying at Dalkeith, a printed bill of a most
wicked tendency. The types of this bill were found in Watt's house, and I will
trace copies of it from his hands to the person who actually distributed them.

Both here comes another plan which Watt proposed and lead in the committee. In
the night time a fire was to be lighted at the Excise Office, to attack the
soldiers from the castle, and when they were to march down the street to aid in
extinguishing it, then were the Friends of the People to attack and massacre
them with those deadly instruments. This done, the castle was to be taken
possession of, together with the Banks and all Public Offices -- The Judges and
Magistrates were then to be seized and imprisoned; and when all this was
accomplished, a proclamation was to be issued, ordering all farmers to bring
their grain immediately to market, and ordering that no country gentleman
should go three miles from home, all under the penalty of death. This was to be
followed by an Address to his Majesty, ordering him to dismiss his Ministers,
and dissolve the Parliament.

Now, gentlemen, all this I will clearly prove; and if I do, surely there can
remain no doubt that the plan of this prisoner was to overthrow the Government,
and put the King's life in danger. I need scarcely add, that before this, the
Friends of the People were to be all armed. -- These facts he had found it
incumbent on him to state; but at the same time, he requested the Jurymen not
to allow his observation to sway their judgment, but throw them out of their
recollection till they were substantiated by the evidence now to be adduced.

EVIDENCE FOR THE CROWN.
Edward Lauzon, King's Messenger, deposed, that he knew Mr. Hardy, Secretary to
the London Corresponding Society, and seized some papers in his house in London.

Mr. Hamilton stated, that he understood it to be law, that no proof can be
adduced to any extraneous matter not in the indictment till such time as an
overt act can be established.

Mr. Austruther answered, that before he could prove Mr. Watt to be accessory
to a conspiracy, he must prove that such a conspiracy did exist, and then he
would show that Watt was concerned.

Mr. Hamilton said, a plot in England is not the same charge with a plot in
Scotland, which Mr. Watt is charged to have been concerned with,

Mr. Austruther replied, it is stated a plot did exist, and I will prove,
perhaps by evidence from England, that a plot in which Watt was concerned,
existed in Scotland. (The objection was overruled by the Court.)

This witness then said, he found some papers in Hardy's house, among which was
a letter signed William Skirving, dated 25th May, 1793 -- another dated 10th
June, 1792; also a printed letter, signed T. Hardy.

Mr. Scott, Procurator-fiscal, stated, that Mr. Skirving and others of the
British Convention, were apprehended on 4th December, 1793; and several papers
were found in Skirving's house. Here the witness identified several papers,
some of which were addressed to Margarot, Gerald, and Skirving; -- also,
instructions from the London Corresponding Society for Constitutional
Information; -- several letters from Hardy, etc. -- Instructions for Citizen
Gerald, Oct. 24, 1793. Mr. Scot then stated the circumstances respecting
Margarot and Gerald being apprehended and the papers found on them.

He next mentioned his having been present when the Convention was dispersed at
the Cross-causeway, in December last. He specified a letter of Skirving's
handwriting, dated in May, 1793, addressed to Thomas Hardy, London. It
acknowledged a former letter which he says would be laid before the society. It
says "I know no more service I can do to my country (...) promote the union you
so much desire. We are the people themselves, and the people can both act and
speak for themselves. When the tabernacles of anarchy and aristocracy are
broken down, then will we, without fear, erect our fabric of freedom. If you go
no farther than meeting in separate towns, you will do no more than show
yourselves the tool of a faction." A variety of other circumstances are noticed.

John Tailor, Fleet Street, London, said he was a member of the London
Corresponding Society, and knows T. Hardy the Secretary and knows his
handwriting, which he now sees upon a paper entitled, Certificate of Gerald's
Election. Several other letters were also shown, which he said were Hardy's
writing. He said, the London Corresponding society was a large body divided
into divisions, amounting to fourteen. A general committee met on Thursday. A
committee of emergency was formed in May last. A general meeting was held in
January last, about a thousand persons present; so great was the crowd that the
floor gave way. One Martin was Chairman. Resolutions were agreed to, and
afterward printed. One speaker proposed, that the permanent committee should
meet every day, and distribute hand-bills; and, in case the Habeas Corpus Act
should be repealed, the Society should repel force by force. He received a copy
of the Resolutions of the Meeting from a person named "Moore," and now sees in
on the table.

He remembers a meeting at Chalk Farm, two miles from London, where there were
about two thousand people. A person named "Love," was in the chair. Some
resolutions were read. They were put separately, and all carried, and printed.
He received one from T. Hardy in May, at a meeting of the second division of
the London Corresponding Society. The witness stated a variation in the copy of
the Resolutions. The one says, the conduct of the Ministry brought Charles I.
to the scaffold, and expelled the Stuart family from the throne; therefore,
resolved, That the present Ministry were guilty of High Treason. The expression
in the other is, "Therefore Ministers ought to consider whether they are not
guilty of High Treason." An hundred thousand of the resolutions at the Globe
Tavern were printed, and two hundred thousand of those at Chalk Farm were
ordered to be printed. Depones, he has heard of military divisions, and once
saw a young man named "Oxley," who had a stick of particular construction,
fitted to allow an instrctrument to be screwed on the end; and, when he
produced it, he said; (...) had formerly belonged to the military in London,
and still meant to continue in that line. And he knew where others such as this
could be found but was bound not to divulge it.

Cross-examined -- He said he took memorandums for his own information,
because, being seduced to be a member at first, imagining their object was
Reform, and afterward discovering it to be very different, he thought these
notes might be of use in case he should be called on, which he afterward was,
being sent for to the Secretary of State's office.

Edward Gattard, clerk to Mr. Wickham, magistrate in London, attended one of
the divisions of the London Corresponding Society. where, by a conversation in
April, he understood a convention was to be formed, and the people were to arm
to defend the convention, as the citizens in Paris protect the convention there.

Cross-examined. He said, he became a member of these societies in consequence
of some curious language he heard at the meeting at Chalk Farm, where he was by
invitation from one of the members.

Alexander Atchinson, late goldsmith, deponed, that he was a member of the
British Convention, and Assistant Secretary to Mr. Skirving, and wrote a
considerable part of the minutes, which he now knows, and has seen the same
papers before in the Court of Judiciary: that several persons gave him
assistance in writing the minutes, among others, George Ross. He recollects a
motion by Mr. Callander, which caused some observation, and was referred to a
committee. Mr. Sinclair moved an amendment, in which the Convention declare,
before God and the world, that they will imitate the wholesome example of
former times, by opposing any step that shall militate against the people, etc.

[Here the witness read part of the minutes, which concluded with these words,
"Here the Members stood up, and solemnly passed the following motion."

Deponed, That he knows Mr. Watt, and that in January last he was appointed a
member of the Commit of Union: That the Convention was dispersed in December,
and the committee was formed in January. The commit was to preserve union
among the Friends of Reform. The Friends of the People met occasionally to keep
up a correspondence about the plan of Reform proposed by Mr. Pit and the Duke
of Richmond: and that Mr. Watt was a Member, and he himself was a member of the
Committee of Emergence for the purpose of paying debts; and has heard it said,
it was for the purpose of paying the expenses of delegates for a convention to
be held in England, this convention was for the same purposes and objects as
the former. Mr. Bonthorn was a member of the British convention. The purposes
the convention had in view were the same which Mr. Pit and the Duke of
Richmond had in view twelve years ago. Deponed, that he has heard out of doors
something of arms, but cannot name any person who said so: that he has seen a
pike in George Ross's: that he saw two in the possession of a blacksmith; that
the Committee of Union met in Ross's. Depones, that he has heard of arming the
people, but cannot say particularly by whom he heard it.

He thinks it was about the time when Earl Stanhope delivered his speech about
introducing foreign troops. Some said they would as readily arm against the
French as against other foreigners; others said they ought to arm in defense of
liberty; but cannot say who were the persons that said so. There were, perhaps,
five or six present when the conversation took place; it was the common talk of
the day. He cannot say what the particular conversation was which he had with
Mr. Watt the night the sub-committee was appointed in January, and cannot
recollect any conversation in the committee -- that he had been in Mr. Watt's
house, but cannot recollect the precise conversation.

Court. Did any conversation pass between you and the prisoner about arms? --


Ans. Never. He only said that something of importance was on the carpet, which
would come before the public or the world. This was about the time of Lord
Stanhope's speech concerning arming the people.


Court. What were your reasons for absenting from the committee of Way and
Means? --


Ans. Because I heard that some secret business was to come before the
committee, but cannot say from whom I learned this.


Court. How did you learn this? --


Wit. I took it for granted it was so.


Court. Did you never give a different account of your conversation with Watt
than what you now do? --


Wit. I never did, or if I did, it certainly was not true.


Mr. Erskine said he did not think it competent by the law of Scotland to
question a witness upon that subject.

Mr. Anstruther stated the law of England to be otherwise.

The Lord President said, the law of Scotland was certainly as Mr. Erskine had
stated, but with respect to England he apprehended it was different, and hinted
to Mr. Anstruther that it would be better to avoid that in future.

Mr. Anstruther, said he would take the hint, and would not have done it in
this case, had not the witness acted in the very extraordinary manner he had
done; but he would now request the jury to lay his evidence out of their view.

George Ross, late of the Gazetteer Office, depones, That he knows the
prisoner, and has seen him in his own house about the end of the last or
beginning of the present year. There was a committee, which began to meet in
his house about the above period; Downie, Mac Ewen, Orrock, and Watt, were of
that Committee which, he thinks, was called the Committee of Union. They went
into a private apartment. There were two Committees; a smaller one met at one
time, and a larger at another. They met once a week, and continued till Downie
and Watt were apprehended, and at that time the witness left Edinburgh.

One Bonthorn a teacher, attended, and Mr. Stoke was once or twice there. After
the convention was dispersed, two societies continued to meet: one in
Symon's-square, the other in his house. In Symon's-square, about 70 people met.
Deponies, That he does not know Mr. Hardy; but once wrote to him: That he
received from Mr. Hardy some printed papers, signed T. Hardy, which Mr. Stoke
brought to him. These were sent to different persons belonging to the societies
in the country, viz. in Perth, Paisley, Strathaven, Dundee, etc. The one sent
to Perth was directed to Walter Miller, the one to Strathaven to John Wilson.

Alexander Mitchell, manufacturer in Stathaven being shown a letter,
acknowledged he wrote it in answer to a printed letter signed Hardy, sent him
regarding a convention. In consequence of that letter, a meeting of the society
was held, and a delegate chosen to the convention. His letter was directed to
T. Hardy, London, and announced that a delegate was chosen.

William Lockhart, sheriff's chamber, said, he went to search the house of Mr.
Watt for some goods, which were secreted, belonging to a bankrupt. In the
search he found some pikes. He made a second search the same week, May 15, and
found some more in a closet. The witness produced the pikes, and put two of
them on a shelf which was also found in the prisoner's house and carried to the
sheriff's chamber. The witness also found the types of a hand-bill, which he
likewise carried to the sheriff's chamber.

William Middleton, sheriff's officer, on 15th May last, searched the house of
Orrock, smith, at Dean, and also searched Mr. Watt's where he found some pikes,
and some types set up. In Mr Orrock's house he found 33 piker, some finished,
and some not. -- Here the witness showed the pikes, and deponed, that they were
found in the smithy.

James Walker, in the sheriff clerk's office, depones, that he saw a form of
types in the sheriff clerk's office in May last: saw an impression taken off
them at Campbell Denovan's printing office; and being shown a copy, depones
that it is the same impression.

Mr. Sheriff Clark said, That upon the 15th May, Mr. Lockhart brought a pike to
his office. A warrant was then granted to search Watt's house, and he, the
witness, went there; where in an upper room he found in a closet a form of
types, two lines of which he could read; the one Dundee, April 12 1794, the
other, for other purposes you were enlisted.

James Somervell, printer, said he took off an impression from a form of types
which he got from the sheriff in May last, and identified a copy of it.

William Watson, Dalkeith, said, he thinks he once saw the panel in his own
house, which is farther down the street than the North Bridge; that Mr. Downie
sent him there. It was about the beginning of summer. Recollects a fencible
regiment at Dalkeith, and it was about the time he saw Watt and Downie. He was
then standing in Ritchie's shop door when Downie passed; and, having heard of a
hand bill about the sencibles, he asked Downie for one, who said, if he would
follow him, he would gratify his curiosity. He then took the witness to Watt's
house, where he remained a few minutes, and Downie said he could not get them
there. He then went to a Mr. Kennedy's, who gave them some of these bills. Mr.
Downie desired him to throw the parcel on the floor, and, if any body asked him
where he got it, he might say he found it. He did so, and took it up again;
and, having carried it home, gave these bills to some of his acquaintances, one
of them named "Johnston." The witness was a member of the convention, and
secretary to the Society of the Friends of the People at Dalkeith.

William Johnston deponed, that he got a paper from William Watson about the
fencibles. It was dated Dundee.

James Sandilands depones, that he got a paper from William Johnston, and
immediately gave it to Sergeant Hardy, of the Earl of Hopetown's fencibles.

Sergeant Hardy deponed, that he got from James Sandilands a seditious paper
regarding the fencibles; this was on Saturday 10th of May last: the regiment
was then going to Liverpool and Whitehaven. -- (Here the witness identified the
paper.)

Arthur M'Ewan, Water of Leith, bred a weaver, deponed, that he was a member of
a Society of Friends of the People there; was as delegate to the convention
when they were dispersed; after the dispersion the society at Water of Leith
continued to meet; That he was afterward at a meeting of the Committee of
Union at George Ross's. -- There were more than twenty members present. They
formed another Committee, called the Committee of Ways and Means, of which he
was a member. The purpose of this meeting was to consider on a letter from Mr.
Skirving, which said, as the convention owed him money he expected they would
pay it, and take care of his wife and children. The members were Watt, Stoke,
Downie, Bonthorn, and himself.

At the second meeting, Watt, Downie, Stoke, Bonthorn, and self were present.
At the third meeting, Watt, Downie, Bonthorn, Stoke, and self were present.

Quest. At this meeting was any proposal made for seizing the government? --


Ans. Mr. Watt read a paper for seizing on Lord Justice Clerk the Lords of
Session, and the Lord Provost. A fire was to be lighted at the Excise, and when
the soldiers were coming down, the people were to fall on them and to seize the
banks.


Thinks this was to be in the night (...). There were to be commissioners to
demand the cash of the banks. Thinks, that Watt afterward put the paper
containing this plan into a press. In Watt's own room he read a paper or
proclamation to this effect, "desiring all farmers not to remove their grain
under pain of death, and all gentlemen not to go three miles from their
houses." This was to be issued immediately after the above mentioned attack.

On the other side of the same paper was an address to the King to dismiss his
Ministers, dissolve the Parliament, put an end to the war or he might abide by
the consequences: That Watt ordered him, to accompany him to Orrock, when he
desired Orrock to make pikes, of which Orrock drew a model: That Watt ordered
him to be busy, as he had 4000 to send to Perth, besides what was needed for
Edinburgh, and so soon as they were made, he would get his money. The witness
saw Orrock's servant making one, and a lad came in, who asked him what was
their use? He answered, an invention mounting for a gentleman's gates: That he
has seen John Fairley at the committee, and he was told he had been sent to the
west, and the prisoner was present when Fairley told he had visited many
places, of which Watt took a note.

Fairley said, Paisly was in a state of great readiness. The witness said, when
the paper was read, he would by no means agree to any thing that would shed the
blood of his countrymen: That he heard another letter read in the committee of
Ways and Means; has heard of some persons called collectors in the commit of
Union. The society of Water of Leith gave 15 s. to provide for Mr. Skirving's
family, to be at the disposal of this committee, and 15 l. from Perth. -- [Here
the witness identified the paper produced by Watt.]

William Bonthorn deponed, that he was a member of the sub-committee, or
committee of Ways and Means, but withdrew from them altogether about the 17th
of April. Watt attended that committee, and the committee of Union -- agreed
with the preceding witness M'Ewan, as to the members of the committee of Ways
and Means.

Court. What made you withdraw from the committee? --


Wit. Different things that at present I cannot say.


Being farther interrogated, said, he wished the Court to ask him no questions,
for he remembered nothing at all of the matter; there was such a confusion that
it cut off his whole recollection. On being told he was criminal in concealing
the truth, he deponed, That he never heard Watt propose a plan, but heard him
read a paper.

Court. What was the purport or substance of that paper? --


Wit. It went on such suppositions that I looked upon the whole as a kind of
frenzy. It contained something about seizing the Castle, but I don't recollect
any thing at all about it.


Being interrogated, What the paper said of that matter? Deponed, That a number
of people were to seize on the Castle, while the soldiers were decoyed down by
a fire kindled about the Register Office, and likewise to seize on the Banks
and Excise Office.

Court. Were there no person to be seized? --


Wit. Don't recollect of any person mentioned to be seized. Taking possession
of the town guard was also mentioned in the paper.

Court. Who was to do this? --


Wit. The people, if so many could be collected.


The paper upon the whole alarmed him much.

Court. What did you say on hearing it read? --


Wit. Arthur M'Ewen opposed the plan, and I agreed with him.


Court. What was the business of the sub-committee? --


Wit. To transact the business of the society.


Court. Do you remember the circular letter printed by the committee? --


Wit. I saw the letter in manuscript at the committee which met in Geo. Ross's,
it was wrote by Mr. Stoke; the other paper was not read then, but in Watt's
house.


Does not recollect the particulars. Watt took it from his packet and after
reading it, put it into a press in the room. M'Ewan and he went home after the
committee dismissed.

Court. Did you take any step after that, to show that you disliked the
proceedings?


Depones that the reading of the paper alarmed him so, that he resolved to quit
the meeting altogether, and wrote an Advertisement for the Advertiser to that
purport, which was the substance of that on the table. It was not sent, as at
that time John Fairley called on the witness, and said he was to take a jaunt
to the West Country, and wanted him to give some shillings, for which he would
account. The witness told him, he had none, but wrote a line to Mr. Watt, and
he gave him the money.

Court. Where was Fairley going? --


Wit. to Falkirk, to see his sister; but said he had a commission from Watt.


Court. Did you see him after his return? --


Wit. Yes, one morning by accident; he did not say where he had been, nor whom
he saw.


Deponed that he heard of a printed letter which Hardy sent, but knows nothing
of the contents; an answer was sent to Hardy's letter, but does not know the
contents; it was wrote by Stoke, and was to be carried by himself, he being
going to London in a few days by sea. -- Saw a paper about the Fencibles, wrote
by Stoke, and Watt was present.

John Fairley, Wright, said he was a member of the British Convention, and was
chosen by a society to be a collector. They collected money and sentiments,
because there was a number of people warmly attached to the cause who could not
give their attendance, but gave money, while others gave only their opinion.
This was sometimes called a Commit of Ways and Means, where he was sometimes
present with Watt. He heard there were some pikes got ready, and was not long
acquainted with Watt when he showed him some. They had once spoke about pikes
before, and he (the witness) had a drawing of one made out, which he showed
Watt, who told him the pikes were intended for self-defence, and no person was
to get them but those who wanted and paid for them.

Crown. Did you ever say any thing about your fear of bloodshed? --


Wit. I was expressing my fears that the measures of government would drive the
people to despair, and Mr. Watt answered there would be no bloodshed, for those
who were most active against the cause of the people would be imprisoned.


He recollects Mr. Watt speaking of soldiers, on which the witness said, that
if affairs came to extremities, he had no fear of the soldiers, for he would
just speak to them, and they would be as glad of freedom as we can be.

Court. What do you mean by freedom, you say the soldiers would be glad of it?
--


Wit. I mean annual election and universal suffrage.


The witness then said it was once mentioned, that after seizing the obnoxious
people here, couriers were to be sent to the country, to announce what was
done. That Mr. Watt once told him he would give him some of the arms to show
the collectors, upon which he made some objections and Mr. Watt replied there
could certainly be no objections to a merchant selling goods in his shop. That
Mr. Watt showed him pikes in his own house, which he wished him to carry and
show the collectors.

Crown. Why did you not carry them? --


Wit. Because none of the collectors ever asked for them.


Crown. Was it not your reason that you thought it dangerous to do so? --


Wit. I thought no harm of it myself, but other people might think so, because
I was distributing them; and the collectors might have thought I wished to urge
them upon them before they were asked. One day I proposed going to Bo-ness,
when Bonthorn asked me to carry a letter. Next morning I called on Mr. Watt,
and he desired me to call at Mr. Campbell's, hatter, and get a parcel, which I
did. It contained papers. Mr. Watt said, I would know what to do with it. I
went to different places, viz. Glasgow, Paisley, Kirkintilloch, Kilsvth,
Stirling, etc. and had two papers of instructions, the one to desire the
society to send Mr. Downie their money, and also to distribute papers; the
other to ask what number of patriots there were in the place. I then went to
Stirling, and delivered a copy of these papers to all the people I called on,
viz. Dr. Forest, in his own house, where were several others. Had no direction
to Dr. Forest, but having heard of him, called to ask how the society was
flourishing there.


Thinks the name of one in Forest's house was Thompson; they all remained about
two hours. I told them the news in Edinburgh about what I have already
mentioned; and drew a plan of a pike on Forest's table. -- Then left Stirling,
and went to Mr. M'Cross, a relief Minister at St. Ninan's. Then went to
Kirkintilloch, and called on Mr. Anderson -- next to Paisley, on Mr. Hasty, a
member of the Convention. Then came to Edinburgh, and went to the committee of
Union, where were M'Ewan, Downie and Watt, to whom I told what I had done, and
returned the written instructions formerly received, to Mr. Watt, as also a
list of the towns and places, and of the people where I had been. -- Had also a
paper on my journey, authorizing me to call at the societies. There were seals
at this commission -- no names; but it was said it came from the committee of
ways and means. This was also returned to Mr. Watt. I received a line from Mr.
Bonthorn to Mr. Watt, who gave me a line to Mr. Downie, from whom I received 30
s. to defray the expenses of the journey.

He was now shown a list of his own writing, and desired to read it. It run
thus; S -- g, support by money; C -- ge not great. S -- pp -- t, as yet
uncertain.

Crown. Why did you keep these words blank? --


Wit. I did not like to write them in this list.


(Here the witness was desired to explain them, and with much seeming
difficulty at length read them thus; Stirling -- support by money -- Courage
not great -- Support as yet uncertain.)

After this the witness said, that he showed his commission and instructions to
Dr. Forest, and at all places he called at. Thinks the instructions spoke
something of a plan or grand plan.

Crown. What was that plan? --


Wit. It might be what Mr. Watt was telling me. It spoke something about a
committee of secresy.


Crown. Did it tell any thing about being free?


Wit. Aye, yes, I think it metioned it, saying something about that. It said
about Britons being free.


Crown. What was to make Britons free? --


A. It just said something about free; it might mean the grand plan. The
committee of secresy was to correspond with Downie, and I went to the country
to tell the societies to correspond with him.


Dr. Forest, Stirling. A person named Fairley, called on me in May last,
telling me he was desired to inquire in what situation the society was. He gave
me three copies of printed bills and a letter, and showed a paper, in which
money was, requested for Mr. Skirving. It spoke about some collectors, or
persons to be provided with --

Crown. What was the construction put on blank? --


Wit. I supposed it should be filled up -- "arms."


Ques. What did you say to Fairley? --


Ans. I told him we did not wish to injure any one, and he should be cautious
what he did.


Ques. Did Fairly say any things of arms manufacturing in Edinburgh? --


Ans. He was talking about an invasion, and then made a draught of a halbert,
and said, he knew a person who could furnish such instruments, who, I
understood, resided in Edinburgh.


Ques. When the company supped, what was Fairley's conversation? Did he say any
thing of a rising of the people? --


Ans. He did say something about it; but whether as a thing settled, or what
might be done, is uncertain. Some conversation took place of a plan for
disarming the soldiers, which, I understood, was to be done by the persons who
sent Firley west. He spoke of some people in Edinburgh who would repent their
conduct, and would be put up by the people who sent him. He spoke of collectors
who were to head and command the people when they should rise. It was said
there was to be a Convention, similar to the British Convention which met at
Edinburgh. From the Conversation I had with Fairley I gathered there was to be
a rising of the people, and a seizing of soldiers arms.


Robert Orrock, smith, said, ha was a member of the Water of Leith Society, the
Convention, etc. He first heard of arms in March, when in George Ross's house
-- There were present Watt, Mac Ewan, and Downie. The conversation took place
about some speech in the newspaper about arms, and the Goldsmiths-Hall people
had got some, and we should apply for some too. It was said we should not get
them, to which Watt answered -- there was no law in Britan cold prevent us.

Watt called on the witness and wished to look at a weapon he had spoken of,
and showed him a draught of one, which he made, and carried to George Ross's
house, and showed it there to Watt, Downie and others. Some days after, about
the 1st of May, Watt called at the Dean, and desired him to make a few pikes
with cross axes, and two or three dozen of different forms. He asked me how
many I could make a week? I said fifty. He asked if I could get sticks? I said
I might. Some time after Martin Todd called on me from Watt, and asked if I had
made any of the instruments? He again called, and showed me a large one, and
desired I would make one like it -- I said I would not. One William Brown
afterward called, and asked if I was making the pikes! I said I was; but he
asked how we could get sticks, for there were thousands of them wanted. I then
began to be alarmed, for William Brown made all his in secret. Watt afterward
desired me to say they were for the top of a gate. -- At first I thought they
were for the defense of the country. Mr. Watt ordered them, and Mr. Downie was
to pay for them. I have heard of a Committee of Ways and Means, of which Watt
was a member. In the Committee of Union there was a conversation about getting
arms, and I made one for himself.

Martin Todd, smith, remembers going from Watt to Orrock with a pike. Orrock
returned it, and said he was going on with them as fast as possible.

William Brown, smith, said, William Robertson asked me to make some spears for
a Mr. Watt; and when I told him I did not know but I might, he desired me to
call on Watt, which I did, and he showed me a spear, and asked if I would make
some. Mr. Watt afterward called at my shop, when I showed him one half done,
and told him I did not choose to make any more of that kind. He then ordered
spears with sockets. I made fourteen and sent them to Watt's house, when he
gave me a line to David Downie, who paid me the money.

John Fairley sent notice to the Court, that he wished to correct his former
evidence. Being again called to the bar, said, he recollected Watt saying, that
the Banks and the Public Offices were to be seized. Those most against us (the
Aristocratics) were to be seized, and couriers to be sent to the country with
the news. The magistrates of Edinburgh were also to be seized.

William Robertson, schoolmaster, Simon's-square. -- Watt once asked me, if I
knew any smith that could make spears. I mentioned Brown, to whom Watt gave me
a message. I was a member of a society that met in my school. It increased much
after the dispersion of the convention. Their object was universal suffrage and
annual Parliaments. Have heard of a committee of Union. Was secretary to a
general committee. Watt was at that committee when a motion was made for a
committee of emergency. Has heard of a Committee of Ways and Means, and also
that a person went to the north, and another to the west country. There was
greater secresy observed than formerly among the societies of the Friends of
the People, at their meetings.

Walter Miller, merchant in Perth, said he knew a letter which was shown him,
to which he was desired to send an answer, addressed to George Ross,
Liberty-Court, which he did, and once sent 15 l. to Mr. Downie, to relieve
suffering patriots, and to support the cause of Reform.

William M'Ewan was again called into Court. He said he heard Mr. Stoke say he
would do every thing in his power to open a correspondence between T. Hardy,
the secretary to the London Corresponding Society and Watt.

Ques. from the Prisoner. -- Did I wish more than any other member to carry on
this correspondence with Hardy? --


Ans. Yes, you did; and Stoke pointed out a plan to carry on your
correspondence.


(Here the evidence for the Crown closed.)

Mr. William Erskine, Counsel for the prisoner, said that he meant to state as
a defense for Mr. Watt, a correspondence which had passed between him and the
right honorable Henry Dundas, Secretary of State, and the Lord Advocate of
Scotland.

EXCULPATORY PROOF.
James Clerk, Esquire. Sheriff-depute of the county of Edinburgh, said, When Watt
was apprehended, he declined giving any answer to questions, until with the
permission of the Lord Advocate and Mr. Secretary Dundas. He was again examined
next day, when he was told the answer he gave was no answer as to the pikes --
He said, at the second examination, that on his table an advertisement would be
found for the sale of pikes, which he considered as an article of trade, and
thought he would sell them cheaper than any other.

The Lord Advocate was then sworn -- His Lordship said, that in October, 1792,
when Mr. Secretary Dundas came to Scotland, he had several conversations with
him about the state of the societies in Scotland. He then mentioned Mr. Watt's
name, on account of a letter which Watt wrote him, offering his services to
government; in consequence of which an enquiry was made concerning him. As he
was thought faithful, he was trusted by those in power. He gave several pieces
of information, and sometimes came to his Lordship's house, in George's-square
in the evening when dark. One piece of information he gave was, that some
soldiers, on their march from Chatham-Barracks to Perth, had on the road been
tampered with by some persons and Societies of the Friends of the People; but,
on a thorough investigation, the whole story turned out to be a falsehood.

His Lordship said, Watt had sent him a letter in March 1793, mentioning, that
two persons, whom he had reason to believe possessed a good deal of knowledge
with regard to certain plans forming by societies in Scotland, had told him
they could give him a very important piece of intelligence; but this they would
divulge to no one unless 1000 l. was paid down. This letter, his Lordship said,
he showed to Mr. Dundas and Mr. Pit, who agreed with him, that such a demand
could not be complied with, and accordingly an answer to that purpose was sent
to Mr. Watt; but that afterward Watt informed his Lordship, that before the
persons alluded to had spoken to him, they took him bound in a bill for 30 l.
which he paid; this bill his Lordship ordered to be paid. He does not think he
received any letter from Watt since July 1793, nor has seen him since October
last.

(Here the whole Proof closed.)

Mr. Hamilton then addressed the Jury on the part of the prisoner. He stated
the importance of the trial as requiring their most serious attention. It was a
charge, he said, of the most heinous nature, accusing of the highest crime: It
was a case of blood, in which they were to determine on the fate of this
panel. He observed, that by order of Court, the conducting of the pannel's
defense had been entrusted to him, and he now promised, a man of honor, to do
him all the service in his power. This he considered as a duty he owed to him,
and a duty he owed to his own feelings. The crime, he said, was not a direct
attak on the sacred person of his Majesty. If it had, I should not have brought
my voice to life in defense of the criminal.

Mr. Hamilton now entered upon an investigation of the law of treason, and, in
a very masterly manner, went through a voluminous body of law authorities, to
show its nature and distinctions.

He then went over the whole evidence, and combated it in its various parts in
the most able manner. He took notice of the supposed attack on the Castle as an
irrational and extravagantly foolish idea. Of the pikes found, he remarked,
that the smallness of the number was sufficient to prove, they could not be
intended to be used in any serious attack against this country; besides only
seven persons were belonging to this committee who are said to have known of
them. Could seven persons use forty-seven pikes? Could forty-seven pikes take
the Castle, massacre the soldiers, seize the Judges, and overcome the
government? Upon every topic of the evidence, he discanted with great ability,
and particularly alluded to the panel's correspondence with those in power,
saying, that was in order to follow out his plan of obtaining information, that
he had done what was charged against him. His case was similar to that of a spy
in an enemy's camp or army, where it was not only necessary he should wear
their uniform, but also carry arms against the power he meant to serve. Yet,
could it be said, that if such a person is taken by that power who employed him
as a spy, that he should suffer for being taken under such circumstances? He
argued that it was probable the prisoner meant to have given intimation to Mr.
Dundas, of any of these plans that might be forming, so soon as he found it a
proper time to do so. He observed, that it was most unquestionably necessary,
that government should have proper persons to give them intimation of any
improper schemes going on; but, what person will be found so hardy in future,
if this man shall fall in the cause.

After many most ingenious remarks, he concluded by saying, That, if the cup of
this man's iniquity be full, the dregs are bitter, yet he must drink them; but
if otherwise, and he shall yet meet with a deliverance, then it falls to you,
gentlemen of the jury, to dash the cup from his trembling lip, that he may not
taste its bitters.

The Lord Advocate then rose to reply; and said, that as the trial had branched
out so long, he should be as concise as the nature and importance of the case
required. His Lordship observed, that although the learned gentleman who had
preceded him said, that no allusions to the state of affairs in another
country, ought to be mentioned on this occasion, yet, as the similarity of the
plans adopted by the discontented in this country so nearly resembled that
which was so unhappily pursued there, he thought it his duty to say, that what
had appeared in evidence this day, fully justified him in saying, that there
was but too much truth in it. His Lordship urged at great length, and with much
ability, on the laws of Treason, particularly the Statute of Edw. III. and
adduced the opinion of many able English Lawyers in support of his construction
of that Statute. He was clearly of opinion, that the crime laid in the
indictment, whatever constructions his learned brother (Mr. Hamilton) might
give it, was clearly that species of treason, of compassing and imagining the
death of the King.

He then proceeded to sum up the evidence in support of the charge; which he
demonstrated to be clearly and substantially proved; yet, if the Jury were not
of his opinion he should be happy at the acquittal of the prisoner -- as the
Jury were the Judges of that, not he; and if that was the case, none would more
rejoice at such an event than himself, though, from the complexion of the
evidence, there was little hopes of that being the case. His Lordship then
stated to the Jury the nature of the evidence beginning with Hardy's
correspondence with Skirving. He then proceeded to state the proceedings of the
British Convention till its dispersion, which was proved by Ross, Aitchison,
and others -- the proceedings of the London corresponding Society at the Globe
Tavern and Chalk Farm, which was proved by Messrs, Tailor and Gosling. He then
said, he had proved the accession of Watt to the schemes of the Friends of the
People, by his being a member of both the Committees of Union and Ways and
Means, and that he was a principal ringleader of the Committees -- that he had
proposed the plan for the taking of the Castle of Edinburgh, securing the
persons of the Judges, Lord Provost, etc. -- he taking possession of the Banks
and Excise Office, and the attacking and disarming the soldiers. That, at an
after meeting of the committee, he had read an address to the people in form of
a proclamation: That he had dispatched Fairly to the West Country, to see (...)
minds of the people stood affected: That he had employed Orrock and Brown to
make pikes, which were afterward found by Mr. Lockhart and Middleton in Watt's
house. That the types of a feditious hand bill were likewise found in Watt's
house, which was circulated among the fencibles at Dalkeith -- and that, upon
the whole, the indictment with respect to the prisoner was clearly proved by
the concurring testimony of almost all the witness adduced for the Crown. With
regard to the defense set up for the prisoner, that he had gone into all those
schemes merely that he might inform government what was going on among the
Friends of the People, he said this was highly absurd and improbable; for
although for some considerable time he and Mr. Watt had been acquainted, and
Mr. Watt had communicated various pieces of information to him, (...) from the
end of last year, he had joined the Friends of the People, and become an active
(...) among them, without acquainting him or any servant of the Crown, of the
alteration of his conduct. This defense, therefore, could avail him nothing, as
before he joined the Friends of the People he had entirely withdrawn himself
from giving information to the government. He thought, therefore, the Jury
could do no less than find the prisoner guilty.

The right honorable the Lord President then charged the Jury, both with
regard to the law and the fact, with the greatest candor and precision.

The Jury were then attended by two constables to be enclosed. However, they
remained out of court only a few minutes, when they returned.

Clerk of Arraigns said, Gentleman, Have you agreed on your verdict? --


Foreman. Yes.


Clerk of Arraigns. Foreman of this Jury, is the prisoner at the bar, Robert
Watt, guilty of the crime charged against him? --


Foreman. He is GUILTY.


The prisoner was immediately taken from the bar, and the court adjourned till
tomorrow (Friday morning) at eight o'clock.

Counsel for the crown -- The Lord Advocate, Solicitor General, Mr. Anstruther,
Mr. Dundas; Mr. Knapp, Clerk, of Arraigns; Mr. Warrender, Agent.

Counsel for the Prisoner -- Mr. William Erskin, Mr. Rob. Hamilton: Mr.
Ritchie, Agent.

A List of the Jury who tried ROBERT WATT, for High Treason: -- September 3,
1794.
David Clark, Bristow-street. William Hunter, Grocer, Edinburgh. James
Mitchell, Merchant in Leith. John Scougal, Merchant in Leith. William Sibbald,
Merchant in Leith. John Horner, Merchant in Edinburgh. Thomas Hutchenson,
Merchant in Edinburgh. Archibald Campbell, Brewer in Edinburgh. George Kinnier,
Banker in Edinburgh. William Fraser, Tinsmith in Edinburgh. John Andrews,
Grocer in Edinburgh. William Lamb, Upholsterer in Edinburgh.
EDINBURGH, COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, September 5, 1794. TRIAL OF DAVID
DOWNIE.
AT eight o'clock in the morning, the following Judges were present, viz.

The LORD PRESIDENT, LORD CHIEF BARON, BARON NORTON, LORD ESKGROVE, LORD
SWINTON, LORD DUNSINNAN.
The Prisoner being put to the Bar, Mr. Knapp, Clerk of the Arrains, addressed
him as follows:

"The good men now to pass between you and the King, and now to be called, you
may challenge when they are named, but not after they are sworn. Mr. Knapp then
nominated several gentlemen, to twenty-six of whom the prisoner objected, and
they were set aside, and others called. Each juryman, when not objected to by
the prisoner, was sworn in."

List of Mr. Downie's Jury.
Robert Young, Upholsterer. William Fraser, Tin Smith. William Fettes,
Merchant. James Lindsay, Wine Merchant. James Hamilton, Upholsterer. Alexander
Pooton, Sworn Measurer. David Deuchar, Seal Engraver. Charles Robertson,
Painter. George Row, Candle Maker. John Bonnar, Painter. David Milne,
Merchant. John Black, Merchant.
Mr. Knapp then read to the prisoner a brief statement of his Indictment, which
was to the same effect as those charges against Watt.

Mr. Dundas rose, and opened the pleadings on the part of the prosecution.

"Gentlemen of the Jury,

"The prisoner is charged with endeavoring to bring about, or assembling a
Convention, similar in its views with the one which some time ago met in this
City, called the British Convention. He is also accused of procuring, or
causing to be made, arms, or offensive weapons, in order to levy war against
the King, with a determination to resist his royal authority, and compel him to
comply with certain measures, to dismiss his ministers, dissolve the
parliament, and put an end to the war. Another charge is, that he endeavored
to seduce the soldiers from their duty and allegiance; and that shortly, he has
taken such measures as make him accused of compassing and imagining the death
of the King. -- These particulars will be more fully stated by the Counsel who
is now to address you."

The Lord Advocate then rose, and said,

"Gentlemen of the Jury,

"This is an indictment for High Treason, and my duty is to state to you the
law upon that subject, and the general nature and import of the facts which, on
the part of the Crown and the public, I mean to bring evidence to support. It
is your duty, Gentlemen, to consider the whole evidence, and from thence form
what your judgment shall be.

"Gentlemen, it must be well known to you, that at the Union of the two
kingdoms, the system of the treason law of this country suffered an alteration,
founded on the best grounds of expediency; and since that period the treason
law of England had been adopted in this country. Had the Scots treason law
still remained here, those men who are now suffering the punishment of their
crimes in a distant country, would have suffered a capital punishment. To the
honor of the treason law of England it has remained since Edward III. the same
down to this day, and has been the foundation of all the trials for treason
that have taken place since; and it has met the applause of our most celebrated
lawyers, and best historians, and the people have lived happy under it: -- for,
while it guards and protects the life of his Majesty, it is equally careful of
the life of the subject, being a barrier against any overstretched power.

"It includes three distinct cases of treason: 1st, Compassing and imagining
the the death of the King: -- 2d, Levying war against the King: -- 3d,
Adhearing to his enemies. -- The first, viz. compassing and imagining the death
of the King, falls to be, in this case the most material. The second also comes
under your consideration; for endeavoring to levy war, even although it is not
actually levied, falls under the first head, that of compassing and imagining
the death of the King. Since the Union, we have had two rebellions in this
country; but by the special Statute, the persons who were brought to trial for
there concern in them, were tried in the Sister Kingdom. We are the first in
this kingdom who have had the melancholy duty to perform -- that of applying it
upon the present occasion.

"Recent occurrances have shown us the conspiracy that has been formed to
seduce the people from their allegiance, under the specious pretense of Reform,
but really with the purpose of distroying the lawful authorities of the
country, and the fair fabric of our Constitution.

"The Act of Parliament, of which I am now to speak, needs no explanation; yet
for your satisfaction, I will state, not in my own words, but in the words of
the most celebrated English lawyers, there opinion concerning it. -- Here his
Lordship went through a great number of law authorities, Judge Foster, Hawkins,
and Blackstone. One of these, he remarked, said, with regard to compassing the
death of the King, "that the will must be taken for the deed." -- The King is
the head of the body politic, and members are connected under him; and his life
cannot be taken away but it must involve the Nation in blood. If conspirators
meet, and consult to take away the life of the King, every person who has a
previous knowledge, and attends such consultation, if he does not give
information, falls to be presented to a Jury. -- The law does not confine the
crime to a direct attack, but to every attempt at compassing the death of the
King, or seizing his person; for experience has shown, that, between the person
and the grave of princes, the distance is very small. Every attempt even to
seize his person is considered compassing his death: for, the purpose cannot be
effected, without manifest danger to his person.

Gentleman, you all well know, that about two years ago a number of persons
formed clubs and societies, to obtain, as they said, Parliament Reform; but
whatever was their pretense, their real scheme was to subvert the Constitution,
and introduce universal suffrage and annual Parliaments in place of that happy
system under which we so securely live. They accordingly applied to Parliament
by petition, but Parliament, to its immortal honor, discovered what was
couched under it, and rejected their application. Being thus disappointed, some
of these clubs immediately set about other means; for, in a letter in 1792,
from Hardy to Skirving, he says, Our petition has been rejected, therefore, we
must take some more effectual means. We have seen a British Convention in this
country, assuming to itself very high powers indeed, and even going the length
to say, they would watch the motion of Parliament, in case they dared to pass
certain acts, and declaring their determination to resist till compelled to
desist by superior force; and that upon the first intimation given to
introduce a certain act of Parliament, then were they to call a Convention of
Emergency, and erect the standard of rebellion against the legal constituted
authorities of this kingdom.

To the honor of the Chief Magistrate of this city, whose conduct upon that as
upon every other occasion, has procured him the esteem of every good citizen,
he went and dispersed this Convention. Prosecutions were afterward brought
against the ringleaders in these transactions, and they suffered the just
punishment which their crimes merited. -- I will prove said his Lordship, that
the prisoner was a member of this Convention.

Mr. Downie -- My Lord President, I object to the Lord Advocate stating this to
the Jury; for I was formerly a witness in one of these trials, and was told by
the Court, that I never could be charged for my conduct in these matters.

The Lord President said, the Lord Advocate was not to charge him with any
crime committed previous to that trial, but only what was done since.

The Lord Advocate proceeded. "I must show his connection with that Convention
to prove his views the same in the one which was proposed to be held. His
Lordship next proceeded to show that he was a member of the different
Committees of Union and Ways and Means, of acting as Treasure, and collecting
and paying money to promote the Grand Cause, as it was termed. That these
Committees had corresponded with a society in London, who voted the most
calumnious resolutions against the Judges of this country.

"His Lordship then stated his intention to prove the prisoner guilty of
endeavoring to seduce the military from their duty and allegiance, by the
distribution of a hand-bill among the Fencibles at Dalkeith, entitled, "An
Address to the Fencibles." That he was accessory to the plan read by Watt for
taking the Castle, seizing the Judges, Magistrates, etc. and to the embassy
which was sent to the west country, for sounding the dispositions of the
people: that in his capacity of Treasurer to the Committee of Ways and Means,
he paid the smiths who were employed by Watt to make the pikes that he acceded
to the plan of having Collectors appointed, who were to collect the sentiments
of the people, and receive money from them, and likewise to act as Commander
when they were armed.

"His Lordship with great ability expatiated on each of these charges, and
concluded with observing, that if he could prove them to the satisfaction of
the Jury, they doubtless would consider the charge of High Treason as fully
proved. The principle, however, his Lordship observed the Jury should ever keep
in their eye -- the impartial distribution of Justice."

EVIDENCE FOR THE CROWN.
Mr. Scott, Procurator Fiscal, identified papers.

Mr. Cullen, for the prisoner, stated, that he would object to any evidence to
be produced against the prisoner prior to the time he was examined in a late
case, concerning the members of the Convention; for then the Court informed
him, that he never could be called in question for his connection in that
affair.

Mr. Anstruther said, he did not mean to adduce evidence against the prisoner
for prcuring a Convention that had met, but, for endeavoring to procure one to
meet at a future period; and the Council for the prisoner will find that
concerning the evidence they object to, no such count is in the indictment,

Mr. Tailor, London, stated, that a number of Committees were formed in London
and a large meeting held at the Globe Tavern, where they came to sundry
resolutions: as also at Chalk Farm in April. The London Society intended to
meet at Shore-street, but were prevented by the Magistrates.

Cross-Examined. --

Q. How do you amuse yourself? --


Ans. Various ways.


Q. Do you attend any Societies for your amusement? --


A. I did.


Q. Was you ever employed to give information? --


A. No.


Q. Did you take notes? --


A. Yes.


Q. Have you them? --


A. Yes.


Counsel. Produce them, and read part.


(The witness did so,)

Counsel. In what you have now read, it begins John Martin by the appellation
of Citizen Martin, Rose," etc. Now, how came you to particularise this
denomination when all the Members were spoke to by a similar one. --


A. It was a singular style.


Q. Did you take these notes for any other purpose than your own information?


A. For no other purpose.


Q. Did you ever show them to any other person?


A. Never till I was carried before the Privy Council.


Mr. Lauzane, King's messenger, identified some papers he found in Hardy's
house, when he took him into custody.

Alexander Aitcheson, late goldsmith, pointed out several parts of the minutes
of Convention, which he wrote as assistant Secretary.

Q. Was D. Downie a member of the Convention?


Pannel's Council. I again object to such question. If the Council for the
Crown wish to prove that he followed measures similar to those of the British
Convention, they may prove the measures of that society to have been as bad as
imagination can conceive, but they must not attempt to prove that he was a
member, or at all concerned with it.


Counsel for the Crown. I most certainly intend to prove that he had similar
views; and in order to show that he knew the intentions of the British
Convention, it is the best mode to show that he was a member of it.


The Court put the question thus, without saying whether David Downie was a
member of the Convention, say whether he knows that David Downie had access to
know their views?

A. He had.


The witness identified a paper which he had written in the Committee of Union.

George Ross said, a Committee of Union met in his house in March last, and
other times. Downie, Watt, Bonthorn, and Stoke, belonged to it. There was also
another Committee of a greater number. He received from Stoke a printed letter,
and understood similar letters were to be sent to the country. He sent some,
etc. to Paisley, Strahaven, Perth -- on these he wrote, "Show this to your
friends, and send an answer to George Ross, Liberty Court, Edinburgh."

William M'Cubbin, writer, was elected a member of the Committee of Union, in
consequence of an acquaintance of his, who was a member, being bound over to
keep the peace for being in the Play-House-Riots. Downie was a member. The
purpose of the Committee was to cooperate in calling a Convention similar to
the British Convention. There was a Committee of Collectors to collect money to
pay delegates, and relieve those who were suffering for political opinions;
likewise for collecting the sense of the people. The witness was a collector;
Mr. Downie was Treasurer to the whole; Fairley was a collector, and was
appointed convener, and to act always as such. The witness was a member of the
Convention when the Lord Provost dispersed it, and he stated the particulars of
what happened at that time. The Committee of Union was to have met the night
Downie and Watt were apprehended, but on that account did not.

Prisoner. Was it not proposed to establish a library of books?


Ans. Thinks he heard it mentioned in some societies, but not positive.


William Binning said, he was a member of Water of Leith Society. They met
three weeks after the dispersing of the British Convention. They sent delegates
to the Committee of Union, viz. Orrock, Farquharson, and M'Ewan. It was for the
purpose of Reform. There was a collector to take the sense of the people, and
money to support Mr. Skirving. This society gave their money to M'Ewan to pay
to the delegates, or Mrs. Skirving. Mr. Downie was Treasurer to the collectors.

Arthur M'Ewan was a member of the Water of Leith Society, which continued to
meet after the dispersion of the Convention. Was a member of the Committee of
Union, which met in Ross's. There was a Sub-Committee chosen from it,
consisting of seven persons. Downie was one of them. It was afterward called
the Committee of Ways and Means. They were to pay some debt the Convention owed
Skirving, and support his widow. Heard Watt one night read a paper proposing to
seize Lord Chief Justice Clerk, etc. [Here the witness gave the same account of
this paper as he did in the trial of Robt. Watt.] He once saw Downie in Ross's
house with Fairley, Watt, etc. Fairley had come from the West Country. Saw
Fairly lay down 15 s. on the table, which he said he had left, and Downie
desired him to take it up again. Fairley said Paisley was in a state of great
readiness; this he thought was for carrying forward Watt's plan. Watt said he
had 4000 arms to send to Perth. Downie called on the witness at his own house
the day Watt was apprehended, and asked, if he, the witness, had been before
the Sheriff, and what questions had been put to him. He then said, that if he
was called upon, he would say he did not know me, and if I was called upon, he
told me to say I did not know him. Heard William Brown once say he was employed
by Watt, and paid by Downie. Heard Downie say, a very spirited letter had been
received from Perth.

Quest. Did the prisoner, when you was going home with him, the night Watt had
read his plan in the Committee, say he disapproved of it?


Ans. Don't recollect.


William Bonthorn, teacher, was a member of a society at Broughton, which sent
him as a delegate to the Committee of Union, and has seen Downie there. Another
Committee was chosen from the Committee of Union, called the Sub-Committee,
viz. Aitchison, Burk, Stoke, M'Ewn, Watt, Downie, and himself, sometimes called
the Committee of Ways and Means. Saw in the Committee a paper called
Regulations. Two pence were collected from each member, to defray expense.
Downie acted as Treasurer. Collectors were appointed to collect money to send a
delegate to England, to attend a Convention to be formed there. He left this
Committee, because he saw matters coming to a very great length, and also for
another reason relating to the peace of his own family. He thought they were
going great lengths, from hearing a paper read by Watt, when Downie was
present; to which paper M'Ewen objected, as did, the witness, by saying "No,
no; by no means," [Here he gave the same account of the paper as in Watt's
trial.] The Committee met in Watt's house to answer T. Hardy's letter, which
Mr. Stoke was to carry with him. After this night the witness determined to
advertise his withdrawing from the Committee. This he did not advertise. He
shortly after wrote a letter to Mr. Watt, to desire Downie to advance Fairley a
few shillings, as he was going to the country, as he understood, upon the
Committee business -- He took a copy of a paper which he saw in the Committee
of Union, and read it in Broughton Society. The collectors were appointed to
numbers, not to districts. Saw a paper about Fencibles in the Committee. He
considered the paper read by Watt as a sort of frenzy. Mr. Stoke and Mr. Watt
wrote any papers the Committee had to write. Mr. Downie received all the money,
and paid it out.

Mr. Gardner, jeweller, being shown two letters, said, one of them was like Mr.
Downie's writing, and the postscript of the other.

Mr. Mathie, jeweller, being shown two letters, thought one like Mr. Downie's
writing, the other not.

Mr. Hunter, clerk in the bank of Scotland. Shown a bill of 15 l. dated April
7, "Pay to "Walter Miller, Perth." Indorsed, "Pay "to David Downie," and
"Received payment, "David Downie," which he identified.

A letter was now read, signed "David Downie," acknowledging the receipt of
this and giving an account of the riots in the playhouse.

Mr. William Lockhart gave the same account of searching Watt's house, and
finding pikes, which he gave in Mr. Watt's trial.

William Middleton stated, that he was present when pikes were found in Watt's
house, and also got some in Orrock's house at the Dean.

Margaret White, servant to Mr. Downie, said, she has seen a pike in Mr.
Downie's dining room. His son came out of the next room where his bed-room was,
and took it away. Soon after, Mrs. Downie asked Mr. Downie what his son had
done with the Dividing Knife! This was one morning about six o'clock, before
Whitsunday; and when she saw it, she thought she never saw such a dividing
knife before.

Robert Corrock, smith, said he knew of a Committee of Union, and was a member
of it, and Mr. Downie was one. At one meeting of the Society, they read a
newspaper, and there was something in it about an invasion. Watt said, there
were arms came down to the Goldsmith's-hall people, and somebody said we had
better apply for them there. Some other person said we could not get them. Watt
answered there was no law could hinder us. I said, I would make one for myself.
Some time after, Watt called at my shop, and asked if I had made the weapon. I
said I had not, but told him what like it was. It did not please him, and he
marked on the table the form of one he wanted. I made it and carried it to
Ross's house; Watt, Downie, and some others were present -- One said it was too
short in the curve, and then made the shape of one longer; on which Watt and
Downie desired me to keep that in my eye. Watt and Downie ordered me to make a
few dozens of the same kind.

William Brown said he made 15 pikes by Watt's order, to whom he delivered
them, and he gave a line to Downie, who paid him 22 s. 6 d. for the 15 pikes --
the one kind was 1 s. 3 d. each, the other kind 5 s. each. The line to Downie
said, "Pay to Mr. Brown 22 s. 6 d. and I will count with you after.

William Watson, Dalkeith, gave the same account of receiving twenty copies of
an Address to the Fencibles as he did on the trial of Watt, and added, that he
gave one to Elliot and one to Johnston. Some persons said they would be
hurtful, and then he destroyed them.

William Johnson, Dalkeith, said he got a paper from Watson, which he gave to
Sandilands when some soldiers, were there.

James Sandilands, Dalkeith, got a bill from Johnston, and gave it to Sergeant
Hardy.

Sergeant Hardy said, he received a paper from Sandilands, and desired him to
read it. The regiment was then going to England.

Corporal O'Conolly said, when in Dalkeith, a person came to him, and said, you
are all sold to go abroad -- you had better not go. Here is a paper I will show
you. The witness would not take it, but saw on it the word Dundee.

Arcbihald M'Feadzan, soldier, said he got a paper in Dalkeith from a man. He
heard it read -- it was signed Dundee, and said, if he went to England we were
all sold to go abroad -- if we staid at home we would get thousands to help us.

John Geddes, said he saw a man giving away papers in Dalkeith to the soldiers.
He read it -- it said, "Stay at home! O dear brothers, stay at home!"

John Fairly, wright. -- Q. do you know George Ross? -- Ans. Yes; he lives in
the Cowgate, and there it an entry to his house from the South Bridge.

Q. Do you know of any Committee, or was you not a member of some society?


A. A committee sometimes met at Ross's, where I have been; I was a member of
the British Convention and Broughton society, who appointed some members to
meet with the other societies, and chose me Collector.


Q. Did you do any business for that Committee?


A. I was twice or thrice with them; some of the Collectors wanted me to get
them some subscription papers, which I did and went again another night,
telling them I had got them.


Q. Did they employ you in any other business.


A. I once had occasion to go to the west country, to see my sister, who
resides at Airth, and Bonthron gave me a letter to Watt. Watt gave me another
letter to Downie, and told me I would find a parcel at Campbell's, containing
some papers, etc. with directions how to act. On carrying Watt's letter to
Downie, I got 30 s. from him. On calling at Campbell's I got the parcel, which
contained instructions, my commission, which was marked with seals, some
circular letters, etc. with orders to correspond with Downie, and to tell the
different societies to do so likewise.


Q. Was there no plan in the parcel among the other papers, etc.


A. I believe there was.


Q. What was the purport of that plan, or what do you call it; was it a little
plan, a great plan, or a grand plan?


A. It was the plan that Watt mentioned.


Q. Had you no conversation with the Committee about that plan?


A. No, I had none either with Downie or Stock; but Watt conversed with them
about it.


Q. n whom did you call at Sterling?


A. I called on Dr. Forest, with whom I saw a Mr. Thompson.


Why did you call on him? Was you acquainted with him before?


A. No, I was not; but had heard in Edinburgh that he was a friend to freedom.


Q. What was the subject of your conversation with him?


A. I told him the news in Edinburgh and he told me the news in Stirling.


Q. Did you not show him your papers, and tell him something about making pikes
at Edinburgh?


A. Yes, I did in the presence of Mr. Thompson, and others that were there, and
drew a pike on the table; saying, Watt told me they were for self-defence.


Q. What said they was the news at Stirling?


A. They told me their societies were not numerous -- were willing to assist us
about Edinburgh with money, but could not in any thing else.


Q. What did you understand from these words, nothing else?


A. I only understood from these words that the Societies were not numerous.


Q. Did they seem happy when you told them of making pikes at Edinburgh?


A. They seemed neither happy nor sorry at it.


Q. Where went you from Stirling, and whom did you call at next?


A. I went to St. Ninian's and called on a Mr. M'Cross, a relief minister, and
a Mr. Brown, a writer.


Q. Where next?


A. To Kilsyth, and called on Mr. Anderson, a minister, and a Mr. Yule.


Q. You was at Glasgow; whom did you call on there?


A. I called on a Mr. Sinclair there; he was not in when I called first.


Q. Where went you on missing Sinclair?


A. I went to the reading-room.


Q. What sort of a place is this reading-room?


A. A house where pamphlets and newspapers are read.


Q. Did you know any of the persons you saw in the reading-room?


A. I did not.


Q. You was at other places before Glasgow?


A. I went to Kirkintilloch and Campsie, and showed my instructions to the
Friends in all the places I visited.


Q. Where went you on leaving Glasgow?


A. To Paisley, and called on Mr. Hasty there; after which I came home to
Edinburgh.


Q. Where went you first on your arrival in Edinburgh?


A. I went to my Father's, then to the Committee at Ross's.


Q. Who found you there, and what conversation passed?


A. I found Watt, Downie, and M'Ewan there, and told them that the Friends were
in general hearty.


Q. Did you return your instructions and commission to the Committee?


A. They were to be returned to the clerk of the committee, but I returned them
to Watt. I do not know whether the Committee knew what they contained.


Here Mr. John Clerk, one of the Counsel for the panel, stood up, and begged
the Jury to attend to what the witness had said, viz. that he had returned his
instructions and commission to Watt, and was uncertain whether the Committee
knew what directions they contained.

Q. Did you pay your own expenses on the road?


A. No; I got 30 s. from Downie; spent 15 s. and on returning the other 15 s.
they gave it me back.


Q. When you went to Airth to see your sister, did you usually take a
round-about jaunt? --


A. No, I did not.


Q. Why did you not carry pikes to the collectors when Watt desired you?


A. I did not like to do that; I was afraid of being blamed for distributing
them.


Q. What passed between you and the Committee on your return?


A. I gave Watt a list of persons, and their places of residence, that might be
in future corresponded with.


Q. Did you not inform the Committee of what you had done in your journey?


A. No, I was uncertain whether they knew any thing of my instructions -- as I
got them through Watt, I returned them again to him.


When the evidence was closed,

Mr. Cullen then rose to charge the Jury on the part of the prisoner, which he
did in an ingenious and argumentative speech, which lasted upwards of three
hours. He began with laying down the law of the case, in which he differed very
much from the Counsel on the other side. He read several quotations, from which
he drew this general inference, that although the indictment charged the
prisoner with compassing and imagining the death of the King, no such crime had
been committed -- for the highest part of the crime charged, even allowing it
to be true, was no more than a sort of Constructive Treason, which the law was
very cautious in with meddling. He next proceeded to comment upon the evidence,
the first part of which, he said, proved nothing of the charge of treason; it
only went to this, that the prisoner, along with a number of other persons,
some in a high and some in a low situation of life, had been active and zealous
to procure a reform in the representation of this country. If the prisoner
carried his notions in this business only as far as some other members of the
British Convention had done, he ought to have been tried for sedition, which
very probably might have been found a good charge against him; but there was no
reason to presume, from all this, that his being concerned in the cause of
Reform, implicated him in the charge of high treason, which, he was sure, a
candid view of the evidence would not make out.

Mr. Cullen next mentioned, that part of the evidence which regarded the taking
of the Castle of Edinburgh; massacreing the soldiers; seizing the Judges, etc.
which said he, was one of the wildest phrenzies that ever entered into the head
of man. This was not the plan of the prisoner, but of Watt; he alone was the
former and promoter of that diabolical business: but, he remarked, it is here
attempted to be proved, that the prisoner and Watt were equally guilty in this
matter -- this was by no means the case; for, though the prisoner was a member
of the British Convention, and afterward of the Committees of Union and Ways
and Means, yet the intention of these Committees was not to promote the
treasonable plans and projects of Mr. Watt, but only to collect money to carry
the plan of reform into effect, and for succouring some of their suffering
friends. It had been attempted to be proved, that the prisoner had both
employed and paid for making pikes, but the employment has not so completely
proved as the law directs, and as to the money paid to William Brown, it was
entirely on Watt's account. With regard to the evidence of Fairley, to whom
likewise the prisoner paid money; he certainly did so, on account of the
Committee of Ways and Means; not to promote the plans of Watt, but merely to
see how the the People in the country stood affected with regard to pursuing
the plan of Reform: if he went farther, it was in consequence of a private
understanding between him and Watt, which the prisoner knew nothing of. The
rest of the evidence Mr. Cullen argued in a strain of very ingenious reasoning,
amounting to nothing that could in the most distant manner, affect the
prisoner, and, on these grounds, he hoped, the Jury would be of opinion with
him, that the charge had not been sufficiently proved, and would, therefore,
acquit the prisoner.

Mr. Cullen pleaded the cause of his unfortunate client with a zeal and ability
that did him great honor.

Mr. Anstruther, on the part of the crown, replied. He said he was exceedingly
sorry to say, that from his opinion of the evidence produced, the charge was
completely proved against the prisoner. He then took a pretty extensive view of
the Law of Treason, in which he differed very much from Mr. Cullen: he said, it
was by no means the case of Constructive Treason, but a deliberate plan to
overturn the government and Constitution of this country, and therefore came
fairly under that part of the statute of Edward III. of compassing and
imagining the death of the King. He next proceeded to the evidence produced,
beginning at the first motion of a design to call a second Convention, which
design he said, was clearly and distinctly proved. The next part of the
evidence was the prisoner's conduct as a member of the committees of Union and
Ways and Means, whose views Mr. Cullen said were solely to promote the cause of
reform; but he differed very much from him with regard to this. Mr. Anstruther
said, for taking the correspondence of Hardy and Skirving; the proceedings of
the British Convention; the meetings held at the Globe Tavern, and Chalk Farm,
upon the principles held out by themselves, and upon whose resolutions those
committees acted. what was their language? Was it to petition the King, or
petition Parliament? -- No! it was, as all their proceedings bear, to do
something stronger than to petition -- It was to effect their purpose by force,
which they said petitioning had not been able to do. There could be no doubt
this was treasonable, and, the evidence fully justified him in saying the
prisoner had acceded to every particular. He next adverted to the plan of
taking the Castle of Edinburgh, etc. which plan no doubt was Watt's -- but the
prisoner did not dissent from that plan, as Mac-Ewen and Bonthorn had done, nor
absent himself from the committees; but, on the contrary, he along with Watt
employed Orrock to make the pikes -- paid money to Brown for making them -- to
Fairley to enable him to go to the West country upon their business. In short,
the prisoner completely acceded to every part of Watt's plan; and beside s all
this, the evidence fully proved, that a pike was found in the prisoner's house,
and that he was concerned in circulating the seditious hand-bill, tending to
debauch the mind of the Fencibles of this country; a copy of which hand-bill
was clearly traced to the prisoner. Mr. Anstruther now took notice of the great
pains that had been taken by some evil-minded people to seduce the lower ranks
in this country from their duty and allegiance; and respecting this he gave an
elegant quotation from the Roman Historian Livy, the purport of which was, that
when the lower orders of the people rose against the Constituent Authority of a
country, the consequence was, that nothing but anarchy and confusion ensued,
and that country was completely wretched. He concluded with saying, that no
doubt remained in his mind, that the charge was completely proved; if, however,
the Jury thought otherwise, he would be happy at the acquittal of the prisoner.

Mr. Anstruther spoke an hour and fifty minutes, in a cool, deliberate, and
elegant manner, and was listened to with the greatest attention by all present
in court.

The Lord President then proceeded to charge the Jury. He began with saying, at
a future period it would no doubt surprise posterity to hear, that in this
enlightened age crimes such as that charged on the prisoner, could be
committed. This country was not now what it had been some hundred years ago,
when civil liberty was ill understood, when agriculture and commerce were not
attended to, and when the nobles and heads of clans usurped a despotic power
over their vassals and dependants. Then nothing was heard but family broils,
and endless quarrels for power and plunder. -- Happily, things were now changed
for the better -- the power of the nobles was restricted, commerce,
agriculture, and arts flourished, and the people, from idleness and poverty,
were rich and industrious. Was it not astonishing then, said his Lordship, that
a period when the country was so prosperous, discontents should arise from
causes, of which our forefathers had never thought or heard; doctrines should
be broached, which, if acted upon, would completely subvert all order in
society, and plunge this country into all the misery and wretchedness which so
unhappily prevailed in a neighboring nation.

To illustrate this, his lordship read an extract from a speech delivered in
the Irish Parliament, and a quotation from an eminent author, who tells the
following story: -- Suppose, says the author, a ship went to sea completely
manned; the crew acting upon these new principles say, Why is this man captain?
Why is this man at the helm? Are we not his equals, and are not our abilities
equally good with the person at the helm? -- From words they proceed to
actions, and deprive the officers of their command; they then elect others to
succeed them from among themselves, throw off all restraint, get drunk, and in
consequence of this the vessel drives among rocks, is lost and every person on
board perishes. Such, said his Lordship, must be the case if ignorant men, who
will not obey the wholesome restraints of Law, were to assume to themselves the
Legislative and Executive Power of a Country.

His Lordship next proceeded to give a clear and distinct view of the Laws of
Treason, in particular that statute upon which his indictment was laid. He
said, that it was a happy thing for this country, that at the Union the Treason
Laws of both countries were made one, as it prevented all uncertainty about
them; the Treason Laws being as well understood as any part of the crimal
Jurisprudence of this kingdom.

His Lordship then commented upon the different parts of the evidence, pointing
out with great precision and candor what was for, and what was against, the
prisoner, leaveing the whole with the Jury. If they found there was not proof
sufficient to convict the prisoner, or if there was even a doubt in there minds
of his guilt, they ought to acquit him, as mercy should always lean to the side
of the prisoner; but if on the contrary, they were satisfied of his guilt, then
they were to bring in their verdict accordingly.

His Lordship spoke above an hour, in his usual able (...) candid manner.

The Jury then withdrew, and after a deliberation of forty minutes, returned
with a verdict -- GUILTY.

Counsel for the crown -- The Lord Advocate, Solicitor General, Mr. Anstruther,
Mr. Dundas: Mr. Knapp, Clerk of Arraigns: Mr. Warrender, Agent.

Counsel for the prisoner -- Mr. Robert Cullen, Mr. John Clerk, Mr. A.
Fletcher: Mr. John Dillon, Agent.

September 6th.
This day the Court met, and the Prisoners being put to the Bar. The judgment
of the Court was, that you Robert Watt, and you, David Downie, be taken from
the Bar to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be drawn upon a
Hurdle to the place of execution, there to be hanged by the neck, but not till
you are dead, for then you are to be taken down, your Hearts to be cut out, and
your Bowels burned before your Faces, your Heads and Limbs severed from your
bodies and held up to public view, and your bodies shall remain at the disposal
of his majesty, and the Lord have mercy on your Souls.


