REPORT OF A CASE, DECIDED ON SATURDAY, the 16 th of NOVEMBER, 1793, IN THE
GENERAL COURT OF VIRGINIA; WHEREIN PETER KAMPER, was Plaintiff, AGAINST MARY
HAWKINS, Defendant; ON A QUESTION ADJOURNED FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF
DUMFRIES, FOR NOVELTY AND DIFFICULTY, touching the CONSTITUTIONALITY OF AN ACT
OF ASSEMBLY; Together with ARGUMENTS and OPINIONS of the respective JUDGES at
LARGE, and the ORDER of COURT thereon.

PUBLISHED WITH THEIR PERMISSION.

BY A GENTLEMAN OF THE BAR.

Philadelphia: PRINTED FOR A. M'KENZIE, and Co. No. 126, South Front-street, BY
W. W. WOODWARD, Franklin's Head, No. 36, Chesnut-street. 1794.

Entered according to the LAWS of CONGRESS.

THE CASE, ARGUMENTS AND DECISION, OF THE COURT.
The adjournment of this Case originated in novelty and difficulty, touching
the constitutionality, or judicial propriety of the judges of the DISTRICT
COURT, carrying the following clause of an act of the General Assembly into
execution, which was conceived to be opposed to, or in direct violation of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia.

The title and clause of the said act are thus:

An Act reducing into one, the several Acts concerning the Establishment,
Jurisdiction, and Powers of District Courts.

("Passed, December 12, 1792.")

SECT. XI. Each of the said District Courts in term time, or any Judge thereof
in vacation, shall, and may have and exercise the same power of granting
injunctions to stay proceedings on any judgment obtained in any of the said
District Courts, as is now had and exercised by the Judge of the High Court of
Chancery in similar cases, and the said District Courts may proceed to the
dissolution or final hearing of all suits commencing by injunction, under the
same rules and regulations as are now prescribed by law for conducting similar
suits in the High Court of Chancery.

The RECORD, ARGUMENTS, and DECISION, here follow.
At a DISTRICT COURT, held at Dumfries, the twenty-third day of May, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-three.
Present, the Honorable Spencer Roane, Esquire

PETER KAMPER, us. MARY HAWKINS, Upon a motion for an injunction to stay the
proceedings on a judgment obtained at the last term held for this district, by
Mary Hawkins, against the said Peter Kamper, under an Act of Assembly,
entitled, an Act reducing into one, the several acts concerning the
establishment, jurisdiction, and power of District Courts.

The Court is of opinion, that the said question should be adjourned to the
General Court for novelty and difficulty, as to the Constitutionality of the
said Law in this behalf. Whereupon,

At a General Court held at the capitol in the city of Richmond, on Saturday
the ninth day of November, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-three.

Present, Saint George Tucker.

And from thence continued by adjournments until Saturday, November 16, 1793.

Present, St. George Tucker, John Tyler, James Henry, Spencer Roane, and
William Nelson, jun. Esquires, Judges.

The Honorable, the Judges, delivered their respective opinions touching the
case aforesaid, in the following manner:

JUDGE NELSON.
THIS is a motion for an injunction, adjourned from the District Court of
Dumfries, on the constitutionality of the eleventh section of the
District-Court law Passed in 1792.
, which gives the District-Court in term time, or a Judge thereof in vacation,
the same power of granting injunctions to stay proceedings on any judgment
obtained in a district-court, and of proceeding to the dissolution or final
hearing of suits commencing by injunction, under the same rules and regulations
as are now prescribed to the High Court of Chancery.

I shall consider the question under two points.

First. Whether, if this clause be contrary to the constitution of this
Commonwealth, it can be executed.

And, Secondly. Whether it be contrary to the constitution.

I. As to the first point, although it has been decided by the Judges of the
court of Appeals, (whether judicially or not is another question,) that a law
contrary, to the constition is void -- I beg leave to make a few observations
on general principles.

The difference between a free and an arbitrary government I take to be -- that
in the former limits are assigned to those to whom the administration is
committed; but the latter depends on the will of the departments or some of
them. Hence the utility of a written constitution.

In the American edition of the Encyclopaedia, Constitution in matters of
policy, signifies the form of government established in any country or kingdom.

Constitution also denotes an ordinance, decision, regulation, or law made by
authority, superior ecclesiastical or civil.

That the word Constitution in the title of the instrument under consideration,
is not synonymous with ordinance or law, (as seems to be the opinion of the
able author of "Notes on Virginia,) but is used in the former sense is evident
from its being called "the Constitution, or form of government, etc."


A Constitution is that by which the powers of government are limited.

It is to the Governors, or rather to the departments of Government, what a law
is to individuals -- nay it is not only a rule of action to the branches of
government, but it is that from which their existence flows, and by which the
powers, (or portions of the right to govern) which may have been committed to
them, are prescribed -- It is their commission -- nay it is their Creator.

The calling this instrument The Constitution or form of Government, shows that
the framers intended it to have this effect, and I shall presently endeavor to
obviate the objection arising from the want of their appointment in form.

The present question is whether an act of the legislature contrary to it, be
valid?

See second Section of the Constitution.
This is the paper by which the delegates and representatives of the people,
viewing with concern the deplorable situation to which this country must have
been reduced unless some regular adequate mode or civil polity, had been
speedily adopted, did ordain and declare the future form of government to be as
there set forth.

This is the paper which divides the government into three distinct
departments, with one exception That Justices of the County Courts are eligible
to either House of Assembly.
.

This is the very paper under which there are two branches of legislature now
assembled.

This is the very paper under which they are to meet once every year, or
oftener.

This is the very paper which gives them their style -- of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF VIRGINIA.

This is the very paper which calls one house the House of Delegates, and the
other the Senate.

This is the very paper which declares that the former shall consist of two
representatives from each county, chosen by freeholders, etc.

This is the very paper which fixes the number of the Senate to twenty-four --
which defines the number that shall compose a house of senate, -- under which
the state is to be divided into twenty-four districts.

Which declares that each county shall vote for a senator, who besides other
qualifications shall be twenty-five years of age -- that a comparison of polls
shall be made by the sheriffs, who are to return the person having the greatest
number of votes.

That a certain number are to be displaced by rotation.

That writs may issue from each house for supplying vacancies -- And --

That all laws shall originate in the House of delegates subject to amendment
by the senate, except money bills.

I ask then, whether the legislature do not sit under the Constitution?

The answer in the affirmative to me is inevitable.

But it may be objected that, although the legislature would be bound by a
fundamental regulation, made by a convention or other body delegated expressly
for such a purpose, the body who formed this, not having been thus specially
appointed, -- this act possesses not sufficient sanctity; but is an act equal
only to those of a common legislature because some acts passed in the same
session are confessedly so.

Here let it be remembered that the question is not whether the people can
change it; but whether the legislature can do so.

As to the powers of the Convention, this body seems to have been appointed,
not only to see that the Commonwealth sustained no injury, but also to consult
in general for the public good, and in such a crisis as that at which our
government was formed, those who are delegated have authority more extensive
than a legislature appointed under a government, one object of which is to
restrain that as well as the other departments, -- whereas in the former case
the people alone can decide whether these powers have been strained too far.

As to some acts of the same session being temporary and others revocable by
the legislature. --

I answer, that the subject matter of them will evince which are intended to be
of this nature, and if any were designed to be permanent, they must be so until
changed by the people, unless indeed calling these ordinances and the other a
See note, page 8.
Constitution, sufficiently manifest a design that this should be of higher
authority than those.

It is confessedly the assent of the People which gives validity to a
Constitution.

May not the people then, by a subsequent acquiescence and assent give a
Constitution, under which they have acted for seventeen years as much validity,
at least so long as they acquiesce in it, as if it had been previously
expressly authorized?

The people have received this as a Constitution. The magistrates and officers
down to a constable (for even the mode of his appointment is directed) have
been appointed under it.

The people have felt its operation and acquiesced.

Who then can change it?

I answer, the PEOPLE alone.

But it has been supposed that the legislature can do this.

To decide this question I have already stated that the legislature derive
their existence from the Constitution.

It may be answered that those Members who passed the law under contemplation
were elected under the act of 1785.

But who held the election? Who was to decide in case of an equality of votes?
and, who certified the persons elected? -- The sheriff under the law. Who
appointed the sheriff? -- The executive. -- By what authority? -- Under the
fifteenth article of this Constitution, which the legislature from their acts
acknowledge to be inviolable. See the Appendix for reference to the particular
laws.


If then the legislature were elected at an election holden by, and were
returned by a sheriff, who derives his commission from the Constitution, does
not that body derive its existence from the same source?

And can the legislature impugn that charter under which they claim, and to
which by their acts they themselves have acknowledged an obligation? -- I
apprehend not, nor can any argument against this position be drawn from an
acquiescence in some acts which may be unconstitutional.

1st. Because we may presume, that if there be any such, their
unconstitutionality has not yet been discovered by the legislature, which, if
it had been done, (from the instance before recited, and some other instances)
we have reason to think, would have produced a similar declaration from that
body. -- And

2dly, Because no individual may have yet felt the operation of them, and
consequently they have not been brought to investigation.

But the greatest objection still remains, that the judiciary, by declaring an
act of the legislature to be no law, assumes legislative authority, or claims a
superiority over the legislature.

In answer to this, -- I do not consider the judiciary as the champions of the
people, or of the Constitution, bound to sound the alarm, and to excite an
opposition to the legislature. -- But, when the cases of individuals are
brought before them judicially, they are bound to decide.

And, if one man claim under an act contrary to the Constitution, that is,
under what is no law, if my former position, that the legislature cannot impugn
the Constitution, and consequently that an act against it is void -- be just,)
must not a court give judgment against him? There are but three lines of
conduct, one of which must be pursued on such an occasion, -- either

1st, To refuse to decide the question at all, which would be a dereliction of
duty, or

2dly, To wait for the legislature to decide whether the act be
unconstitutional, which would be contrary to that article in the Constitution,
which declares, that the legislative, executive, and judiciary departments
shall be separate and distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly
belonging to the other. -- since to decide whether the plaintiff or the
defendant under the existing laws have a right, is a judicial act, and to
decide whether the act be a void law as to a right vested or in litigation, is
in fact to decide which of the parties have the right.

There remains therefore when the question occurs, but one thing to be done by
the judiciary, -- which is,

3dly, To decide that the act is void, and therefore that the claimant under it
cannot succeed.




Nor is it a novelty for the judiciary to declare, whether an act of the
legislature be in force or not in force, or in other words, whether it be a law
or not.

In many instances one statute is virtually repealed by another, and the
judiciary must decide which is the law, or whether both can exist together.

The only difference is that in one instance that which was once in existence
is carried out of existence, by a subsequent act virtually contrary to it, and
in the other the prior fundamental law has prevented its coming into existence
as a law.

With respect to the idea that for the judiciary to declare an act of the
legislature void, -- is to claim a superiority to the legislature, -- if the
legislative authority is derived from the Constitution, and such a decision be
a judicial act (as I have endeavored to prove) this objection seems to be
refuted.

For the reasons which I have given, I am of opinion that the fundamental act
of government controuls the legislature, who owe their existence and powers to
it -- this concludes the first point --

That if the clause under consideration be unconstitutional, it is void.

II. The second point -- whether it be unconstitutional is next to be
considered.

By the fourteenth section of the Constitution, "the two houses of Assembly
shall, by joint ballot, appoint Judges of the Supreme Court of Appeals, and
general court, Judges in Chancery, Judges of Admiralty, etc."

I was at first inclined to think that the insertion of the word Judges between
the General Court and Chancery, evinced an intention that the judges of the
general court and those in chancery should be distinct persons; but perhaps it
would be unjustifiable to rest such an opinion on so critical a construction.

However this opinion is supported by the sixteenth and seventeenth sections.

By the sixteenth the governor and others offending against the state, by
mal-administration, corruption, etc. are impeachable before the general court.
And --

By the seventeenth the judges of the general court are to be impeached before
the court of appeals. -- This might prove then that a judge of the general
court could not according to the Constitution be a judge of the supreme court
of appeals, because all officers (except the judges of the general court,) are
to be tried before the general court; but Judges of the general court are to be
tried before the court of appeals -- and the Constitution intended to prevent a
man being tried in that court of which he is a member; because in causes which
might give rise to an impeachment, the judges of a court might act jointly, and
the influence of partiality or an esprit du Corpse was to be guarded against.

However to decide whether a judge of the general court could be a judge of the
court of appeals, would be extrajudicial as that question is not before the
court, but this research enables me to decide the question that is before the
court -- that is, whether the same person can under the Constitution be a judge
in chancery, and a judge of the general court? -- I think that he cannot for
these reasons --

A judge in chancery is to be tried before the general court. -- A judge of the
general court cannot be a judge in chancery, because a judge in chancery must
be tried before the general court; but if a judge of the general court be a
judge in chancery, then he (a judge of the general court) will be tried in the
general court which is against the seventeenth article, which declares that a
judge of the general court shall be impeached before the court of appeals.

My inference is that a judge in chancery and a judge of the general court were
intended under the Constitution to be distinct individuals.

This is one reason against the law; but there are others also of force --
Whoever is appointed a judge in chancery under the Constitution must be elected
by joint ballot, and commissioned by the governor; neither of which
requisitions have been complied with.

On the whole, I am for certifying to the court below, That the motion for an
injunction be overruled, the clause under which it is prayed being
unconstitutional.

JUDGE ROANE.
THIS great question was adjourned by me from the district court of Dumfries. I
thought it necessary to obtain the opinion of this court, for the government of
the several district courts, who might otherwise have differed in their
construction of the clause in question, and the administration of the law in
this instance been consequently partial.

My opinion then was upon a short consideration, that the district courts ought
to execute this law; for I doubted how far the judiciary were authorized to
refuse to execute a law, on the ground of its being against the spirit of the
Constitution.

My opinion, on more mature consideration, is changed in this respect, and I
now think that the judiciary may and ought not only to refuse to execute a law
expressly repugnant to the Constitution; but also one which is by a plain and
natural construction, in opposition to the fundamental principles thereof.

I consider the people of this country as the only sovereign power. -- I
consider the legislature as not sovereign but subordinate, they are subordinate
to the great constitutional charter, which the people have established as a
fundamental law, and which alone has given existence and authority to the
legislature. I consider that at the time of the adoption of our present
Constitution, the British government was at an end in Virginia: it was at an
end, because among many other weighty reasons very emphatically expressed in
the first section of our Constitution, George the third heretofore entrusted
with the exercise of the kingly office in this colony had abandoned the helm of
government, and declared us out of his allegiance and protection.

The people were therefore at that period, they were at the period of the
election of the Convention, which formed the Constitution, absolved from the
former kingly government, and free, as in a state of nature, to establish a
government for themselves. But admitting for a moment that the old government
was not then at an end, I assert that the people have a right by a convention,
or otherwise, to change the existing government, whilst such existing
government is in actual operation, for the ordinary purposes thereof. The
example of all America in the adoption of the federal government and that of
several of the states in changing their state constitutions in this temperate
and peaceable manner, undeniably proves my position. The people of Virginia,
therefore, if the old government should not be considered as then at an end,
permitted it to proceed, and by a convention chosen by themselves, with full
powers, for they were not restrained, established then a constitution.

This Convention was not chosen under the sanction of the former government; it
was not limited in its powers by it, if indeed it existed, but may be
considered as a spontaneous assemblage of the people of Virginia, under a
recommendation of a former convention, to consult for the good of themselves,
and their posterity. They established a bill of rights purporting to appertain
to their posterity, and a constitution evidently designed to be permanent. This
constitution is sanctioned by the consent and acquiesence of the people for
seventeen years; and it is admitted by the almost universal opinion of the
people, by the repeated adjudications of the courts of this commonwealth, and
by very many declarations of the legislature itself, to be of superior
authority to any opposing act of the legislature. The celebrated Vattel in a
passage of his, which I will not fatigue this audience by quoting, denies to
the ordinary legislature the power of changing the fundamental laws "for, says
he, it is necessary that the Constitution of the state be fixed."

But if the legislature may infringe this Constitution, it is no longer fixed;
it is not this year what it was the last; and the liberties of the people are
wholly at the mercy of the legislature.

A very important question now occurs, viz. whose province it is to decide in
such cases. It is the province of the judiciary to expound the laws, and to
adjudge cases which may be brought before them -- the judiciary may clearly say
that a subsequent statute has not changed a former for want of sufficient
words, though it was perhaps intended it should do so. It may say too that an
act of assembly has not changed the Constitution though its words are express
to that effect, because a legislature must have both the power and the will (as
evidenced by words) to change the law, and it is conceived for the reasons
above mentioned that the legislature have not power to change the fundamental
laws. In expounding laws the judiciary considers every law which relates to the
subject: would you have them to shut their eyes against that law which is of
the highest authority of any, or against a part of that law, which either by
its words or by its spirit, denies to any but the people the power to change
it? In cases where the controversy before the court, does not involve the
private interest or relate to the powers of the judiciary, they are not only
the proper, but a perfectly disinterested tribunal; -- e. g. if the Legislature
should deprive a man of the trial by jury -- there the controversy is between
the legislature on one hand, and the whole people of Virginia (through the
medium of an individual) on the other, which people have declared that the
trial by jury shall be held sacred.

In other cases where the private interest of judges may be affected, or where
their constitutional powers are encroached upon, their situation is indeed
delicate, and let them be ever so virtuous they will be censured by the ill
disposed part of their fellow citizens: but in these cases, as well as others,
they are bound to decide, and they do actually decide on behalf of the people
-- for example, though a judges is interested privately in preserving his
independence, yet it is the right of the people which should govern him, who in
their sovereign character have provided that the judges should be independent;
so that it is in fact a controversy between the legislature and the people,
though perhaps the judges may be privately interested. The only effect on the
judges in such case should be, to distrust their own judgment if the matter is
doubtful, or in other words to require clear evidence before they decide in
cases where interest may possibly warp the judgment.

From the above premises I conclude that the judiciary may and ought to adjudge
a law unconstitutional and void if it be plainly repugnant to the letter of the
Constitution, or the fundamental principles thereof. By fundamental principles
I understand, those great principles growing out of the Constitution, by the
aid of which, in dubious cases, the Constitution may be explained and preserved
inviolate; those landmarks, which it may be necessary to resort to, on account
of the impossibility to foresee or provide for, cases within the spirit but
without the letter of the Constitution.

To come now more immediately to the question before the court; can those who
are appointed judges in chancery, by an act of assembly, without ballot, and
without commission during good behavior, constitutionally exercise that
office? -- The fourteenth article of the Virginia Constitution recites that the
people have a right, to uniform government; and therefore, that no government
separate from, or independent of, the government of VIRGINIA, ought to be
erected or established within the limits thereof. Here then is a general
principle pervading all the courts mentioned in the Constitution -- from which
without an exception we ought not to depart -- If those may be judges who are
not appointed by joint ballot, but by an act of assembly, the senate have in
that instance more power than the Constitution intended; for they control the
other branch, by their negative upon the law, whereas if they mixed with that
branch in a joint ballot, a plurality of votes of senators and delegates would
decide.

If there can be judges in chancery who have no commission during good
behavior, their tenure of office is absolutely at the will of the legislature,
and they consequently are not independent. The people of Virginia intended that
the judiciary should be independent of the other departments: they are to judge
where the legislature is a party, and therefore should be independent of it,
otherwise they might judge corruptly in order to please the legislature, and be
consequently continued in office. It is an acknowledged principle in all
countries, that no man shall be judge in his own cause; but it is nearly the
same thing, where the tribunal of justice is under the influence of a party. If
the legislature can transfer from constitutional to legislative courts, all
judicial powers, these dependent tribunals being the creatures of the
legislature itself, will not dare to oppose an unconstitutional law, and the
principle I set out upon, viz. that such laws ought to be opposed would become
a dead letter, or in other words, this would pave the way to an uncontrolled
power in the legislature. The constitution requires the concurrence of the
legislature to appoint, and the executive to commission a judge: -- but an
appointment by act of assembly, will invest with this high power one who has
not the sanction of the executive; and will throw a new office upon a man,
without the liberty of declining such appointment, if he thinks proper. For
these reasons, and others which it would be tedious to enumerate, I am of
opinion, that the clause in question, is repugnant to the fundamental
principles of the Constitution in as much as the judges of the general court
have not been ballotted for and commissioned as judges in chancery, pursuant to
the fourteenth article of the Constitution.

Mr. ROANE then said, "Although it is not in my opinion now necessary to
decide, whether the offices of a judge in chancery and of the general court,
may be united in the same person or not, supposing a constitutional appointment
to have been made of the same person to each -- yet in as much as this question
is in some measure involved in the one just discussed, I will give my present
impressions upon it, leaving myself free to decide hereafter the one way or the
other, should it come judicially before me.

The constitution has declared that the three departments of government should
be separate and distinct. -- There are great political evils which would arise
from their union: -- for example, if according to Montesquieu, the members of
the legislature were also members of the judiciary, the same man would as a
legislator make a tyrannical law, and then as a judge would enforce it
tyrannically. -- This union it is evident would produce a complete despotism.

It is therefore a fundamental principle not only of our constitution, but
acknowledged by all intelligent writers, to be essential to liberty, that such
an union should not take place.

But is there any great political evil resulting from the same persons being a
judge in chancery, and of the general court?

Is there any constitutional impediment? -- It would be wise in the legislature
to keep the offices separate; for an union of several functions in one person,
will put it out of his power to be perfect in either, and the commonwealth will
be better served by dividing than by accumulating the public duties.

But it has been said, and I confess with great force, that in as much as the
judges in chancery are to be tried, on impeachment, before the general court,
if the judges of the general court are also judges in chancery, they in their
latter character must be tried before themselves in their former, and
consequently there will be a defect of an impartial tribunal. I can only answer
this objection by saying, that the former court of appeals was composed of the
judges of the general court, court in chancery, and admiralty. -- The
legislature might have so organized the said Courts as to have had nine-tenths
of the court of appeals members of the general court.

The judges of the general court are by the constitution to be tried before the
court of appeals, i. e. under that organization, before themselves; -- and the
judges of appeals before the general court, which would produce the same
dilemma.

This case then is precisely similar to the case before us. -- And yet the
judges of the court of appeals did in the remonstrance of May, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty eight, declare that the forming the court of appeals,
so as to consist of all the judges is no violation of the constitution; thereby
overruling the objection which must have occurred in that case as will as in
this.

Upon the whole I must say, that however inconvenient and unwise it might be to
unite these distinct offices in the same person; -- however in the case that
has been supposed, there might be a defect of an impartial, tribunal to try an
offending chancellor upon an impeachment; -- still not seeing any express
provision in, or fundamental principle of, the constitution, restricting the
power of the legislature in this respect; and grounding myself upon the above
recited opinion of the former court of appeals as to the constitutionality of
the union of offices which then existed in that body; -- My present impressions
are, that there is no constitutional impediment, plainly apparent, against
uniting the two offices in the same person.

JUDGE HENRY.
THIS is an adjourned case from the Dumfries District, and the question (new
and difficult) referred to this court is, -- Ought the district judges to
exercise that branch of chancery jurisdiction committed to them by the last
district law, of hearing and deciding all causes brought before them by
injunction according to the rules prescribed by law for conducting similar
suits in the high court of chancery.

The difficulty and novelty of this case is, that the law in question requires
of the common law judges, to exercise chancery jurisdiction, and that without a
legal appointment, and without a commission.

The discussion of this subject is no less delicate than it is important. -- It
is important as it brings in question the rights of the legislature on one of
the particular subjects committed to them by the plan of government: It is
delicate, as the judges are compelled to examine their powers, their duties,
and the regularity of their appointments, and therefore, they may be
considered, in some sense, as judges in their own cause. -- But be the subject
as delicate as can be supposed possible, and as important as any which can ever
come before a court, it is now before us, and I embrace the opportunity, now
offered me for the first time, of publicly declaring my opinion.

The importance of the subject requires a particular attention, and thorough
examination. We will then have recourse to the revolution and some of the
history.

In the year 1776, the people of this country chose deputies, to meet in
general convention, to consult of, and take care for, their most valuable
interests. These deputies seem to have been complete representatives of the
people, and vested with the most unlimited authority. Accordingly, having taken
a careful review of the state of their country, they found a number of
instances of misrule in the then existing government, and that our prince by
abandoning the helm of government, and declaring the people to be out of his
allegiance and protection, had produced a total dissolution of the social band.

When this was found to be our unhappy situation, our deputies proceeded, (as
of right they might), to prepare that form of government for us they judged
best.

Accordingly, a plan of government was agreed upon, promulged, and accepted by
the people, which has been uniformly acquiesced under from that day to this
time. -- But previous to the promulging the plan of government, these deputies
declared that certain rights were inherent in the people, which the public
servants who might be entrusted with the execution or this government, were
never to be permitted to infringe -- for example -- the legislative branch were
declared to be restrained from interfering, with the right of trial by jury in
criminal cases; from meddling with the rights of conscience, in matters of
religion, and each of the three branches into which the government was to be
divided was declared incompetent to any of the duties of either of the other
two.

The judiciary, from the nature of the office, and the mode of their
appointment, could never be designed to determine upon the equity, necessity,
or usefulness of a law; that would amount to an express interfering with the
legislative branch, in the clause where it is expressly forbidden for any one
branch to interfere with the duties of the other. The reason is obvious, not
being chosen immediately by the people, nor being accountable to them, in the
first instance, they do not, and ought not, to represent the people in framing
or repealing any law.

There is a proposition which I take to be universally true in our
constitution, which to gentlemen whose ideas of parliament, and parliamentary
powers were formed under the former government, may not be always obvious --
it is this -- We were taught that Parliament was omnipotent, and their powers
beyond control; now this proposition, in our constitution, is limited, and
certain rights are reserved as before observed; -- if this were always kept in
mind, it might free the mind from a good deal of embarrassment in discussing
several questions where the duty, and the power of the legislature is
considered.

Our deputies, in this famous convention, after having reserved many
fundamental rights to the people, which were declared not to be subject to
legislative control, did more; -- they pointed out a certain and permanent mode
of appointing the officers who were to be entrusted with the execution of the
government. -- Though the choice of the officers was entrusted to the wisdom of
the legislature, yet the manner of conducting this choice was fixed; hereby
declaring in the most solemn manner, the public will and mind of the people to
be, that the laws, when made, should be executed by officers chosen and
appointed, as therein is directed, and not otherwise, whereas under the former
government, the legislature seemed to have had no bounds to their authority but
the negative of the crown, and the public officers were appointed and displaced
at the pleasure of the governing powers which then were.

I come now to the particular case before the court. Kamper applied to the
district court of Dumfries, for an injunction to a judgment obtained at law in
that court by Hawkins, under the law which directs the district judges to hear
and determine all suits commencing by injunction, under the same rules and
regulations as are now prescribed by law, for conducting similar suits in the
high court of chancery.

The permanent will of the people, expressed in the constitution, is that the
legislature, by joint ballot of both houses, shall appoint judges of the
supreme court of appeals and general court, judges in chancery, etc. to be
commissioned by the governor, and to hold their offices during good behavior.

It Is alleged by some of my brethren, that the legislature are not warranted
in appointing the same men to be judges both at common law and in chancery. The
words of the plan of government are, they shall appoint judges of the high
court of appeals and general court, judges in chancery, etc. -- These words,
Judges in Chancery, are supposed to design different persons from the judges of
the general court, and an argument to enforce this opinion is drawn from 16 and
17, where it is provided, that any judge of the general court, offending
against the state, may be prosecuted in the high court of appeals; but a
chancery judge offending must be prosecuted in the general court; therefore it
is alleged, a common law judge cannot be a chancery, nor a chancery a common
law judge in our government.

This question has heretofore been alleged as one of the reasons of the high
court of appeals for declining to execute a very important law of the land; --
without saying any thing about the propriety or impropriety of that business,
it is sufficient for my present purpose to observe, that the question did not
then come before the court in a judicial manner, -- it was taken up as a
general proposition, and when published, contained an appeal to the people;
this looked like a dissolution of the government, -- therefore I cannot view it
as an adjudged case, to be considered as a binding precedent.

It is much to be wished that the question had been then decided, by calling a
convention of the people. -- But unfortunately the legislature neither yielded
the point nor insisted, but adopted an expedient. -- They new-modelled the
courts. -- The question then went to sleep, but the legislature preserved the
principle; they appointed judges of the high court of appeals, with unlimited
jurisdiction, both in law and equity; they appointed judges of the general
court, and a judge in chancery.

If the common law and chancery jurisdiction ought not to be united in the same
persons in the first instance, I do not see how it can be justified in the
appellate jurisdiction. -- If the form of government has provided that justice
at common law ought to be administered by one set of men, and in chancery by
another, it seems to me to follow as a necessary inference, that the appellate,
as well as the original jurisdiction, ought to be separate and distinct, and
that those gentlemen who now exercise the appellate jurisdiction have admitted
the legislative construction of the form of government formerly objected to.

But I do not rest the question on this ground. Where I am not bound by regular
adjudications of the superior court, I cannot rest on other men's opinions. I
must and will think for myself.

Our government is declared to be founded on the authority of the people. The
people, in convention, have ordered that a legislature shall be chosen, a
governor and council shall be chosen, judges shall be appointed. -- All these
different characters are servants of the people, have different duties, and are
amenable to them. When the legislature were entrusted with the appointment of
judges, I can find no particular characters, or any description of men,
declared to be ineligible, but those holding legislative or executive
authority, who are forbidden to interfere. To the discretion of the legislature
is committed the choice of the judges, who shall fill all the superior courts,
and therefore, if they have chosen, or shall hereafter choose to appoint the
same set of men to administer justice to the people, both at common law and in
chancery, I cannot find any thing in the form of government to restrain them.
-- They are to appoint judges in chancery at their discretion; -- and for me to
say I cannot act as a chancery judge in any case, because if I should offend, I
am to be prosecuted for such offense before my brethren in the general court,
seems to be a strange reason for me to assign for declining the office.

I am therefore very clear and decided in my opinion, that the legislature were
fully authorized by the form of government, to appoint the district judges to
exercise a chancery jurisdiction in the case before us, and I do cheerfully
embrace this public opportunity of declaring my hearty approbation of the
measure, and my willingness to act when the appointment is regularly made.

This brings me to the second point in the case. Have the legislature made the
appointment in the manner prescribed by the form of government? --

I wish most seriously I could give an affirmative answer to this question.
It Is provided by the form of government, so often alluded to, that judges in
chancery shall be chosen by joint ballot of both houses, shall be commissioned
by the governor, shall hold their office during good behavior, and to secure
their independence and remove them from all temptation to corruption, their
salaries shall be adequate and fixed. -- If a chancellor in any case must be
chosen by ballot, be commissioned and hold his office during good behavior,
surely it is proper, it is necessary in all cases, that every judge shall be so
chosen, shall be so commissioned, and hold his office so long as he behaves
well. -- The business of hearing causes originating in that court by
injunction, is of a permanent nature. -- To exercise this duty without the
appointment and commission prescribed by the constitution, would be an exercise
of a power according to the will of the legislature, who are servants of the
people, not only without, but expressly against the will of the people. -- This
would be a solecism in government, -- establishing the will of the legislature,
servants of the people, to control the will of their masters, if the word may
be permitted. -- 'Till the appointment is made agreeable to the directions of
the constitution, I cannot think myself duly authorized to take upon me the
office.

Before I conclude, I wish to embrace the present opportunity of saying
something about what may be called inconsistency in my conduct. -- It Is well
known I sat in the former court of appeals, not being particularly balloted for
and commissioned. I have latterly obeyed the commands of the legislature, by
sitting in the special court of appeals without any such appointment or
commission.

When I was appointed a judge of the court of admiralty there was a standing
law of the land, that every such judge should of course be a judge of the court
of appeals, and an oath of office in both courts was prescribed. When I was
ballotted for, I considered myself as having a general appointment to both the
courts, and acted accordingly: and had a commission been applied for as a judge
of the court of appeals, it is probable, it might have been granted. However,
the legislature, on reviewing this subject, availing themselves of what was
then in their opinion judged to be an incomplete appointment, thought
themselves authorized to garble the commission, and dismiss one half of the
judges, without either giving them notice, or assigning any reason, assuming a
right from their own omission, if it was one, to dismiss their judges. -- If
the legislature were authorized to take this step at that time, it surely
furnishes all succeeding judges, as they value their reputation and their
independence, to see that their appointment be regular, before entering upon
the duties of their office, in future.

This dismission was submitted to, though, in a short time afterward, the
legislature seem to have forgotten the principle on which they grounded the
dismission of the judges; for when public convenience seemed to require a
special court of appeals, in cases where a majority of the judges of that court
should be interested, they commanded the judges of the general court to attend
in such special court, without either an appointment or commission, which
command I have more than once obeyed: and I freely acknowledge, that I consider
this special court, with respect to me, who have been neither appointed nor
commissioned since the passing of that law, as unconstitutional; but it is
temporary. -- The case cannot often happen; it is exceedingly disagreeable to be
faulting the legislature; and, perhaps, one particular mischief had better be
submitted to, than a public inconvenience. -- These were my reasons for sitting
in this special court.

It is most devoutly to be wished, that the present subject, now become the
topic of public, discussion, may be fully and generally understood, by the
legislature, by the judiciary, and by the public at large, that there be no
more of these unhappy differences of opinion between any of the different
departments of government.

It remains only for me to add that where I have been appointed and
commissioned, I obey with alacrity when a new appointment shall be made, and a
commission be directed, authorizing me to exercise the office of a judge in
chancery, in any case whatever, I shall then have it in my power to exercise
the right of every other free man, -- to accept or refuse, -- though I have no
difficulty in declaring, were the appointment perfect, that I might hold during
good behavior, I should have no objection to enter upon the discharge of these
new duties; -- but until that is done, in justice to the public, whose rights
are concerned, and to myself, as an individual, I must decline the duty
prescribed by the law in question, not being as yet such a judge in chancery as
the people have said shall exercise that kind of jurisdiction.

Of course, my opinion is that the district court of Dumfries be advised to
overruled the motion for an injunction in this cause.

JUDGE TYLER.
I am saved much trouble in the investigation of this case by the gentlemen
whose opinions have been already delivered with so much propriety and sound
reason, as it respects the question of the validity of the Constitution.

It is truly painful to me to be under the necessity of saying any thing in
support of it at this day; but since I am reduced to this necessity, I must be
indulged with a few observations on the subject.

I know it has been the opinion of some critical and speculative gentlemen of
considerable merit and abilities too, that one form of government was not
authorized by the people; inasmuch as no instructions were given by the people
to the convention at the time the Constitution was established.

To investigate this subject rightly, we need but go back to that awful period
of our country when we were declared out of the protection of the then mother
country -- and take a retrospective view of our situation, and behold the bands
of civil government cut asunder, and destroyed -- No social compact, no system
of protection and common defense against an invading tyrant -- In a state of
nature, without friends, allies, or resources -- In such a case what was to be
done?

Those eminent characters to whom so much gratitude is, and for ever will be
due; whose names are enrolled in the annals of America, recommended a
convention of delegates to be chosen for that purpose; who were to meet
together for the express design of completely protecting and defending the
rights, both civil and religious, of our common country. -- The delegates were
so elected and convened. -- What power had the people therefore that was not
confided to their representatives? All their rights, all their power, all their
happiness, all their hopes and prospects of success, were most indubitably
entrusted to their care. -- They were not betrayed. -- The people did not say
to their representatives, So far shall ye go, and no farther. -- Happy, indeed,
for this country, that no such restraint was laid on them.

In order to protect and defend the common cause then, a system of social
duties were formed. -- Without this what obedience could have been expected,
and how could a regular defense have been made?

A great variety of departments were established, and those who were to execute
them must have been made responsible to some regular power -- And all this was
to complete the great work of liberty.

Has not this policy been sufficiently ratified by time and action? And if it
were possible to doubt, under these circumstances, has it not been sealed with
the blood of this wide extended empire? And shall its validity be now
questioned? for what purpose? to revert back to our former insignificancy? It
cannot be.

Before I proceed to say any thing on the adjourned case now under
contemplation, I will beg leave to make a few observations on the opinion that
some gentlemen have taken up of the impropriety of the judiciary in deciding
against a law which is in contradiction to the Constitution.

A little time and trouble bestowed on this subject, I am sure, would enable
any person, endowed with common understanding, to see the fallacy of such
sentiments.

What is the Constitution but the great contract of the people, every
individual whereof having sworn allegiance to it? -- A system of fundamental
principles, the violation of which must be considered as a crime of the highest
magnitude. -- That this great and paramount law should be faithfully and
rightfully executed, it is divided into three departments, to wit; the
legislative, the executive, and judiciary, with an express restraint upon all,
so that neither shall encroach on the rights of the other. -- In the Bill of
Rights many things are laid down, which are reserved to the people -- trial by
jury, on life and death; liberty of conscience, etc. Can the legislature
rightfully pass a law taking away these rights from the people? Can the
judiciary pass sentence without a conviction of a citizen by twelve of his
peers? Can the executive do any thing forbidden by this bill of rights, or the
constitution? In short, can one branch of the government call upon another to
aid in the violation of this sacred letter? The answer to these questions must
be in the negative.

But who is to judge of this matter? the legislature only? I hope not. -- The
object of all governments is and ought to be the faithful administration of
justice -- It cannot, I hope, be less the object of our government, which has
been founded on principles very different from any we read of in the world, as
it has ingrafted in it a better knowledge of the rights of human nature, and
the means of better securing those rights. -- And were I inclined to borrow a
sentiment from any man, in support of my opinion, (not as authority, but merely
argumentative) I should make use of the following one from the celebrated Hume,
in his essay on our government -- viz. We are therefore to look upon all the
vast apparatus of our government, as having ultimately no other object, or
purpose, but the distribution of justice, or in other words the support of the
judges. Kings and parliaments, heads and armies, officers of the court and
revenue, ambassadors, ministers, and privy-counsellors, are all subordinate in
their end to this part of administration. -- Hence it may reasonably be
inferred that if the commonwealth itself is subordinate to this department of
government at times, so therefore will necessarily be the acts of the
legislature, when they shall be found to violate first principles,
notwithstanding the supposed "omnipotence of parliament," which is an
abominable insult upon the honor and good sense of our country, as nothing is
omnipotent as it relates to us, either religious or political, but the God of
Heaven and our constitution!

I will not in an extra-judicial manner assume the right to negative a law, for
this would be as dangerous as the example before us; but if by any legal means
I have jurisdiction of a cause, in which it is made a question how far the law
be a violation of the constitution, and therefore of no obligation, I shall not
shrink from a comparison of the two, and pronounce sentence as my mind may
receive conviction. -- To be made an agent, therefore, for the purpose of
violating the constitution, I cannot consent to. -- As a citizen I should
complain of it; as a public servant, filling an office in one of the great
departments of government, I should be a traitor to my country to do it. But
the violation must be plain and clear, or there might be danger of the
judiciary preventing the operation of laws which might be productive of much
public good. These premises being admitted, as I think they must, I will now
draw a comparison of the law before us with the constitution. The constitution
declares there shall be judges in chancery, judges of the general court, etc.
etc. and the first question that occurs is this -- Can the office of a judge in
chancery and common law be rightfully vested in the same persons, provided the
appointment be regular? -- To which I answer, I see no incompatibility, in the
exercise of these offices, by the same persons -- for although they be distinct
offices, possessing distinct powers, they do not necessarily blend and run
together, because they are placed in the same hands. The judge who knows the
powers and duties of both, will well know how to keep them apart -- like the
rays of the sun, they radiate from one common center, and may run parallel for
ever, without an interference. -- But to this, an ingenius and subtle argument
is offered, and taken from the 17th article of the constitution, wherein it is
directed, that when the judges of the general court are impeached, the court of
appeals shall set in judgment -- but all other officers of government, shall be
impeached before the general court. Therefore, the constitution meant to keep
the offices distinct, in distinct hands, because it is possible that they may
try one another, and perhaps form a combination, in favor of the fraternity.
This is too nice a deduction, and is a better argument in favor of an
amendment of the constitution, than of the question under consideration. We
cannot supply defects; nor can we reconcile absurdities, if any there be; this
must be done by the people; and were we about the business of amendments duly
authorized, it might be well to consider this point. -- But I cannot see why a
judge in chancery, if he be a judge also of the general court, may not be tried
by the court of appeals; for if he be convicted of such a crime, as he ought to
be displaced office in either capacity, he would hardly be allowed to hold the
other -- nor do I see why the judges of the general court, cannot try their
brothers in chancery.

The Legislature having a knowledge of this case, chose to trust the powers in
our hands, as in the case of the high court of appeals who possess both
chancery and common law powers, and are yet impeachable before the general
court, who ought not to have a stronger sympathy or fellow-feeling for each
other than for all the judges. In this case we find the same possible
inconvenience, but it is barely possible to suppose that justice and the law
will not be the object of a court's decision let who will be the culprit, or
object of trial -- we find the county courts possess these powers, and I do
suppose, if the doctrine contended for, on this point, was sound, they would
not have been suffered to have rested from the beginning of the revolution to
this day, in those courts, and without arrogating much to ourselves we may be
allowed to hope the trust would be at least as well executed, in our hands. --
I have nothing to say with respect to the policy of the measure, that will
speak for itself; and moreover, it belongs to the legislature to decide.

The next inquiry we are to make, brings us pointedly to the comparison of the
law now under contemplation, and the constitution, and how does it stand? the
constitution says that judges in chancery shall be appointed by joint ballot of
both houses of assembly, and commissioned by the governor during good behavior
-- and for the most valuable purposes; to secure the independence of the
judiciary. -- Contrary to this express direction, which admits of no doubt,
implication or nice construction, that bane to political freedom, the
legislature has made the appointment by an act mandatory, to the judges,
leaving them not at liberty to accept or refuse the office conferred, which is
a right every citizen enjoys, in every other case -- a right too sacred to be
yielded to any power on earth -- but, were I willing to do it as it relates to
myself, as a judge I ought not; because it would frustrate that most important
object beforementioned -- intended by the constitution to be kept sacred, for
the wisest and best of purposes -- to wit, that justice and the law be done to
all manner of persons without fear or reward. --

For how would the rights of individuals stand when brought in contest with the
public or even an influential character, if the judges may be removed from
office by the same power who appointed them, to wit, by a statute appointment
as in this case, and by a statute disappointment as was the case in the court
of appeals -- might not danger be apprehended from this source when future
times shall be more corrupt? and yet, thank Heaven, the time has not arrived,
when any judge has thus degraded his office, or dignity as a man, by a decision
governed by fear or any other base motive, and I hope a long time will yet
elapse before this will be the case -- but our constitution was made, not only
for the present day, but for ages to come, subject only to such alterations as
the people may please to make. Let me now compare the law and the constitution
in the other point; that of the want of a commission during good behavior, and
the reasons will fully or forcibly apply -- when I receive the commission, I
see the ground on which I stand. I see that my own integrity is that ground,
and no opinions, but such as are derived from base motives, can be sufficient
to remove me from office -- in which case whenever an appeal is made to me by
an injured citizen, I will do him justice, as far as my mental powers will
enable me, to discover it without any apprehensions of an unjust attack -- that
if the proudest sovereign on earth was in contest with the lowest peasant, that
creeps through this vale of sorrow yet should the arm of justice be extended to
him also.

To conclude, I do declare that I will not hold an office, which I believe to
be unconstitutional, that I will not be made a fit agent, to assist the
legislature in a violation of this sacred letter, that I form this opinion from
the conviction I feel that I am free to think, speak, and act, as other men do
upon so great a question, that as I never did sacrifice my own opinions for the
sake of popularity, in the various departments I have had the honor to fill,
however desirable popular favor may be, when obtained upon honorable
principles; so now that I am grown old, I cannot depart from those motives
which I have both in public and private life made my standard -- I concur
therefore most heartily with my brothers, who have gone before me in the last
two points, that the law is unconstitutional and ought not to be executed, the
injunction therefore must be over ruled -- and this opinion I form not from a
view of the memorials, nor from writers who knew not the blessings of free
government, but as they were seen and felt through the prospect of future
times, but from honest reason, common sense, and the great letter of a Free
Constitution!

JUDGE TUCKER.
THIS question was an adjourned case from district court of Dumfries, and arose
upon the act of 1792, for reducing into one the several acts concerning the
establishment, jurisdiction, and powers of the district courts.

Sect. 3. of that act declares it to be the duty of two of the judges of the
general court to attend each district court at their respective terms; and the
said two judges shall constitute a court for such district, etc.

Sect. 11. provides that each of the said district courts, in term-time, or any
judge thereof, in vacation, shall, and may have, and exercise the same power of
granting injunctions, to stay proceeding; on any judgment, obtained in any of
the said district courts, as is now had, and exercised by the judge of the high
court of chancery, in similar cases, and the said district courts, may proceed
to the dissolution, or final hearing of all suits, commencing by injunction,
under the same rules, and regulations, as are now prescribed by law for
conducting similar suits in the high court of chancery.

Upon this clause, a motion was made in Dumfries district court, May 23, 1791,
for an injunction to stay proceedings on a judgment obtained in that court, and
was adjourned hither for novelty and difficulty.

The question which it is now incumbent on this court to decide, seems to me to
be shortly this -- whether a judge of the general court of this commonwealth,
can constitutionally exercise the functions of a judge in chancery? this calls
upon us for a recurrence to fundamental principles, a duty which our bill of
right Bill of Rights, Art. 15.
expressly suposes upon all the servants of the commonwealth. And this renders
it necessary not only to investigate the principles upon which our government
is founded, but the authority by which it Was established; inasmuch as there
are doubts in the breasts of many, whether our constitution itself is any more
than an act of the ordinary legislature, revocable, or subject to alteration by
them, in any manner, and at any time.

In considering this question, I shall first state my own impressions, arising
from the text of the constitution, and the spirit of our government, only
unsupported by any former judicial opinions on the subject -- and, secondly, as
founded on the authority and decision of the court of appeals.

I. In stating my own impressions, I shall consider:

1st. Whether the constitution, or form of government of this commonwealth, be
an act of the ordinary legislature, and, consequently revocable, or subject to
alteration by the same authority; or something paramount thereto?

2dly. Whether, according to that constitution, the functions of a judge of the
general court, and a judge in chancery, were intended to be distinct; or might
be bleeded in the same person?

1st. Whether the constitution be an act of the ordinary legislature; or
something paramount thereto?

It will be remembered, by all those who are conversant with the history of the
rise and progress of the late glorious revolution, that the measures which led
to the final consummation of that important event, although they originated, in
most instances, with the legal and constitutional assemblies of the different
colonies, made but a small progress in that channel, particularly in this
state. The dissolution of the constitutional Assemblies, by the governors
appointed by the crown, obliged the people to resort to other methods of
deliberating for the common good. -- Hence the first introduction of
conventions: bodies neither authorized by; or known to the then constitutional
government; bodies, on the contrary, which the constitutional officers of the
then existing governments considered as illegal, and treated as such.
Nevertheless, they met, deliberated, and resolved for the common good. They
were the people, assembled by their deputies; not a legal, or constitutional
assembly, or part of the government as then organized. -- Hence they were not,
nor could be deemed the ordinary legislature; that body being composed of the
governor, council, and burgesses: who sat in several distinct chambers, and
characters: while the other was composed of a single body, having neither the
character of governor, council, or legitimate representative among them: they
were, in effect, the people themselves, assembled by their delegates, to whom
the care of the commonwealth was especially, as well as unboundedly confided.

To prove this distinction still farther. The power of convening the legal
assemblies, or the ordinary constitutional legislature, resided solely in the
executive: they could neither be chosen without writs issued by it is authority,
nor assemble when chosen, but under the same authority. The conventions, on the
contrary, were chosen, and assembled, either in pursuance of recommendations
from Congress, or from their own bodies, or by the discretion, and common
consent of the people. They were held, even whilst a legal assembly existed.
Witness the convention, held in Richmond in March, 1775: after which period,
the legal, or constitutional assembly was convened in Williamsburgh, by the
governor, lord Dunmore; and continued fixting until finally dissolved by him in
June or July 1775. -- No other legal assembly was ever chosen, or convened
under the British government.

The convention then was not the ordinary legislature of Virginia. It was the
body of the people, impelled to assemble from a sense of common danger,
consulting for the common good, and acting in all things for the common safety.
It could not be the legitimate legislature, under the then established
government, since that body could only be chosen under the permission, and
assembled under the authority of the crown of Great Britain.

But although the exercise of the authority of the excutive government under
the crown of Great Britain ceased altogether with the dissolution of that
assembly in June 1775, yet a constitutional dependence on the British
government, was never denied, until the succeeding May, nor dissolved until the
moment of adopting the present constitution, or form of government; an event,
which took effect by the unanimous voice Ord. of Conv. July 1775, c. 4. Rev.
Co. 30.
of the convention, (elected after the final dissolution of the general
assembly, is abovementioned, and assembled in Williamsburgh,) on the 29th of
June 1776, after six weeks deliberation thereon The convention came to a
resolution to instruct their delegates in Congress to move that body to declare
America independent on the 15th of May, 1776, and the same day appointed a
committee to prepare the draught of the new constitution, or form of
government. See the journals of the convention assembled in Williamsburgh, May
1776.
, and eight days before the declaration of independence, by the Congress of the
United States. This was not then the act of the ordinary legislature that
dissolved the bands of union between us. It was the voice of the people
themselves, proclaiming to the world their resolution to be free; to be
governed only by their own laws; and to institute such a government, as, in
their own opinion, was most likely to produce peace, happiness, and safety to
the individual, as well as to the community.

It seems to me an observation of great importance, that the declaration of
independence by this state, was first made in that instrument which establishes
our constitution. The instant that the declaration of independence took effect,
had the convention proceeded no further, the government, as formerly exercised
by the crown of Great Britain, being thereby totally dissolved, there would
neither have been an ordinary legislature, nor any other organized body, or
authority in Virginia. Every man would have been utterly absolved from every
social tie, and remitted to a perfect state of nature. But a power to demolish
the existing fabric of government, which no one will, I presume, at this day,
deny to that convention, without authority to erect a new one, could never be
presumed. A new organization of the fabric, and a new arrangement of the powers
of government, must instantly take place, to prevent these evils which the
absence of government must infallibly produce in any case; but more especially
under circumstances so awful, and prospects so threatening, as those which
surrounded the people of America, at that alarming period. Is would therefore
have been absurdity in the extreme, in the people of Virginia, to authorize the
convention to absolve them from the bonds of one government, without the power
to unite them under any other, at a time when the utmost exertions of
government were required to preserve both their liberties and their lives: but
since they are both in form, and effect only different clauses of the same act,
and necessary consequences of each other, to question the validity of the one,
is to deny of the effect of the other. The declaration of independence, and the
constitution, as the ACTS OF THE PEOPLE, must therefore stand, or fall together.

Here let me cite the opinion of an eminent lawyer on the one hand, and of an
enlightened politician on the others on the subject of two national
revolutions, the most familiar to us of any, except our own.

The revolution of 1688, says judge Blackstone, 1 Corn. 211, was not a
defeazance of the succession, and a new limitation of the crown by the king,
and both houses of parliament: it was the act of the nation alone, upon the
conviction that there was no king in being.

The national assembly of France, says the ingenious M'Kintosh, p. 60. was
assembled as an ordinary legislature under existing laws. They were transformed
by events into a national convention, and vested with powers to organize a new
government. It is in vain that their adversaries contest this assertion by
appealing to the deficiency of forms. It is in vain to demand the legal
instrument that changed their constitution, and extended their powers. Accurate
forms in the conveyance of power are prescribed by the wisdom of the law, in
the regular administration of states. But great revolutions are too Immense for
technical formality. All the sanction that can be hoped from such events is the
voice of the people, however informally and irregularly expressed. (Def. of Fr.
Revo. 60.)

Our case was much stronger than either of those. There was at least the shadow
of legal, constitutional authority in the convention parliament of England in
1688, as the ordinary legislature, and the national assembly of France, was
constitutionally assembled under the authority of the government it subverted.
The convention of Virginia had not the shadow of a legal, or constitutional
form about it. It derived it is existence and authority from a higher source; a
power which can supersede all law, and annul the constitution itself -- namely,
the people, in their sovereign, unlimited, and unlimitable authority and
capacity.

From what I have said, I am inclined to hope, that it will appear that our
constitution was not the act of the ordinary legislature: a few words
concerning it is operation* authority, and effect, as the act of the people, may
not be improper.

A constitution, says the celebrated Pain, is not a thing in name only, but in
fact. It has not an ideal, but a real existence; and wherever it cannot be
produced in a visible form, there is none. A constitution is a thing antecedent
to government, and a government is only the creature of a constitution. It is
not the act of the government, but of the people constituting a government. It
is the body of elements to which you can refer, and quote article by article,
and which contains the principles on which the government shall be established,
the manner in which it shall be organized, the powers it shall have, etc. See
Rights of Man, part I. p. 30.

Vattel, in treating of the fundamental laws of a state, observes, that a
nation may entrust the exercise of the legislative power to the prince, or to
an assembly, or to that assembly and the prince, jointly; who have then a right
of making new, and of abrogating old laws. It is here demanded, whether if
their power extends as far as the fundamental laws, they may change the
constitution of the state? to this he answers, we may decide with certainty,
that the authority of these legislators does not extend so far, and that they
ought to consider the fundamental laws as sacred, if the nation has not in
express terms given them power to change them. For the constitution of the
state ought to be fixed; and since that was first established by the nation,
which afterward trusted certain persons, with the legislative powers, the
fundamental laws are excepted from their commission. In short, these
legislators derive their power from the constitution: how then can they change
it, without destroying the foundation of their authority? Vattel, p. 31.

That the legislature of this commonwealth have regarded our constitution in
this light, will appear from more than one authority. I shall select the
preamble of an act passed in May session, 1783. c. 32. Rev. Co. 204. entitled
an act to amend an act, entitled an act concerning the appointment of sheriffs,
which recites that the former act was contrary to the constitution, or form of
government, for which reason it was repealed. -- A second instance may be found
in the acts of 1787, c. 23. which recites that a former act, entitled an act to
extend the powers of the governor and council, Rev. Co. 81. appears to the
present general assembly to be contrary to the true spirit of the constitution:
wherefore it was repealed. -- Two other instances may be found, the first in
the repeal 1788, chapter 67.
of the act of 1787, c. 39. for establishing district courts, whereby the
judges of the court of appeals were required to act as judges of the district
courts: the second, in an act of the last session, 1792, chapter 28. providing for
the republication of the laws of this commonwealth, which directs that the bill
of rights, and constitution, or form of government, shall be prefixed to the
code of laws. -- Other instances doubtless may be found in our laws where the
legislature have either expressly, or tacitly, recognized the constitution as
paramount to their own legislative acts; so that reasoning, in this instance,
is confirmed by precedent.

But here an objection will no doubt be drawn from the authority of those
writers who affirm, that the constitution of a state is a rule to the
legislature only, and not to the judiciary, or the executive: the legislature
being bound not to transgress it; but that neither the executive nor judiciary
can resort to it to enquire whether they do transgress it, or not.

This sophism could never have obtained a moment's credit with the world, had
such a thing as a written constitution existed before the American revolution.
All the governments that now exist in the world, says a late writer, M'Kintosh
on the Er. Rev. 155.
except the United States of America, have been fortuitously formed. They are
the produce of chance, not the work of art. They have been altered, impaired,
improved, and destroyed, by accidental circumstances, beyond the foresight or
control of wisdom; their parts thrown up against present emergencies, formed no
systematic whole. What the constitution of any country was, or rather was
supposed to be, could only be collected from what the government had at any
time done; what had been acquiesced in by the people, or other component parts
of the government; or what had been resisted by either of them. Whatever the
government, or any branch of it had once done, it was inferred they had a right
to do again. The union of the legislative and executive powers in the same men,
or body of men, ensured the success of their usurpations; and the judiciary,
having no written constitution to refer to, were obliged to receive whatever
exposition of if the legislature might think proper to make. -- But, with us,
the constitution is not an ideal thing, but a real existence: it can be
produced in a visible form: its principles can be ascertained from the living
letter, not from obscure reasoning or deductions only. The government,
therefore, and all its branches must be governed by the constitution. Hence it
becomes the first law of the land, and as such must be resorted to on every
occasion, where it becomes necessary to expound what the law is. This
exposition it is the duty and office of the judiciary to make; our constitution
expressly declaring that the legislative, executive, and judiciary, shall be
separate and distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging
to the other. -- Now since it is the province of the legislature to make, and
of the executive to enforce obedience to the laws, the duty of expounding must
be exclusively vested in the judiciary. -- But how can any just exposition be
made, if that which is the supreme law of the land be withheld from their view?
Suppose a question had arisen on either of the acts before cited, which the
legislature have discovered to be unconstitutional, would the judiciary have
been bound by the act, or by the constitution?

But that the constitution is a rule to all the departments of the government,
to the judiciary as well as to the legislature, may, I think, be proved by
reference to a few parts of it.

The bill of rights, art. 8. provides, that in all capital and criminal
prosecutions, the party accused shall be tried by a jury of the vicinage, and
cannot be found guilty without their unanimous consent.

Suppose any future act of the legislature should abridge either of these
privileges, what would be said of a court that should act in conformity to such
an act?

Again; art. 9. declares that excessive bail ought not to be required. The act
1785, chapter 80.
concerning bail, I apprehend, extends not to the superior courts; perhaps not
even to the county courts. Is this injunction a mere dead letter, because the
legislature have not yet passed a law equally extensive in its obligation?

Art. 10. declares that general warrants are illegal and oppressive, and ought
not to be granted. Is this too a dead letter, because we have no act of the
legislature to enforce the obligation?

Art. 16. secures the free exercise of our religious duties, according to the
dictates of every man's own conscience. Should the legislature, at any future
period, establish any particular mode of worship, and enact penal laws to
support it, will the courts of this commonwealth be bound to enforce those
penalties?

Art. 15. of the constitution, declares that the clerks of courts shall hold
their offices during good behavior, to be judged of and determined in the
general court. Can any legislative act give any other court cognizance of such
a case? -- Or can any impeachment be tried in any court of this commonwealth,
except this court, and the court of appeals, even should an act of the
legislature (as was once contemplated) erect a court for that especial purpose?

From all these instances it appears to me that this deduction clearly follows,
viz. that the judiciary are bound to take notice of the constitution, as the
first law of the land; and that whatsoever is contradictory thereto, is not the
law of the land.

And here I shall avail myself of the reasoning of one of the ablest political
writers that has appeared in America. Pub. v. 2. p. 293.


Some perplexity respecting the right of the courts to pronounce legislative
acts void, because contrary to the constitution, has arisen, he observes, from
an imagination that the doctrine would imply a superiority of the judiciary
over the legislative power. It is urged that the power which can declare the
acts of another void, must necessarily be superior to the one whose acts may be
declared void.

But there is no position which depends on clearer principles, than that every
act of a delegated authority, contrary to the tenor of the commission under
which it is exercised, is void. No legislative act therefore, contrary to the
constitution, can be valid. To deny this would be to affirm, that the deputy is
greater than the principal; that the servant is above his master; that the
representatives of the people are superior to the people themselves.

If it be said that the legislative body are themselves the constitutional
judges of their own powers, and that the construction they put upon them is
conclusive upon the other departments, it may be answered that this cannot be
the natural presumption, where it is not to be collected from any particular
provisions in the constitution. It is not otherwise to be supposed that the
constitution could intend to enable the representatives of the people to
substitute their will to that of their constituents. It is far more rational to
suppose that the courts were designed to be an intermediate body between the
people and the legislature, in order, among other things, to keep the latter
within the limits assigned to their authority. The interpretation of the laws
is the proper and particular province of the courts. A constitution is in fact,
and must be regarded by the judges, as a fundamental law. It therefore belongs
to them to ascertain its meaning, as well as the meaning of any particular act
proceeding from the legislative body. If there be an irreconcilable variance
between the two, that which has the superior obligation and validity ought of
course to be preferred; or, in other words, the constitution ought to be
preferred to the statutes; the intention of the people to the intention of
their agents.

Nor does this conclusion by any means suppose a superiority of the judiciary
to the legislative power. It only supposes that the power of the people is
superior to both; and that where the will of the legislature, declared in its
statutes, stands in apposition to that of the people, declared in the
constitution, the judges ought to be governed by the latter, rather than the
former. They ought to regulate their decisions by the fundamental laws, rather
than those which are not fundamental.

Publius 295.
It can be of no weight to say that the courts, on the pretense of a repugnancy,
may substitute their own pleasure to the constitutional intentions of the
legislature. This might as well happen in the case of two contradictory
statutes; or it might as well happen in every adjudication upon any single
statute. The courts must declare the sense of the law. The observation, if it
proved any thing, would prove that there ought to be no judges distinct from
the legislative body.

Such is the reasoning of one (...) the most profound politicians in America.
It is so full, so apposite, and so conclusive, that I think it unnecessary to
add any thing farther on the subject, and shall now proceed to the second
point, viz.

2. Whether, according to the constitution of this commonwealth, a judge of the
general court can exercise the functions of a judge in chancery?

There again I must recur to one of the fundamental principles of our
government, a principle essentially and indispensably necessary to its
existence as a free government, exercised by the immediate authority of the
people, delegated to the servants of their own choice, viz. the separation of
the legislative, executive, and judiciary departments.

These departments, as I have before observed, our constitution declares shall
be for ever separate and distinct. To be so, they must be independent one of
another, so that neither can control, or annihilate the other.

The independence of the judiciary results from the tenure of their office,
which the constitution declares shall be during good behavior. The offices
which they are to fill must therefore in their nature be permanent as the
constitution itself, and not liable to be discontinued or annihilated by any
other branch of the government. Hence the constitution has provided that the
judiciary department should be arranged in such a manner as not to be subject
to legislative control. The court of appeals, court of chancery, and general
court, are tribunals expressly required by it; and in these courts the
judiciary power is either immediately, or ultimately vested.

These courts can neither be annihilated or discontinued by any legislative
act; nor can the judges of them be removed from their offices for any cause,
except a breach of their good behavior.

But if the legislature might at any time discontinue or annihilate either of
these courts, it is plain that their tenure of office might be changed, since a
judge, without any breach of good behavior, might in effect be removed from
office, by annihilating or discontinuing the office itself.

This has been proved in the case of the former court of appeals. Virg. Acts
vi. 1788, chapter 68.
The moment that it was discovered that that court was not constituted
according to the directions of the constitution, the legislature, without any
charge of a breach of good behavior by any one of that court, removed a
majority of the judges from their office, as judges of that court, by
new-moddelling the court altogether.

I am far from considering this act of the legislature as unconstitutional, for
reasons that I shall hereafter mention.

But it proves that the judiciary can never be independent, so long as the
existence of the office depends upon the will of the ordinary legislature, and
not upon a constitutional foundation.

The district courts considered as independent of the general court, and not a
modification of it, are merely legislative courts, and consequently may be
discontinued, or annihilated, whenever the legislature may think proper to
abolish them. -- And if the judges of those courts held their offices only as
judges of the district courts, they might be virtually, and in fact, removed
from office, as the judges of the former court of appeals were, by a
legislative act, discontinuing the courts, and transferring their jurisdiction
to other tribunals, without any breach of good behavior.

Hence arises a most important distinction between constitutional and
legislative courts. The judges of the former hold an office co-existent with
the government itself, and which they can only forfeit by a breach of good
behavior. The judges of the latter, although their commissions should import
upon the face of them, to be during good behavior, may be at any time
discontinued from their office, by abolishing the courts. -- In other words,
constitutional judges may be an independent branch of the government,
legislative judges must ever be dependant on that body at whose will their
offices exist.

If the principles of our government have established the judiciary as a
barrier against the possible usurpation, or abuse of power in the other
departments, how easily may that principle be evaded by converting our courts
into legislative, instead of Constitutional tribunals?

To preserve this principle in it is full vigor, it is necessary that the
constitutional courts should all be restrained within those limits which the
constitution itself seems to have assigned to them respectively.

What those limits are, may be collected from the 14th article, Constable. Virg.
ar. 14.
which provides for the appointment of judges of the supreme court of appeals,
and general court, judges in chancery, judges of admiralty, etc. This
specification of judges of several tribunals, would lead us of itself to
conclude, that the tribunals themselves were meant to be separate and distinct
Since every word in that instrument, the constitution of the commonwealth,
should be construed to have its effect; a rule applied to all written
instruments whatsoever, and more peculiarly applicable, I should presume, to
that which expresses the collective, and sovereign will, and intention of the
people.
. This conclusion seems to be warranted by two circumstances, the one
extrinsic, the other arising out of the constitution itself. Those who
recollect the situation of our jurisprudence, at the time of the revolution,
will remember that the union of civil and criminal, common law, and equity
jurisdiction, all in the general court, was one of the most obvious defects of
that system. In truth, nothing can be more dangerous to the citizen, than the
union of criminal courts, and courts of equity. On the European continent,
wheresoever the civil law has been adopted, criminal and civil proceedings have
been conducted upon the like principles: the defendant in civil cases might be
examined upon oath by interrogatories, to which if he gave not satisfactory
answers he might be committed until he did* this principle being extended to
criminal cases, was denominated by the moderate term of putting the person
accused to the question: but inasmuch as the forcing a criminal to accuse
himself on oath, might prove a snare to his conscience, the obligation to
answer to the question, was enforced by torture. To separate forever, courts,
whose principles and proceedings are so diametrically opposite, as those of the
common and civil law, was, I should presume, one of the fundamental principles
which the framers of our constitution had an eye to. They, therefore,
distributed the powers of the then existing general court into three distinct
branches, viz. the court of appeals, the court of chancery, and the court of
general jurisdiction, at common law. The repetition of the term, judges, shows
that it was in contemplation that both the tribunals, and the judges should be
distinct and separate. This is farther confirmed by art. 16 and 17: Constable.
Virg. arts. 16. and 17.
the former of which provides that impeachments in general shall be prosecuted
in this court, the latter that impeachments against the judges of this court,
shall be prosecuted in the court of appeals. Nothing, then, can be clearer than
that the constitution intended they should be distinct judges of distinct
courts. And hence I am satisfied, that the former court of appeals was
unconstitutionally organized. This reasoning, I apprehend will apply no less
forcibly to the separation of the general court from the court of chancery. A
judge of the general court, if impeached, can be prosecuted in the court of
appeals only; a judge in chancery only in the general court: if these offices
be united in the same person, it must be by separate commissions; a judgment on
impeachment in the general court, cannot vacate the commission of a judge of
that court, because the constitution has assigned another tribunal, where a
judge of that court shall be tried; a judgment in the court of appeals cannot
vacate the commission of a judge in chancery, because he must be tried, as
such, in the general court. Hence it seems to me we are driven to conclude that
the constitution meant that the two offices shall be separate and distinct.
This construction removes every difficulty, the contrary, I apprehend, creates
a multitude, and those insurmountable A curious question might here be
propounded. Suppose a judge of the general court, holding also a commission as
a judge in chancery, and sitting as a judge of a district court, where his
functions were united, should receive a bribe from one of the parties to a suit
depending there before him: that on the trial at law he shall endeavor to
influence the jury, and shall after grant an injunction to the party from who
he received the bribe: Must there be two impeachments and two trials, in
different courts in this case, or could one trial, and one judgment vacate both
commissions?
. In pursuance of this direction, contained in the constitution, the
legislature, when it set about organizing the courts, distributed them as
abovementioned. The criminal and common law court, was separated from the
court of equity; and both from the court of appeals, in form, though not in
reality, until the legislature, by the act of 1788, c. 68. corrected it is
former error. And thus distinct have they remained, until the act of the last
session, which has not indeed united the constitutional courts, but has
blended them in effect, by assigning the functions of a judge in chancery to
the judges of this court; and if carried into effect may lead to the total
annihilation of all the courts which the constitution had in contemplation to
establish.

I have said before (pa. 52,) that the district courts considered as
independent of the general court, and not a modification of it, are mere
legislative, and not constitutional courts. If they are a modification only of
the general court, it flows from what I have already said, that the
constitution prohibits the exercise of chancery jurisdiction therein. If they
be mere legislative courts, it cannot be the duty of any judge of a
constitutional court, merely as such, to exercise the functions of a judge of
these courts: and it is, I conceive, expressly contrary to the duty of a
constitutional judge of one court, to exercise the functions of a
constitutional judge of another distinct constitutional court.

It appears then immaterial, whether, on the present question, the district
courts are to be considered as branches of the general court, or not: yet it
would be easy to show, that as they are at present modified and organized, they
are nothing more than branches of that court; and not distinct, independent,
legislative courts; unless the operation of the act in question should be
construed to affect and change their whole system, and constitution.

But, if they are mere legislative courts, they may, at any time, be organized
at the will of the legislature: legislative judges may be appointed, the tenor
of whose commission may import that their office shall be during good
behavior, and yet that office be discontinued whenever the legislature may
think fit. If the jurisdiction of the court of chancery can be constitutionally
transferred to them, so may that of the general court, and of the court of
appeals. In fine these legislative courts may absorb all the jurisdictions,
powers and functions of the constitutional courts. These last then must either
be suppressed, as useless, which the constitution forbids Art. 14.
; or the judges of them will hold sinecures instead of offices, which is
expressly contrary to the bill of rights, art. 4. Add to this that such an
arrangement must ever render the judiciary the mere creature of the legislative
department, which both the constitution Constable. V. art. 3.
, and the bill of rights Bill of Rights, art. 5.
most pointedly appear to have guarded against.

2. I shall now proceed to take a short view of the subject, as founded upon a
solemn decision of the court of appeals, on a similar occasion.

It will not, I presume, be denied that the decisions of the supreme court of
appeals in this commonwealth, upon any question, whether arising upon the
general principles of law, the operation or construction of any statute or act
of assembly, or of the constitution of this commonwealth, are to be resorted to
by all other courts, as expounding, in their truest sense, the laws of the
land; and where any decision of that court applies to a case depending before
any other tribunal, that tribunal is bound to regulate its decisions
conformably to those of the court of appeals. This postulatum I conceive to be
too obviously founded upon the principles of our government to require an
attempt to demonstrate it. Proceeding upon this ground, I shall take up the
question upon the authority of a previous decision of that court, on a similar
question.

In the year 1787, the first act establishing district courts was passed. This
act declared it to be the duty of the judges of the high court of appeals to
attend the said courts, allotting among themselves the districts they should
respectively attend; three judges to be allotted to each district; any two of
whom should constitute a court. chapter 39. 3.

It should be remembered, that at that time the court of appeals was composed
of the judges of the high court of chancery; judges of the general court; and
judges of the court of admiralty. The office of the judge of the court of
appeals was, at that time, as it were, incidentally annexed to their
appointment to a seat on either of the other tribunals.

A part of the duty assigned to the court of appeals by that act was the
appointment of clerks to the district courts, which the act required should be
done at the next succeeding session of the court of appeals. Ib. 2.

On the 12th of May following, the court made the following entry upon their
records. On consideration of a late act of assembly, entitled an act
establishing district courts, after several conferences, and upon mature
deliberation, the court do adjudge that clerks of the said courts ought not now
to be appointed, for reasons contained in a remonstrance to the general
assembly: -- which remonstrance is likewise entered on record, and contains,
among other things, the following important passages.

1. That in discussing the act establishing district courts, the court found it
unavoidable to consider, whether the principles of that act do not violate
those of the constitution, or form of government, which the people, in 1776,
when the former bands of their society were dissolved, established as the
foundation of that government which they judged necessary for the preservation
of their persons and property; and if such violation were apparent, whether
they had power, and it was their duty to declare that the act must yield to the
constitution?

2. That they found themselves obliged to decide, whatever temporary
inconveniences might arise, and in that decision to declare, that the
constitution and the act were in opposition, and could not exist together, and
that the former must control the latter.

3. That the propriety and necessity of the independence of the judges is
evident in reason, and the nature of their office, since they are to decide
between government and the people, as well as between contending citizens; and
if they be dependent on either, corrupt influence may be apprehended.

4. That this applies more forcibly to exclude a dependence on the legislature,
a branch of whom, in cases of impeachment, is itself a party.

5. To obviate a possible objection that the court, while they are maintaining
the independence of the judiciary, are countenancing encroachments of that
branch upon the departments of others, and assuming a right to control the
legislature, it may be observed, that when they decide between an act of the
people, and an act of the legislature, they are within the line of their duty,
declaring what the law is, and not making a new law.

6. That although the duties of their office were not ascertained at the time of
establishing the constitution, yet in respect thereto, the constitution gives a
principle, namely, that "no future regulation should blend the duties of the
judges of the general court, court of chancery, and court of admiralty, which
the constitution seems to require to be exercised by distinct persons."

7. That the assigning to the judges of chancery and admiralty jurisdiction in
common law cases, may be considered as a new office."

These declarations, according to my weak apprehensions, comprehend the present
question in the fullest extent. I should therefore be of opinion, upon the
ground of this authority, as well as upon the conviction of my own mind,
independent thereof, which, unless so fortified, I might have mistrusted, that
we ought to certify to the district court of Dumfries That in the opinion of
this court, a judge of the general court cannot constitutionally exercise the
functions of a judge in chancery. But the judges who have already delivered
their opinions, although some of them appear to dissent from me upon this
point, having unanimously concurred in another, viz. That the functions of a
judge in chancery can only be exercised by those who may be constituted judges
in chancery, in the manner prescribed by the constitution; I shall concur in
their unanimous judgment, without offering any reasons on a subject which has
been so fully and satisfactorily discussed by them.

When the court unanimously agreed, and the certificate was in these words:

"Ordered, that it be certified to the said district court (Dumfries,) as the
opinion of this court, that the motion of the plaintiff, praying an injunction,
to stay the proceedings on a judgment obtained against him in the said district
court by the defendant, ought to be over ruled, because the powers and duties
assigned to be performed by the eleventh section of the act of the last session
of assembly, entitled 'an act reducing into one the several acts concerning the
establishment, jurisdiction, and powers of the district courts,' can only be
executed by those who may be constituted judges in chancery, in the manner
prescribed by the constitution of this common wealth,

THE DECLARATION OF RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTION. At a GENERAL CONVENTION of
Delegates and Representatives, from the several counties and corporations of
Virginia, held at the capitol in the city of Williamsburgh, on Monday, the 6th
of May, 1776.
DECLARATION OF RIGHTS. A declaration of rights, made by the representatives of
the good people of Virginia, assembled in full and free convention; which
rights do pertain to them, and their posterity, as the basis and foundation of
government.
1. THAT all men are by nature equally free and independent, and have certain
inherent rights, of which, when they enter into a state of society, they
cannot, by any comp^^^^ deprive of divest their posterity; namely, the
enjoyment of life and liberty, with the means of acquiring and possessing
property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

2. That all power is vested in, and consequently derived from the people; that
magistrates are their trustees and servants, and at all times amenable to them.

3. That government is, or ought to be instituted for the common benefit,
protection, and security of the people, nation, or community; of all the
various modes and forms of government, that is best, which is capable of
producing the greatest degree of happiness and safety, and is most effectually
secured against the danger of mal-administration; and that when any government
shall be found inadequate or contrary to these purposes, a majority of the
community has an indubitable, unalienable, and indefeasible right, to reform,
alter, or abolish it, in such manner as shall be judged most conducive to the
public weal.

4. That no man, or set of men, are entitled to exclusive or separate
emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public
services, which not being descendible, neither ought the offices of magistrate,
legislator, or judge to be hereditary.

5. That the legislative, and executive powers of the state should be separate
and distinct from the judiciary; and that the members of the two first may be
restrained from oppression, by feeling and participating the burdens of the
people, they should, at fixed periods, be reduced to a private station, return
into that body from which they were originally taken, and the vacancies be
supplied by frequent, certain, and regular elections, in which all, or any part
of the former members, to be again eligible, or ineligible, as the laws shall
direct.

6. That elections of members to serve as representatives of the people, in
assembly, ought to be free; and that all men, having sufficient evidence of
permanent common interest with, and attachment to the community, have the right
of suffrage, and cannot be taxed or deprived of their property for public uses,
without their own consent, or that of their representatives so elected, nor
bound by any law to which they have not, in like manner, assented, for the
public good.

7. That all power of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, by any
authority without consent of the representatives of the people, is injurious to
their rights and ought not to be exercised.

8. That in all capital or criminal prosecutions, a man has a right to demand
the cause and nature of his accusation, to be confronted with the accusers and
witnesses, to call for evidence in his favor, and to a speedy trial by an
impartial jury of his vicinage, without whose unanimous consent he cannot be
found guilty, nor can he be compelled to give evidence against himself; that no
man be deprived of his liberty, except by the law of the land, or the judgment
of his peers.

9. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

10. That general warrants, whereby an officer or messenger may be commanded to
search suspected places, without evidence of a fact committed, or to seize any
person or persons not named, or whose offense is not particularly described and
supported by evidence, are grievous and oppressive, and ought not to be granted.

11. That in controversies respecting property, and in suits between man and
man, the ancient trial by jury is preferable to any other, and ought to be held
sacred.

12. That the freedom of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty, and
can never be restrained, but by despotic governments.

13. That a well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, trained
to arms, is the proper, natural and safe defense of a free state; that standing
armies, in the time of peace, should be avoided, as dangerous to liberty; and
that in all cases, the military should be under a strict subordination to, and
governed by the civil power.

14. That the people have a right to uniform government, and therefore, that no
government separate from, or independent of the government of Virginia, ought
to be erected or established within the limits thereof.

15. That no free government, or the blessing of liberty, can be preserved to
any people but by a firm adherence to justice, moderation, temperance,
frugality and virtue, and by frequent recurrence to fundamental principles.

16. That religion, or the duty which we owe to our Creator, and the manner of
discharging it, can be directed only by reason and conviction, not by force or
violence, and therefore all men are equally entitled to the free exercise of
religion, according to the dictates of conscience; and that it is the mutual
duty of all to practice Christian forbearance, love, and charity toward each
other.

THE CONSTITUTION. The Constitution, or Form of Government, agreed to and
resolved upon by the Delegates and Representatives of the several Counties and
Corporations of Virginia.
1. WHEREAS George the third, king of Great Britain and Ireland, and elector of
Hanover, heretofore entrusted with the exercise of the kingly office in this
government, has endeavored to pervert the same into a detestable and
insupportable tyranny, by putting his negative on laws the most wholesome and
necessary for the public good: By denying his governors permission to pass laws
of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation for
his assent, and when so suspended, neglecting to attend to them for many years:
By refusing to pass certain other laws, unless the persons to be benefited by
them would relinquish the inestimable right of representation in the
legislature: By dissolving legislative assemblies repeatedly and continually,
for opposing, with manly firmness, his invasions of the rights of the people:
When dissolved, by refusing to call others for a long space of time, thereby
leaving the political system without any legislative head: By endeavoring to
prevent the population of our country, and, for that purpose, obstructing the
laws for the naturalization of foreigners: By keeping among us, in the time of
peace, standing armies and ships of war: By affecting to render the military
independent of, and superior to the civil power: By combining with others to
subject us to foreign jurisdiction, giving his assent to their pretended acts
of legislation: For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us: For
cutting off our trade with all parts of the world: For imposing taxes on us
without our consent: For depriving us of the benefits of trial by jury: For
transporting us beyond seas, to be tried for pretended offenses: For suspending
our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate
for us in all cases whatsoever: By plundering our seas, ravaging our coasts,
burning our towns, and destroying the lives of our people: By inciting
insurrections of our fellow subjects, with the allurements of forfeiture and
confiscation: By prompting our negroes to rise in arms among us, those very
negroes whom, by an inhuman use of his negative, he has refused us permission
to exclude by law: By endeavoring to bring on the inhabitants of our
frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known rule of warfare is an
undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes, and conditions of existence: By
transporting, at this time, a large army of foreign mercenaries, to complete
the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun with circumstances
of cruelty and perfidy, unworthy the head of a civilized nation: By answering
our repeated petitions for redress with a repetition of injuries: And finally,
by abandoning the helm of government, and declaring us out of his allegiance
and protection. By which several acts of misrule the government of this
country, as formerly exercised under the crown of Great Britain, is totally
dissolved.

2. We, therefore, the delegates and representatives of the good people of
Virginia, having maturely considered the premises, and viewing with great
concern the deplorable condition to which this once happy country must be
reduced, unless some regular adequate mode of civil polity is speedily adopted,
and in compliance with a recommendation of the General Congress, do ordain and
declare the future form of government of Virginia to be as follows:

3. The legislative, executive, and judiciary departments, shall be separate
and distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the
other; nor shall any person exercise the powers of more than one of them at the
same time, except that the justices of the county courts shall be eligible to
either house of assembly.

4. The legislative shall be formed of two distinct branches, who, together,
shall be a complete legislature. They shall meet once or oftener every year, and
shall be called the General Assembly of Virginia.

5. One of these shall be called the House of Delegates, and consist of two
representatives to be chosen for each county, and for the district of
West-Augusta, annually, of such men as actually reside in, and are freeholders
of the same, or duly qualified according to law; and also one delegate or
representative to be chosen annually for the city of Williamsburg, and one for
the borough of Norfolk, and a representative for each of such other cities and
boroughs as may hereafter be allowed particular representation by the
legislature; but when any city or borough shall so decrease as that the number
of persons having right of suffrage therein shall have been for the space of
seven years successively less than half the number of voters in some one county
in Virginia, such city or borough thenceforward shall cease to send a delegate
or representative to the assembly.

6. The other shall be called the Senate, and consist of twenty-four members,
of whom thirteen shall constitute a house, to proceed on business, for whose
election the different counties shall be divided into twenty-four district, and
each county of the respective district, at the time of the election of its
delegates, shall vote for one senator, who is actually a resident and
freeholder within the district, or duly qualified according to law, and is
upwards of twenty-five years of age; and the sheriffs of each county, within
five days at farthest after the last county election in the district, shall
meet at some convenient place, and from the poll so taken in their respective
counties, return as a senator the man who shall have the greatest number of
votes in the whole district. To keep up this assembly by rotation, the district
shall be equally divided into four classes, and numbered by lot. At the end of
one year after the general election, the six members elected by the first
division shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned, supplied
from such class or division, by new election, in the manner aforesaid. This
rotation shall be applied to each division, according to its number, and
continued in due order, annually.

7. That the right of suffrage in the election of members, of both houses,
shall remain as exercised at present, and each house shall choose its own
speaker, appoint its own officers, set^^^ its own rules of proceeding, and
direct writs of elect^^or supplying intermediate vacancies.

8. All laws shall originate in the house of delegates, to be approved or
rejected by the senate, or to be amended with the consent of the house of
delegates; except money bills, which in no instance shall be altered by the
senate, but wholly approved or rejected.

9. A governor, or chief magistrate, shall be chosen annually, by joint ballot
of both houses, to be taken in each house respectively, deposited in the
conference room, the boxes examined jointly by a committee of each house, and
the numbers severally reported to them, that the appointments may be entered
(which shall be the mode of taking the joint ballot of both houses in all
cases) who shall not continue in that office longer than three years
successively, nor be eligible until the expiration of four years after he shall
have been out of that office. An adequate, but moderate salary, shall be
settled on him during his continuance in office; and he shall, with the advice
of a council of state, exercise the executive powers of government, according
to the laws of this commonwealth; and shall not, under any pretense, exercise
any power or prerogative, by virtue of any law, statute, or custom of England:
But he shall, with the advice of the council of state, have the power of
granting reprieves or pardons, where the prosecution shall have been carried on
by the house of delegates, or the law shall otherwise particularly direct; in
which cases, no reprieve or pardon shall be granted, but by resolve of the
house of delegates.

10. Either house of the general assembly may adjourn themselves respectively.
The governor shall not prorogue or adjourn the assembly during their sitting,
nor dissolve them at any time; but he shall, if necessary, either by the advice
of the council of state, or on application of a majority of the house of
delegates, call them before the time to which they shall stand prorogued or
adjourned.

11. A privy council, or council of state, consisting of eight members, shall
be chosen by joint ballot of both houses of assembly, either from their own
members or the people at large, to assist the administration of government.
They shall annually choose out of their own members a president, who, in case
of the death, inability, or necessary absence of the governor from the
government, shall act as lieutenant governor. Four members shall be sufficient
to act, and their advice and proceedings shall be entered on record, and signed
by the members present (to any part whereof any member may enter his dissent)
to be laid before the general assembly, when called for by them. This council
may appoint their own clerk, who shall have a salary settled by law, and take
an oath of secrecy in such matters as he shall be directed by the board to
conceal. A sum of money appropriated to that purpose shall be divided annually
among the members, in proportion to their attendance; and they shall be
incapable, during their continuance in office, of sitting in either house of
assembly. Two members shall be removed by joint ballot of both houses of
assembly at the end of every three years, and be ineligible for the three next
years. These vacancies, as well as those occasioned by death or incapacity,
shall be supplied by new elections, in the same manner.

12. The delegates for Virginia to the Continental Congress shall be chosen
annually, or superseded in the mean time by joint ballot of both houses of
assembly.

13. The present militia officers shall be continued, and vacancies supplied by
appointment of the governor, with the advice of the privy council, or
recommendations from the respective county courts; but the governor and council
shall have a power of suspending any officer, and ordering a court martial on
complaint of misbehaviour or inability, or to supply vacancies of officers
happening when in actual service. The governor may embody the militia, with the
advice of the privy council, and when embodied, shall alone have the direction
of the militia under the laws of the country.

14. The two houses of assembly shall, by joint ballot, appoint judges of the
supreme court of appeals, and general court, judges in chancery, judges of
admiralty, secretary, and the attorney general, to be commissioned by the
governor, and continue in office during good behavior: In case of death,
incapacity, or resignation, the governor, with the advice of the privy council,
shall appoint persons to succeed in office, to be approved or displaced by both
houses. These officers shall have fixed and adequate salaries, and, together
with all other holding lucrative offices, and all ministers of the gospel of
every denomination, be incapable of being elected members of either house of
assembly, or the privy council.

15. The governor, with the advice of the privy council, shall appoint justices
of the peace for the counties; and in case of vacancies, or a necessity of
increasing the number hereafter, such appointments to be made upon the
recommendation of the respective county courts. The present acting secretary in
Virginia, and clerks of all the county courts, shall continue in office, in
case of vacancies, either by death, incapacity, or resignation, a secretary
shall be appointed as before directed, and the clerks by their respective
courts. The present and future clerks shall hold their offices during good
behavior, to be judged of and determined in the general court. The sheriffs
and coroners shall be nominated by the respective courts, approved by the
governor, with the advice of the privy council, and commissioned by the
governor. The justices shall appoint constables, and all fees of the aforesaid
officers be regulated by law.

16. The governor, when he is out of office, and others offending against the
state, either by mal-administration, corruption, or other means by which the
safety of the state may be endangered, shall be impeachable by the house or
delegates. Such impeachment to be prosecuted by the attorney general, or such
other person or persons as the house may appoint in the general court,
according to the laws of the land. If found guilty, he or they shall be either
for ever disabled to hold any office under government, or removed from such
office pro tempore, or subjected to such pains or penalties as the law shall
direct.

17. If all, or any of the judges of the general court shall, on good grounds
(to be judged of by the house of delegates) be accused of any of the crimes or
offenses before mentioned, such house of delegates may, in like manner, impeach
the judge or judges so accused, to be prosecuted in the court of appeals; and
he or they, if found guilty, shall be punished in the manner as is prescribed
in the preceding clause.

18. Commissions and grants shall run in the name of the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and bear test by the governor, with the seal of the commonwealth
annexed. Writs shall run in the same manner, and bear test by the clerks of the
several courts. Indictments shall conclude, against the peace and dignity of
the commonwealth.

19. A treasurer shall be appointed annually, by joint ballot of both houses.

20. All escheats, penalties, and forfeitures, heretofore going to the king,
shall go to the commonwealth, save only such as the legislature may abolish or
otherwise provide for.

21. The territories contained within the charters erecting the colonies of
Maryland, Pennsylvania, North and South Carolina, are hereby ceded, released,
and for ever confirmed to the people of those colonies respectively, with all
the rights of property, jurisdiction and government, and all the rights
whatsoever which might at any time heretofore have been claimed by Virginia,
except the free navigation, and use of the rivers Potowmack and Pokomoke, with
the property of the Virginia shores or stands bordering on either of the said
rivers, and all improvements which have been or shall be thereon. The western
and northern extent of Virginia shall in all other respects stand as fixed, by
the charter of king James the first, in the year one thousand six hundred and
nine, and by the public treaty of peace between the courts of Great Britain and
France in the year one thousand seven hundred and sixty three; unless, by act
of legislature, one or more territories shall hereafter be laid off, and
governments established westward of the Allegheny mountains. And no purchase of
lands shall be made of the Indian natives but on behalf of the public, by
authority of the general assembly.

22. In order to introduce this government, the representatives of the people
met in convention, shall choose a governor and privy council, also such other
officers directed to be chosen by both houses as may be judged necessary to be
immediately appointed. The senate to be first chosen by the people, to continue
until the last day of March next, and the other officers until the end of the
succeeding session of assembly. In case of vacancies, the speaker of either
house shall issue writs for new elections.

(The End of the Constitution.)
COURT OF APPEALS. Court of appeals first opened at Williamsburgh, 30th August,
1779.
Williamsburgh, to wit.
AT the capital in the said city on Monday the 30th of August, one thousand
seven hundred and seventy nine: In virtue of an act passed at the last session
of general assembly entitled "an act constituting the court of appeals," --
then and there convened, Edmund Pendleton and George With esquires, two of the
judges of the high court of chancery; John Blair esquire, one of the judges of
the general court and Benjamin Waller, Richard Carry, and William Roscow, Wilson
Curle esquires, judges of the court of admiralty.

And thereupon the oath of fidelity prescribed by an act entitled "an act
prescribing the oath of fidelity," and the oath of certain public officers
"together with the oath of office prescribed by the said act, constituting the
court of appeals, to be taken by every judge of the said court, being first
administered by the said George With and John Blair esquires, to the said
Edmund Pendleton, and then by the said Edmund Pendleton esquire to the rest of
the judges; the court proceeded to the business before them, and then adjourned
till the 16th day of December next." --

[Signed,] "EDMUND PENDLETON."

REMONSTRANCE, Of the court of appeals, to the general assembly.
AT a court of appeals, held at the court house, in the city of Richmond, on
Tuesday, the twenty ninth day of April, one thousand seven hundred and eighty
eight, and thence continued, by adjournments, until Monday, the twelfth day of
May next following, then and there present:

Edmund Pendleton, George With, John Blair, Paul Carrington, Peter Lions,
William Fleming, Henry Tazwell, Richard Carry, James Henry, and John Tyler,
Esquires, Judges.
On consideration of a late act of assembly entitled "an act establishing
district courts," after several conferences, and upon mature deliberation, the
court do adjudge that clerks of the said courts, ought not now to be appointed,
for reasons contained in a remonstrance to the general assembly, in the words
following, to wit:

To the honorable the speakers and other members of the senate and house of
delegates of the commonwealth of Virginia in general assembly.

THE RESPECTFUL REMONSTRANCE OF THE COURT OF APPEALS.
THE remonstrants finding themselves called upon by a late act of the general
assembly, entitled, "an act establishing district courts," to proceed at this
session to the appointment of clerks to the said courts, that whole act was
necessarily brought into their view; in considering which they encountered many
difficulties, of an ordinary nature, such as whether their power of appointing
now, though directed by the 2nd section, was not controled by the 116th,
declaring that the act should take effect, and be in force, from and after the
first day of July, in the year 1788, and not before, whether the district
courts have jurisdiction of any suits now depending in the general court, of
above thirty pounds value; whether any, and what, provision was made for the
trial of criminals who might remain in the public jail after the session of the
general court in June next, or who might be examined and committed prior to the
said first day of July; and whether for want of precision in several other
parts of the law, it was, in the respective cases to operate from the time of
passing, or from the first day of July.

(In other instances, particularly in the construction of the late execution
law, regularly brought before the court this term, they have to lament the last
difficulty, which they found so great that nothing but the repose of the
community, and the necessity of having one uniform system in that respect could
have induced the court to decide upon it at last without further consideration.)

But in the progress of their discussion, they found it unavoidable to consider
more important questions, viz: whether the principles of this act do not
violate those of the constitution or form of government, which the people in
1776, when the former bands of their society were dissolved, established as the
foundation of that government which they judged necessary for the preservation
of their persons and property; and if such violation were apparent, whether
they had power, and it was their duty, to declare that act must yield to the
constitution.

And here they have again to lament, that there should be occasion to decide
those important questions in any case, especially at a time when the minds of
the citizens are agitated upon other questions of great and national concern,
more so that the necessity should occur in a case wherein their individual
interests are involved, and still more that a decision one way might suspend,
though for a short time, the beneficial effects of a law tending to promote the
speedy and easy administration of justice.

On this view of the subject, the following alternative presented themselves to
the court; either to decide those questions, or resign their offices. The
latter would have been their choice, if they could have considered the
questions as affecting their individual interests only; but viewing them as
relating to their office, and finding themselves called by their country to
sustain an important post as one of the three pillars on which the great fabric
of government was erected, they judged that a resignation would subject them to
the reproach of deserting their station, and betraying the sacred interests of
society entrusted with them, and on that ground found themselves obliged to
decide, however their delicacy might be wounded, or whatever temporary
inconveniences might ensue, and in that decision to declare that the
constitution and the act are in opposition and cannot exist together, and that
the former must control the operation of the latter. If this opinion declaring
the supremacy of the constitution needed any support, it may be found in the
opinion of the legislature themselves, who have in several instances considered
the constitution as prescribing limits to their powers as well as to those of
the other departments of government.

In forming their judgment upon both questions they had recourse to that
article in the declaration of rights, that no free government, or the blessings
of liberty can be preserved to any people but (among other things) by frequent
recurrence to fundamental principles; an article worthy to be written in
letters of gold. The propriety and necessity of the independence of the judges
is evident in reason, and the nature of their office, since they are to decide
between government and the people as well as between contending citizens, and
if they be dependent on either, corrupt influence may be apprehended,
sacrificing the innocent to popular prejudice; and subjecting the poor to
oppression and persecution by the rich, and this applies more forcibly to
exclude a dependence on the legislature, a branch of whom in cases of
impeachment, is itself a party. This principle supposed, the court are led to
consider, whether the people have secured, or departed from it, in their
constitution or form of government. In that solemn act they discover the people
distributing the governmental powers, into three great branches, legislature,
executive, and judiciary, in order to preserve that equipoise which they judged
necessary to secure their liberty, declaring that those powers be kept separate
and distinct from each other, and that no person shall exercise at the same
time an office in more than one of them. The independence of the two former
could not be admitted, because in them a long continuance in office might be
dangerous to liberty, and therefore they provided for a change, by frequent
elections at stated periods; but in the last from the influence of the
principle before observed upon, they declared that the judges should hold their
offices during good behavior. Their independence would have been rendered
complete, by fixing the quantum of their salaries, which perhaps would have
been done, if the duties of office had been at that time ascertained. But
although it was not then done, yet in respect to this, the constitution gives a
principle, not to be departed from, declaring that the salaries shall be
adequate and fixed, leaving it to the legislature to judge what would be
adequate when they should appoint the duties. And when they had so done, they
exercised their whole power over the subject, and the salary was thenceforth to
be considered as fixed, while the duties should continue the same. And when
public utility should require an increase or diminution of duty, there should
be an analogous alteration of salary, with this restriction however, that such
regulation should not blend the duties of the judges of the general court,
court of chancery, and court of admiralty, which the constitution seems to
require to be exercised by distinct persons; and the legislature appear to have
so considered it in the arrangement of those courts.

The court of appeals of whomsoever constituted, must necessarily act upon the
subjects referred to all the others, and therefore the forming it so as to
consist of all the judges is no violation of the constitution; and that mode,
assimulated to adjournments of cases before all the judges of England in the
exchequer chamber, may have been dictated by necessity.

The court then proceeded to consider what had been done by the legislature in
consequence of the constitution. In the October session of 1777, they passed
two acts, organizing the general court and court of chancery, giving to the
former jurisdiction at common law, in civil cases as well as criminal, and to
the latter jurisdiction in all cases in equity. The duties of each were
distinctly pointed out, and a salary of five hundred pounds to each judge was
thought by the legislature to be an adequate reward for those duties, and this
previous to the appointment of any judges. The election of the judges followed,
when four of those at present in office were of the number elected; who,
thinking as they still think the salary was adequate to the services, declined
other pursuits, and accepted their appointments, under a confidence that the
constitution (...) them to that salary, so long as they should perform the
duty, in an upright manner.

The nominal sum they conceived was to be paid them in specie, or in something
equivalent thereto, and they have reason to believe the legislature so
understood it, from laws in force at that period, making it penal to demand an
allowance for the difference between specie and paper money.

And though the other judges have been called into duty by subsequent
appointments, they may be supposed to stand upon the same ground of original
compact. The court of admiralty, indeed, was not permanently constituted 'till
the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, and the judges then
appointed; yet by being made judges of the court of appeals, they have ever
since been put upon the same footing with their brethren in point of salary.
The various substitutions of paper money and tobacco for specie, which was not
to be had, the judges considered as temporary expedients, which, though
operating greatly to the diminution of their salaries, were not designed to
affect their independence; and therefore they acquiesced, content to share in
the public calamities, in hopes of a recurrence to the constitutional principle
in better times. And they considered in the same light the act of one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-one, stating the salary at three hundred pounds, as
dictated by necessity, and not proceeding from design, and therefore, did not
conceive it to be their official duty to interpose.

But the act now under consideration, presenting a system, which assigns to the
judges of the chancery and admiralty jurisdiction in common law cases, which so
far may be considered as a new office, the labor of which would greatly exceed
that of the former, without a correspondent reward, and to the judges of the
general court duties, which though not changed as to their subjects are yet
more than doubled, without any increase of salary, appeared so evident an
attack upon the independency of the judges that they thought it inconsistent
with a conscientious discharge of their duty to pass it over. For vain would be
the precaution of the founders of our government to secure liberty, if the
legislature though restrained from changing the tenure of judicial offices, are
at liberty to compel a resignation by reducing salaries to a copper, or by
making it a part of the official duty to become hewers of wood and drawers of
water, or if in case of a contrary disposition, they can make salaries
exhorbitant, or by lessening the duties render offices almost sinecures; the
independency of the judiciary is in either case, equally annihilated. The
court, however, willing to hope, that in the present instance the legislature
had no such design, but that inattention or some other circumstances might
occasion the deviation, and that upon a revision of the subject, this law will
be placed upon unexceptionable ground, had only to consider what ought to be
their conduct in the mean time. The result of which was that they ought not to
do any thing officially in execution of an act which appeared to be contrary to
the spirit of the constitution, and therefore they declined to appoint the
clerks of the district courts, under the said act.

To obviate a possible objection, that the court, while they are maintaining
the independency of the judiciary, are countenancing encroachments of that
branch upon the departments of others, and assuming a right to control the
legislature, it may be observed that when they decide between an act of the
people and an act of the legislature, they are within the line of their duty,
declaring what the law is, and not making a new law. And ever disposed to
maintain harmony with the other members of government, so necessary to promote
the happine^^ of society, the court most sincerely wish, that the present
infraction of the constitution may be remedied by the legislature themselves,
and thereby all further uneasiness on the occasion be prevented. But should
their wishes be disappointed by the event, they see no other alternative for a
decision between the legislature and judiciary than an appeal to the people,
whose servants both are, and for whose sakes both were created, and who may
exercise their original and supreme power whenever they think proper. To that
tribunal, therefore, the court, in that case, commit themselves, conscious of
perfect integrity in their intensions, however they may have been mistaken in
their judgment."

It is ordered that the President of the Court do deliver the said remonstrance
to his Excellency the Governor, with a request that he will be pleased to lay
the same before the General Assembly at their first session.

(Signed) EDMUND PENDLETON.
Subsequent to this Remonstrance, the whole of the Judges resigned, and
afterward re-qualified, under an Act for amending the Act, entitled, "An Act
constituting the Court of Appeals," passed the 22d of December, 1788.



ADVERTISEMENT.
ALTHOUGH this case is a contest between two individuals in its origin, yet,
considering it as one which involves the dearest rights and interests of the
community, by its creating a ground of nice and critical enquiry between the
legislature and judicial departments of the particular state, and taking into
view the extensive field of law learning (into which the respective judges of
the general court have advanced, with very sound and able arguments), as one
applying not only to the respective States, but to the co-relative departments
of the federal government, the Editor has thought it proper to annex hereunto
the Constitution of the UNITED STATES.

CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.
The constitution framed for the United States of America, by a convention of
deputies from the states of New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, at a session begun May 25, and
ended September 17, 1787.

WE, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union,
establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common
defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to
ourselves and our posterity, to ordain and establish this constitution for the
United States of America.

ARTICLE I.
SECTION I.
ALL legislative powers herein granted, shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States, which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.

SECTION II.
1. The house of representatives shall consist of members chosen every second
year, by the people of the several states; and the electors, in each state,
shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the state legislature.

2. No person shall be a representative, who shall not have attained to the age
of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States; and
who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall
be chosen.

3. Representatives, and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several
states, which may be included in this union, according to their respective
numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the
United States; and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as
they shall by law direct. The number of representatives shall not exceed one
for every thirty thousand: but each state shall have at least one
representative: and, until such enumeration shall be made, the state of
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three; Massachusetts eight;
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one; Connecticut five; New York six;
New Jersey four; Pennsylvania eight; Delaware one; Maryland six; Virginia ten;
North Carolina five; South Carolina five; and Georgia three.

4. When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

5. The house of representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers;
and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SECTION III.
1. The senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators from each
state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years: and each senator shall
have one vote.

2. Immediately after they shall be assembled, in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided, as equally as may be, into three classes. The
seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year; of the second class, at the expiration of the fourth year; and
of the third class, at the expiration of the sixth year; so that one third may
be chosen every second year. And if vacancies happen, by resignation or
otherwise, during the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

3. No person shall be a senator, who shall not have attained to the age of
thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States; and who shall
not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.

4. The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the senate;
but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

5. The senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro
tempore, in the absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the
office of President, of the United States.

6. The senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting
for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of
the United States is tried, the chief justice shall preside: and no person
shall be convicted, without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members
present.

7. Judgment, in cases of impeachment, shall not extend further than to removal
from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor,
trust, or profit, under the United States. But the party convicted shall,
nevertheless, be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and
punishment according to law.

SECTION IV.
1. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof:
but the Congress may, at any time, by law, make or alter such regulations,
except as to the places of choosing senators.

2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year: and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

SECTION V.
1. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications
of its own members: and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do
business: but a smaller number may adjourn (...) from day to day, and may be
authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner, and
under such penalties as each house may provide.

2. Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings; punish its members
for disorderly behavior; and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a
member.

3. Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings; and, from time to time,
publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house, on any question,
shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

4. Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent
of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than
that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

SECTION VI.
1. The senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for their
services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United
States. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of the
peace, be privileged from arrest, during their attendance at the session of
their respective houses, and in going to, and returning from the same: and for
any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

2. No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil office, under the authority of the United
States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have
been increased, during such time: and no person, holding any office under the
United States, shall be a member of either house, during his continuance in
office.

SECTION VII.
1. All bills, for raising revenue, shall originate in the house of
representatives; but the senate shall propose or concur with amendments, as on
other bills.

2. Every bill, which shall have passed the house of representatives and the
senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President of the
United States. If he approve, he shall sign it: but if not, he shall return it,
with his objections, to that house, in which it shall have originated, who
shall enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to consider
it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of that house shall agree to
pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other
house, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered: and, if approved by
two-thirds of that house, it shall become a law. But, in all such cases, the
votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays: and the names of the
persons voting for and against the bill, shall be entered on the journal of
each house respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President,
within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him,
the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the
Congress, by their adjournment, prevent its return; in which case it shall not
be a law.

3. Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the senate
and house of representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and,
before the same shall take effect, be approved by him; or, being disapproved by
him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of both houses, according to the rules and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

SECTION VIII.
The Congress shall have power,

1. To lay and collect taxes, duties, imports, and excises, to pay the debts,
and provide for the common defense, and general welfare, of the United States;
but all duties, imposts, and excises, shall be uniform throughout the United
States.

2. To borrow money on the credit of the United States.

3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States,
and with the Indian tribes.

4. To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the
subject of bankruptcies, throughout the United States.

5. To coin money; regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin; and fix the
standard of weights and measures.

6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States.

7. To establish post-offices and post-roads.

8. To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing, for
limited times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries.

9. To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court.

10. To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and
offenses against the law of nations.

11. To declare war; grant letters of marque and reprisal; and make rules
concerning captures on land and water.

12. To raise and support armies. But no appropriation of money for that use,
shall be for a longer term than two years.

13. To provide and maintain a navy.

14. To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval
forces.

15. To provide for calling forth the militia, to execute the laws of the
union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions.

16. To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for
governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United
States: reserving to the States respectively the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress.

17. To exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatsoever over such
district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular
States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of
the United States; and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by
the consent of the legislature of the State in which the same shall be, for the
erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other needful
buildings: -- and

18. To make all laws, which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or
officer thereof.

SECTION IX.
1. The migration or importation of such persons, as any of the States now
existing, shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress,
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight: but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

3. No bill of attainder, or ex post facto law shall be passed.

4. No capitation or other direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to
the census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

5. No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State. No
preference shall be given, by any regulation of commerce or revenue, to the
ports of one State over those of another: nor shall vessels, bound to or from,
one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

6. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law: and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

7. No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no person,
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
Congress, except of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

SECTION X.
1. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant
letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any
thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or
grant any title of nobility.

2. No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any imposts or duties
on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any
State on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury of the United
States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the
Congress. No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty on
tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time of peace, enter into any
agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in
war, unless actually invaded, or in such eminent danger as will not admit of
delay.

ARTICLE II.
SECTION I.
1. The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States of
America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together
with the Vice President, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:

2. Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of senators and
representatives, to which the State may be entitled in the Congress. But no
senator, or representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit,
under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

3. The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for
two persons, of whom one, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same
State with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for,
and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify,
and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States,
directed to the President of the senate. The President of the senate shall, in
the presence of the senate and house of representatives, open all the
certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the
greatest number of votes shall be the President, if such number be a majority
of the whole number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who
have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the house of
representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for President:
and if no person have a majority, then, from the five highest on the list, the
said house shall in like manner choose the President. But in choosing the
President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each
State having one vote: a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or
members from two-thirds of the States: and a majority of all the States shall
be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the President, the
person having the greatest number of votes of the electors, shall be the
Vice President. But if there should remain two or more, who have equal votes,
the senate shall choose from them, by ballot, the Vice President.

4. The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day
on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout
the United States.

5. No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United
States, at the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to
the office of President. Neither shall any person be eligible to that office,
who shall not have attained, to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen
years a resident within the United States.

6. In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President; and the Congress may, by
law, provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of
the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then ad as
President; and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.

7. The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished, during the
period for which he shall have been elected: and he shall not receive, within
that period, any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

8. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation:

I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States; and will, to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the constitution of the United States.

SECTION II.
1. The President shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the
actual service of the United States. He may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officers in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices: and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons, for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to
make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur: and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may, by law, vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

3. The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen,
during the recess of the senate, by granting commissions, which shall expire at
the end of their next session.

SECTION III.
He shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information of the state of
the union; and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge
necessary and expedient. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both
houses, or either of them: and, in case of disagreement between them, with
respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he
shall think proper. He shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers. He
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed; and shall commission all
the officers of the United States.

SECTION IV.
The President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United States,
shall be removed from office, on impeachment for, and convicton of, treason,
bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanor.

ARTICLE. III.
SECTION I.
The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one supreme court,
and in such inferior courts as the Congress may, from time to time, ordain and
establish. The judges, both of the supreme and inferior courts, shall hold
their offices during good behavior; and shall, at stated times, receive for
their services, a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their
continuance in office.

SECTION II.
1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising
under this constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or
which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting ambassadors,
other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to
controversies between two or more states, between a state and citizens of
another state, between citizens of different states, between citizens of the
same state, claiming lands under grants of different states, and between a
state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens or subjects.

2. In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and
those in which a state shall be a party, the supreme court shall have original
jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the supreme court shall
have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and
under such regulations as the Congress shall make.

3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury:
and such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any state, the trial shall be at such
place or places, as the Congress may by law have directed.

SECTION III.
1. Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.

2. The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason: but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
SECTION I.
Full faith and credit shall be given in each state, to the public acts,
records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. And the Congress may,
by general laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and
proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

SECTION II.
1. The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several states.

2. A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who
shall flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall, on demand of the
executive authority of the state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
remove to the State, having jurisdiction of the crime.

3. No person, held to service or labor in one state, under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor; but shall be delivered up on claim of
the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

SECTION III.
1. New states may be admitted by the Congress into this union; but no new
state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state --
nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts of
states -- without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned, as
well as of the Congress.

2. The Congress shall have power to dispose of, and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting, the territory or other property belonging to the United
States: and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed, as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular state.

SECTION IV.
The United States shall guarantee to every state in this union, a republican
form of government; and shall protect each of them against invasion, and on
application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature
cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

ARTICLE V.
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary,
sholl propose amendments to this constitution, or, on the application, of the
legislatures of two-thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for
proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of
three-fourths of the several states, or by conventions in three-fourths
thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the
Congress; provided, that no amendment, which may be made prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and
fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no state,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate.

ARTICLE VI.
1. All debts contracted, and engagements entered into, before the adoption of
this constitution, shall be as valid against the United States, under this
constitution, as under the confederation.

2. This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land: and the
judges, in every state, shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution
or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
several state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of
the United States and of the several states shall be bound, by oath or
affirmation to support this constitution; but no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United
States.

ARTICLE VII.
The ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the
establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.

Done in convention, by the unanimous consent of the states present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven, and of the independence of the United States of
America the twelfth. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, President and Deputy from Virginia.
AMENDMENTS to
NEW HAMPSHIRE, John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman.
MASSACHUSETTS, Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King.
CONNECTICUT, William Samuel Johnson, Roger Sherman.
NEW YORK, Alexander Hamilton.
NEW JERSEY, William Livingston, David Brearley, William Patterson, Jonathan
Dayton.
PENNSYLVANIA, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Mifflin, Robert Morris, George Clymer,
Thomas Fitzsimons, Jared Ingersoll, James Wilson, Gouverneur Morris,
DELAWARE, George Reed, Gunning Bedford, jun. John Dickinson, Richard Basset,
Jacob Broom.
MARYLAND, James M'Henry, Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer, Daniel Carrol.
VIRGINIA, John Blair, James Madison, junior.
NORTH CAROLINA, William Blount, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Hugh Williamson.
SOUTH CAROLINA, John Rutledge, Charles C. Pinckney, Charles Pinckney, Pierce
Butler.
GEORGIA, William Few, Abraham Baldwin.

Attest. WILLIAM JACKSON, secretary.



CONGRESS of the UNITED STATES, Begun and held at the city of New York, on
Wednesday, the fourth of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine.
The conventions of a number of the states having, at the time of their
adopting the constitution, expressed a desire, in order to prevent
misconstruction or abuse of its powers, that further declaratory and
restrictive clauses should be added -- and as extending the ground of public
confidence in the government will best insure the beneficent ends of its
institution --
RESOLVED, by the senate and house of representatives of the United States of
America, in Congress assembled, two-thirds of both houses concurring, that the
following articles be proposed to the legislatures of the several states, as
amendments to the constitution of the United States, all, or any of which
articles, when ratified by three-fourths of the said legislatures, to be valid,
to all intents and purposes as part of the said constitution, viz.

ARTICLES, in addition to, and amendment of the Constitution of the United
States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legislatures of
the several States, pursuant to the fifth article of the original Constitution.
I. After the first enumeration, required by the first article of the
Constitution, there shall be one representative for every thirty thousand,
until the number shall amount to one hundred; after which, the proportion shall
be so regulated by Congress, that there shall be not less than one hundred
representatives -- nor less than one representative for every forty thousand
persons -- until the number of representives shall amount to two hundred; after
which, the proportion shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall not
be less than two hundred representatives, nor more than one representative for
every fifty thousand persons.

II. No law, varying the compensation for the services of the senators and
representatives shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall
have intervened.

III. Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

IV. A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state,
the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.

V. No soldier shall in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without the
consent of the owner; nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by
law.

VI. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated: and
no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation -- and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized.

VII. No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment by a grand jury, except in cases
arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service,
in time of war, or public danger: nor shall any person be subject for the same
offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in
any criminal case, to be a witness against himseif; nor be deprived of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law: nor shall private property be
taken for public use, without just compensation.

VIII. In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury, of the State and district,
wherein the crime shall have been committed; which district shall have been
previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the
assistance of counsel for his defense.

IX. In suits at common law, where the value in controversy, shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved: and no fact
tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the United
States, than according to the rules of common law.

X. Excessive bail shall not be required; nor excessive fines imposed; nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

XI. The enumeration, in the constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others, retained by the people.

XII. The powers, not delegated to the United States, by the constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to
the people.

FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the House of Representatives. JOHN
ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
Attest. JOHN Beckley, Clerk of the House of Representatives. SAMUEL A. OTIS,
Secretary of the Senate.

N. B. By the returns made into the Secretary of State's office, it appears
that the first article of the above amendments is agreed to by only seven
States -- the second by only four -- and therefore these are not obligatory.
All the remainder, having been ratified by nine States, are of equal obligation
with the constitution itself.

August 12, 1791.



