A MESSAGE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES TRANSMITTING A REPORT OF THE
SECRETARY OF STATE OF SUCH LAWS, DECREES AND ORDINANCES RESPECTING COMMERCE IN
THE COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THE UNITED STATES HAVE COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN, M, DCC, XCIV.

UNITED STATES, December 30th, 1793. Gentlemen of the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES.
I NOW transmit you a REPORT by the SECRETARY of STATE, of such Laws, Decrees
and Ordinances, or their substance, respecting Commerce in the Countries, with
which the United States have commercial intercourse, as he has received, and
had not stated in his Report, of the sixteenth instant.

Go: WASHINGTON.

The SECRETARY of STATE, to whom the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES referred
the Resolution of the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, of December 24, 1793, desiring
the Substance of all such LAWS, DECREES, or ORDINANCES, respecting COMMERCE in
any of the Countries with which the UNITED STATES have Commercial Intercourse,
as have been received by the SECRETARY of STATE, and not already stated to the
House, in his Report of the 16th instant, REPORTS:
THAT he has had an official communication of a decree rendered by the National
Assembly of France, on the 26th day of March last, of which the following is a
translation.

DECREE,
Exempting from all duties the subsistences and other objects of supply in the
colonies, relatively to the United States, pronounced in the sitting of the
26th March, 1793, 2d year of the French republic.

The National Convention, willing to prevent, by precise dispositions, the
difficulties that might arise relatively to the execution of its decree of the
19th February last, concerning the United States of America; -- to grant new
favors to this ally-nation, and to treat it in its commercial relations with
the colonies of France, in the same manner as the vessels of the republic --
decree as follows:

Art. 1. From the day of the publication of the present decree, in the French
American colonies, the vessels of the United States, of the burden of 60 tons
at the least, laden only with meals and subsistances, as well as the objects of
supply, announced in Art. 2d of the arret of 30th August, 1784, as also lard,
butter, salted salmon, and candles, shall be admitted in the ports of the said
colonies, exempt from all duties: The same exemption shall extend to the French
vessels laden with The same articles, and coming from a foreign port.

Art. 2. The captains of vessels of the United Stages, who, having brought into
the French American colonies the objects comprised in the above article, wish
to return to the territory of the said states, may lade in the said colonies,
independent of sirrups, rum, taffias, and French merchandises, a quantity of
coffee equivalent to the 1/50 of the tonnage of every vessel, as also a
quantity of sugar equal to the 1/10, on conforming to the following articles.

Art. 3. Every captain of an American vessel, who wishes to make returns to the
United States of coffee and sugar of the French colonies, shall make it appear
that his vessel entered therein with at least of her cargo according to Art.
1st. For this purpose he shall be obliged to transmit, within 24 hours after
his arrival, to the custom-house of the place he may land at, a certificate of
the marine agents, establishing the guage of his vessel, and the effective
tonnage of her cargo.

The heads of the said custom-houses shall assure themselves that the
exportation of the sugars and coffee does not exceed the proportion fixed by
the 2d Art. of the present decree.

Art. 4. The captains of vessels of the United States of America shall not pay
on going from the islands, as well as those of the republic, but a duty of 5
livres per quintal of indigo, 10 livres per thousand weight of cotton, 5 livres
per thousand weight of coffee, 5 livres per thousand weight of brown and clayed
sugars, and 50 sols per thousand weight of raw sugar. Every other merchandise
shall be exempt from duty on going out of the colonies.

Art. 5. The sugars and coffee which shall be laden, shall pay at the
custom-houses which are established in the colonies, or that shall be
established, in addition to the duties above fixed, those imposed by the law of
19th March, 1791, on the sugars and coffee imported from the said colonies to
France, and conformably to the same law.

Art. 6. The captains of vessels of the United States, who wish to lade
merchandises, of the said colonies, for the ports of France, shall furnish the
custom-house at the place of departure with the bonds required of the masters
of French vessels by the 2d Art. of the law of 10th July, 1791, to secure the
unlading of these merchandises in the ports of the Republic.

Art. 7. The vessels of the nations with whom the French Republic is not at
war, may carry to the French American Colonies all the objects designated by
the present decree. They may also bring into the ports of the Republic, only,
all the productions of the said Colonies, on the conditions announced in the
said decree as well as that of the 19th February.

Copy conformable to the Original. GENET.

That he has not received officially any copy of the decree said to have been
rendered by the same Assembly on the 27th day of July last, subjecting the
vessels of the United States laden with provisions, to be carried against their
will into the ports of France, and those having enemy goods on board, to have
such goods taken out as legal prize.

That an ordinance has been passed by the government of Spain on the 9th day of
June last, the substance of which has been officially communicated to him in
the following words, to wit,

Extract of an Ordinance for regulating provisionally the commerce of Louisiana
and the Floridas -- dated the 9th of June 1793.

The preamble states that the inhabitants of Louisiana being deprived of their
Commerce with France (on account of the war) as allowed by the ordinance of
January 1782: and his Majesty considering that they and the inhabitant of the
Floridas cannot subsist without the means of disposing of their productions and
of acquiring those necessary for their consumption -- for that purpose and to
increase the national commerce -- the commerce of those provinces and their
agriculture -- has directed the following articles to be provisionally observed.

The inhabitants of the abovementioned provinces to be allowed to commerce
freely both in Europe and America with all friendly nations who have treaties
of commerce with Spain. -- New Orleans, Pensacola and St. Augustine, to be
ports for that purpose. -- No exception as to the articles to be sent or to be
received. -- Every vessel however to be subjected to touch at Corcubion in
Gallicia, or Alicant, and to take a permit there, without which the entry not
to be allowed in the ports above mentioned.

The articles of this commerce carried on thus directly between those provinces
and foreign nations to pay a duty of 15 per cent. importation, and 6 per cent.
exportation, except negroes who may be imported free of duty -- the productions
and silver exported to purchase those negroes to pay the 6 per cent.
exportation duty -- the exportation of silver to be allowed for this purpose
only.

The commerce between Spain and those provinces to remain free -- Spaniards to
be allowed to observe the same rules and to fit out from the same ports (in
vessels wholly belonging to them without connection with foreigners) for those
provinces as for the other Spanish colonies.

To remove all obstacles to this commerce, all sorts of merchandise destined
for Louisiana and the Floridas, (even those whose admission is prohibited for
other places) may be entered in the ports of Spain, and in like mannner tobacco
and all other prohibited articles may be imported into Spain from these
provinces, to be re-exported to foreign countries.

To improve this commerce and encourage the agriculture of those provinces, the
importation of foreign rice into the ports of Spain is prohibited, and a like
preference shall be given to the other productions of these provinces, when
they shall suffice for the consumption of Spain.

All articles exported from Spain to these provinces shall be free of duty on
exportation, and such as being foreign, shall have paid duty on importation
into Spain, shall have it restored to the exporters.

These foreign articles thus exported, to pay a duty of three per cent. on
entry in those provinces, those which are not foreign to be free of duty.

The articles exported from those provinces to Spain to be free of duty,
whether consumed in Spain or re-exported to foreign countries.

Those Spanish vessels which having gone from Spain to those provinces should
desire to bring back productions from thence, directly to the foreign ports of
Europe, may do it on paying a duty of exportation of 3 per cent.

All vessels both Spanish and foreign, sailing to those provinces to be
prohibited from touching at any other port in his Majesty's American dominions.

No vessel to be fitted out from New-Orleans, Pensacola or St. Augustine for
any of the Spanish islands or other dominions in America, except for some
urgent cause, in which case only the respective Governor to give a permission,
but without allowing any other articles to be embarked than the productions of
those provinces.

All foreign vessels purchased by his Majesty's subjects, and destined for this
commerce, to be exempted from those duties to which they are at present
subjected, they proving that they are absolute and sole proprietors thereof.

He takes this occasion to note an act of the British Parliament of the 28, G.
III. c. 6. which though passed before the epoch to which his report aforesaid
related, had escaped his researches. The effect of it was to convert the
Proclamations regulating our direct intercourse with their West-Indian islands
into a standing law, and so far to remove the unfavourable distinction between
us and foreign nations stated in the report, leaving it however in full force
as to our circuitous intercourse with the same islands, and as to our general
intercourse, direct and circuitous with Great Britain and all her other
dominions.

December 30, 1793. TH: JEFFERSON.

Decret qui exempte de tous droits les subsistances et auires objets
d'approvisionement dans les Colonies relativement aux Etats Unis prononce dans
le seance du 26 May, 1793, l'an 2d de la Republique Francaise.
LA Convention Nationale, voulant prevenir par des dispositions precises, les
difficultes qui pourroient s'elever relativement a l'execution de son decret du
19 Fevrier dernier, concernant les Etats Unis d'Amerique; accorder de nouvelles
faveurs a cette nation aliee et la traiter dans ses relations commerciales avec
les colonies Francaises de la meme maniere que les batiments de la Republique,
decrete ce qui suit.

Art. 1. A compter du jour de la publication du present decret dans les
colonies Francaises d'Amerique, les navires des Etats Unis du port de soixante
tonneaux au moins, uniquement charges de farines et de subsistances, ainsi que
des objets d'approvisionement enonces dans l'article 2d. de l'arret du 30th
Aout, 1784, comme encore de lard, beurre, saumon sale et chandelle seront admis
dans les ports des dites colonies en exemption de tous droits. La meme
exemption aura lieu pour les batiments Francais charges des memes especes
venants de l'etranger.

Art. 2. Les capitaines des batiments des Etats Unis qui, ayant port dans les
colonies Francaises d'Amerique les objets compris dans, l'article ci-dessus
voudront fair leur retour dans les territoire des dits etats, pourront charger
dans les dites colonies, independamment des sirops, rhums, taffias, et des
marchandises de France, une quantite de cafe equivalente au cinquantieme du
tonnage de chaque navire ainsi qu'une quantite de sucre equivalante au dixieme
du tonnage, en se conformant aux articles suivantes.

Art. 3. Tout captain de navire Americain qui voudra fair des retours dans
les Etats Unis en cafe et sucre des colonies Francaises devra justifier que son
navaire y est enter aux deux tiers au moins de sa charge, suivant l'Art. 1st.
-- A cet effet il sera tenu de remettre dans les 24 heures de son arrivee au
bureau des Douanes du lieu du debarquement, un certificat des agens de la
marine, qui constate la jauge de son batiment et le tonnage effectif de son
chargement.

Les preposes des dites Douanes s'assureront que l'exportation des sucres et
cafes n'excedent pas les proportions fixees par l'article 2, du present decret.

Art. 4. Les capitaines des batiments des Etats Unis d'Amerique, ne payeront a
la sortie des isles, ainsi que ceux de la Republique qu'un droit de cinq livres
par quintal d'indigo, dix livres par millier de coton, cinq livres par millier
de cafe, cinq livres par millier de sucre tet et terre, et cinquante sols par
millier de sucre brut. Toutes autres marchandises seront exemptes des droits a
la sortie des dites colonies.

Art. 5. Les sucres et cafes qui seront charges, payeront dans les bureaux des
Douanes qui sont dans les colonies, ou seront etablis ensus des droits
ci-dessus fixes, ceux imposes par la loi du 19 Mars, 1791, sur les sucres et
cafes importes des dites colonies en France et conformement a la meme loi.

Art. 6. Les capitaines des batiments des Etats Unis qui voudront charger des
marchandises dans les dites colonies pour les ports de France fou^niront au
bureau des Douanes du lieu du depart les soumissions exigees des armateurs des
batiments Francais par l'article 2, de la loi du 10 Juillet, 1791, pour assurer
le dechargement de ces marchandises dans les ports de la Republique.

Art. 7. Les batiments des nations avec lesquelles la Republique Francaise
n'est point en guerre, pourront porter dans les colonies Francaises d'Amerique
tous les objets designs par le present decret. Ils pourront aussi rapporter
dans les ports de la Republique seulement toutes les denrees des dites colonies
aux conditions enoncees dans le dit decret ainsi que dans celui du 19 Fevrier.

Pour copy conform a l'original. GFNET.


