AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI, HARTFORD, July 4, 1794.

BY ELIJAH WATERMAN.

All governments labor under incurable disorders. The affairs of mortals are
desperate: they will never know happiness, till philosophy takes them under her
guidance. Plato. I am the light of the world. Christ. PRINTED AT HARTFORD, BY
HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

MDCCXCIV.

State of Connecticut. HARTFORD, 4th July, 1794.
SOCIETY of CINCINNATI.
VOTED, that Maj. SEYMOUR, and Mr. BEERS, be, and they are hereby appointed a
Committee to wait on Mr. WATERMAN, and return him the Thanks of this Society
for his ORATION delivered before them this Day, and to request a Copy of the
same for publication, at the Expense of said Society.

Extract from the Minutes, E. KIRBY, Secretary.

AN ORATION.
CITIZENS OF UNITED AMERICA,
THE story of Independence has been often told: age makes it more venerable: to
latest posterity it will be the richest patrimony.

REPLETE with sentiment, this triumph of liberty over oppression, can never be
unpleasing to the mind, that is anxious to annihilate the miseries of man, nor
tedious to the bosom, that delights to enlarge the sphere of felicity.

ON the morning of the seventeenth century, our pious ancestors landed on this
uncultivated country. Immediately dependent on each other, emergency dictated
their proceedings. Like a connected family their object was mutual benefit.
Industry and frugality resulted from their situation. The forests were subdued,
and their enemies retired before them. Religion was the darling object of their
souls; they guarded her with a feeling and a jealous eye. They instructed each
other; they instructed their children. At a proper distance from the splendour
of courts and the contagion of nobility; they were possessed of a manly
honesty, which warranted them to examine the conduct of others, with the
minuteness of philosophy. Masters of themselves, generations were matured upon
the grounds of equality. Towns were incorporated and societies established.
Officers were appointed and respected. Differences were examined and adjusted.
Free from the trammels of system and the rich chicanery of law, they varied
their institutions with their circumstances, reformed and improved, not so much
because individuals regarded the good of the whole, as that each was resolute
to preserve his own particular rights. Disputes gave origin to enquiry; this
led to truth, to justice. Superstition might mislead, and the glooms of bigotry
might sometimes prevail; but repeated necessity to examine without the shackles
of precedent, gave gradually to religion more of her native beauty, her charms
and her cheerfulness. This western world, was designed by our God, as the
garden where man should again vegetate, and recover to himself his native
powers. Like the trees of the forest, they grew up at random, they received
their nourishment, they communicated their blessings. But like the wild
luxuriance of the forest, the nature of man requires regulation and restraint.
Government is essential to his security. Happiness must be promoted by the
encouragement of virtue. Industry must be animated by the security of reaping
the fruit of her labors. In extending the principles of town corporations, to
the government of a province, the piety of our ancestors, was blended with
zeal, and every movement was designed as a step toward heaven. Civil policy
was engrafted upon religion; it found an able support, without being too rigid
or too austere for the credulity of the age. The colonies successively received
the precepts, without the example of Britain. They safely learnt the principles
of her government, without the iniquity of her practice. While her chariot of
empire was rolled along by the springs of bribery and intrigue; while her sons
were indulging in excess, idleing in prophanity, or traveling without
improvement: the youth of America were entering their colleges; diverting
themselves by rival feats of bodily strength -- were discussing the principles
of law and the rights of men -- were cultivating their fields and rejoicing in
the hope of harvest. When retired from their labors, they listened, they
heard, they examined. They were educated soldiers without knowing the cruelties
of a military establishment; they were freemen without knowing the evils of
oppression.

SUCH were the diverging circumstances of the two countries. As opposite in
their interest as they were distant in their situation. The one increased in
knowledge, virtue and wealth. The other grew old in pride, oppression and
venality. The progression of each was gradual. The long race of causes had been
multiplying. Arbitrary power more than once commenced and suspended her
operations. Under the smooth formal guise of right, the sagacity of self-taught
Americans discovered the vile progress of despotic slavery. Their feeling
remonstrance was answered by contempt, while the cords of oppression were drawn
still harder; till the arms of Britain appeared on our shore. The hearts of
men, distinguishing between right and wrong, reason and oppression, which had
been early strung to the notes of liberty, were now played into unison by the
guardian angel of our country.

The patriot flame with quick contagion ran,
Hill lighted hill, and man electris'd man. Darwin.

But we approach the era of Independence -- shall I pass the venerable scence
and bow to superiors who have delineated the glories of seventy-six. Why should
I lead you through the carnage of war -- scenes where many of you have been
active -- where the valiant have fallen -- and the mighty have ceased from
their labors. It is a tale of woe, of joy, through seven long years -- when the
happiness of ages was put to issue, between the infant spirit of liberty, and
the minions of bloodnourished tyranny. Why should I mention the unequal contest
-- and not point you to the God of armies -- when you behold the collected
hosts of Britain piling their arms on the field of submission: their navy
retiring with infamy from our shores, leaving us in the possession of
ourselves, in the possession of liberty, of independence. It is enough, we
fought but for "peace, liberty and safety." Our expectations were more than
gratified. The sword returned to its scabbard: the implements of death to their
place: and our warriors, like Cincinatus, to their domestic concerns, carrying
with them the affection of brothers, the attachments of those who had fought
side by side, who had been companions of danger and partners of victory. They
parted, but it was an hour -- let the painter catch the scene and present at
once the minds of heroes agitated with the termination of their long shared
toils and social pleasures; and with the gloomy fear of ingratitude from their
country.

THE morning of independence opened, but not without clouds. The sun arose, but
the political horizon was obscure. It was a delicate moment, in which the
opinions of many were anxiously suspended. When our enemies predicted that we
should work out our destruction. For as tyrants cannot subsist without slaves,
so they concluded that we could not live without masters. But the American
revolution was the establishment of our liberties. It was not a revolution of
opinion, not a change of sentiments. We had not our information to collect from
the precedent of ages: not our opinions to form upon bare prejudices; we had
not to encounter the delirium of habits, and an education upon the principles
of slavery. But a people whose sentiments were formed by the religion of
equality, and worn deeply into the mind by a seven years bloody defense, knew
at once, both how to estimate and how to secure their safety. Hence an event
the most majestic, which could have happened in no age, but the close of the
eighteenth -- in no country but united America. That four millions of people
should possess that clear discernment and sober thought; which impelled them,
upon the most bold and intrepid discussion, to form a federal government, which
should channel the flowings of commerce; check the selfish spirit of individual
states; draw into one view the different interests of the whole, and which
should at the same time define and reduce to practice the complicated
principles of national security and happiness. This bulwark of liberty has been
celebrated -- but it practically confers on itself the most complete eulogium.

THUS anticipating the period which theory had defined: independent America,
the rich heiress of the western world, with a healthy and a vigorous
constitution, holds an envied rank among the family of empires. She no longer
stands by herself; her interest and her welfare become interwoven with those of
other nations. The different policies of Britain and of France, amid the
convulsions of war, shoulder upon her the necessity of examining their conduct
and the principles of their proceedings, that she may not grant too many favors
to the one, nor receive too many insults from the other.

WE may recollect the awful moment, when the polite sagacity of Frenchmen
reached the arm of friendship, and gave to America salvation from slavery, and
from death. They have sought her alliance. They have interestedly, but
honorably, courted her smiles and attention. Enamored with the blessings and
the privileges which were secured to her, they desired to taste the same joys;
to drink of the streams of liberty, and to eat the bread of equality.

THEIR exertions were proportioned to the accomplishment of their object. Their
successes have been unparalleled. History yields no precedent. The contest of
America was but a tournament in comparison. Ere she started in the career,
France had to burst the chains of arbitrary power; to loosen the long riveted
shackles of habit; to scatter the dark shades of superstition; to invigorate
the minds of millions by the light of science: and to make a total revolution
in opinion, before she could make a permanent revolution in government.

FRENCHMEN have manifested a superior genius; the talent of turning every
incident to their advantage, and every occurrence to the promotion of their
designs. Even those events, the gregarious combinations of tyrants, which
seemed to threaten a total destruction to their liberty, have been the means of
eradicating the seeds of royalty, and of giving unity of design to their
national proceeding.

PASSING the frothy declamations of a Burke, no one may deny, that the
government of eighty-nine, deeply contemplated the happiness of the people and
the glory of the nation. How far ultimately they will have deviated from this
great object, cannot be so precisely determined. The humane, the generous mind
would have wished that their object might have been accomplished, without that
cruelty, havoc and barbarity, which must blacken many pages of their history.
When I speak of a king, I speak of a man like myself: I attach nothing to him
but the rights of an individual. The authority of nations is supreme; their
judgment is the last appeal; but in this, they cannot control the principles
of justice, nor sport with the life of an individual. Circumstances can alone
determine the lawfulness or necessity, of taking the life of a man, whose
generosity of heart was the originating source of his misfortune.

BUT when France must part with her liberties, or part with her king who shall
hesitate to determine. We might drop a generous tear, over the misfortunes of
French royalty -- but our regret and anxiety are be spoken to a still more
distressing scene, where religion and science are entombed together. Come
hither, ye who have experienced the labor of knowledge, who know the value of
liberty, the blessings of christianity, -- but tread with caution. France has
extinguished the light of the world; and for the prospect of immortality she
presents a universal blank: -- existence is no longer a blessing, virtue is no
longer amiable. Ye benefactors, ye lovers of mankind collect your compassion,
weep, for the glory of France is departed. Emerging from the glooms of
benighted popery, she has traveled to the extremes of infidelity, to midnight
credulity. She affords the world the first example, that a nation without
religion is a curse to itself, and harbors in its bosom, the violent
contortions of dissolution. The streets of her capital are drenched in blood.
Her citizens mad to fury, seeking for some miserable victim which may be
sacrificed to their rage, by an atheistical tribunal, who give judgment without
mercy, and inflict death without justice. Come hither ye statesmen and
legislators; ye who are entrusted with the happiness of millions, and learn to
reverence that religion which inculcates the principles of peace, forgiveness
and charity; which clears the mind from the painfulness of suspense, and the
glooms of annihilation; which gives a hope to the wicked, forgiveness to the
penitent, and a reward to the righteous -- which is the support of morality,
and the fountain of national felicity.

FRANCE has abjured her religion at a moment, when she has the strongest
necessity for its restraints. This throws a dark shade over her proceedings,
and makes the friends of her cause, tremble for the event. But that
satisfaction, which probability and conjecture cannot give, is derived alone
from the certainty, that there is a providence, which teaches events to know
their places, the supreme character of which is to bring good out of evil.
France may wander from the way, violence and iniquity may usurp the place of
truth and justice; but the object for which she contends is founded upon the
principles of righteousness. It is therefore with greater certainty we look
forward to its accomplishment: Its accomplishment! my country, should they fail
-- should they be subjected, you will stand the next victim for the alter of
tyranny. Your garments will be next parted among the crucifiers of liberty. For
look at the countenance of Britain -- and what is there, but injury and insult?
Palliations for her conduct against France, both mean and trifling. For at the
moment, when the enemies of the ancient despotism, were willing and anxious to
support the limited power of the king, as recommended by the convention; when
foreign force and domestic faction increased each others exasperation. It was
then France appealed to Britain, Mr. Fox.
for counsel and instruction -- she refused to mediate. She would not extend
the friendly hand of accommodation, to give permanency to that government which
the people and the king had freely adopted; nor to prevent foreign invasion,
nor the anarchy which would roll itself in blood. They suffered, for they might
have prevented the certain consequence of an invasion -- the death of Louis:
yet they make his death a political cover for spreading the horrors of war.
Here is the boasted humanity of degenerate Britain. To revenge the death of the
man whom they would not protect, they deliberately sign a death warrant for the
slaughter of millions.

WE may look into Paris and see heads falling from the guillotine. We may look
into the parliament of England, and see the same illegal cruelties perpetrated
in a more genteel and royal manner. However unrighteously the convention of
France may have conducted. How many crimes soever they may have committed --
does justice or humanity, demand their crimes to be visited upon an innocent
people? Has a nation erred, and shall the despots of Germany undertake to
define the error and to correct it? Shall those ignorant imperial robbers
attempt to define the rights of the descendents of the ancient Franks: That
race of heroes whose posterity have not till now known the value of freedom --
who for centuries have forgotten the spirit of their fathers: who are bold and
valiant to the verge of temerity; who rush headlong against the enemy, without
deigning to compute his numbers or their own; in whose eyes a retreat is
shameful, a flight indelible infamy. Gibbon.


Do these butchers of mankind calculate to visit the same broad calamities upon
such a race of men, as they have upon the wretchedly unfortunate Polanese? Do
they wish for the coffers of another empire to support their iniquity? Has
Britain anticipated enormously the revenues of her posterity, and does she wish
to indemnify them at the expense of France? I ask the question -- were the
combined powers anxious for the life of Louis? The answer need not too far
insinuate from indicative circumstances, that the emigrant princes, the
cidevant nobles and the nonjuring clergy, wished for the death of the man who
had not iniquity enough to support them in their exclusive privileges; nor how
far the conspiring despots might desire the death of the man, who, if they
succeeded, would be an obstruction to the partition of the kingdom. Did the
success of France endanger the safety of Holland? And was Britain obligated to
protect her? She is now secure, and the war is direct and offensive against the
rights of Frenchmen, against liberty at large. Where then will a British
minister seek a palliation for throwing the nation into the convulsions of war?
Does that church and state which ought to be renovated, fear the event will be
fatal to their powers? Does the head lie uneasy that wears a crown? Is that
sinning-word reformation, harsh and grating to the ear of royalty. Then let not
an accumulation of crimes, hasten the period he wishes to avoid. The days of
revolution are commenced. The new order of events is proceeding. The temple of
science is opened; and the highway is laid out for liberty. Tyrants, would you
escape destruction? Then lend your assistance; make your subjects citizens;
heal the wound you have inflicted; live like honest men, and learn the luxury
of doing good!

Is not the principle on which Britain wars against France, a principle equally
hostile to all liberty and all righteous government. How should it be
otherwise? The court of St. James is the sink of venality, where kings rule and
nobles decree iniquity. We may revere the British nation, considered as a
people, who have enlarged the bounds of science, and given luster to the genius
of man. But their parliament is the most detestable; it originates and exists
from venality. As a political body, they give us answers but for evasion. And
while our government endeavor to walk upon the strictest principles of
neutrality, they, like the pestilence, walk in darkness; and while by free
commerce they suck the treasures of the continent, seize the sacred property of
individuals, and under the shadow of legal adjudication appropriate it to their
use. It is unparralleled meanness -- infamous perfidy. It outrages the annals
of piracy. It stands more than in competition with the conduct of that nation,
in supplying the western tribes, both with the means and disposition to destroy
our infant settlements. Can we be calm under such provoking injuries, such
insults and such robberies. Yes, our moderation has been known -- our patience
tried. We wish for peace, we know too well the miseries of war: We ask for
satisfaction: There is a point beyond which our forbearance cannot extend --
when war becomes a blessing -- and when waged with pirates, justifiable -- when
the spirits of our fathers, would rise to defend the liberties of their
posterity, from the gloomy grasp of oppression. Can Americans forget their
rights? Forget the era of seventy six? My country, can you forget too the
wretchedness, misery and destruction which war brings and entails upon a
nation. Your wounds are scarcely healed. The glorious calamities of
independence are not removed. There is a middle way between cowardice and
revenge. It is the path of honor. Show then that you not only have the spirit
to resent the insolence, but the energy to correct the perfidy of Britain. At
the same time, manifest an untaught example, that you will never sacrifice your
happiness and prosperity as a people, to the caprices of pride or the royal
punctilios of honor. The condemnation of your vessels, separate from the
violence upon national confidence, and the meanness of the insult, is trifling
compared to the calamities of war. Your shipping has been chained to your
ports, but in your dwellings have been peace and plenty. Make not the conduct
of other nations, a rule for your proceedings. Mankind have been long enough
chained to the principles of iniquity, to the honor of murdering each other, by
no other reason, but the precedent authority of their fathers. From Nimrod to
Pit, fraud and robbery have been the great mysteries of government. War has
been the inseparable business of statesmen. And what is it? It is an
accumulation of all the miseries and all the vices that can afflict or ruin a
people. It originates from selfish policy and is carried on by injustice. Such
are the consequences; such are the principles of war. There is an everlasting
alliance between iniquity and misery. True policy ever proceeds upon the
principles of justice. And the people who rest their conduct upon these, in
every change of circumstances, will have a foundation which will never fail.

WHEN we look back upon departed empires, and learn their existence from their
ruins, a dismal horror thrills the soul. They speak to us the forcible language
of truth: that the same iniquity which prompted them to destroy their
neighbors, gradually produced their own dissolution. This is an infallible
maxim: that the people who practice injustice upon others, are sharpening the
weapon, that will cut the very nerves of their own existence: to have peace and
happiness, nations must reverence the principles of virtue. They must be honest
and just. Our venerable ancestors have taught us that knowledge and virtue are
the guardians of liberty. And your minds have been purposely led on this day,
over the manners and proceedings of your fathers; that from facts you might
learn the origin and permanent principles of a happy government, which in the
settlements of New England are more forcibly illustrated, than they ever have
been by the most ingenious theories and utopian speculations.

AMERICANS should ever watch the causes which produced their revolution, which
produced the declaration of independence. That this truth may be practically
inculcated upon their minds -- to preserve their rights and liberties, they
must tenaciously adhere to the same principles, by which they were originated
and perfected. Whatever has been the foundation of their independence, must
still be preserved as the permanent basis of their security and future
happiness. The mind, when it reflects that former nations have uniformly
traveled in the road to ruin, is anxious to know, if there is not some way
through which we may walk in safety, and continue our existence as a happy
people till time shall be no longer. On this subject many conjectures have been
made. But the experience of six generations since the settlement of this
country, will permit us to draw this positive conclusion: that as long as the
principles of christianity are inculcated upon the minds of people: as long as
the infant draws virtue and industry from the breast of the mother: as long as
the spirit of education which now prevails in Connecticut, shall pervade the
federal empire, so long will this nation avoid the poison of luxury, the
distraction of parties and the oppression of power; so long will they grow in
strength and continue a monument of this truth, that virtue and knowledge are
inseparably connected with happiness.

WE glory in our revolution, we triumph in the blessings of liberty; but in
vain shall we boast of these, if we do not inculcate upon the minds of
posterity, the manly and industrious sentiments of our fathers. If labor is
not honorable, if knowledge is not diffused, and virtue engrafted on the tender
mind -- the melancholy era will come, when vice and contention, faction and
misery, will distract and enslave this empire.

DOES the conduct of one generation determine the happiness of another; and
shall the rising generations be forgotten? Reverence your children, was a
heathen maxim: yet christians must embrace it, for it is the law of nature.
What but our religion and the diffusion of knowledge, has lead us to the
happiness which we now enjoy? An happiness, which when compared to that of
France or Britain, or any nation on earth, has a superiority, which is not to
be calculated. -- Looking to our federal government, we find the first man on
earth -- the man who has conducted to the satisfaction of his country -- to the
admiration of the world, "who is equally entitled to our esteem and affection,
whether we view him at the head of our armies, leading them to victory -- or at
the head of our councils, exerting his constitutional authority to preserve the
blessings of peace. No man has acted a more distinguished and glorious part on
the theater of human life -- and the personal characters of all the kings in
the world appear contemptible, when put in comparison with the virtues and the
talents of this illustrious patriot." Letter from a member of Congress, to a
gentleman in Hartford.


IF we examine the several departments of government, we shall find but a few
solitary members who want ability, integrity and science, and who are not
ambitious to obtain the confidence of their fellow citizens, by boldly pursuing
their welfare. When we examine the principles of our constitution, the
prosperity it has conferred upon our country, shall we not exert our united
ability to give it energy, permanency and support. Our rulers are chosen from
among us; our interest is theirs: shall we then hesitate to conside in their
wisdom, and to abide by their counsels.

MAY not every serious friend to his country, who feels the necessity of a
stable and energetic government, ask the democratic societies, and the jacobin
clubs, the brooders of faction, who wish by their resolves, to guide the
affairs of the empire, and to erect the standard of anarchy, if they solemnly
wish to work their own destruction, and entail misery and wretchedness in their
country? It is in moments the most critical, on circumstances most hazardous;
that the true patriot will proceed with sober thought, prudent delay, and the
genuine Yankee spirit of enquiry. Many conjectures have been made, with regard
to the derivation of the word yankee, as applied in particular to the people of
New England. -- Among others is this; that there was a tribe of Indians, called
the Yankooz: -- designating that they were a brave and hardy race of warriors.
-- Hence this word, by some circumstance, was pertinently applied to the
inhabitants of New England.
It is when the interest and welfare of millions hang upon the opinions of
rulers, that every action should be weighed, every fact compared, and every
consequence balanced. The citizens who delight in the prosperity of their
country, feel a peculiar joy in knowing by severe experiment, that they have
rulers who love peace and virtue, who believe facts and not misrepresentations,
who look to the good of their country, who disregard the flash of popular
clamor, pass over trival errors, and comprehend with perspicuity and
precision, the means of national happiness.

IT is the domestic survey of our country that affords peculiar satisfaction:
for we find among us a spirit of enquiry that leads to truth; we have among us,
the principles of liberty and economy; we have among us, every blessing and
enjoyment of life. Our farmers and manufacturers, the source of our national
wealth, are flourishing in their business. -- Our merchants are bartering with
all nations. -- Population most rapidly increasing. -- Manners and customs
improving, and assimilating. -- Schools and colleges multiplied and supported.
-- Science diffused to every class of citizens. -- Our women, in the possession
of their genuine rights, exercising their talents in the happy sphere of
domestic duty, and conferring many blessings upon their country, by the
amiableness of their manners and the prudence of their conduct. And by giving a
dignity to morality and a respect to religion; they insensibly steal devotion
from the more careless heart of man. I can fairly congratulate the citizens of
Connecticut, while from past experience they may anticipate the increasing
happiness of their country. I can fairly congratulate the patriot and the
soldier, who fought and bled for the prosperity which we now enjoy, upon
principles which may baffle the poison of luxury and the efforts of iniquity.
We may hall the day of independence, and carry our thoughts forward to the
period, when our national debt, the price of liberty, will be paid, the object
of our funds accomplished; when much of the expense and many of the officers of
government will be removed; when we shall be able to accomplish every object
which will be for our welfare; whether in agriculture, commerce or
manufactures; when the principles of law and justice will be more accurately
defined; when our state and country will have a common jurisprudence, separate
from the unweildly volumes, and perplexing authorities of British Courts; when
the proceedings of the judicial departments shall come nearer to the principles
of equity: when sects and parties shall lay aside their animosities, their
bigotry and superstition, and agree to walk together as brethren of the same
family; when genuine religion shall assume her native dignity, idle and
mysterious theories cease* and forms and modes no longer be tenaciously
embraced as the essentials of the worship of God; when piety and virtue shall
be esteemed as consi^^ing more in doing than talking, more in practice than
speculation; when peace, knowledge, and happiness, shall pervade the multiplied
millions of our country. Does the present age wish to hasten the happy period?
Let them support their government, educate their children, and reverence their
religion, and their God.

THE END.

