SERMONS ON Several Occasions: IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln-College, OXFORD.

VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. CRUKSHANK, AND SOLD BY JOHN DICKINS, NO. 118,
NORTH FOURTH-STREET.

M,DCC,XCIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the present state of our funds will not conveniently admit of our
publishing at once, the four volumes of these admirable Sermons, we have judged
it most prudent to furnish the purchasers with one or two volumes at a time;
assuring them that we intend not to stop, till we have presented them with the
whole set.

Philadelphia, Jan. 1, 1794.
THE PREFACE.
THE following Sermons contain the substance of what I have been preaching, for
between eight and nine years last past* During that time I have frequently
spoken in public, on every subject in the ensuing collection: And I am not
conscious, that there is any one point of doctrine, on which I am accustomed to
speak in public, which is not here, incidentally, if not professedly laid
before every Christian Reader. Every serious man, who peruses these will
therefore see in the clearest manner, what those doctrines are which I embrace
and (...) the essentials of true religion.

2. But I am thoroughly sensible, these are not proposed, in such a manner as
some may expect. Nothing here appears in an elaborate, elegant, or oratorical
dress. If it had been my desire or design to write thus, my leisure would not
permit. But in truth I at present designed nothing less; for I now write (as I
generally speak) ad populum: To the bulk of mankind, to those who neither
relish nor understand the art of speaking: But who notwithstanding are
competent judges of those truths, which are necessary to present and future
happiness. I mention this, that curious readers may spare themselves the labor
of seeking for what they will not find.

3. I design plain truth for plain people. Therefore of set purpose I abstain
from all nice and philosophical speculations, from all perplexed and intricate
reasonings; and as far as possible, from even the show of learning, unless in
sometimes citing the original scriptures. I labor to avoid all words which are
not easy to be understood, all which are not used in common life: and in
particular, those kind of technical terms, that so frequently occur in bodies
of divinity, those modes of speaking which men (...) reading are intimately
acquainted with, but which to common people are an unknown tongue. Yet I am not
assured, that I do not sometimes slide into them unawares: It is so extremely
natural to imagine, that a word which is familiar to ourselves, is so to all
the world.

4. Nay, my design is, in some sense to forget all that ever I have read in my
life. I mean to speak, in the general, as if I had never read one author,
ancient or modern (always excepting the inspired.) I am persuaded, that on the
one hand, this may be a means of enabling me more clearly to express the
sentiments of my heart, while I simply follow the chain of my own thoughts,
without entangling myself with those of other men: And that, on the other, I
shall come with fewer weights upon my mind, with less of prejudice and
prepossession, either to search for myself, or to deliver to others, the naked
truths of the gospel.

5. To candid, reasonable m^^^ I am not afraid to lay open what have been the
inmost thoughts of my heart. I have thought, "I am a creature of a day, passing
through life, as an arrow through the air. I am a Spirit, come from GOD, and
returning to GOD: Just hovering over the Great Gulf; till a few moments hence,
I am no more seen: I drop into an unchangeable eternity! I want to know one
thing, the way to Heaven: How to land safe on that happy shore. GOD himself has
^ondescended to teach the way; for this very end he came from Heaven. He has
written it down in a book. O give me that book! At any price give me the book
of GOD! I have it; Here is knowledge enough for me. Let me be Homo unius libri.
Here then I am, far from the busy ways of men. I sit down alone: Only GOD is
here. In his presence I open, I read his book; for this end, to find the way to
Heaven. Is there a doubt concerning the meaning of what I read? Does any thing
appear dark (...) intricate? I lift up my heart to the Father of lights. "Lord,
is it not thy word, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of GOD? Thou give
liberally and upbraidest not; Thou have said, If any be willing to do thy will,
he shall know. I am willing to do. Let me know thy will." I then search after
and consider parallel passages of scripture, comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual. I meditate thereon, with all the attention and earnestness of which
my mind is capable. If any doubt still remain, I consult those who are
experienced in the things of GOD: And then, the writings whereby being dead,
they yet speak. And what I thus learn, that I teach.

6. I have accordingly set down in the following Sermons, what I find in the
bible concerning the way to Heaven; with a view to distinguish this way of GOD,
from all those which are the inventions of men. I have endeavored to describe
the true, the scriptural, experimental religion, so as to omit nothing which is
a real part thereof, and to add nothing thereto which is not. And herein it is
more especially my desire, first, to guard those who are just setting their
faces toward Heaven, (and who having little acquaintance with the things of
GOD, are the more liable to be turned out of the way) from formality, from me^^
outside religion, which has almost driven heart-relion out of the world: And
secondly, To warn those who know the religion of the heart, the faith which
works by love, left at any time they make void the law through faith, and so
fall back into the snare of the Devil.

7. By the advice and at the request of some of my friends, I have prefixed to
the other sermons contained in this volume, three sermons of my own and one of
my Brother's, preached before the University of Oxford. My design requi^ed some
discourses on those heads. And I preferred these before any others, as being a
stronger answer than any which can be drawn up now, to those who have
frequently asserted, -- "That we have changed our doctrine of late, and do not
preach now, what we did some years ago." Any man of understanding may now judge
for himself, when he has compared the latter with the former Sermons. But some
may say, I have mistaken the way myself, although I take upon me to teach it to
others. It is possible, many will think this, and it is very probable, that I
have. But I trust, whereinsover I have mistaken, my mind is open to conviction.
I sincerely desire to be better informed. I say to GOD and man, "What I know
not, teach thou me!"

9. Are you persuaded, you see more clearly than me? It is not unlikely that
you may. Then, treat me, as you would desire to be treated yourself upon a
change of circumstances. Point me out a better way than I have yet known. Sh^^
me it is so, by plain proof of scripture. And if I linger in the path I have
been accustomed to tread, and therefore unwilling to leave, labor with me a
little, take me by the hand, and lead me as I am able to bear. But be not
displeased if I entreat you, not to beat me down, in order to quicken my pace:
I can go but feebly and slowly at best; then, I should not be able to go at
all. May I not request of you further, not to give me hard names, in order to
bring me into the right way? Suppose I was ever so much in the wrong. I doubt
this would not set me right. Rather, it would make me run so much the farther
from you, and so get more and more out of the way.

10. Nay, perhaps, if you are angry, so shall I be too; and then there will be
small hopes of finding the truth. If once anger arise, (...) (as Homer
somewhere expresses it) this smoke will so dim the eyes of my soul, that I
shall be able to see nothing clearly. For GOD'S sake, if it be possible to
avoid it, let us not provoke one another to wrath. Let us not kindle in each
other this fire of Hell; much less, blow it up into a flame. If we could
discern truth by that dreadful light, would it not be loss, rather than gain?
For how far is love, even with many wrong opinions, to be preferred before
truth itself without love? We may die without the knowledge of many truths, and
yet be carried into Abraham's bosom. But if we die without love, what will
knowledge avail? Just as much as it avails the Devil and his Angels!

The GOD of love forbid we should ever make the trial! May he prepare us for
the knowledge of all truth, by filling our hearts with all his love, and with
all joy and peace in believing.

SALVATION by FAITH. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S, OXFORD, BEFORE THE
UNIVERSITY, On JUNE 18, 1738.
EPHESIANS. ii. 8. By Grace ye are saved through Faith.


1. ALL the Blessings which GOD has bestowed upon Man are of his mere Grace,
Bounty or Favor: His Free, undeserved Favor; Favor altogether undeserved;
Man having no claim to the least of his Mercies. It was free Grace that formed
Man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into him a living Soul, and stamped
on that Soul the Image of GOD, and put all Things under his Feet. The same Free
Grace continues to us at this Day, Life and Breath, and all Things. For there
is nothing we are, or have, or do, which can deserve the least Thing at GOD'S
Hand. All our Works thou, O GOD, have wrought in us. These, therefore, are so
many more Instances of Free Mercy: And whatever Righteousness may be found in
Man, this is also the Gift of GOD.

2. Wherewithal then shall a sinful Man atone for any the least of his Sins?
With his own Works? No: Were they ever so many or holy, they are not his own,
but GOD'S. But indeed they are all Unholy and Sinful themselves, so that every
one of them needs a fresh Atonement. Only corrupt Fruit grows on a corrupt
Tree. And his Heart is altogether corrupt and abominable; being come short of
the Glory of GOD, the glorious Righteousness at first impressed on his Soul,
after the Image of his Great Creator. Therefore, having nothing, neither
Righteousness nor Works to plead, his (...) ^s utterly stopped before GOD.

3. If then ^^^ful Man find Favor with GOD, it is Grace upon Grace. If GOD
vouchsafe still to pour fresh Blessings upon us, yea, the Greatest of all
Blessings, Salvation; what can we say to these Things, but Thanks be unto GOD
for his Unspeakable Gift! And thus it is. Herein GOD commends his Love toward
us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died to save us. By Grace then
are ye saved through Faith. Grace is the Source, Faith the Condition, of
Salvation.

Now, that we fall not short of the Grace of GOD, it concerns us carefully to
enquire, I. What Faith it is through which we are saved? II. What is the
Salvation which is through Faith? III. How we may answer some Objections.


I. What Faith it is through which we are saved?

1. And first, It is not barely the Faith of a Heathen. Now GOD requires of a
Heathen to believe, That GOD is; that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him: and that he is to be sought by glorifying him as GOD, by giving him
Thanks for all Things; and by a careful Practice of Moral Virtue, of Justice,
Mercy and Truth toward their Fellow Creatures. A Greek or Roman therefore, yea
a S^ythi^n or Indian, was without Excuse if he did not believe thus much. The
Being and Attributes of GOD, a future State of Reward and Punishment, and the
obligatory Nature of Moral Virtue. For this is barely the Faith of a Heathen.
2. Nor, 2dly, Is it the Faith of a Devil, though this goes much farther than that
of a Heathen. For the Devil believes, not only, that there is a wise and
powerful GOD, Gracious to reward, and Just to punish, but also, that JESUS is
the Son of GOD, the CHRIST, the SAVIOR of the World. So we find him declaring,
in express Terms, Luke iv. 34. I know Thee, who Thou art, the Holy One of GOD.
Nor can we doubt but that unhappy Spirit believes all those Words, which came
out of the Mouth of the Holy One; yea, and whatsoever else was written by those
Holy Men of old; of two of whom he was compelled to give that glorious
Testimony, These men are the Servants of the most high GOD, who show unto you
the Way of Salvation. Thus much then the great Enemy of GOD and Man believes,
and trembles in believing, That GOD was made manifest in the Flesh; That he
will tread all Enemies under his Feet, and that all Scripture was given by
Inspiration of GOD. Thus far goes the Faith of a Devil. 3 Thirdly, The Faith
through which we are saved, in that Sense of the Word which will hereafter be
explained, is not barely that which the Apostles themselves had while CHRIST
was yet upon Earth; though they so believed on him as (...) leave all and follow
him; although they had then Power to work Miracles, to heal all manner of
Sickness, and all Manner of Disease; yea, they had then Power and Authority
over all Devils: And which is beyond all this, were sent by their Master to
preach the Kingdom of GOD. 4. What Faith is it then through which we are saved?
It may be answered, first, in general, It is a Faith in CHRIST; CHRIST, and GOD
through CHRIST, are the proper Object of it. Herein therefore, it is
sufficiently, absolutely, distinguished from the Faith either of ancient or
modern Heathens. And from the Faith of a Devil, it is fully distinguished by
this, It is not barely a Speculative, Rational Thing, a cold, lifeless Assent,
a Train of Ideas in the Head; but also a Disposition of the Heart. For thus
says the Scripture, With the Heart, Man believes unto Righteousness. And, If
thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with thy
Heart, that GOD has raised Him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. 5. And
herein does it differ from that Faith which the Apostles themselves had while
our Lord was on Earth, that it acknowledges the Necessity and Merit of his
Death, and the Power of his Resurrection. It acknowledges his death as the only
sufficient Means of redeeming Man from Death Eternal; and his Resurrection as
the Restoration of us all to Life and Immortality: Inasmuch as he was delivered
for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification. Christian Faith is then,
not only an Assent to the whole Gospel of CHRIST, but also a full Reliance on
the Blood of CHRIST, a Trust in the Merits of his Life, Death, and
Resurrection; a Recumbency upon him as our atonement and our Life; as given for
us, and living in us. It is a sure Confidence which a Man has in GOD, that
through the Merits of CHRIST, his Sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the
Favor of GOD; and in consequence hereof, a closing with him, and cleaving to
him, as our Wisdom* Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, or in one Word
our Salvation.
II. What Salvation it is, which is through this Faith, is the second Thing to
be considered.

1. And first, Whatsoever else it imply, it is a Present Salvation. It is
something attainable, yea, actually attained on Earth, by those who are
Partakers of this Faith. For thus says the Apostle to the Believers at
Ephesus, and in them to the Believers of all Ages, not Ye shall be (though that
also is true) but ye are saved through Faith. 2. Ye are saved (to comprize all
in one Word) from Sin. This is the Salvation which is through Faith. This is
that great Salvation foretold by the Angel, before GOD brought his first
begotten into the World, Thou shall call his Name JESUS, for he shall save his
People from their Sins. And neither here, nor in other Parts of Holy Writ, is
there any Limitation or Restriction. All his People, or, as it is elsewhere
expressed, all that believe in him, he will save from all their Sins; from
Original and Actual, Past and Present Sin, of the Flesh and of the Spirit.
Through Faith that is in him, they are saved both from the Guilt and from the
Power of it. 3. First from the Guilt of all Past Sin. For whereas all the World
is guilty before GOD; insomuch that should he be extreme to mark what is done
amiss, there is none that could abide it: And whereas by the Law is only the
Knowledge of Sin, but no Deliverance from it; so that by fulfilling the Deeds
of the Law, no Flesh can be justified in his Sight: Now the Righteousness of
GOD, which is by Faith of JESUS CHRIST, is manifested unto all that believe.
Now they are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
JESUS CHRIST. Him GOD has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood; To declare his Righteousness for (or by) the Remission of the Sins that
are past. Now has CHRIST taken away the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse
for us. He has blotted out the Handwriting that was against us, taking it out
of the Way, nailing it to his Cross. There is therefore no Condemnation now, to
them which believe in CHRIST JESUS. 4. And being saved from Guilt, they are
saved from Fear. Not indeed from a filial Fear of offending, but from all
servile Fear, from that Fear which has Torment, from Fear of Punishment, from
Fear of the Wrath of GOD; whom they now no longer regard as a severe Master,
but as an indulgent Father. They have not received again the Spirit of Bondage;
but the Spirit of adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father: The Spirit itself
also bearing Witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children of GOD.
They are also saved from the Fear, though not from the Possibility, of falling
away from the Grace of GOD, and coming short of the great and precious
Promises: They are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest
of their Inheritance. (Ephesians. i. 13.) Thus have they Peace with GOD through our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. They rejoice in Hope of the Glory of GOD. And the love of
GOD is shed abroad in their Hearts, through the Holy Ghost, which is given unto
them. And hereby they are persuaded (though perhaps not all at all Times, nor
with the same Fullness of Persuasion) that neither Death nor Life, nor Things
present, nor Things to come, nor Height nor Depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate them from the Love of GOD which is in CHRIST JESUS
our Lord. 5. Again, through this Faith they are saved from the Power of Sin, as
well as from the Guilt of it. So the Apostle declares. Ye know that he was
manifested to take away our Sins, and in him is no Sin. Whosoever abides in
him sins not. (Chap. iii. 5, etc.) Again, Little Children, let no Man
deceive you. -- He that commits Sin is of the Devil. -- Whosoever believes
is born of GOD. And whosoever is born of GOD does not commit Sin, for his Seed
remains in him: And he cannot Sin, because he is born of GOD. Once more, We
know that Whatsoever is born of God sins not: But he that is begotten of
God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not, Chap. v. 18. 6. He
that is by Faith born of God, sins not, 1. By any habitual Sin: For all
habitual Sin, is Sin reigning. But Sin cannot reign in any that believes. Nor,
2. By any wilful Sin, for his Will, while he abides in the Faith is utterly
set against all Sin, and abhors it as deadly Poison. Nor, 3. By any sinful
Desire; for he continually desires the Holy and Perfect Will of God; and any
Tendency to an Unholy Desire, he by the Grace of God, stifleth in the Birth.
Nor, 4, Does he sin by Infirmities, whether in Act, Word, or Thought. For his
Infirmities have no Concurrence of his Will; and without This they are not
properly Sins. Thus, He that is born of God does not commit Sin. And though he
cannot say, He has not sinned, yet now, he sins not.
7. This then is the Salvation which is through Faith, even in the present
World: A Salvation from Sin, and the Consequences of Sin, both often expressed
in the Word Justification; which, taken in the largest Sense, implies, A
Deliverance from Guilt and Punishment, by the Atonement of CHRIST actually
applied to the Soul of the Sinner now believing on him, and a Deliverance from
the whole Body of Sin through CHRIST formed in his Heart. So that he who is
thus justified or saved by Faith, is indeed born again. He is born again of the
Spirit unto a new Life, which is hid with Christ in God. He is a new Creature:
Old Things are past away: All Things in him are become new. And as a newborn
Babe he gladly receives the (...) sincere Milk of the Word, and grows thereby:
Going on in the Might of the Lord his God, from Faith to Faith, from Grace to
Grace, until at Length he come unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the
Stature of the Fullness of Christ.
III. The first usual Objection to this is, 1. That to preach Salvation or
Justification by Faith only, is to preach against Holiness and Good Works. To
which a short Answer might be given: It would be so, if we spoke, as some do,
of a Faith which was separate from these. But we speak of a Faith which is not
so, but necessarily productive of all Good Works and all Holiness. 2. But it
may be of use to consider it more at large: Especially since it is no new
Objection, but as old as St. Paul's Time; for even then it was asked, Do we not
make void the Law through Faith? We answer, first, All who preach not Faith, do
manifestly make void the Law; either directly and grossly by Limitations and
Comments, that eat out all the Spirit of the Text: Or indirectly, by not
pointing out the only Means whereby it is possible to perform it. Whereas,
secondly, We establish the Law; both by showing its full Extent, and Spiritual
Meaning: And by calling all to that living Way, whereby the Righteousness of
the Law may be fulfilled in them. These, while they trust in the Blood of
CHRIST alone, use all the Ordinances which he has appointed, do all the Good
Works which he had before prepared that they should walk therein, and enjoy and
manifest all holy and heavenly Tempers, even the same Mind that was in Christ
Jesus. 3. But does not preaching this Faith lead Men into Pride? We answer,
Accidentally it may. Therefore ought every Believer to be earnestly cautioned,
(in the Words of the Great Apostle) Because of Unbelief, the first Branches
were broken off; and thou stand by Faith. Be not high minded, but fear. If
God spared not the Natural Branches, take heed lest he spare not Thee. Behold,
therefore, the Goodness and Severity of God! On them which fell, Severity: But
toward thee, Goodness: If thou continue in his Goodness; otherwise thou also
shall be cut off. And while he continues therein, he will remember those Words
of St. Paul, foreseeing and answering this very Objection, ( Romans iii. 27)
Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay; but by the
Law of Faith. If a Man were justified by his Works, he would have whereof to
glory. But there is no glorying for him, that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the Ungodly, (Romans iv.) To the same Effect, are the Words both
preceding and following the Text, ( Ephesians. ii. 4, etc.) God, who is rich in
Mercy, -- even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with
Christ, (by Grace ye are saved) -- that he might slew the exceeding Riches of
his Grace, in his Kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by Grace ye are
saved through Faith. And that not of yourselves. Of yourselves comes neither
your Faith nor your Salvation. It is the Gift of God; the free, undeserved
Gift, the Faith through which ye are saved, as well as the Salvation, which he of
his own good Pleasure, his mere Favor, annexes thereto. That ye believe, is
one Instance of his Grace; that believing ye are saved, another. Not of Works,
lest any Man should boast. For all our Works, all our Righteousness, which were
before our Believing, merited nothing of God but Condemnation. So far were they
from deserving Faith; which therefore, whenever given, is not of Works. Neither
is Salvation of the Works we do when we believe. For it is then God that
works in us. And therefore, that he gives us a Reward for what he himself
works, only commends the Riches of his Mercy, but leaves us nothing
whereof to glory. 4. However, may not the speaking thus of the Mercy of God, as
saving or justifying freely by Faith only, encourage Men in Sin? Indeed it may
and will; many will continue in Sin that Grace may abound. But their Blood is
upon their own Head. The Goodness of God ought to lead them to Repentance, and
so it will those who are sincere of Heart. When they know there is yet
Forgiveness with him, they will cry aloud that he would blot out their Sins
also, through Faith which is in Jesus. And if they earnestly cry, and faint not,
if they seek him in all the Means he has appointed, if they refuse to be
comforted till he come, he will come and will not tarry. And he can do much
Work in a short Time. Many are the Examples in the Acts of the Apostles, of
God's shedding abroad this Faith in Men's Hearts, even like Lightning falling
from Heaven. So in the same Hour that Paul and Silas began to preach, the
Jailor repented, believed, and was baptized: As were three Thousand by St.
Peter on the Day of Pentecost, who all repented and believed at his first
Preaching. And blessed be God, there are now many living Proofs, that he is
still mighty to save. 5. Yet to the same Truth, placed in another View, a quite
contrary Objection is made: If a Man cannot be saved by all that he can do,
this will drive Men to Despair. True, to despair of being saved by their own
Works, their own Merits or Righteousness. And so it ought; for none can trust
in the Merits of Christ, till he has utterly renounced his own. He that goes
about to establish his own Righteousness, cannot receive the Righteousness of
God. The Righteousness which is of Faith cannot be given him, while he trusts
in that which is of the Law. 6. But this, it is said, is an uncomfortable
Doctrine. The Devil spoke like himself, that is, without either Truth or Shame,
when he dared to suggest to Men that it is such. It Is the only comfortable one,
it is very full of Comfort, to all self-destroy'd, self-condemned Sinners. That
whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed: That the same Lord over all,
is rich unto all that call upon him: Here is Comfort, high as Heaven, stronger
than Death! What! Mercy for all? For Zaccheus, a Public Robber? For Mary
Magdalene, a Common Harlot? Methinks I hear one say, Then I, even I, may hope
for Mercy! And so thou may, thou afflicted one, whom none has comforted!
God will not cast out thy Prayer. Nay, perhaps he may say the next Hour, Be of
good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee; so forgiven that th^^ ^^ll (...) ^^ee
no more; yea, and that the Holy Spirit shall bear witness with thy Spirit that
thou art a Child of God. O glad Tidings! Tidings of great Joy, which are sent
unto all People. Ho^ every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters: Come ye
and buy, without Money, and without Price. Whatsoever your Sins be, though red,
like Crimson, though more than the Hairs of your Head: Return ye unto the Lord,
and he will have Mercy upon you; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
7. When no more Objections occur, then we are simply told, That Salvation by
Faith only, ought not to be preached as the first Doctrine, or at least not to
be preached to All. But what says the Holy Ghost? Other Foundation can no Man
lay, than that which is laid, even JESUS CHRIST. S^ ^hen, That whosoever
believes on him shall be (...), is and must be the Foundation of all our
Preaching; that is, must be preached first. "Well, but not to all." To whom
then are we not to preach it? Whom shall we except? The Poor? Nay, they have a
peculiar Right to have the Gospel preached unto them. The unlearned? No. God
has revealed these Things unto unlearned and ignorant Men from the Beginning.
The Young? By no Means. Suffer these in any wise to come unto Christ, and
forbid them not. The Sinners? Least of all. He came not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners to Repentance. Why then, if any, we are to except the Rich, the
Learned, the Reputable, the Moral Men. And it is true, they too often except
themselves from hearing; yet we must speak the Words of our Lord. For thus the
Tenor of our Commission runs, Go and preach the Gospel to every Creature. If
any Man wrest it or any Part of it to his Destruction, he must bear his own
Burden. But still, as the Lord lives, whatsoever the Lord says unto us, That
we will speak. 8. At this Time more especially will we speak, That by Grace ye
are saved through Faith: Because never was the maintaining this Doctrine more
seasonable than it is at this Day. Nothing but this can effectually prevent the
Increase of the Romish Delusion among us. It Is endless to attack one by one,
all the Errors of that Church. But Salvation by (...) strikes at the Root, and
all fall at once where this ^s established. It was this Doctrine, (which our
Church justly calls the strong Rock and Fountain of the Christian Religion)
that first drove Popery out of these Kingdoms, and it is this alone can keep it
out. Nothing but this can give a Check to that Immorality, which has
overspread the Land as a Flood. Can you empty the great Deep, Drop by Drop?
Then you may reform us, by Dissuasives from particular Vices. But let the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith be brought in, and so shall its proud
Waves be stayed. Nothing but this can stop the Mouths of those who glory in
their Shame, and openly deny the Lord that bought them. They can talk as
sublimely of the Law, as he that has it written by God in his Heart. To hear
them speak on this Head, might incline one to think, they were not far from the
Kingdom of God. But take them out of the Law into the Gospel; begin with the
Righteousness of Faith, with Christ, the End of the Law to every one that
believes: And those who but now appeared almost, if not altogether Christians,
stand confessed the Sons of Perdition; as far from Life and Salvation (God be
merciful unto them!) as the Depth of Hell from the Height of Heaven. 9. For
this Reason the Adversary so rages, whenever Salvation by Faith is declared to
the World. For this Reason did he stir up Earth and Hell, to destroy those who
first preached it. And for the same Reason, knowing that Faith alone could
overturn the Foundations of his Kingdom, did he call forth all his Forces, and
employ all his Arts of Lies and Calumny, to affright that Champion of the Lord
of Hosts, Martin Luther, from reviving it. Nor can we wonder thereat; for as
that Man of God observes, How would it enrage a p^oud strong Man armed, to be
stopped and set at naught by a little Child, coming against him with a Reed in
his Hand? Especially, when he knew that little Child would surely overthrow
him, and tread him under Foot. Even so, Lord Jesus! Thus has thy Strength been
ever made perfect in W^^kness! Go forth then, thou little Child, that believ^st
in him, and his Right hand shall teach thee terrible Things! Though thou art
helpless and weak as an Infant of Days, the strong Man shall not be able to
stand before thee. Thou shall prevail over him, and subdue him, and overthrow
him, and trample him under thy Feet. Thou shall march on under the great
Captain of thy Salvation, conquering and to conquer, until all thine Enemies
are destroyed, and Death is swallowed up in Victory.


Now Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Blessing and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, for ever and ever.
Amen.

THE ALMOST CHRISTIAN. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S, OXFORD, BEFORE THE
UNIVERSITY, On JULY 25, 1741.
ACTS xxvi. 28. Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.


AND many there are who go thus far: Ever since the Christian Religion was in
the World, there have been many in every Age and Nation, who were almost
persuaded to be Christians. But seeing it avails nothing before God, to go only
thus far, it highly imports us to consider, First, What is implied in being
almost, Secondly, What in being altogether a Christian.


I.) 1. Now, in the being almost a Christian is implied, first Heathen Honesty.
No one, I suppose, will make any Question of this; especially, since by Heathen
Honesty here, I mean, not that which is recommended in the Writings of their
Philosophers only, but such as the common Heathens expected of one another, and
many of them actually practiced. By the Rules of this they were taught, that
they ought not to be unjust; not to take away their Neighbor's Goods, either
by Robbery or Theft: Not to oppress the Poor, neither to use Extortion toward
any: Not to cheat or overreach either the Poor or Rich, in whatsoever Commerce
they had with them: To defraud no Man of his Right, and, if it were possible to
owe no Man any Thing.

2. Again, the common Heathens allowed, that some Regard was to be paid to
Truth as well as to Justice. And accordingly, they not only held him in
Abomination, who was forsworn, who called God to witness to a Lie; but him
also, who was known to be a Slanderer of his Neighbor, who falsely accused any
Man. And indeed little better did they esteem wilful Liars of any Sort,
accounting them the Disgrace of Human Kind, and the Pests of Society.

3. Yet again, there was a Sort of Love and Assistance, which they expected one
from another. They expected whatever assistance any one could give another,
without Prejudice to himself. And this they extended, not only to those little
Offices of Humanity, which are performed without any Expense or Labor; but
likewise, to the Feeding the Hungry, if they had Food to spare, the clothing
the Naked, with their own superfluous Raiment; and in general, the giving to
any that needed, such Things as they needed not themselves. Thus far (in the
lowest Account of it) Heathen Honesty went, the first Thing implied in the
being almost a Christian.

II.) 4. A second Thing implied in the being almost a Christian, is the having
a Form of Godliness, of that Godliness which is prescribed in the Gospel of
Christ: The having the Outside of a real Christian. Accordingly, the Almost
Christian does nothing which the Gospel forbids. He takes not the Name of God
in vain: He blesses and curses not; he swears not at all, but his
Communication is yea, yea; nay, nay. (...) profanes not the Day of the Lord,
nor suffers (...) to be profaned, even by the Stranger that is within his
Gates. He not only avoids all actual Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness,
but every Word or Look, that either directly or indirectly tends thereto: Nay,
and all idle Words, abstaining both from all Detraction, Backbiting, Tale
bearing, Evil speaking, and from all foolish Talking and Jesting, (...), a kind
of Virtue in the Heathen Moralist's Account. Briefly from all Conversation that
is not good to the Use of edifying, and that consequently grieves the Holy
Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed to the Day of Redemption.

5. He abstains from Wine wherein is Excess, from Revelling and Gluttony. He
avoids, as much as in him lies, all Strife and Contention, continually
endeavoring to live peaceably with all Men. And if he suffer wrong, he
avengeth not himself, neither returns Evil for Evil. He is no Railer, no
Brawler, no Scoffer, either at the Faults or Infirmities of his Neighbor. He
does not willingly wrong, hurt, or grieve any Man; but in all Things acts and
speaks by that plain Rule, Whatsoever thou would not be should do unto thee,
that do not thou to another.

6. And in doing Good, he does not confine himself to cheap and easy Offices of
Kindness, but labors and suffers for the Profit of many, that by all Means he
may help some. In spite of Toil or Pain, Whatsoever his Hand finds to do, he
does it with all his Might: Whether it be for his Friends, or for his Enemies;
for the Evil, or for the Good. For, being not slothful in this, or in any
^^^^ness, as he has Opportunity he does Good, all M^^^er of Good to all Men;
and to their Souls as well as their Bodies. He reproves the Wicked, instructs
the Ignorant, confirms the Wavering, quickens the Good, and comforts the
Afflicted. He labors to awaken those that sleep, to lead those whom God has
already awakened, to the Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness, that they
may wash therein and be clean; and to stir up those who are saved through
Faith, to adorn the Gospel of Christ in all Things.

7. He that has the Form of Godliness, uses also the Means of Grace, yea, all
of them, and at all Opportunities. He constantly frequents the House of God;
and that not as the Manner of some is, who come into the Presence of the Most
High, either loaded with Gold and costly Apparel, or in all the gaudy Vanity of
Dress; and either by their unseasonable Civilities to each other, or the
impertinent Gaiety of their Behavior, disclaim all Pretensions to the Form, as
well as to the Power of Godliness. Would to God there were none even among
ourselves who fall under the same Condemnation: Who come into his House, it may
be, gazing about, or with all the Signs of the most listless, careless
Indifference, though sometimes they may seem to use a Prayer to God for his
Blessing on what they are entering upon; who during that awful Service, are
either asleep or reclined in the most convenient Posture for it; or, as though
they supposed God was asleep, talking with one another, or looking round, as
utterly void of Employment. Neither let these be accused of the Form of
Godliness. No; he who has even this, behaves with Seriousness and Attention, in
every Part of that solemn Service. More especially when he approaches the Table
of the Lord, it is not with a light or careless ^^^aviour, but with an Air,
Gesture and Deportment which speaks nothing else, but God be merciful to me a
Sinner.

8. To this if we add, the constant Use of Family Prayer, by those who are
Masters of Families, and the setting Times apart for private Addresses to God,
with a daily Seriousness of Behavior: He who uniformly practices this Outward
Religion, has the Form of Godliness. There needs but One Thing more in order to
his being almost a Christian, and that is, Sincerity.

III.) 9. By Sincerity, I mean, a real, inward Principle of Religion, from
whence these outward Actions flow. And indeed, if we have not this, we have not
Heathen Honesty; no, not so much of it as will answer the demand of a Heathen,
Epicurean Poet. Even this poor Wretch, in his sober Intervals, is able to
testify, Good Men avoid Sin from the Love of Virtue: Wicked Men avoid Sin from
a Fear of Punishment.
Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore;
Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae.
So that if a Man only abstains from doing Evil, in order to avoid Punishment,
Thou shall not be hanged.
Non pasces in cru^e corvos, says the Pagan; there, Thou have thy Reward. But
even he will not allow such a harmless Man as this, to be so much as a good
Heathen. If then any Man, from the same Motive, viz. to avoid Punishment, to
avoid the Loss of his Friends, or his Gain, or his Reputation, should not only
abstain from doing evil, but also do ever so much Good, yea, and use all the
Means of Grace; yet we could not with any Propriety say, This Man is even
almost a Christian. If he has no better Principle in his Heart, he is only a
Hypocrite altogether.

10. Sincerity therefore is necessarily implied in the being almost a
Christian: A real Design to serve God, a hearty Desire to do his Will: It is
necessarily implied, that a Man have a sincere View of pleasing God in all
Things: In all his Conversation; in all his Actions; in all he does, or leaves
undone. This Design, if any Man be almost a Christian, runs through the whole
Tenor of his Life. This is the moving Principle both in his doing Good, his
abstaining from Evil, and his using the Ordinances of God.

11. But here it will probably be enquired, Is it possible that any Man living,
should go so far as this, and nevertheless be only almost a Christian? What
more than this can be implied, in the being a Christian altogether? I answer,
first, That it is possible to go thus far, and yet be but almost a Christian; I
learn not only from the Oracles of God, but also from the sure Testimony of
Experience.

12. Brethren, Great is my Boldness toward you in this Behalf. And forgive me
this Wrong, if I declare my own Folly upon the Housetop, for yours and the
Gospel's Sake. Suffer me then to speak freely of myself, even as of another
Man. I am content to be abased, so ye may be exalted, and to be yet more vile,
for the Glory of my Lord.

13. I did go thus far for many Years, as (...) of this Place can testify:
Using Diligence to eschew all Evil, and to have a Conscience void of Offense:
Redeeming the Time, buying up every Opportunity of doing all Good to all Men;
constantly and carefully using all the Public and all the Private Means of
Grace; endeavoring after a steady Seriousness of Behavior, at all Times and
in all Places: And God is my Record, before whom I stand, doing all this in
Sincerity; having a real Design to serve God, a hearty Desire to do his Will in
all Things, to please him who had called me to fight the good Fight, and to lay
hold of eternal Life. Yet my own Conscience bears me Witness in the Holy
Ghost, that all this Time I was but almost a Christian.

II. If it be enquired, what more than this is implied in the being altogether
a Christian? I answer,

I.) 1. First, The Love of God. For thus says his Word, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind,
and with all thy Strength: Such a Love of God is this, as engrosses the whole
Heart, as takes up all the Affections, as fills the entire Capacity of the
Soul, and employs the utmost Extent of all its Faculties. He that thus loves
the Lord his God, his Spirit continually rejoiceth in God his Savior. His
Delight in in the Lord, his Lord and his All, to whom in every Thing he gives
Thanks. All his Desire is unto God, and the Remembrance of his Name. His Heart
is ever crying out, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and there is none upon
Earth that I desire beside Thee. Indeed, what can he desire beside God? Not the
World, or the Things of the World. For he is crucified to the World, and the
World crucified to him. He is crucified to the Desire of the Flesh, the Desire
of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. Yea, he is dead to Pride of every Kind: For
Love is not puffed up; but he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in
him, is less than nothing in his own Eyes.

II.) 2. The Second Thing implied in the being altogether a Christian is, The
Love of our Neighbor. For thus said our Lord in the following Words, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. If any Man ask who is my Neighbor, we
reply, Every Man in the World; every Child of his, who is the Father of the
Spirits of all Flesh. Nor may we in any wise except our Enemies, or the Enemies
of God and their own Souls. But every Christian loves these also as himself,
yea, as Christ loved us. He that would more fully understand what Manner of
Love this is, may consider St. Paul's Description of it. It is, long suffering
and kind. It envieth not. It is not rash or hasty in judging. It is not puffed
up, but makes him that loves, the least, the Servant of all. Love does not
behave itself unseemly, but becomes all Things to all Men. She seeks not her
own, but only the Good of others, that they may be saved. Love is not provoked.
It casts out Wrath, which he who has, is not made perfect in Laws. It
thinks no Evil. It rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth. It
cove^eth all Things believes all Things, hops all Things, endures all
Things.

III. 3. There is yet one Thing more that may be separately considered, though it
cannot actually be separate from the preceding, which is implied in the being
altogether a Christian. And that is the Ground of All, even Faith. V^ry
excellent Things are spoken of this throughout the Oracles of God. Every one,
says the beloved Disciple, that believes, is born of God. To as many us
received him, gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe on his Name. And, this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even
our Faith. Yea, our Lord himself declares, He that believes in the Son has
everlasting Life; and comes not into Condemnation, but is passed from Death
unto Life.

4. But here let no Man deceive his own Soul. " Homily on the Salvation of Man.
It is diligently to be noted, the Faith which brings not forth Repentance
and Love, and all good Works, is not that right living Faith which is here
spoken of, but a dead and devilish one. For even the Devils believe that Christ
was born of a Virgin, that he wrought all kinds of Miracles, declaring himself
very God: That for our Sakes he suffered a most painful Death, to redeem us
from Death everlasting: That he rose again the third Day; that he ascended into
Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of the Father, and at the End of the
World, shall come again to judge both the Quick and Dead. These Articles of our
Faith the Devils believe, and so they believe all that is written in the Old
and New Testament. And yet for all this Faith, they be but Devils. They remain
still in their damnable Estate, lacking the very true Christian Faith."

5. "The right and true Christian Faith is, ^o go on in the Words of our own
Church, not only to believe that holy Scripture, and the Articles of our Faith
are true, but also to have a sure Trust and Confidence, to be saved from
everlasting Damnation by Christ. It is a sure Trust and Confidence which a Man
has in God, that by the Merits of Christ his Sins are forgiven, and he
reconciled to the Favor of God, -- whereof does follow a loving Heart, to obey
his Commandments."

6. Now, whosoever has this Faith, which purifies the Heart, by the Power of
God, who dwells therein, from Pride, Anger, Desire, from all Unrighteousness,
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, which fills it with Love stronger than
Death, both to God and to all Mankind; Love that does the Works of God,
glorying to spend and to be spent for all Men, and that endures with Joy, not
only the Reproach of Christ, the being mocked, despised, and hated of all Men,
but whatsoever the Wisdom of God permits the Malice of Men or Devils to
inflict; whosoever has this Faith, thus working by Love, is not almost only,
but altogether a Christian.

7. But who are the living Witnesses of these Things? I beseech you, Brethren,
as in the Presence of that God, before whom Hell and Destruction are without a
Covering: How much more the Hearts of the Children of Men? That ea^h of you
would ask his own Heart, "Am I of that Number? Do I so far practice Justice,
Mercy and Truth, as even the Rules of Heathen Honesty require? If so, have I
the very Outside of a Christian? The Form of Godliness? Do I abstain from Evil,
from whatsoever is forbidden in the written word of God? Do I, whatever Good my
Hand finds to do, do it with my Might? Do I seriously use all the Ordinances
of God at all Opportunities? And is all this done, with a sincere Design and
Desire to please God in all Things?

8. Are not many of you conscious, that you never came thus far: That you have
not been even almost a Christian? That you have not come up to the Standard of
Heathen Honesty? At least, not to the Form of Christian Godliness? Much less
has God seen Sincerity in you, a real Design of pleasing him in all Things.
You never so much as intended, to devote all your Words and Works, your
Business, Studies, Diversions, to his Glory. You never even designed or
desired, that whatsoever you did, should be done in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and, as such, should be a spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God through Christ.

9. But supposing you had, Do good Designs and good Desires make a Christian?
By no Means, unless they are brought to good Effect. Hell is paved, says one,
with good Intentions. The great Question of all then still remains. Is the Love
of God shed abroad in your Heart? Can you cry out, My God and my All? Do you
desire nothing but him? Are you happy in God? Is he your Glory, your Delight,
your Crown of Rejoicing? And is this Commandment written in your Heart, That he
who loves God loves his Brother also? Do you then love your Neighbor as
yourself? Do you love every Man, even your Enemies, even the Enemies of God, as
your own Soul? As Christ loved you? Yea, do thou believe that Christ loved
thee, and gave himself for thee? Have thou Faith in his Blood? Believe thou
the Lamb of God has taken away thy Sins, and cast them as a Stone into the
Depth of the Sea? That he has blotted out the Handwriting that was against
thee, taking it out of the Way, nailing it to his Cross? Have thou indeed
Redemption through his Blood, even the Remission of thy Sins? And does his
Spirit bear witness with thy Spirit, that thou art a Child of God?

10. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who now stands in the Midst
of us, knows that if any Man die without this Faith and this Love, good it
were for him that he had never been born. Awake then, thou that sleep, and
call upon thy God: Call in the Day when he may be found. Let him not rest, till
he make his Goodness to pass before thee, till he proclaim unto thee the Name
of the Lord. She Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
abundant in Goodness and Truth; keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniq^^ry
and Transgression and Sin. Let no Man persuade thee by vain Words, to rest
short of this Prize of thy high Calling. But cry unto him Day and Night, who,
while we were without Strength, died for the Ungodly, until thou know in
whom thou have believed, and can say, "My Lord and my God." Remember, always
to pray and not to faint, till thou also can lift up thy Hand unto Heaven,
and declare to him that lives for ever and ever, "Lord, Thou know all
Things, Thou know that I love Thee."

11. May we all thus experience what it is, to be not almost only, but
altogether Christians! Being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus: Knowing we have Peace with God through Jesus
Christ: Rejoicing in Hope of the Glory of God, and having the the Love of God
shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost given unto us!

A SERMON PREACHED ON SUNDAY, APRIL 4, 1742. BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD,
By CHARLES WESLEY, M. A. Student of CHRIST-CHURCH.
EPHESIANS. V. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ
shall give thee Light.


IN discoursing on these Words, I shall, with the Help of God, First, Describe
the Sleepers to whom they are spoken. Secondly, Enforce the Exhortation, Awake
thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead. And, Thirdly, Explain the Promise
made to such as do awake and arise; Christ shall give the Light.


I.) 1. And first, as to the Sleepers here spoken to. By Sleep is signified the
Natural State of Man: That deep Sleep of the Soul into which the Sin of Adam
has cast all who spring from his Loins; that Supineness, Indolence, and
Stupidity, that Insensibility of his real Condition, wherein every Man comes
into the World, and continues till the Voice of God awakes him. 2. Now they
that sleep, sleep in the Night. The State of Nature is a State of utter
Darkness; a State wherein Darkness covers the Earth, and gross Darkness the
People. The poor unawakened Sinner, how much Knowledge soever he may have as to
other Things, has no Knowledge of himself: In this Respect, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know. He knows not that he is a fallen Spirit, whose only
Business in the present World, is to recover from his Fall, to regain that
Image of God wherein he was created. He sees no Necessity for the one Thing
needful, even that inward universal Change, that Birth from above (figured out
by Baptism) which is the Beginning of that total Renovation, that
Sanctification of Spirit, Soul and Body, without which no Man shall see the
Lord. 3. Full of all Diseases as he is, he fancies himself in perfect Health:
Fast bound in Misery and Iron, he dreams that he is happy, and at Liberty. He
says, Peace, Peace, while the Devil, as a strong Man armed, is in full
Possession of his Soul. He sleeps on still, and takes his Rest, though Hell is
moved from beneath to meet him; though the Pit, from whence there is no Return,
has opened its Mouth to swallow him up: A Fire is kindled around him, yet he
knows it not; yea it burns him, yet he lays it not to Heart. 4. By one who
sleeps we are therefore to understand (and would to God we might all understand
it!) A Sinner satisfied in his Sins; contented to remain in his fallen State,
to live and die without the Image of God: One who is ignorant both of his
Disease, and of the only Re^^dy for it: One who never was warned, or never
regarded the warning Voice of God to flee from the Wrath to come: One that
never yet saw he was in Danger of Hellfire, or cried out in the Earnestness of
his Soul, What must I do to be saved? 5. If this Sleeper be not Outwardly
vicious, his Sleep is usually the deepest of all: Whether he be of the
Laodician Spirit, neither cold (...) hot; but a quiet, rational, inoffensive;
good natured Professor of the Religion of his Fathers; or whether he be Zealous
and Orthodox, and after the most straitest Sect of our Religion, live a
Pharisee; that is according to the Scriptural Account, one that justifies
himself; one that labors to establish his own Righteousness, as the Ground of
his Acceptance with God. 6. This is he, who having a Form of Godliness, denies
the Power thereof; yea, and probably reviles it, wheresoever it is found, as
mere Extravagance and Delusion. Mean while, the wretched Self-deceiver thanks
God, that he is not as other Men are; Adulterers, Unjust, Extortioners: No, he
does no Wrong to any Man. He fasts twice in a Week, uses all the Means of
Grace, is constant at Church and Sacrament: Yea, and gives Tithes of ^ll that
he has, does all the Good that he can: Touching the Righteousness of the Law,
he is blameless: He wants nothing of Godliness but the Power; nothing of
Religion, but the Spirit; nothing of Christianity, but the Truth and the Life.
7. But know ye not, that however highly esteemed among men, such a Christian as
this may be, he is an Abomination in the Sight of God, and an Heir of every
Woe, which the Son of God Yesterday, Today, and for ever, denounces against
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites? He has made clean the Outside of the Cup
and the Platter, but within is full of all Filthiness. An evil Disease cleaves
still unto him, so that his inward Parts are very Wickedness. Our Lord fitly
compares him to a painted Sepulcher, which appears (...); but nevertheless is
full of dead Men's Bones, and of all Uncleanness. The Bones indeed are no longer
dry; the Sinews and Flesh are come upon them, and the Skin covers them above:
But there is no Breath in them, no Spirit of the living God. And if any Man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Ye are Christ's, if so be
that the Spirit of God dwell in you. But if not, God knows that ye abide in
death, even until now. 8. This is another Character of the Sleeper here spoken
to. He abides in Death, though he knows it not. He is dead unto God, dead in
Trespasses and Sins. For, to be carnally minded is Death. Even as it is
written, By one Man Sin entered into the world, and death by Sin: And so Death
passed upon all Men, not only temporal Death, but likewise Spiritual and
Eternal. In that Day that thou eatest (said God to Adam) Thou shall surely die.
Not bodily (unless as he then became Mortal) but spiritually: Thou shall lose
the Life of thy Soul: Thou shall die to God; shall be separated from him, thy
essential Life and Happiness. 9. Thus first was dissolved the Vital Union of
our Soul with God: Insomuch that in the midst of natural Life, we are now in
spiritual Death. And herein we remain till the second Adam becomes a quickening
Spirit to us, till he raises the Dead, the Dead in Sin, in Pleasure, Riches, or
Honors. But before any dead Soul can live, he hears ((...) to) the Voice of
the Son of God: He is made sensible of his lost estate, and receives the
Sentence of Death in himself. He knows himself to be dead while he lives, dead
to God, and all the Things of God: Having no more Power to perform the Actions
of a living Christian, than a dead Body to perform the Functions of a living
Man. 10. And most certain it is, that one dead in Sin, has not Senses exercised
to discern spiritual Good and Evil. Having Eyes, he sees not, he has Ears and
hears not. He does not taste and see that the Lord is gracious. He has not
se^^ God at any Time, nor heard his Voice, nor handled the Word of Life. In
vain is the Name of Jesus like Ointment poured forth, and all his Garments
smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia. The Soul that sleepeeth in Death has no
Perception of any Objects of this Kind. His Heart is past feeling, and
understands none of these Things. 11. And hence having no Spiritual Senses,
no Inlets of Spiritual Knowledge, the Natural Man receives not the Things of
the Spirit of God; nay, he is so far from receiving them, that whatsoever is
spiritually discerned is mere Foolishness unto him. He is not content with
being utterly ignorant of Spiritual Things, but he denies the very Existence of
them. And Spiritual Sensation itself is to him, the Foolishness of Folly. How,
says he, Can these Things be? How can any Man know, that he is alive to God?
Even as you know, that your Body is now alive. Faith is the Life of the Soul:
And if ye have this Life abiding in you, ye want no Mark to evidence it to
yourself, but that (...), that divine Consciousness, that Witness of God, which
is more and greater than ten thousand Human Witnesses. 12. If he does not now
bear Witness with thy Spirit, that thou art a Child of God, O that he might
convince Thee, Thou poor unawakened Sinner, by his Demonstration and Power,
that Thou art a Child of the Devil! O that as I prophecy, there might now be a
Noise and a Shaking, and may the Bones come together, Bone to his Bone. Then
come from the four Winds, O Breath, and breathe on these slain, that they may
live! And do not ye harden your Hearts, and resist the Holy Ghost, who eve^^
now is come to convince you of Sin, because you believe not on the Name of the
only (...) of God.


II.) 1. Wherefore, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead. God
calls Thee now by my Mouth; and bids Thee know thyself, Thou fallen Spirit,
thy true State and only Concern below. What meanest Thou, O Sleeper? Arise!
Call upon thy God, if so be thy God will think upon Thee, that thou perish not.
A mighty Tempest is stirred up round about Thee, and thou art sinking into the
Depths of Perdition, the Gulf of God's Judgments. If thou would escape them,
cast thyself into them. Judge thyself, and thou shall not be judged of the
Lord. 2. Awake, awake! Stand up this Moment, lest Thou drink at the Lord's Hand
the Cup of his Fury. Stir up thyself to l^^ held on the Lord, the Lord thy
Righteousness, (...) ^hey to save! Shake thyself from the Dust. At least, let
the Earthquake of God's Threatening shake Thee. Awake and cry out with the
trembling Jailer, What must I do to be saved? And never rest, till Thou
believe on the Lord Jesus, with a Faith which is his Gift, by the Operation
of his Spirit. 3. If I speak to any one of you more than to another, it is to
Thee, who think thyself unconcerned in this Exhortation. I have a Message
from God unto Thee. In his Name, I warn Thee to flee from the Wrath to come.
Thou unholy Soul, see thy Picture in condemned Peter, lying in the Dark
Dungeon, between the Soldiers, bound with two Chains, the Keepers before the
Door keeping the Prison. The Night is far spent, the Morning is at hand, when
thou art to be brought forth to Execution. And in these dread Circumstances,
Thou art fast asleep; Thou art fast asleep in the Devil's Arms, on the Brink of
the Pit, in the Jaws of everlasting Destruction. 4. O may the Angel of the Lord
come upon Thee, and the Light shine into thy Prison! And may Thou feel the
Stroke of an Almighty Hand, raising. Thee with Arise up quickly, gird thyself
and bind on thy Sandals, cast thy Garment about Thee, and follow me. 5. Awake,
Thou everlasting Spirit, out of thy Dream of Worldly Happiness. Did not God
create Thee for Himself? Then, thou can not rest, till th^^ restest in him.
Return thou Wanderer. Fly back to thy Ark. This is not thy Home. Think not of
building Tabernacles here. Thou art but a Stranger, a Sojourner upon Earth: A
Creature of a Day, but just launching out into an Unchangeable State. Make
haste. Eternity is at hand. Eternity depends on this Moment. An Eternity of
Happiness, or an Eternity of Misery! 6. In what State is thy Soul? Was God,
while I am yet speaking, to require it of Thee, art Thou ready to meet Death
and Judgment? Can Thou stand in his Sight, who is of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity? Art Thou meet to be Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light? Have Thou fought a good Fight and kept the Faith? Have Thou secured
the one Thing Needful? Have Thou recovered the Image of God, even Righ^^^ness
and true Holiness? Have Thou put off the Old Man and put on the New? Art Thou
clothed upon with Christ? 7. Have Thou Oil in thy Lamp? Grace in thy Heart?
Do Thou love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Mind, and
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength? Is that Mind in Thee, which was
also in Christ Jesus? Art Thou a Christian indeed? That is, a new Creature? Are
old Things past away, and ^ll Things become new? 8. Art Thou a Partaker of the
Divine Nature? Know thou not, that Christ is in Thee, except Thou be
Reprobate? Know Thou, that God dwells in Thee, and Thou in God, by his
Spirit which he has given Thee? Know Thou not, that thy Body is a Temple of
the Holy Ghost, which Thou have of God? Have Thou the Witness in thyself? The
Earnest of thine Inheritance? Art Thou sealed by that Spirit of Promise, unto
the Day of Redemption? Have Thou received the Holy Ghost -- or do thou start
at the Question, not knowing whether there be any Holy Ghost? 9. If it offends
Thee, be Thou assured, that Thou neither art a Christian, nor desire to be
One. Nay, thy very Prayer is turned into Sin; and Thou have solemnly mocked God
this very Day, by praying for the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit, when Thou
did not believe there was any such Thing to be received. 10. Yet on the
Authority of God's Word and our own Church, I must repeat the Question, Have
thou received the Holy Ghost? If Thou have not, Thou art not yet a Christian.
For a Christian is a Man, that is anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with Power.
Thou art not yet made a Partaker of pure Religion and undefiled. Do Thou
know, what Religion is? That it is, a Participation of the Divine Nature, the
Life of God in the Soul of Man: Christ formed in the Heart, Christ in thee, the
Hope of Glory. Happiness and Holiness; Heaven begun upon Earth. A Kingdom of
God within thee: Not Meat and Drink, no outward Thing: but Righteousness and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost? An everlasting Kingdom brought into thy Soul,
a Peace of God, that passes all Understanding; a Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory? 11. Know Thou, that in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails
any Thing, nor Uncircumcision; but Faith that Works by Love; but a New
Creation? See Thou the Necessity of that Inward Change, that Spiritual Birth,
that Life from the Dead? That Holiness? And art Thou thoroughly convinced, that
without it, no Man shall see the Lord? Art thou laboring after it? Giving all
Diligence, to make thy Calling and Election sure? Working out thy Salvation
with Fear and Trembling (...) Agonizing to enter in at the straight Gate? Art
Thou in ^^^nest about thy Soul? And, can Thou tell the Searcher of Hearts,
Thou O God, art the thing that I long for! Lord, Thou know all Things! Thou
know that I would love Thee! 12. Thou hopest to be saved -- but what Reason
have Thou to give of the Hope that is in Thee? Is it because thou have done no
Harm? Or, because Thou have done much Good? Or because Thou art not like other
Men; but Wise, or Learned, or Honest and morally Good? Esteemed of Men, and of
a Fair Reputation! Alas, all this will never bring Thee to God. It is in his
Account lighter than Vanity. Do Thou know Jesus Christ whom he has sent?
^^th he taught Thee, that by Grace we are saved through Faith? And that, not of
ourselves: It is the Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man should boast. Have
Thou received the faithful Saying as the whole Foundation of thy Hope, that
Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners? Have Thou learned what that
means, I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance? I am not
sent, but to the lost Sheep? Art Thou (He that hears, let him understand!)
Lost, Dead? Damned already? -- Do Thou know thy Deserts? Do thou feel thy
Wants? Art thou poor in Spirit? Mourning for God and refusing to be comforted?
Is the Prodigal come to himself, and well-content to be therefore thought
beside himself; by those who are still feeding upon the Husks which he has
left? Art Thou willing to live Godly in Christ Jesus? And do thou therefore
suffer Persecution? Do Men say all Manner of Evil against thee falsely, for the
Son of Man's Sake? 13. O, that in all these Questions ye may hear the Voice
that wakes the Dead, and feel that Hammer of the Word, which breaks the Rock
in Pieces! -- If ye will hear his Voice to Day, while it is called to Day,
harden not your Hearts. Now awake thou that sleep in Spiritual Death, that
Thou sleep not in Death Eternal^^ Feel thy lost Estate, and arise from the
Dead. Leave thine old Companions in Sin and Death. Follow Thou Jesus, and let
the Dead (...) their Dead. Save thyself from this untoward Generation. Come out
from among them, and be thou separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and the
Lord shall receive thee, Christ shall give thee Light.


III. 1. This Promise I come, lastly, to explain. And how encouraging a
Consideration is this, that whosoever thou art who obeye^^ his Call, Thou can
not seek his Face in vain. If Thou even now awakest and arisest from the Dead,
he has bound himself to give thee Light. The Lord shall give Thee Grace and
Glory; the Light of his Grace here and the Light of his Glory, when Thou (...)
the Crown that fades not away. Thy (...) shall break, forth as the Morning,
and thy Darkness be as the Noonday. God who co^^^^nded the Light to shine out
of Darkness, shall shine in thy Heart; to give the Knowledge of the Glory of
God in the Face of Jesus Christ. On them that fear the Lord shall the Sun of
Righteousness arise, with Healing in his Wings. And in that Day it shall be
said unto thee, Arise, shine: for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. For Christ shall reveal himself in thee. And he is the true
Light. 2. God is Light, and (...) give himself to every awakened Sinner, that
waits for him: And Thou shall then be a Temple of the living God, and Christ
shall dwell in thy Heart by Faith: And being rooted and grounded in Love, Thou
shall be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length,
and Depth, and Height of that Love of Christ which passes Knowledge that Thou
may be filled with all the Fullness of God. 3. Ye see your Calling, Brethren.
We are called to be an Habitation of God through his Spirit: And through his
Spirit dwells in us, to be Saints, here, and Partakers of the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light. So exceeding great are the Promises which are given unto
us, actually given unto us who believe. For by Faith we receive, not the Spirit
of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, the Sum of all the Promises, that
we may know the Things that are freely given to us of God. 4. The Spirit of
Christ is that great Gift of God, which at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners
he has promised to Man, and has fully bestowed since the Time that Christ was
glorified. Those Promises before made to the Fathers, he has thus fulfilled: I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 27.
I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground: I
will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring. Isaiah
xliv. 3.
5. Ye may all be living witnesses of these Things: Of Remission of Sins, and
the Gift of the Holy Ghost, If thou can believe, all things are possible to
him th^^ ^^lieveth. Who among you is there, that fears the Lord, and yet
wal^^th ^n in Darkness, and has no Light? I ask Thee in the Name of Jesus,
believe Thou that his Arm is not shortened at all? That he is still mighty to
save? That he is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever? that he has now
Power on Earth to forgive Sin? Son, be of good Cheer; thy Sins are forgiven.
God for Christ's Sake has forgiven Thee. Receive this, not as the Word of Man;
but as it is, indeed, the Word of God; and Thou art justified freely through
Faith. Thou shall be sanctified also through Faith which is in Jesus, and shall
set to thy Seal, even thine, that God has given unto us eternal Life, and this
Life is in his Son. 6. Men and Brethren, let me freely speak unto you: And
suffer ye the Word of Exhortation, even from one the least esteemed in the
Church. Your Conscience bears you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that these
things are so, if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. This is
Eternal Life, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
This experimental Knowledge, and this alone, is true Christianity. He is a
Christian, who has received the Spirit of Christ. He is not a Christian, who
has not received him. Neither is it possible to have received him and not know
it. For at that Day John xiv. 22.
(when he comes, says our Lord, ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and
you in me, and I in you. This is that Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him. But ye know him: For he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. 7. The World cannot receive him, (...)
^^ly reject the Promise of the Father, contradicting and blaspheming. But every
Spirit which confesses not this, is not of God. Yea, this is that Spirit of
Antichrist, whereof ye have heard, that it should come into the World, and even
now it is in the World. He is Antichrist whosoever denies the Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, or that the Indwelling Spirit of God is the common Privilege of
all Believers, the Blessing of the Gospel, the unspeakable Gift, the Universal
Promise, the Criterion of a real Christian. 8. It nothing helps them to say, We
do not deny the Assistance of God's Spirit; but only this Inspiration, this
receiving the Holy Ghost, and being sensible of it. It is only this feeling of
the Spirit, this being moved by the Spirit, or filled with it, which we deny to
have any Place in Sound Religion. But in only denying this, you deny the whole
Scriptures, the whole Truth and Promise and Testimony of God. 9. Our own
excellent Church knows nothing of this devilish Distinction: But speaks plainly
of Art. 17.
feeling the Spirit of Christ; of being Office of consecrating Priests
moved by the Holy Ghost, and knowing and Visitation of the Sick.
feeling there is no other Name than that of Jesus, whereby we can receive Life
and Salvation. She teaches us all to pray for the Collect before the Holy
Communion.
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, yea, that we may be filled with the Holy Ghost
Order of Confirmation.
. Nay, and every Presbyter of hers, professes to receive the Holy Ghost by the
Imposition of Hands. Therefore to deny any of these, is in Effect, to renounce
the Church of England, as well as the wh^le Christian Revelation. 10. But the
Wisdom of God was always Foolishness with Men. No Marvel then, that the great
Mystery of the Gospel, should be now also hid from the Wise and Prudent, as
well as in the Days of Old: That it should be almost universally denied,
ridiculed and exploded as mere Frenzy: And that all who dare avow it still, are
branded with the Names of Madmen and Enthusiasts. This is that falling away
which was to come: that general Apostasy, of all Orders and Degrees of Men,
which we even now find to have overspread the Earth. Run to and fro in the
Streets of Jerusalem, and see if ye can find a Man; a Man that loves the Lord
his God with all his Heart, and serves him with all his Strength? How does our
own Land mourn (that to look no farther) under the Overflowings of Ungodliness?
What Villainies of every Kind are committed Day by Day; yea, too often with
Impunity, by those who sin with a high Hand, and glory in their Shame? Who can
reckon up the Oaths, Curses, Profaneness, Blasphemies, the Lying, Slandering,
Evil-speaking, the Sabbath-breaking, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Revenge, the
Whoredoms, Adulteries, and various Uncleanness, the Frauds, Injustice,
Oppression, Extortion, which overspread our Land as a Flood? 11. And even among
those who have kept themselves pure from these grosser Abominations; how much
Anger and Pride, how much Sloth and Idleness, how much Softness and Effeminacy,
how much Luxury and Self-Indulgence, how much Covetousness and Ambition, how
much Thirst of Praise, how much Love of the World, how much Fear of Man is to
be found? Mean while, how little of true Religion? For where is he that loves
either God or his Neighbor, as He has. given us Commandment? On the one Hand
are those, who have not so much as the Form of Godliness: On the other those
who have the Form only; there stands the Open, there the Painted Sepulcher. So
that in very Deed, whosoever were earnestly to behold any public gathering
together of the People, (I fear, those in our Churches are not to be excepted)
might easily perceive, that the one Part were Sadduces, and the other
Pharisees: The one having almost as little Concern about Religion, as if there
were no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit; and the other making it a mere
lifeless Form, a dull Round of external Performances, without either true
Faith, or the Love of God, or Joy in the Holy Ghost. 12. Would to God I could
except us of this Place. Brethren, my Hearts Desire, and Prayer to God for you
is, That ye may be saved from this overflowing of Ungodliness, and that here
may its proud Waves be stayed! But is it so indeed? God knows, yea, and our
own Conscience, it is not. Ye have not kept yourselves pure. Corrupt are we
also and abominable; and few are there that understand any more, few that
worship God in Spirit and in Truth. We too are a Generation that set not our
Hearts aright, and whose Spirit cleaves not steadfastly unto God: He has
appointed us indeed to be the Salt of the Earth. But if the Salt have lost its
Savor, it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under Foot of Men. 13. And shall I not visit for these Things, says
the Lord? Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yea, we know
not how soon he may say to the Sword, Sword, go through this Land! He has
given us long Space to repent. He lets us alone this Year also: But he warns
and awakens us by Thunder. His Judgments are abroad in the Earth. And we have
all Reason to expect the Heaviest of All, even that he should come unto us
quickly, and remove our Candlestick out of its Place, except we repent and do
the first Works: Unless we return to the Principles of the Reformation, the
Truth and Simplicity of the Gospel. Perhaps we are now resisting the last
Effort of Divine Grace to save us. Perhaps we have ^ell nigh filled up the
Measure of our Iniquities, by rejecting the Counsel of God against ourselves,
and casting out his Messengers. 14. O God, in the midst of Wrath remember
Mercy! Be glorified in our Reformation, not in our Destruction. Let us hear the
Rod, and him that appointed it. Now that thy Judgments are ^broad in the Earth,
let the Inhabitants of the World learn Righteousness. 15. My Brethren, it is
high Time for us, to awake out of Sleep; before the great Trumpet of the Lord
be blown, and our Land become a Field of Blood. O may we speedily see the
Things that make for our Peace, before they are hid from our Eyes! Turn Thou
us, O good Lord, and let thine Anger cease from us. O Lord, (...) down from
Heaven, behold and visit this Vine; and cause us to know the Time of our
Visitation. Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name; O
deliver us, and be merciful to our Sins, for thy Names Sake. And so will we not
go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon thy Name. Turn us
again, O Lord God of Hosts, show the Light of thy Countenance, and we shall be
whole.


Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask
or think, according to the Power that works in us, unto him be Glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages, World without End. Amen.

Scriptural Christianity. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S, OXFORD, BEFORE THE
UNIVERSITY, AUGUST 24, 1744. Whosoever hears the Sound of the Trumpet, and
takes not Warning, if the Sword come and take him away, his Blood shall be
upon his own Head, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 4.
ACTS iv. 31. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.


1. THE same Expression occurs in the second Chapter, where we read, When the
Day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all (the Apostles, with the Women,
and the Mother of Jesus, and his Brethren) with one Accord in one Place. And
suddenly there came a Sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind. And there
appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of Fire, and it sat upon each of
them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Acts ii. 1, 2, 3, 4.
One immediate Effect whereof was, They began to speak with other tongues; Ver.
4.
insomuch that both the Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and the other Strangers who
came together, when this was noised abroad, heard them speak, in their several
tongues, the wonderful Works of God. Ver, 6.


2. In this Chapter we read, that when the Apostles and Brethren had been
praying, and praising God, the Place was shaken where they were assembled
together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Acts iv. 31.
Not that we find any visible Appearance here, such as had been in the former
Instance: Nor are we informed that the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
were then given to all or any of them; such as the Gifts of Healing, of Working
other Miracles, of Prophecy, of discerning Spirits: the speaking with diverse
kinds of Tongues, and the Interpretation of Tongues. 1 Cor. xii. 9, 10.


3. Whether these Gifts of the Holy Ghost were designed to remain in the Church
throughout all Ages; and whether or no they will be restored at the nearer
Approach of the Restitution of all Things, are Questions which it is not
needful to decide. But it is needful to observe this, That even in the Infancy
of the Church, God divided them with a sparing Hand. Were all even then
Prophets? Were all Workers of Miracles? Had all the Gifts of Healing? Did all
speak with Tongues? No, in no wise. Perhaps not one in a Thousand. Probably
none but the Teachers in the Church, and only some of them 1. Cor. xii. 28, 29,
30.
It was therefore for a more excellent Purpose than this, that they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost.

4. It was, to give them (what none can deny to be essential to all Christians
in all Ages) the Mind which was in Christ, those Holy Fruits of the Spirit,
which whosoever has not, is none of His: To fill them with Gal. v. 22, 23, 24.
Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness: To endue them with
Faith, (perhaps it might be rendered, Fidelity) with Meekness and Temperance:
To enable them to crucify the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, its Passions
and Desires; and, in consequence of that inward Change, to fulfill all outward
Righteousness, to walk as Christ also walked, in the 1 Thessalonians. ^.3.
Work of Faith, the Patience of Hope, the Labor of Love.

5. Without busying ourselves then in curious, needless Enquiries, touching
those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, let us take a nearer View of these his
ordinary Fruits; which we are assured will remain throughout all Ages: Of that
great Work of God among the children of Men, which we are used to express by
one Word, Christianity: Not as it implies a Set of Opinions, a System of
Doctrines, but as it refers to Men's. Hearts and Lives. And this Christianity it
may be useful to consider under three dictinct Views.

I. As beginning to exist in Individuals. II. As speading from one another.
III. As covering the Earth.
I design to close these Considerations with (...) plain practical Application.

1. And first, let us consider Christianity in its Rise, as beginning to exist
in Individuals.

Suppose then one of those who heard the Apostle Peter preaching Repentance and
Remission of Sins, was pricked to the Heart, was convinced of Sin, repented,
and then believed in Jesus. By this Faith of the Operation of God, which was
the very Substance or Subsistence of Things hoped for, Heb. xi. 1.
the demonstrative Evidence of invisible Things, he instantly received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby he now c^ied Abba, Father! Romans viii. 15.
Now first it was that he could call Jesus Lord by the Holy Gh^^^, 1 Cor. xii.
3.
the Spirit itself bearing Witness with his Spirit that he was a Child of God.
Romans viii. 15.
Now it was that he could truly say, I live not, but Christ lives in (...);
and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by Faith in the Son of God,
who loved me and gave himself for me Gal. ii. 20.
.

2. This then was the very Essence of his Faith, a divine (...) Evidence or
Conviction.
of the Love of God the Father, through the Son of his Love, to him a Sinner,
now accepted in the Beloved. And Romans v. 1.
being justified by Faith, he had Peace with God, yea the Peace of God ruling
in his Heart: A Peace which possing all Understanding, ((...), all barely
rational Conception) kept his Heart and Mind from all Doubt and Fear, through
the Knowledge of him in whom he had believed. He could not therefore be afraid
of any evil Tidings; for his Heart stood fast believing in the Lord. He feared
not what Man could do unto him, knowing the very Hairs of his Head were all
numbered. He feared not all the Powers of Darkness, whom God was daily bruising
under his Feet. Least of all was he afraid to die; nay, he desired to depart
and be with Christ Phil. i. 23.
; who Heb. 2.15.
through Death had destroyed him that had the Power of Death even the Devil and
delivered them who through Fear of Death, were all their Life time, till then,
subject to Bondage.

3. His ^oul therefore magnified the Lord, and ^^s Spirit rejoiced in God his
Savior. He rejoiced in him with joy unspeakable, who had reconciled him to God
even the Father: In whom he had Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness
of Sins. He rejoiced in that Witness of God's Spirit with his Spi^^^ that he
was a Child of God: And more abundantly, in Hope of the Glory of God, in Hope
of the Glorious image of God, and full Renewal of his Soul in Righteousness and
true Holiness; and in Hope of that Crown of Glory, that Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away.

4. The Love of God was also shed abroad in his Heart, by the Holy Ghost which
was given unto him Romans v. 5.
Because he was a Son, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into his
Heart, crying, Abba, Father! Gal. iv. 6.
And that filial Love of God was continually increased by the Witness he had in
himself, 1 John v. 10.
of God's pardoning Love to him, by beholding what Manner of Love it was, which
the Father had bestowed upon him, that he should be called a Child of God 1
John iii. 1.
So that God was the Desire of his Eyes, and the Joy of his Heart; his Portion
in Time and in Eternity.

5. He that thus loved God, could not but love his Brother also; and not in
Word only, but in Deed and in Truth. "If God, said he, so loved us, we ought
also to love one another 1 John iv. 11.
." Yea, every Soul of Man, as the Merey of God is over all his Works Psalm.
cxlv. 9.
. Agreeably hereto, the Affection of this Lover of God, embraced all Mankind
for his Sake; not excepting those whom he had never seen in the Flesh, or those
of whom he knew nothing more than that they were the Offspring of God; for
whose Souls his Son had died; not excepting the Evil and Unthankful, and least
of all his Enemies, those who hated, or persecuted, or despitefully used him
for his Master's sake. These had a peculiar Place both in his Heart and his
Prayers. He loved them even as Christ loved us.

6. And Love is not puffed up 1 Cor. xiii. 4.
. It abases to the Dust every Soul wherein it dwells. Accordingly he was lowly
of Heart, little, mean, and vile in his own Eyes. He neither sought nor
received the Praise of Men, but that which comes of God only. He was meek and
long-suffering, gentle to all, and easy to be entreated. Faithfulness and Truth
never forsook him; they were bound about his Neck, and wrote on the Table of
his Heart. By the same Spirit he was enabled to be temperate i^ all Things,
refraining his Soul even as a weaned Child. He was crucified to the World, and
the World crucified to him: Superior to the Desire of the Flesh, the Desire of
the Eye, and the Pride of Life. By the same Almighty Love was he saved, both
from Passion and Pride, from Lust and Vanity, from Ambition and Covetousness,
and from every Temper which was not in Christ.

7. It may easily be believed, he who had this Love in his Heart, would work no
Evil to his Neighbor. It was impossible for him, knowingly and designedly, to
do Harm to any Man. He was at the greatest Distance from Cruelty and Wrong,
from any unjust or unkind Action. With the same Care did he set a Watch before
his Mouth, and keep the Door of his Lips; lest he should offend in Tongue,
either against Justice, or against Mercy or Truth. He put away all Lying,
Falsehood and Fraud; neither was Guile found in his Mouth. He spoke Evil of no
Man; nor did an unkind Word ever come out of his Lips.

8. And as he was deeply sensible of the Truth of that Word, without me ye can
do nothing, and consequently, of the Need he had to be watered of God every
Moment; so he continued dady an all the Ordinances of God, the stated Channels
of his Grace to Man. In the Apostle's Doctrine or Teaching, receiving that Food
of the Soul with all Readiness of Heart, in the breaking of Bread, which he
found to be the Communion of the ^ody of Christ, and in the Prayers and Praises
effered up by the great Congregation. And thus he daily grew in Grace,
increasing in Strength, in the Knowledge and Love of God.

9. But it did not satisfy him, barely to abstain from doing Evil. His Soul was
^-thirst to do Good. The Language of his Heart conti^^ally was, My Father
works Hitherto, and I wor^ My Lord went about doing Good; and shall not^^
tread in his Steps? As he had Opportunity therefore, if he could do no Good of
a higher Kind, he fed the Hungry, clothed the Naked, helped the Fatherless or
Stranger, visited and assisted them that were Sick or in Prison. He gave all
his Goods to feed the Poor. He rejoiced to labor or to suffer for them, and
wherein soever he might profit another, there especially to deny himself. He
counted nothing too dear to part with for them, as well remembering the Word of
his Lord, Insomuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me Matt. xxv. 40.


10. Such was Christianity in its Rise. Such was a Christian in ancient Days.
Such was every one of those, who when they heard the Threatenings of the Chief
Priests and Elders, lift up their Voice to God with one Accord, and were all
filled with the Holy Ghost. The Multitude of (...) that believed, were of one
Heart and of one Soul. (So did the Love of Him in whom they had believed,
constrain them to love one another.) Neither said any of them that ought of the
Things which he possessed was his own; but they had all Things common. So fully
were they crucified to the World, and the World crucified to them. And they
continued steadfastly with one Accord in the Apostles Doctrine, and in the
Breaking of Bread, and in Prayer. And great Grace was upon them all; neither
was there any among them that lacked: For as many as were Possessors of Lands
or Houses sold them, and brought the Prices of the Things that were sold, and
laid them down at the Aposties Feet; and Distribution was made unto every M^^
according as he had need Acts iv. 31 -- 35.
.

II. 1. Let us take a View, in the second Place, of this Christianity, as
spreading from one to another, and so gradually making its Way into the World.
For such was the Will of God concerning it, who did not light a Candle to put
it under a Bushel, but that it might give Light to all that were in the House.
And this our Lord had declared to his first Disciples, Ye are the Salt of the
Earth, the Light of the World; at the same Time that he gave that general
Command, Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven Matt. v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
.

2. And, indeed, supposing a few of these Lovers of Mankind, to see the whole
World lying in Wickedness, Can we believe they would be unconcerned at the
Sight, at the Misery of those for whom their Lord died? Would not their Bowels
yearn over them, and their Hearts melt away for very Trouble? Could they then
stand idle all the Day long, even were there no Command from him whom they
loved? Rather would they not labor, by all possible Means, to pluck some of
these Brands out of the Burning? Undoubtedly they would: They would spare no
Pains to bring back whomsoever they could of those poor Sheep that had gone
astray, to the great Shepherd and Bishop of their Soul 1 Pet. ii. 25.
.

3. So the Christians of old did. They labored, having Opportunity, Gal. vi.
10.
to do good unto all Men, warning them to flee from the Wrath to come, now,
now, to escape the Damnation of Hell. They declared, Acts xvii. 30.
The Times of Ignorance God winked at; but now he calls all Men every where
to repent. They cried aloud, Turn ye, turn ye from your Evil Ways; so Iniquity
shall not be your Ruin Ezekiel. xviii. 30.
. They Acts xxiv. 25.
reasoned with them of Temperance and Righteousness, or Justice, of the Virtues
opposite to their reigning Sins, and of Judgment to come, of the Wrath of God
which would surely be executed on Evil Doers in that Day when he should judge
the World.

4. They endeavored herein to speak to every Man severally as he had need. To
the Careless, to those who lay unconcerned in Darkness and in the Shadow of
Death, they thundered, Awake thou that sleep; arise from the Dead, and Christ
shall give thee Light: But to those who were already awakened out of Sleep, and
groaning under a Sense of the Wrath of God, their Language was, We have an
advocate with the Father; he is the Propitiation for our Sins. Meantime those
who had believed, they provoked to Love and to good Works; to patient
Continuance in Well-doing; and to abound more and more in that Holiness,
without which no Man can see the Lord Heb. xii. 14.
.

5. And their Labor was not in vain in the Lord. His Word ran and was
glorified. It grew mightily and prevailed. But so much the more did offenses
prevail also. The World in general were offended, because they testified of it,
that the Works thereof were evil John vii. 7.
. The Men of Pleasure were offended, not only because these Men were made, as
it were, to reprove their Thoughts. ( He professes, said they, to have the
Knowledge of God: He calls himself the Child of the Lord: His Life is not
like other Men's; his Ways are of another Fashion: He abstaineth from our Ways,
as from Filthiness: He makes his Boast that God is his Father Wisd. i. 13, 14,
15, 16.
.) But much more, because so many more of their Companions were taken away, and
would no more run with them to the same Excess of Riot I Pet. iv. 4.
. The Men of Reputaion were offended, because, as the Gospel spread, they
declined in the Esteem of the People; and because many no longer dared to give
them flattering Titles, or to pay Man the Homage due to God only. The Men of
Trade called one another together, and said, Acts xix. 25, etc.
Sirs, ye know that by this Craft we have our Wealth. But ye see and hear that
these Men have persuaded and turned away much People. So that this our Craft is
in Danger to be set at naught. Above all, the Men of Religion, so called, the
Men of Outside Religion, "the Saints of the World," were offended and ready at
every Opportunity to cry out, Acts xxiv. 5.
Men of Israel, Help! we have found these Men! Pestilent Fellows, Movers of
Sedition throughout the World. Acts xxi. 28.
These are the Men that teach all Men, every where, against the People, and
against the Law.

6. Thus it was that the Heavens grew black with Clouds, and the Storm gathered
amain. For the more Christianity spread, the more Hurt was done, in the Account
of those who received it not, and the Number increased of those who were more
and more enraged at these Acts xvii. 6.
Men who thus turned the World upside down; insomuch that they more and more
cried out, Away with such fellows from the Earth; it is not fit that they
should live, yea, and sincerely believed, that whosoever should kill them,
would do God Service.

7. Mean while they did not fail to Luke vi. 22.
cast out their Name as evil: So that this Acts xxxviii. 22.
Sect was every where spoken against. Matt. v. 11, 37, etc.
Men said all Manner of Evil of them, even as had been done of the Prophets
that were before them. And whatsoever any would affirm, others would believe.
So that offenses grew as the Stars of Heaven for Multitude. And hence arose, at
the Time foreordained of the Father, Persecution in all its Forms. Some, for a
Season, suffered only Shame and Reproach; some, the Spoiling of their Goods;
some had Trial of Mocking and Scourging, some of Bonds and Imprisonment; and
others resisted unto Blood. Heb. x. 34 -- xi.


8. Now it was that the Pillars of Hell were shaken, and the Kingdom of God
spread more and more. Sinners were every where turned from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God. He gave his Children, such a Mouth, and
such Wisdom, as all their Adversaries could not resist. And their Lives were of
Equal Force with their Words. But, above all, their Sufferings spoke to all the
World. They approved themselves the Servants of God, in Afflictions, in
Necessities; in Distresses; in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in
Labors; in Perils in the Sea, in Perils in the Wilderness; in Weariness and
Painfulness, in Hunger and in Thirst, in Cold and Nakedness. 2 Cor. vi. 4. etc.
And when having fought the good fight, they were led as Sheep to the
Slaughter, and offered up on the Sacrifice and Service of their Faith, then the
Blood of each found a Voice, and the Heathen owned, He being dead, yet speaks.

9. Thus did Christianity spread itself in the Earth. But how soon did the
Tares appear with the Wheat? And the Mystery of Iniquity work as well, as the
Mystery of Godliness! How soon did Satan find a Seat, even in the Temple of
God! Till the Woman fled in the Wilderness, and the Faithful were again
minished from the Children of Men. Here we tread a beaten Path: The still
increasing Corruptions of the succeeding Generations, have been largely
described from Time to Time, by those Witnesses God raised up, to show that he
had built his Church upon a Rock, and the Gates of Hell should not wholly
prevail against her. Matt. xvi. 18.


III. I. But shall we not see greater Things than these? Yea, greater than have
been yet from the Beginning of the World. Can Satan cause the Truth of God to
fail, or his Promises to be of none Effect? If not, the Time will come, when
Christianity will prevail over all, and cover the Earth. Let us stand a little,
and survey (the third Thing which was proposed) this strange Sight, a Christian
World Of this the Prophet of old enquired and searched diligently: I Pet. i.
10, 11, etc.
Of this the Spirit which was in them testified, It shall come to pass in the
last Days, that the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be established in the
Top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations
shall flow unto it. And they shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks. Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation;
neither shall they learn War any more. Isa. ii. 2, 4.
In that Day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of
the People. To it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glorious. And
it shall come to pass in that Day, that the Lord shall set his hand again to
recover the Remnant of his People; and he shall set up an Ensign for the
Nations, and shall assemble the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
Dispersed of Judah, from the four Corners of the Earth. Isa. xi. 10, 11, 12.
' 'The Wolf shall then dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid: And the Calf and the young Lion and the Fatling together; and a little
Child shall lead them. They shall not hurt nor destroy, says the Lord, in all
my Holy Mountain. For the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as
the Waters cover the Sea. Isa. xi. 6 -- 9.


2. To the same Effect are the Words of the great Apostle, which it is evident
have never yet been fulfilled. Has God cast away his People? God forbid. But
through their Fall Salvation is come to the Gentiles. And if the diminishing of
them be the Riches of the Gentiles, how much more their Fullness? For I would
not, Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this Mystery. -- That Blindness in
Part is happened to Israel, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in: And
so all Israel shall be saved. Romans xi. 1, 11, 12, 25, 26.


3. Suppose now the Fullness of Time to be come, and the Prophecies to be
accomplished. What a Prospect is this? All is Peace, Quiet^^^^, and Assurance
for ever. Here is no Din of Arms, no confused Noise, no Garments rolled in
Blood. Destructions are come to a perpetual End: Wars are ceased from the
Earth. Neither are there any intestine Jars remaining; no Brother rising up
against Brother; no Country or City divided against itself and tearing out its
own Bowels. Civil Discord is at an End for evermore, and none is left either to
destroy or hurt his Neighbor. Here is no Oppression to Duke even the wise Man
mad; no Extortion to ^^ind the Face of the Poor; no Robbery or Wrong; no Rapine
or Injustice; for all are content with such Things as they possess. Thus
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; Psalm. let iv. 1^
they have taken Root and filled the Land: Righteousness flourishing out of the
Earth, and Peace looking down from Heaven.

4. And with Righteousness or Justice, Mercy is also found. The Earth is no
longer full of cruel Habitations. The Lord has destroyed both the
blood-thirsty and malicious, the envious and revengeful Man. Were there any
Provocation, there is none that now knows to return Evil for Evil: But indeed
there is none does Evil, no not one: for all are harmless as Doves. And being
filled with Peace and Joy in Believing, and united in one Body, by one Spirit,
they all love as Brethren, they are all of one Heart, and of one Soul. Neither
says any of them, that ought of the Things which he possesses is his own.
There is none among them that lacks; for every Man loves his Neighbor as
himself. And all walk by one (...), Whatever ye would that Men should do unto
you, even so do unto them.

5. It follows that no unkind Word can ever be heard among them. No Strife of
Tongue, no Contention of any Kind, no Railing or Evilspeaking; but every one
opens his Mouth with Wisdom, and in his Tongue there is the Law of Kindness.
Equally incapable are they of Fraud or Guile: Their Love is without
Dissimulation: Their Words are always the just Expression of their Thoughts,
opening a Window into their Breast, that whosoever desires may look into their
Hearts, and see that only Love and God are there.

6. Thus, where the Lord Omnipotent takes to himself his mighty Power and
reigns, does he subdue all Things to himself; cause every Heart to overflow
with Love, and fill every Mouth with Praise. Happy are the People that are in
such a Case; yea, blessed are the People who have the Lord for their God.'
Psalm. cxliv. 15.
'Arise, shine (says the Lord) for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee. Thou have known that I the Lord am thy Savior, and
thy Redeemer, the mighty God of Jacob. I have made thy Officers Peace, and thy
Exacters Righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, Wasting
nor Destruction within thy Borders; but thou shall call thy Walls Salvation,
and thy Gates Praise. Thy People are all Righteous; they shall inherit the Land
for ever: The Branch of my planting, the Work of my Hands, that I may be
glorified. The Sun shall no more be thy Light by Day; neither for Brightness
shall the Moon give Light unto thee: But the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory. Isa. lx. 1, 16 -- 19.


IV Having thus briefly considered Christianity, as beginning, as going on, and
as covering the Earth, it remains only that I should close the whole with a
plain practical Application.

1. And first, I would ask, Where does this Christianity now exist? Where, I
pray, do the Christians live? Which is the Country, the Inhabitants whereof are
all thus filled with the Holy Ghost? Are all of one Heart and of one Soul?
Cannot suffer one among them to lack any Thing, but continually give to every
Man as he has Need? Who one and all have the Love of God filling their Hearts,
and constraining them to love their Neighbor as themselves? Who have all put
on Bowels of Mercy, Humbleness of Mind, Gentleness, Long suffering?-Who offend
not in any Kind, either by Word or Deed, against Justice, Mercy, or Truth? But
in every Point do unto all Men, as they would these should do unto them. With
what Propriety can we term any a Christian Country, which does not answer this
Description? Why then, let us confess we have never yet seen a Christian
Country upon Earth.

3. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, if ye do account me a
Madman or a Fool, yet as a Fool bear with me. It is utterly needful that some
one should use great Plainness of Speech toward you. It is more especially
needful at this Time; for who knows but it is the last? Who knows how soon
the Righteous Judge may say, I will no more be entreated for this People. Though
Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in this Land, they should but deliver their own
Souls. And who will use this Plainness, if I do not? Therefore I, even I will
speak. And I adjure you, by the Living God, that ye steel not your Breasts
against receiving a Blessing at my Hands. Do not say in your Heart, Non
persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris: Or, in other Words, Lord, thou shall not send
by whom thou will send. Let me rather perish in my Blood, than be saved by this
Man!

3. Brethren, I am persuaded better Things of you, though I thus speak. Let me
ask you then, in tender Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness, Is this City a
Christian City? Is Christianity, Scriptural Christianity, found here? Are we,
considered as a Community of Men, so filled with the Holy Ghost, as to enjoy in
our Hearts, and show forth in our Lives, the genuine Fruits of that Spirit? Are
all the Magistrates, all Heads and Governors of Colleges and Halls, and their
respective Societies, (not to speak of the Inhabitants of the Town) of one
Heart and one Soul? Is the Love of God shed abroad in our Hearts? Are our
Tempers the ^^me that were in him? And are our Lives agreeable thereto? Are we
Holy as he which has called us is holy, in all manner of Conversation?

4. I entreat you to observe, that here are no peculiar Notions now under
Consideration; that the Question moved is not concerning doubtful Opinions, of
one kind or another; but concerning the undoubted, fundamental Branches (if
there be any such) of our common Christianity. And for the decision thereof, I
appeal to your own Conscience, guided by the Word of God. He therefore that is
not condemned by his own Heart, let him go free.

5. In the Fear then, and in the Presence of the Great God, before whom both
you and I shall shortly appear, I pray you that are in Authority over us, whom
I reverence for your Office Sake, to consider, (and not after the Manner of
Dissemblers with God) Are you filled with (...) Holy Ghost? Are ye lively
Portraitures of Him, whom ye are appointed to represent among Men? I have said,
Ye are Gods, ye Magistrates and Rulers; ye are by office so nearly allied to
the God of Heaven! In your several Stations and Degrees, ye are to show forth
unto us the Lord our Governor. Are all the Thoughts of your Hearts, all your
Tempers and Desires, suitable to your High Calling? Are all your Words like
unto those which come out of the Mouth of God? Is there in all your Actions
Dignity and Love? A Greatness which Words cannot express, which can flow only
from an Heart full of God -- and yet consistent with the Character of Man that
is a Worm and the Son of Man that is a Worm!

6. Ye venerable Men, who are more especially called to form the tender Minds
of Youth, to dispel thence the Shades of Ignorance and Error, and train them up
to be wise unto Salvation, Are you filled with the Holy Ghost? With all these
Fruits of the Spirit, which your important Office so indispensibly requires? Is
your Heart whole with God? Full of Love and Zeal to set up his Kingdom on
Earth? Do you continually remind those under your Care, that the one rational
End of all our Studies, is to know, love, and serve the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent? Do you inculcate upon them, Day by Day, that
Love alone never fails? (Whereas, whether there be Tongues, they shall fail,
or Philosophical Knowledge, it shall vanish away:) And that without Love, all
Learning is but splendid Ignorance, pompous Folly, Vexation of Spirit. Has all
you teach an actual Tendency to the Love of God, and of all Mankind for his
sake? Have you an Eye to this End in whatever you prescribe, touching the Kind,
the Manner, and the Measure of their Studies; desiring and laboring, that
wherever the Lot of these young Soldiers of Christ is cast, they may be so many
burning and shining Lights, adorning the Gospel of Christ in all Things? And
permit me to ask, Do you put forth all your Strength in the vast Work you have
undertaken? Do you labor herein with all your Might? Exerting every Faculty of
your Soul? Using every Talent which God has lent you, and that to the
uttermost of your Power?

7. Let it not be said, that I speak here, as If all under your Care were
intended to be Clergymen. Not so: I only speak as if they were all intended to
be Christians. But what example is set them by us who enjoy the Beneficence of
our Forefathers; by Fellows, Students, Scholars; more especially those who are
of some Rank and Eminence? Do ye, Brethren, abound in the Fruits of the Spirit,
in Lowliness of Mind, in Self-denial and Mortification, in Seriousness and
Composure of Spirit, in Patience, Meekness, Sobriety, Temperance, and in
unwearied, restless Endeavors, to do good, in every kind, unto all Men; to
relieve their outward. Wants, and to bring their Souls to the true Knowledge
and Love of God? Is this the general Character of Fellows of Colleges? I fear
it is not. Rather, have not Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit, Impatience and
Peevishness, Sloth and Indolence, Gluttony, and Sensuality, and even a
proverbial Uselessness, been objected to us, perhaps not always by our Enemies,
nor wholly without Ground? O that God would Roll away this Reproach from us,
that the very Memory of it might perish for ever!

8. Many of us are more immediately consecrated to God, called to minister in
holy Things. Are we then Patterns to the rest, in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity; in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity? 1 Timothy 1^. iv.
Is there written on our Forehead and on our Hearts, Holiness to the Lord? From
what Motives did we enter upon this Office? Was it indeed with a single Eve to
serve God, trusting that we were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon
us this Ministration, for the promoting of his Glory and the edifying of his
People? And have we clearly determined, by God's Grace, to give ourselves
wholly to this Office? Do we forsake and setaside, as much as in us lies, all
worldly Cares and Studies? Do we apply ourselves wholly to this one thing, and
draw all our Cares and Studies this Way? Are we apt to teach? Are we taught of
God, that we may be able to teach others also? Do we know God? Do we know Jesus
Christ? Has God revealed his Son in us? And has he made us able Minislers of
the New Covenant? Where then are the Seals of our Apostleship? Who that were
dead in Trespasses and Sin, have been quickened by our Word? Have we a burning
Zeal to save Souls from Death, so that for their sake we often forget even to
eat our Bread? Do we speak plain, by Manifestation of the Truth, commending
ourselves to every Man's Conscience in the Sight of God? 2 Cor. iv. 2.
Are we dead to the World and the Things of the World, laying up all our
Treasure in Heaven? Do we lord over God's Heritage? Or are we the least, the
Servants of all? When we bear the Reproach of Christ, Does it sit heavy upon
us? Or do we rejoice therein? When we are smitten on the one Cheek, Do we
resent it? Are we impatient of Affronts? Or do we turn the other also; not
resisting the Evil, but overcoming Evil with Good? Have we a bitter Zeal,
inciting us to strive sharply and passionately with them that are out of the
Way? Or is our Zeal the Flame of Love, so as to direct all our Words with
Sweetness, Lowliness, and Meekness of Wisdom?

9. Once more, What shall we say concerning the Youth of this Place? Have you
either the Form or the Power of Christian Godliness? Are you humble, teachable,
advisable: or stubborn, self-willed, heady, and high-minded? Are you obedient
to your Superiors as to Parents? Or do you despise those to whom you owe the
tenderest Reverence? Are you diligent in your ^asy Business, pursuing your
Studies with all your Strength? Do you re^^^m the Time, crowding as much Work
into every Day as it can contain? Rather, are ye not conscious to yourselves,
that you waste away Day after Day, either in reading what has no Tendency to
Christianity, or in Gaming, or in -- you know not what? Are you better Managers
of your Fortune than of your Time? Do you, out of Principle, take care to owe
no Man any thing? Do you remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; to spend it
in the more immeciate Worship of God? When you are in his House, Do you
consider that God is there? Do you behave, as secing Him that is invisible? Do
you know how to possess your Bodies, in Sanctification and Honor? Are not
Dru^kenness and Uncleanness found among you? Yea, are there not of you, who
glory in their Shame? Do not many of you take the Name of God in vain, perhaps
habitually, without either Remorse or Fear? Yea, Are there not a Multitude of
you that are forsworn? I fear, a swiftly-increasing Maltitude. Be not
surprised, Brethren. Before God and this Congregation, I own myself to have
been of the Number; solemnly swearing to observe all those Customs, which I
then knew nothing of; and those Statutes, which I did not so much as read over,
either then, or for some Years after. What is Perjury, if this is not? But if
it be, O what a Weight of Sin, yea, Si^ of no common Dye, lies upon us! And
does not the Most High regard it?

10. May it not be one of the Consequences of this, that so many of you are a
Generation of Triflers; Triflers with God, with one another, and with your own
Souls? For how few of you spend, from one Week to another, a single Hour in
private Prayer? How few have any Thought of God in the General Tenor of your
Converiation? Who of you is, in any Degree, acquainted with the Work of his
Spirit, his supernatural Work in the Souls of Men? Can you bear, unless now and
then, in a Church, any Talk of the Holy Ghost? Would you not take it for
granted, if one began such a Conversation, that it was either Hypocrisy or
Enthusiasm? In the Name of the Lord God Almighty, I ask, What Religion are you
of? Even the Talk of Christianity ye cannot, will not bear. O my Brethren! What
a Christian City is this? It is Time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine Hand!

11. For indeed, what Probability, what Possibility rather, (speaking after the
Manner of Men) is there that Christianity, Scriptural Christianity, should be
again the R^^gion of this Place? That all Orders of Men among us should speak
and live as Men, filled with the Holy Ghost? By whom should this Christianity
be restored? By those of you that are in Authority? Are you convinced then,
that this is Scriptural Christianity? Are you desirous it should be restored?
And to ye not coun^ your Fortune, Liberty, Life, dear unto yours^^ves, so ye
may be instrumental in the resto^^^? But suppose ye have this Desne, who has
any Power proportioned to the Effect? Perhaps some of you have made a ^^w faint
Attempts, but which how small success? Shall Christianity then be restored by
young, unknown, inconsiderable men? I know not whether ye yourselves could
suffer it. Would not some of you cry out, "Young Man, in so doing thou
reproachest us?" But there is no Danger of your being put to the Proof; so has
Iniquity overspread us like a Flood. Whom then shall God send? The Famine, the
Pestilence, (the last Messengers of God to a guilty Land) or the Sword? The
Armies of the Romish Aliens to reform us into our first Love? Nay, rather let
us fall into thy Hand, O Lord, and let us not fall into the Hand of Man.

Lord, save or we perish? Take us out of the Mire that we sink not! O Help us
against these Enemies, for vain is the help of Man. Unto thee all things are
possible. According to the Greatness of thy Power, preserve thou those that are
appointed to die; and preserve us in the Manner that seems to thee good; not
as we will, but as thou will.

Justification by Faith. A SERMON On ROMANS iv. 5.
ROMANS iv. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted to him for Righteousness.


1. HOW a Sinner may be justified before God, the Lord and Judge of all, is a
Question of no common Importance, to every Child of Man. It contains the
Foundation of all our Hope; in as much as while we are at Enmity with God,
there can be no true Peace, no solid Joy, either in Time or in Eternity. What
Peace can there be, while our own Heart condemns us? And much more, He that is
greater than our Heart and knows (...) Things? What solid Joy, either in this
Word^ or that to come, while the Wrath of God (...) on us?

2. And yet how little has this importa^^ Question been understood? What
confused Notions have many had concerning it? Indeed not only confused, but
often utterly false; contra^^ to the Truth, as Li^ht to Darkness: Notions
absolutely ^^consisten^ with the Oracles of God, and with (...) whole Analogy
of Faith. And hence erring concerning the very Foundation, they could not
possibly build thereon: At least, not Gold, Silver, or precious Stenes, which
would endure when tried as by Fire; but only Hay and Stubble, neither
acceptable to God, nor profitable to Man.

3. In order to do Justice, as far as in me lies, to the vast Importance of the
Subject, to save those that seek the Truth in Sincerity, from vain J^ngling and
Strife of Words, to clear the Confusedness of Thought, into which so many have
already been led thereby, and to give them true and just Conceptions of this
great Mystery of Godsiness, I shall endeavor to show, First, What is the
general Ground of this whole Doctrine of Justification. Secondly, What
Justification is. Thirdly, Who they are that are justified. And, Fourthly, On
what Terms they are justified.


1. I am, first, to show, What is the general ^round of this whole Doctrine of
Justification. 1. In the Image of God was Man made, ho^^y (...) he that created
him is holy; merciful as the Author of all is merciful, perfect as his Father
in Heaven is perfect. As God is Love, so Man dwelling in Love, dwelt in God,
and God in him. God made him to be an Image of his own Eternity, an
incorruptible Picture of the God of Glory. He was accordingly pure, as God is
pure, from every Spot of S^^^. He knew not Evil in any King or Degree, (...)
was inwardly and outwardly sinless and undefiled. He loved the Lord his God
with all his Heart, and with all his Mind and Soul and Strength.

2. To Man thus upright and perfect, God give a perfect Law, to which he
required full and perfect Obedience. He required full Obedience in every Point,
and this to be performed without any Intermission, from the Moment Man became a
living Soul, till the Time of his Trial should be ended. No Allowance was made
for any falling short. As indeed there was no need of any; Man being altogether
equal to the Task assigned, and thoroughly furnished for every good Word and
Work.

3. To the entire Law of Love which was written in his Heart (against which
perhaps he could not sin directly) it seemed good to the sovereign Wisdom of
God, to superadd one positive Law: Thou shall not eat of the Fruit of the Tree
that grows in the midst of the Garden: Annexing that Penalty thereto, In the
Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

4. Such then was the State of Man in Paradise. By the free, unmerited Love of
God, he was holy and happy; he knew, loved, enjoyed God, which is (in
Substance) Life everlasting. And in this Life of Love, he was to continue for
ever, if he continued to obey God in all Things: But if he disobeyed in any, he
was to forfeit all. In that Day, said God, thou shall surely die.

5. Man did disobey God. He ate of the Tree, of which God commanded him,
saying, Thou shall not eat of it. And in that Day he was condemned, by the
righteous Judgment of God. Then also the Sentence whereof he was warned before,
began to take Place upon him. For the Moment he tasted that Fruit, he died: His
Soul died, was separated from God; separate from whom the Soul has no more
Life, than the Body has when separate from the Soul. His Body likewise became
corruptible and mortal; so that Death then took hold on this also. And being
already dead in Spirit, dead to God, dead in Sin, he hastened on to Death
everlasting; to the Destruction both of Body and Soul, in the Fire never to be
quenched.

6. Thus by one Man, Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin. And so Death
passed upon all Men, as being contained in him who was the common Father and
Representative of us all. Thus through the Offense of one, all are dead, dead
to God, dead in Sin, dwelling in a corruptible, mortal Body, shortly to be
dissolved, and under the Sentence of Death eternal. For as by one Man's
Disobedience, all were made sinners; so by that Offense of one, Judgment came
upon all Men to Condemnation, Romans v. ^2, etc.

7. In this State we were, even all Mankind, when God so loved the World, that
he gave his only begotten Son, to the End we might not perish but have
everlasting Life. In the Fullness of Time, he was made Man, another common Head
of Mankind, a second general Parent and Representative of the whole human Race.
And as such it was that he bore our Griefs, the Lord laying upon him the
Iniquities of us all. Then was he wounded for our Transgressions and b^uised
for our Iniquities. He made his Soul an Offering for Sin: He poured out his
Blood for the ^^^sgressors: He bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that
by his Stripes we might be healed: And by that one Oblation of himself once
offered, he has redeemed me and all Mankind; having thereby made a full,
perfect and sufficient Sacrifice and Satisfaction, for the Sins of the whole
World.

8. In Consideration of this, that the Son of God has tasted Death for every
Man, God has now reconciled the World to himself, not inputing to them their
former Trespasses. And thus, as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all
Men to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came
upon all Men unto Justification. So that for the Sake of his we^-he-loved Son,
of what he has done and suffered for us, God now vouchsafes on one only
Condition (which himself also enables us to perform) both to remit the
Punishment due to our Sins, to reinstate us in his Favor, and to restore our
dead Souls to spiritual Life, as the Earnest of Life eternal.

9. This therefore is the general Ground, of the whole Doctrine of
Justification. By the Sin of the first Adam, who was not only the Father, but
likewise the Representative of us all, we all fell short of the Favor of God:
we all became Children of Wrath: Or, as the Apostle expresses it, Judgment came
upon all Men to Condemnation. Even so, by the Sacrifice for Sin made by the
second Adam, as the Representative of us all, God is so far reconciled to all
the World, that he has given them a New Covenant. The plain Condition whereof
being once fulfilled, there is no more Condemnation for us, but we are
justi^^^d freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

But what is it to be justified? What is Justification? This was the second
Thing which I proposed to show. And it is evident from what has been already
observed, that it is not, the being made actually just and righteous. This is
Sanctification; which is indeed, in some Degree, the immeditate Fruit of
Justification: But nevertheless is a distinct Gift of God, and of a totally
different Nature. The one implies, what God does f^^^ us through his Son; the
other what he works in us by his Spirit. So that although some rare Instances may
be found, wherein the Term Justified, or Justification, is used in so wide a
Sense as to include Sanctification also; yet in general Use, they are
sufficiently distinguished from each other, both by St. Paul and the other
inspired Writers.

2. Neither is that far-fetched Conceit, that Justification is, the clearing us
from Accusation, (...) ^^larly that of Satan, easily proveable from (...) Text
of holy Writ. In the whole (...) ^^^al Account of this Matter, as above laid
(...), neither that Accuser nor his Accusation appears to be at all taken in.
It cannot indeed be denied, that he is the Accuser of Men, emphatically so
called. But it does in no wise appear, that the great Apostle has any
reference to this, more or less, in all that he has written touching
Justification, either to the Romans or the Galatians.

3. It is also far easier to take for granted, than (...) prove from any clear
Scripture-Testimony, (...) Justification is, the clearing us from the
Accusation brought against us by the Law. At least, if this forced, unnatural
Way of speaking, mean either more or loss than this, That whereas we have
transgressed the Law of God, and thereby deserved the Damnation of Hell, God
does not inflict on those who are justified, the Punishment which they had
deserved.

4. Least of all does Justification imply, that God is deceived in those whom
he justifies; that he thinks them to be what in fact they are not, that he
accounts them to be otherwise than they are. It does by no means imply, that
God judges concerning us, contrary to the real Nature of Things: that he
esteems us better than we really are, or believes us righteous, when we are
unrighteous. Surely no. The judgment of the all wise God, is always according
to Truth. Neither can it ever consist with his unerring Wisdom, to think that I
am innocent, to judge that I am righteous or holy, because another is so. He
can no more in this manuer confound me with Christ, than with David or Abraham.
L^^ any Man to whom God has given Understanding, weigh this without Prejudice:
and he cannot but perceive, that such a Notion of Justification, is neither
reconcilable to Reason or Scripture.

5. The plain scriptural Notion of Justification is Pardon, the Forgiveness of
Sins. It is that Act of God the Father, whereby for the sake of the
Propitiation made by the Blood of his Son, he shows forth his Righteousness
(or Mercy) by the Remission of the Sins that are past. This is the easy,
natural Account of it given by St. Paul, throughout this whole Epistle. So he
explains it himself, more particularly in this, and in the following Chapter.
Thus in the next, Verses but one to the Text, Blessed are they, says he, whose
Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sin^ are covered: Blessed is the Man to whom
the Lord will not impute Sin. To him that is justified or forgiven, God will
not impute Sin to his Condemnation. He will not condemn him on that account,
either in this World or in that which is to come. His Sins, all his past Sins,
in Thought, Word and Deed, are covered, are blotted out: shall not be
remembered or mentioned against him, any more than if they had not been. God
will not inflict on that Sinner what he deserved to suffer, because the Son of
his Love has suffered for him. And from the Time we are accepted through the
Beloved, reconciled to God through his Blood, he loves and blesses and watches
over us for Good, even as if we had never sinned.

Indeed the Apostle in one Place seems to extend the Meaning of the Word much
farther; where he says, Not the Hearers of the Low, but the Doers of the Law
shall be justified. Here he appears to refer our Justification, to the Sentence
of the great Day. And so our Lord himself unquestionably does, when he says, By
thy Words thou shall be justified: proving thereby, that for every idle Word
Men shall speak, they shall give an Account in the Day of Judgment. But perhaps
we can hardly p^oduce another Instance, of St. Paul's using the Word in that
distant Sense. In the general Tenor of his Writings, it is evident he does not.
And least of all in the Text before (...), which undeniably speaks, not of
those wh^^ have already finished their Course, but of those who are now just
setting out, just beginning to run the Race which is set before them.

III. 1. But this is the third Thing which was to be considered, namely, who
are they that are justified? And the Apostle tells us expressly, the Ungodly:
He, that is, God, justifies the Ungodly: The Ungodly of every Kind and Degree,
and none but the Ungodly. As they that are righteous, need no Repentance, so
they need no Forgiveness. It is only Sinners that have any Occasion for Pardon:
It is Sin alone which admits of being forgiven. Forgiveness therefore has an
immediate Reference to Sin, and (in this Respect) to nothing else. It is our
Unrighteousness to which the pardoning God is merciful: It is our Iniquity
which he remembereth no more.

2. This seems not to be at all considered by those who so vehemently contend,
that a Man must be sanctified, that is, holy, before he can be justified:
Especially by such of them as affirm^ that universal Holiness or Obedience must
precede Justification (unless they mean, that Justification at the last Day,
which is wholly out of the present Question) so far from it, that the very
Supposition, is not only flatly impossible (for where there is no Love of God,
there is no Holiness; and there is no Love of God, but from a Sense of his
loving us) but also grossly, intrinsically absurd, contradictory to itself. For
it is not a Saint but a Sinner that is forgiven, and under the Notion of a
Sinner. God justifies not the Godly, but the Ungodly: not those that are holy
already, but the Unholy. Upon what Condition he does this, will be considered
quickly: But whatever it is, it cannot be Holiness. To assert this, is to say,
the Lamb of God takes away, only those Sins which were taken away before.

3. Does then the good Shepherd seek and save only those that are found
already? No. He seeks and saves that which is lost. He pardons those who need
his pardoning Mercy. He saves from the Guilt of Sin (and at the same time from
the Power) Sinners of every Kind, of every Degree: Men who till then were
altogether ungodly; in whom the Love of the Father was not; and consequently,
in whom dwelt (...) ^ood Thing, no good or truly Christian Temper: But all such
as were evil and abominable, Pride, Anger, Love of the World, the genuine
Fruits of that carnal Mind, which is Enmity against God.

4. These who are sick, the Burden of whose Sins is intol^^^ble, are they that
need a Physician; these who are guilty, who groan under the Wrath of God. are
they that need a Pardon. These who are condemned already, not only by God, but
also by then own Conscience, as by a thousand Witnesses, of all their
Ungodliness, both in Thought and Word and Work, cry aloud for him that
justifies the Ungodly, through the Redemption that is in Jesus: The Ungodly
and him that works not; that works not before he is justified; any thing
that is good, that is truly virtuous o^ holy, but only evil continually. For
his Heart is necessarily, essentially evil, till the Love of God is shed abroad
therein. And while the Tree is corrupt, so are the Fruits; for an evil Tree
cannot bring forth good Fruit.

5. If it be objected, "Nay, but a Man, before he is justified, may feed the
Hungry, or clothe the Naked; and these are good Works:" The answer is easy. He
may do those, even before he is justified. And these are, in one Sense, Good
Works; they are good and profitable to Man. But it does not follow, that they
are, strictly speaking, good in themselves, or good in the Sight of God. All
truly good Works (to use the Words of our Church) follow after Justification.
And they are therefore good and acceptable to God in Christ, because they
spring out of a true and living Faith. By a Parity of Reason, all Works done
before Justification, are not good, in the Christian Sense, forasmuch as they
spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ (though from some kind of Faith in God they
may spring) yea rather, for that they are not done, as God has willed and
commanded them to be done, we doubt (...) (how strange soever it may appear to
some) but they have the Nature of Sin.

6. Perhaps those who doubt of this, have not duly cons^dered the weighty
Reason which is here assigned, why no Works done before Justification, can be
truly and properly good. The Argument plainly run^ thus:

No Works are good which are not done as God has willed and commanded them to
be done:

^ut no Works done before Justification are done as God has willed and
commanded them to be done:

Therefore no Works done before Justification are good.

The first Proposition is self-evident. And the second, That no Works done
before Justification, are done as God has willed and commanded them to be
done, will appear equally plain and undeniable, if we only consider God has
willed and commanded, that all our Works should be done in Charity, ((...)) in
Love, in that Love to God, which produces Love to all Mankind. But none of our
Works can be done in this Love, while the Love of the Father (of God as our
Father) is not in us. And this Love cannot be in us, till we receive the Spirit
of Adaption, crying in our Hearts, Abba, Father. If therefore God does not
justify the Ungodly, and him that (in this Sense) works not, then has Christ
died in vain; then notwithstanding his Death, can no Flesh living be justified.

IV. 1. But on what Terms then is he justified, who is altogether ungodly, and
till that Time, works not? On one alone, which is Faith. He ^^^ieveth in him
that justifies the Ungodly. And he that believes is not condemned: Yea, he is
passed from Death unto Life. For the Righteousness (or Mercy) of God is by
Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe: -- Whom God
has set forth for a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood: that he might be
just, and (consistently with his Justice) the Justifier of him which believes
in Jesus: Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the
Deeds of the Law: without previous Obedience to the Moral Law, which indeed he
could not till now perform. That it is the Moral Law, and that alone which is
here intended, appears evidently from the Words that follow. Do we then make
void the Law through Faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the Law. What Law do
we establish by Faith? Not the Ritual Law: Not the Ceremonial Law of Moses. In
no wise; but the great unchangeable Law of Love, the holy Love of God and of
our Neighbor.

2. Faith in general is, a divine, supernatural (...), Evidence or Conviction
of Things not seen, not discoverable by our bodily Senses, as being either
past, future or spiritual. Justifying Faith implies, not only a Divine Evidence
or Conviction, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, but
a sure Trust and Confidence, that Christ died for my Sins, that he loved me and
gave himself for me. And at what Time soever a Sinner thus believes, be it in
early Childhood, in the Strength of his Years, or when he is old and
hoary-hair'd, God justifies that ungodly one: God for the sake of his Son,
pardons and absolveth him who had in him till then no good Thing. Repentance
indeed God had given him before: But that Repentance was neither more nor less,
than a deep Sense of the Want of all Good, and the Presence of all Evil. And
whatever Good he has or does from that Hour, when he first believes in God
through Christ, Faith does not find but bring. This is the Fruit of Faith.
First the Tree is good, and then the Fruit is good also.

3. I cannot describe the Nature of this Faith better, than in the Words of our
own Church. "The only Instrument of Salvation" (whereo^ Justification is one
Branch) "is Faith: that is, a sure Trust and Confidence, that God both has and
will forgive our Sins, that he has accepted us again into his Favor, for the
Merits of Christ's. Death and Passion. -- But here we must take heed that we do
not halt with God, through an inconstant, wavering Faith. Peter coming to
Christ upon the Water, because he fainted in Faith, was in danger of drowning.
So we, if we begin to waver or doubt, it is to be feared, that we should sink
as Peter did, not into the Water, but into the bottomless Pit of Hellfire."
Second Sermon on the Passion.

"Therefore have a sure and constant Faith, not only that the Death of Christ
is available for; all the World, but that he has made a full and sufficient
Sacrifice for thee, a perfect cleansing of thy Sins, so that thou may say
with the Apostle, He loved thee and gave himself for thee. For this is to make
Christ thine own, and to apply his Merits unto thyself." Sermon on the
Sacrament, first Part.

4. By affirming that this Faith is the Term or Condition of Justification, I
mean, first, that there is no Justification without it. He that believes not
is condemned already; and so long as he believes not, that Condemnation cannot
be removed, but the Wrath of God abides on him. As there is no other Name
given under Heaven th^^ that of Jesus of Nazareth, no other Merit whereby a
condemned Sinner can ever be saved from the Guilt of Sin; so there is no other
Way of obtaining a Share in his Merit, than by Faith in his Name. So that as
long as we are without this Faith, we are Strangers to the Covenant of Promise,
we are Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and without God in the World.
Whatsoever Virtues (so called) a Man may have (I speak of those unto whom the
Gospel is preached; for what have I to do to judge them that are without?)
whatsoever good Works (so accounted) he may do, it profits not; he is still a
Child of Wrath, still under the Curse, till he believes in Jesus.

5. Faith therefore is the necessery Condition of Justification. Yea, and the
only necessary Condition thereof. This is the second Point carefully to be
observed; that the very Moment God gives Faith ( for it is the Gift of God) to
the Ungodly, that works not, that Faith is counted to him for Righteousness.
He has no Righteousness at all, antecedent to this, not so much as negative
Righteousness or Innocence. But Faith is imputed to him for Righteousness, the
very Moment that he believes. Not that God (as was observed before) thinks
him to be, what he is not. But as (...) made Christ to be Sin for us, that is,
treated him as a Sinner, punished him for our Sins, so he counts us
righteous, from the time we believe in him: that is, he does not punish us for
our Sins, yea, treats us as though we were guiltless and righteous.

6. Surely the Difficulty of assenting to the Proposition, That Faith is the
only Condition of Justification, must arise from not understa^^^ (...) We mean
thereby thus much, That it is the only Thing without which none is justified;
the only Thing that is immediately, indispensably, absolutely requisite in
order to Pardon. As on the (...) hand, though a Man should have every thing else,
without Faith, yet he cannot be justified; so on the other, though he be supposed
to want every thing else, yet if he has Faith, he cannot but be justified. For
suppose a Sinner of any Kind or Degree, in a full Sense of his total
Ungodliness, of his utter Inability to think, speak or do Good, and his
absolute Meetness for Hellfire: Suppose, I say, this Sinner, helpless and
hopeless, casts himself wholly on the Mercy of God in Christ (which indeed he
cannot do but by the Grace of God) who can doubt, but he is forgiven in that
Moment? Who will affirm, that any more is indispensably required, before that
Sinner can be justified?

Now if there ever was one such Instance from the Beginning of the World (And
have there not been, and are there not ten thousand times ten thousand?) it
plainly follows, that Faith is, in the above Sense, the sole Condition of
Justification.

7. It does not become poor, guilty, sinful Worms, who receive whatsoever
Blessings they enjoy, (from the least Drop of Water that cools our Tongue, to
the immense Riches of Glory in Eternity) of Grace, of mere Favor, and not of
(...) to ask of God the Reasons of his Conduct. It is not meet for us to call
him in question, who gives Account of None of his Ways; to demand, Why did
thou make Faith the Condition, the only Condition of Justification? Wherefore
did thou decr^^, He that believes, and he only. shall be saved? This is the
very Point on which St. Paul so strongly insists in the Ninth Chapter of this
Epistle, viz. That the Terms of Pardon and Acceptance must depend, not on us,
but on him that calls us: That there is no Unrighteousness with God, in
fixing his own Terms, not according to ours, but his own good Pleasure: who may
justly say, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, namely, on him who
believes in Jesus. So then it is not of him that wills, or of him that
runs, to choose the Condition on which he shall find Acceptance; but of God
that shows Mercy, that accepts none at all, but of his own free Love, his
unmerited Goodness. Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, viz. on
those who believe on the Son of his Love. And whom he will, that is, those who
believe not, he hardens, leaves at last to the Hardness of their Hearts.

8. One Reason, however, we may humbly conceive, of God's fixing this Condition
of Justification, If thou believe in the Lord Jesus Christ thou shall be
saved, was to hide Pride from Man. Pride had already destroyed the very Angels
of God, had cast down a third Part of the Stars of Heaven. It was likewise in
great Measure owing to this, when the Tempter said, Ye shall be as Gods, that
Adam fell from his own Stedfastness, and brought; Sin and Death into the World.
It was therefore an Instance of Wisdom worthy of God, to appoint such a
Condition of Reconciliation, for him and all his Posterity, as might
effectually humble, might abase them to the Dust. And such is Faith. It is
peculiarly fitted for this End. For he that comes unto God by this Faith, must
fix his Eye singly on h^^ (...) Wickedness, on his Guilt and Helph^^^^ without
having the least Regard to any supposed Good in himself, to any Virtue or
Righteousness whatsoever. He must come as a mere Sinner inwardly and outwardly,
self-destroyed and selfcondemned, bringing nothing to God but Ungodliness only,
pleading nothing of his own but Sin and Misery. Thus it is, and thus alone,
when his Mouth is stopped, and he stands utterly guilty before-God, that he can
look unto Jesus, as the whole and sole Propitiation for his Sins. Thus only can
he be found in him, and receive the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

9. Thou ungodly one, who hear or read these Words, thou vile, helpless,
miserable Sinner, I charge thee before God the Judge of all, go strait unto
him, with all thy Ungodliness. Take heed thou destroy not thy own Soul, by
pleading thy Righteousness, more or less. Go as altogether ungodly, guilty,
lost, destroyed, deserving and dropping into Hell: And thou shall then find
Favor in his Sight, and know that he justifies the Ungodly. As such thou
shall be brought unto the Blood of Sprinkling, as an undone, helpless, damned
Sinner. Thus look unto Jesus! There is the Lamb of God, who takes away thy
Sins! Plead thou no Works, no Righteousness of thine own! No Humility,
Contrition, Sincerity. In no wise. That were, in very Deed, to deny the Lord
that bought thee. No. Plead thou singly, the Blood of the Covenant, the Ransom
paid for thy proud, stubborn, sinful Soul. Who art thou, that now see and
feel both thine inward and outward Ungodliness! Thou art the Man! I want
thee for my Lord, I challenge Thee for a Child of God by Faith. The Lord has
need of Thee. Thou who feel thou art just fit for Hell, art just fit to
advance his Glory: The Glory of his free Grace, justifying the Ungodly and him
that works not. O come quickly. Believe in the Lord Jesus: and thou, even
thou art reconciled to God.

The Righteousness of Faith. A SERMON On ROMANS X. 5, 6, 7, 8.
ROMANS X. 5, 6, 7, 8. Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law,
that the Man which does those Things shall live by them.

But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise. Say not in
thine Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? that is, to bring Christ down from
Above:

Or who shall descend into the Deep? that is, to bring Christ again from the
Dead.

But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart;
that is the Word of Faith, which we preach.


1. THE Apostle doe^s not here oppose the Covenant given by Moses, to the
Covenant given by Christ. If we ever imagined this, it was for want of
observing, that the latter, as well as the former Part of these Words, were
spoken by Moses himself, to the People of Israel, and that, concerning the
Covenant which then was. ( Deuteronomy. xxx. 11, 12, 14.) But it is the Covenant of
Grace, which God through Christ has established with Men in all Ages, (as well
before and under the Jewish Dispensation, as since God was manifest in the
Flesh) which St. Paul here opposes to the Covenant of Works, made with Adam
while in Paradise; but commonly supposed to be the only Covenant which God had
made with Man, particularly by those Jews of whom the Apostle writes.

2. Of these it was that he so affectionately speaks, in the Beginning of this
Chapter. My Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be
saved. For I bear them Record, that they have a Zeal for God, but not according
to Knowledge. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness (of the
Justification that flows from his mere Grace and Mercy, freely forgiving our
Sins through the Son of his Love, through the Redemption which is in Jesus) and
seeking to establish their own Righteousness, (their own Holiness, antecedent
to Faith, in him that justifies the Ungodly, as the Ground of their Pardon and
Acceptance) have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God, and
consequently seek Death in the Error of their Life.

4. They were ignorant, that Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to
every one that believes, that by the Oblation of himself once offered, he had
put an End to the first Law or Covenant (which indeed was not given by God to
Moses, but to Adam in his State of Innocence) the strict Tenor whereof, without
any Abatement was; "Do this and live:" And at the same time purchased for us
that better Covenant, "Believe and live;" Believe and thou shall be saved; now
faved both from the Guilt and Power of Sin, and, of Consequence, from the Wages
of (...).

4. And how many are equally ignorant now, even among those who are called by
the Name of Christ? How many who have now a Zeal for God, yet have it not
according to Knowledge: But are still seeking to establish their own
Righteousness, as the Ground of their Pardon and Acceptance; and therefore
vehemently refuse, to submit themselves unto the Righteousness of God? Surely
my Heart's Desire, and Prayer to God for you, Brethren, is, that ye may be
saved. And in order to remove this grand Stumbling Block out of your Way, I
will endeavor to show, first, What the Righteousness is, which is of the Law,
and what the Righteousness which is of Faith; Secondly, The Folly of trusting
in the Righteousness of the Law, and the Wisdom of submitting to that which is
of Faith.

I. 1. And, first, The Righteousness which is of the Law, says, the Man which
does these Things, shall live by them. Constantly and perfectly observe all
these Things to do them, and then thou shall live for ever. This Law or
Covenant (usually called, The Covenant of Works) given by God to Man in
Paradise, required an Obedience, perfect in all its Parts, entire and wanting
nothing, as the Condition of his eternal Continuance, in the Holiness and
Happiness wherein he was created.

2. It required, that Man should fulfill all Righteousness, inward and outward,
negative and positive: That he should not only abstain from every idle Word,
and avoid every evil Work, but should keep every Affection, every Desire, every
Thought in Obedience to the Will of God. That he should continue holy, as he
which had created him was holy, both in Heart and in all Manner of
Conversation: That he should be pure in Heart, even as God is pure: perfect as
his Father in Heaven was perfect: That he should love the Lord his God with all
his Heart, with all his Soul, with all his Mind, and with all his Strength:
That he should love every Soul which God had made, even as God had loved him:
That by this universal Benevolence, he should dwell in God (who is Love) and
God in him: That he should serve the Lord his God with all his Strength, and in
all Things singly aim at his Glory.

3. These were the Things which the Righteousness of the Law required, that he
who did them might live thereby. But it farther required. That this entire
Obedience to God, this inward and outward Holiness, this Conformity both of
Heart and Life to his Will, should be perfect in Degree. No Abatement, no
Allowance could possibly be made, for falling short in any Degree, as to any
Jot or Tittle either of the outward or the inward Law. If every Commandment
relating to outward Things was obeyed, yet that was not sufficient, unless
every one was obeyed with all the Strength, in the highest Measure, and most
perfect Manner. Nor did it answer the Demand of this Covenant, to love God with
every Power and Faculty, unless he were loved with the full Capacity of each,
with the whole Possibility of the Soul.

4. One Thing more was indispensably required by the Righteousness of the Law,
namely, that this universal Obedience, this perfect Holiness both of Heart and
Life, should be perfectly uninterrupted also, should continue without any
Intermission, from the Moment wherein God created Man, and breathed into his
Nostrile the Breath of Life, until the Days of his Trial should be ended, and
he should be confirmed in Life everlasting.

5. The Righteousness then which is of the Law, speaks on this wise. "Thou, O
Man of God, stand fast in Love, in the Image of God, wherein thou art made. If
then wilt remain in Life, keep the Commandments, which are now written in thy
Heart. Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart. Love as thyself every Soul
that he has made. Desire nothing but God. Aim at God in every Thought, in
every Word and Work. Swerve not in one Motion of Body or Soul, from him thy
Mark and the Prize of thy high Calling. And let all that is in thee praise his
holy Name, every Power and Faculty of thy Soul, in every Kind, in every Degree,
and at every Moment of thine Existence. This do, and thou shall live: Thy Light
shall shine, thy Love shall slame more and more, till thou art received up into
the House of God in the Heavens, to reign with him for ever and ever."

6. But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise: Say not i^
thine Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring down Christ from
Above (as though it were some impossible Task, which God required thee previously
to perform, in order to thine Acceptance:) Or, who shall descend into the Deep,
that is, to bring up Christ from the Dead; (as though that were still remaining
to be done, for the sake of which thou were to be accepted.) But what says it?
The Word (according to the Tenor of which, thou may now be accepted as an
Heir of Life eternal) is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, that
is, the Word of Faith, which we preach: The new Covenant which God has now
established with sinful Man, through Christ Jesus.

7. 'By the Righteousness which is of Faith,' is meant, that Condition of
Justification (and in Consequence of present and final Salvation, if we endure
therein unto the End) which was given by God to fallen Man, through the Merits
and Mediation of his only begotten Son. This was in Part revealed to Adam soon
after his Fall, being contained in the Original Promise, made to him and his
Seed, concerning the Seed of the Woman, who should bruise the Serpent's Head
Genesis iii. 15.
. It was a little more clearly revealed to Abraham, by the Angel of God from
Heaven, saying, Genesis xxii. 15, 18.
By Myself have i sworn, says the Lord, that in thy Seed shall all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed. It was yet more fully made known to Moses, to David,
and to the Prophets that followed: And through them, to many of the People of
God, in their respective Generations. But still the Bulk even of these were
ignorant of it; and very few understood it clearly. Still Life and Immortality
were not so brought to Light (...) Jews of old, as they are now unto us by the
Gospel.

8. Now this Covenant (...) ^^unful Man, "Perform unsinning Obedience and
live." If this were the Term, he would have no more Benefit by all which Christ
has done and suffered for him, than if he was required, in order to Life, to
ascend into Heaven and bring down Christ from Above; or to descend into the
Deep, into the invisible World, and bring up Christ from the Dead. It does not
require any Impossibily to be done (although to mere Man, what it requires would
be impossible; but not, to Man assisted by the Spirit of God:) this were only,
to mock human Weakness. Indeed, strictly speaking, the Covenant of Grace does
not requre us, to do any thing at all, as absolutely and indispensably
necessary in order to our Justification: But only, to believe in him, who, for
the Sake of his Son, and the Propitiation which he has made, justifies the
Ungodly that works not, and imputes his Faith to him for Righteousness. Even
so Abraham believed in the Lord Genesis xv. 6.
and he counted it to him for Righteousness. Romans iv. II.
And he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith
-- that he might be the Father of all them that believe -- that Righteousness
might be imputed unto them also. Ver. 23, 24, 25.
Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it (i. e. Faith) was imputed
to him. But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed (to whom Faith shall be
imputed for Righteousness, shall stand in the Stead of perfect Obedience, in
order to our Acceptance with God) if we believe on him who raised up Jesus our
Lord from the Dead: Who was delivered' to Death 'for our Offenses, and was
raised again for our Justification: "For the Assurance of the Remission of
Sins, and of a second Life to come to them that believe."

9. What says then the Covenant of Forgiveness, of unmerited Love, of
pardoning Mercy? Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. In
the Day thou believe, thou shall surely live. Thou shall be restored to the
Favor of God; and in his Favor is Life. Thou shall be saved from the Curse
and from the Wrath of God. Thou shall be quickened from the Death of Sin, into
the Life of Righteousness. And if thou endure to the End, believing in Jesus,
thou shall never taste the second Death, but having suffered with thy Lord,
shall also live and reign with him for ever and ever.

10. Now this word is nigh thee. This Condition of Life, is plain, easy, always
at hand. It is in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, through the Operation of the
Spirit of God. The Moment thou believe in thine Heart in him, whom God has
raised from the Dead, and confessest with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, as thy Lord
and thy God, thou shall be saved from Condemnation, from the Guilt and
Punishment of thy former Sins, and shall have Power to serve God in true
Holiness, all the remaining Days of thy Life.

11. What is the Difference then between the Righteousness which is of the Law,
and the Righteousness which is of Faith? Between the First Covenant, or the
Covenant of Works, and the Second, the Covenant of Grace? The essential,
unchangeable Difference is this: The one supposes him to whom it is given, to
be already holy and happy, created in the image and enjoying the Favor of God;
and prescribes the Condition whereon he may continue therein, in Love and Joy,
Life and Immortality. The other supposes him to whom it is given, to be now
unholy and unhappy; fallen short of the glorious Image of God, having the Wrath
of God abiding on him, and hastening through Sin, whereby his Soul is dead, to
bodily Death, and Death everlasting. And to Man in this State, it prescribes
the Condition, whereon he may regain the Pearl he has lost: May recover the
Favor, and the Image of God, may retrieve the Life of God in his Soul, and be
restored to the Knowledge and the Love of God, which is the Beginning of Life
eternal.

12. Again, the Covenant of Works, in order to Man's Continuance in the Favor
of God, in his Knowledge and Love, in Holiness and Happiness, required of
perfect Man, a perfect and uninterrupted Obedience, to every Point of the Law
of God. Whereas the Covenant of Grace, in order to Man's Recovery, of the
Favor and Life of God, requires only Faith; living Faith in him who through
God justifies him that obeyed not.

13. Yet again: The Covenant of Works required of Adam and all his Children, to
pay the Price themselves, in Consideration of which, they were to receive all
the future Blessings of God. But in the Covenant of Grace, seeing we have
nothing to pay, God frankly forgives us all: Provided only, that we believe in
him, who has paid the Frice for us; who has given himself a Propitiation for
our Sins, for the Sins of the whole World.

14. Thus the first Covenant required what is now afar off from all the
Children of Men; namely, unlinning Obedience, which is far from those who are
conceived and born in Sin. Whereas the second requires what is nigh at hand; as
though it should say, Thou art Sin! God is Love. Thou by Sin art fallen short of
the Glory of God; yet there is Mercy with him. Bring then all thy Sins to the
Pardoning God, and they shall vanish away as a Cloud. If thou were not ungodly,
there would be no room for him to justify thee as ungodly. But now draw near,
in full Assurance of Faith. He speaks, and it is done. Fear not, only
believe; for even the just God justifies all that believe in Jesus.

II. 1. These Things considered, it will be easy to show, as I proposed to do
in the second Place, the Folly of trusting in the Righteousness which is of the
Law, and the Wisdom of submitting to the Righteousness which is of Faith.

The Folly of those who still trust, in the Righteousness which is of the Law,
the Terms of which are, Do this and live, may abundantly appear from hence.
They set out wrong. Their very first Step is a fundamental Mistake. For before
they can ever think of claiming any Blessing on the Terms of this Covenant,
they must suppose themselves to be in his State, with whom this Covenant was
made. But how vain a Supposition is this? Since it was made with Adam in (...)
State of Innocence. How weak therefore must that whole Building be, which
stands on such a Foundation? And how foolish are they who thus build on the
Sand? Who seem never to have considered, that the Covenant of Works was not
given to Man, when he was dead in Trespasses and Sins, but when he was alive to
God, when he knew no Sin, but was holy as God is holy: Who forget, that it was
never designed for the Recovery of the Favor and Life of God once lost, but
only for the Continuance and Increase thereof, till it should be complete in
Life everlasting.

2. Neither do they consider, who are thus seeking to establish their own
Righteousness which is of the Law, what manner of Obedience or Righteousness
that is, which the Law indispensably requires. It must be perfect and entire,
in every Point, or it answers not the Demand of the Law. But which of you is
able to perform such Obedience? Or, consequently, to live thereby? Who among
you fulfils every Jot and Tittle even of the outward Commandments of God? Doing
nothing, great or small, which God forbids? Leaving nothing undone which he
enjoins? Speaking no idle Word? Having your Conversation always meet to
minister Grace to the Hearers? And whether you eat or drink, or whatever you
do, doing all to the Glory of God? And how much less are you able to fulfill all
the inward Commandments of God? Those which require, that every Temper and
motion of your Soul should be Holiness unto the Lord? Are you able, To love God
with all your Heart? To love all Mankind as your own Soul? To pray without
ceasing? In every Thing to give Thanks? To have God always before you? And to
keep every Affection, Desire and Thought, in Obedience to his Law?

3. You should farther consider, That the Righteousness of the Law requires,
not only the obeying every Command of God, negative and positive, internal and
external, but likewise in the perfect Degree. In every instance whatever, the
Voice of the Law is, Thou shall serve the Lord thy God with all thy Strength.
It allows no Abatement of any Kind. It excuses no Defect. It condemns every
coming short of the full Measure of Obedience, and immediately pronounces a
Curse on the Offender. It regards only the invariable Rules of Justice, and
says, "I know not to show Mercy."

4. Who then can appear before such a Judge, which is extreme to mark what is
done amiss? How weak are they who desire to be tried at the Bar, where no Flesh
living can be justified? None of the Offspring of Adam. For suppose we did now
keep every Commandment with all our Strength: Yet one single Breach which ever
was, utterly destroys our whole Claim to Life. If we have ever offended in any
one Point, this Righteousness is at an end. For the Law condemns all who do not
perform uninterrupted as well as perfect Obedience. So that according to the
Sentence of this, for him who has once finned, in any Degree, there remains
only a fearful Looking for of fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries of God.

5. Is it not then the very Foolishness of Folly, for fallen Man to seek Life
by this Righteousness? For Man, who was shapen in Wickedness, and in Sin did
his Mother conceive him: Man, who is by Nature all earthly, sensual, devilish,
altogether corrupt and abominable: In whom, till he find Grace, dwells no
good Thing; nay, who cannot of himself think one good Thought? Who is indeed
all Sin, a mere Lump of Ungodliness, and who commits Sin in every Breath he
draws; whose actual Transgressions, in Word and Deed, are more in Number than
the Hairs of his Head! What Stupidity, what Senselesness must it be for such an
unclean, guilty, helpless Worm as this, to dream of seeking Acceptance by his
own Righteousness, of living by the Righteousness which is of the Law?

6. Now whatsoever Considerations prove the Folly of trusting in the
Righteousness which is of the Law, prove equally the Wisdom of submitting to
the Righteousness which is of God (...) Faith. This were easy to be shown with
regard to each of the preceding Considerations. But to wave this, the Wisdom of
the first step hereto, the disclaiming our own Righteousness, plainly appears
from hence, That it is acting according to Truth, to the real Nature of Things.
For what is it more, than to acknowledge with our Heart as well as Lips, the
true State wherein we are? To acknowledge, that we bring with us into the
World, a corrupt, sinful Nature; more corrupt indeed than we can easily
conceive, or find Words to express? That hereby we are prone to all that is
evil, and averse from all that is good; that we are full of Pride, Self-will,
unruly Passions, foolish Desires, vile and inordinate Affections; Lovers of the
World, Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God? That our Lives have been no
better than our Hearts, but many ways ungodly and unholy; insomuch that our
actual Sins, both in Word and Deed, have been as the Stars of Heaven for
Multitude: That on all these Accounts, we are displeasing to him, who is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; and deserve nothing from him, but
Indignation and Wrath and Death, the due Wages of Sin? That we cannot by any of
our Righteousness, (for indeed, we have none at all) nor by any of our Works
(for they are as the Tree from which they grow) appease the Wrath of God, or
avert the Punishment we have justly deserved; Yea, that, if left to ourselves,
we shall only was worse and worse, sink deeper and deeper into Sin, offend God
more and more both with our evil Works, and with the evil Tempers of our carnal
Mind, till we fill up the Measure of our Iniquities, and bring upon ourselves
swist Destruction? And is not this the very State wherein by Nature we are? To
acknowledge this then, both with our Heart and Lips, that is, to disclaim our
own Righteousness, the Righteousness which is of the Law, is to act according
to the Real Nature of Things, and consequently is an instance of true Wisdom.

7. The Wisdom of submitting to the Righteousness of Faith, appears farther
from this Consideration. That it is the Righteousness of God: I mean here, It
is that Method of Reconciliation with God, which has been chose and
established by God himself, not only as he is the God of Wisdom, but as he is
the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, and of every Creature which he has
made. Now as it is not meet for Man to say unto God. What do thou? As none
who is not utterly void of Understanding, will contend with one that is
mightier than he, with him whose Kingdom rules over all; so it is true Wisdom,
it is a Mark of sound Understanding, to acquiesce in whatever he has chosen,
to say in this, as in all Things, "It is the Lord. Let him do what ^eemeth him
Good."

8. It may be farther considered. That it was of mere Grace, of free Love, of
undeserved Mercy, that God has vouchsafed to sinful Man, any way of
Reconciliation with himself, that we were not out away from his Hand, and
utterly blotted out of his Remembrance. Therefore whatever Method he is pleased
to appoint, of his tender Mercy, of his unmerited Goodness, whereby his
Enemies, who have so deeply revolted from him, so long and obstinately rebelled
against him, may still find Favor in his Sight, it is doubtless our Wisdom to
accept with all Thankfulness.

9. To mention but one Consideration more. It is wisdom to aim at the best End
by the best Means. Now the best End which any Creature can pursue, is Happiness
in God. And the best End a fallen Creature can pursue is, The Recovery of the
Favor and Image of God. But the best, indeed the only Means under Heaven given
to Man, whereby he may regain the Favor of God, which is better than Life
itself, or the Image of God, which is the true Life of the Soul, is the
submitting to the Righteousness which is of Faith, the believing in the only
begotten Son of God.

III. 1. Whosoever therefore thou art who desire to be forgiven and
reconciled to the Favor of God; Do not say in thy Heart, "I must first do
this; I must first conquer every Sin; break off every evil Word and Work, and
do all Good to all Men: Or, I must first go to Church, receive the Lord's
Supper, hear more Sermons, and say more Prayers." Alas, my Brother, thou art
clean gone out of the Way. Thou art still ignorant of the Righteousness of God,
and art seeking to establish thy own Righteousness, as the Ground of thy
Reconciliation. Know thou not, that thou can do nothing but sin, till thou
art reconciled to God? Wherefore then do thou say, I must do this and this
first, and then I shall believe. Nay, but First Believe. Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Propitiation for thy Sins. Let this good Foundation first be
laid, and then thou shall do all Things well.

2. Neither say in thy Heart, "I cannot be accepted yet, because I am not good
enough." Who is good enough? Who ever was? To merit Acceptance at God's Hands!
Was ever any Child of Adam good enough for this? Or will any, till the
Consummation of all Things? And as for thee, thou art not good at all: There
dwells in thee no good Thing. And thou never wilt be, till thou believe in
Jesus. Rather thou will find thyself worse and worse. But is there any need of
being worse, in order to be accepted? Art thou not bad enough already? Indeed
thou art, and that God knows. And thou thyself can not deny it. Then delay
not. All Things are now ready. Arise and wash away thy Sins. The Fountain is
open. Now is the Time, to wash thee white in the Blood of the Lamb. Now he
shall purge thee as with Hyssop, and thou shall be clean; he shall wash thee,
and thou shall be whiter than Snow.

3. Do not say, "But I am not contrite enough: I am not sensible enough of my
Sins." I know it. I would to God, thou were more sensible of them, more
contrite a thousand fold than thou art. But do not stay for this. It may be God
will make thee so, not before thou believe, but by believing. It may be, thou will nor weep much, till thou love much, because thou have had much forgiven.
In the mean time, look unto Jesus. Behold how he loves thee! What could he
have done more for thee which he has not done? "O Lamb of God, was ever Pain,
Was ever Love like Thine!"
Look steadily upon him, till he looks on thee, and breaks thy hard Heart. Then
shall thy Head be Waters, and thy Eyes Fountains of Tears.

4. Nor yet do thou say, "I must do something more, before I come to Christ." I
grant, supposing thy Lord should delay his coming, it were meet and right to
wait for his appearing, in doing so far as thou have Power, whatsoever he has
commanded thee. But there is no Necessity for making such a Supposition. How
know thou that he will delay? Perhaps he will appear, as the Dayspring from
on High, before the Morning-light. O do not set him a Time. Expect him every
Hour. Now, he is nigh! Even at the Door!

5. And to what End would thou wait for more Sincerity, before thy Sins are
blotted out? To make thee more worthy of the Grace of God? Alas, thou art still
establishing thy own Righteousness. He will have Mercy, not because thou art
worthy of it, but because his Compassions fail not: Not because thou art
righteous; but because Jesus Christ has atoned for thy Sins.

Again, if there be any thing good in Sincerity, why do thou expect it,
before thou have Faith? Seeing Faith itself is the only Root of whatever is
really good and holy.

Above all, How long will thou forget, That whatsoever thou do, or whatsoever
thou have, before thy Sins are forgiven thee, it avails nothing with God,
toward the procuring of thy Forgiveness? Yea, and that it must all be cast
behind thy Back, trampled under Foot, made no Account of, or thou will never
find Favor in God's Sight; because until then thou can not ask it, as a mere
Sinner, guilty, lost, undone, having nothing to plead, nothing to offer to God,
but only the Merits of his well-beloved Son, who loved thee, and gave himself
for thee.

6. To conlude. Whosoever thou art, O Man, who have the Sentence of Death in
thyself, who feel thyself a condemned Sinner, and have the Wrath of God
abiding on thee: Unto thee says the Lord, Not, Do this: perfectly obey all my
Commands and live: But, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved. The Word of Faith is nigh unto thee; Now, at this instant, in the
present Moment, and in thy present State, Sinner as thou art, just as thou art,
Believe the Gospel: And I will be merciful unto thy Unrighteousness and thy
Iniquities will I remember no more.

The Way to the Kingdom. A SERMON On MARK i. 15.
MARK i. 15. The Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.


THESE Words naturally lead us to consider, First, The Nature of True Religion,
here termed by our Lord, The Kingdom of God, which, says he, is at hand: And
Secondly, The Way thereto, which he points out in those Words, Repent ye, and
believe the Gospel.

I. 1. We are First, to consider, The Nature of True Religion, here termed by
our Lord, The Kingdom of God. The same Expression the great Apostle uses in his
Epistle to the Romans, where he likewise explains his Lord's Words, saying, The
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink; but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. Chap. xiv. 17.

2. The Kingdom of God, or True Religion, is not Meat and Drink. It is well
known, that not only the unconverted Jews, but great Numbers of those who had
received the Faith of Christ, were notwithstanding zealous of the Law, ( Acts
xxi. 20.) even the Ceremonial Law of Moses. Whatsoever therefore they found
written therein, either concerning Meat and Drink Offerings, or the Distinction
between clean and unclean Meats, they not only observed themselves, but
vehemently pressed the same, even on those among the Gentiles (or Heathens) who
were turned to God. Yea, to such a Degree, that so^^^ of them taught,
wheresoever they came among them, Except ye be circumcised, and keep the Law
(the whole Ritual Law) ye cannot be saved. Acts xv. 1, 24.

3. In Opposition to these, the Apostle declares, both here and in many other
Places, That True Religion, does not consist in Meat and Drink, or in any
Ritual Observances: Nor indeed in any outward Thing whatever, in any Thing
exterior to the Heart; the whole Substance thereof lying in Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

4. Not in any outward Things; such as Forms or Ceremonies, even of the most
excellent Kind. Supposing these to be ever so decent and significant, ever so
expressive of inward Things: Supposing them ever so helpful, not only to the
Vulgar, whose Thought reaches little farther than their Sight; but even to Men
of Understanding, Men of stronger Capacities, as doubtless they may sometimes
be: Yea, supposing them, as in the Case of the Jews, to be appointed by God
himself; yet even during the Period of Time wherein that Appointment remains in
Force, True Religion does not principally consist therein; nay, strictly
speaking, not at all. How much more must this hold concerning such Rights and
Forms, as are only of Human Appointment? The Religion of Christ rises
infinitely higher, and lies immensely deeper than all these. These are good in
their Place; just so far as they are in fact subservient to true Religion. And
it were Superstition to object against them, while they are applied only as
occasional Helps to Human Weakness. But let no Man carry them farther. Let no
Man dream, that they have any intrinsic Worth; or that Religion cannot subsist
without them. This were to make them an Abomination to the Lord.

5. The Nature of Religion is so far from consisting in these, in Forms of
Worship, or Rites and Ceremonies, that it does not properly consist in any
outward Actions, of what Kind soever. It is true, a Man cannot have any
Religion, who is guilty of vicious, immoral Actions; or who does to others,
what he would not they should do to him, if he were in the same Circumstance.
And it is also true, that he can have no real Religion, who knows to do good,
and does it not. Yet may a Man both abstain from outward Evil, and do Good, and
still have no Religion. Yea, two Persons may do the same outward Work, suppose,
Feeding the Hungry, or Clothing the Naked: And, in the Mean Time, one of these
may be truly Religious, and the other have no Religion at all: For the one may
act from the Love of God, and the other from the Love of Praise. So manifest it
is; that although true Religion naturally leads to every good Word and Work, yet
the Real Nature thereof lies deeper still, even in the Hidden Man of the Heart.

6. I say of the Heart. For neither does Religion consist in Orthodoxy or Right
Opinions; which although they are not properly outward things, and not in the
Heart, but the Understanding. A Man may be orthodox in every Point; he may not
only espouse Right Opinions, but zealously defend them against all Opposers: He
may think justly concerning the Incarnation of our Lord, concerning the ever
blessed Trinity, and every other Doctrine, contained in the Oracles of God: He
may assent to all the three Creeds; that called The Apostles, the Nicene, and
the Athanasian: And yet it is possible, he may have no Religion at all, no more
than a Jew, Turk, or Pagan. He may be almost as orthodox as -- the Devil; (though
indeed, not altogether. For every Man errs in something; whereas we cannot well
conceive him to hold any erroneous Opinion) and may all the while be as great a
Stranger as he to the Religion of the Heart.

7. This alone is Religion, truly so called: This alone is in the Sight of God
of great Price. The Apostle sums it all up in three Particulars, Righteousness,
and Pence, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. And first, Righteousness. We cannot be at
a Loss concerning this, if we remember the Words of our Lord describing the two
grand Branches thereof, or which hang all the Law and the Prophets. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Mind, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Mark xii. 30.
Strength. This is the First and great Commandment, the first and great Branch
of Christian Righteousness. Thou shall delight thyself in the Lord thy God;
thou shall seek and find all Happiness in Him. He shall be thy Shield, and thy
exceeding great Reward, in Time and in Eternity. All thy Bones shall say, Whom
have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire beside
thee! Thou shall hear, and fulfill his Word who says, My Son, give me thy
Heart. And having given him thy Heart, thy inmost Soul, to reign there without
a Rival, thou may well cry out, in the Fullness of thy Heart, I will love
thee, O Lord, my Strength. The Lord is my strong Rock, and my Defense: My
Savior, my God, and my Might, in whom I will trust; my Buckler, the Horn also
of my Salvation, and my Refuge.

8. And the Second Commandment is like unto this; the Second great Branch of
Christian Righteousness is closely and inseparably connected therewith, even
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. Thou shall love -- Thou shall embrace
with the most tender good will, the most earnest and cordial Affection, the
most inflamed Desires of preventing or removing all Evil, and of procuring for
him every possible Good -- Thy Neighbor -- that is, not only thy Friend, thy
Kinsman, or thy Acquaintance; not only the Virtuous, the Friendly, him that
loves thee, that prevents or returns thy Kindness; but every Child of Man,
every human Creature, every Soul which God has made: Not excepting him whom
thou never have seen in the Flesh, whom thou know not either by Face or
Name: Not excepting him whom thou know to be evil and unthankful, him that
still despightfully uses and persecutes thee. Him thou shall love as thyself;
with the same invariable Thirst after his Happiness in every Kind: the same
unwearied Care to skreen him from whatever might grieve or hurt either his Soul
or Body.

9. Now is not this Love The fulfilling of the Law? The Sum of all Christian
Righteousness? Of all inward Righteousness; for it necessarily implies Bowels
of Mercies, Humbleness of Mind (seeing Love is not puffed up) Gentleness,
Meekness, Long-suffering, (for Love is not provoked but believes, hops,
endures all Things) and of all outward Righteousness; for Love works no Evil
to his Neighbor, either by Word or Deed. It cannot willingly either hurt or
grieve any one. And it is zealous of Good Works. Every Lover of Mankind, as he
has Opportunity, does good unto all Men, being (without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy) full of Mercy and good Fruits.

10. But true Religion, or a Heart right toward God and Man, implies Happiness
as well as Holiness. For it is not only Righteousness but also Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. What Peace? The Peace of God, which God only can give and the
World cannot take away: The Peace which passes all Understanding, all (barely)
rational Conception; being a supernatural Sensation, a divine Taste of the
Powers of the World to come: Such as the natural Man knows not, how wise
soever in the Things of this World: Nor indeed can he know it, in his present
State, because it is spiritually discerned. It is a Peace that banishes all
Doubt, all painful Uncertainty; the Spirit of God bearing witness with the
Spirit of a Christian, that he is a Child of God. And it banishes Fear, all
such Fear as has Torment; the Fear of the Wrath of God, the Fear of Hell, the
Fear of the Devil, and in particular, the Fear of Death: he that has the Peace
of God, desiring (if it were the Will of God) to depart and to be with Christ.

11. With this Peace of God, wherever it is fixed in the Soul, there is also
Joy in the Holy Ghost; Joy wrought in the Heart by the Holy Ghost, by the ever
blessed Spirit of God. He it is that works in us that calm, humble Rejoicing
in God, through Christ Jesus, by whom we have now received the Atonement,
(...), the Reconciliation with God; and that enables us boldly to confirm the
Truth of the Royal Psalmist's Declaration, Blessed is the Man (or rather happy)
(...) whose Unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered. He it is
that inspires the Christian Soul, with that even, solid Joy, which arises from
the Testimony of the Spirit, that he is a Child of God: And that gives him to
rejoice with Joy unspeakable, in Hope of the Glory of God: Hope, both of the
glorious Image of God, which is in part and shall be fully revealed in him; and
of that Crown of Glory, which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for him.

12. This Holiness and happiness joined in one, are sometimes styled in the
inspired Writings, the Kingdom of God, (as by our Lord in the Text) and
sometimes, The Kingdom of Heaven. It is termed, the Kingdom of God, because it
is the immediate Fruit of God's reigning in the Soul. So soon as ever he takes
unto himself his mighty Power, and sets up his Throne in our Hearts, they are
instantly filled with this Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
It is called the Kingdom of Heaven, because it is (in a Degree) Heaven opened
in the Soul. For whosoever they are that experience this, they can aver before
Angels and Men, "Everlasting Life is won:
Glory is on Earth begun.
According to the constant Tenor of Scripture, which every where bears Record,
God has given unto us eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has
the Son (reigning in his Heart) has Life, even Life everlasting 1 John v. 11,
12, For this is Life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, John xvii. 3. And they to whom this is given, may
confidently address God, though they were in the midst of a fiery Furnace.

"Thee -- Lord, safe shielded by thy Power,
Thee, Son of God, Jehovah, we adore;
In Form of Man descending to appear:
To thee be ceaseless Hallelujah's given.
Praise, as in Heaven thy Throne, we offer here:
For where thy Presence is displayed, is Heaven."
10. And this Kingdom of God or of Heaven is at hand. As these Words were
originally spoken, they implied, that the Time was then fulfilled, God being
made manifest in the Flesh, when he would set up his Kingdom among Men, and
reign in the Hearts of his People. And is not the Time now fulfilled? For lo!
says he, I am with you always, you who preach Remission of Sins in my Name,
even unto the End of the World. (Matt. xxviii. 20.) Wheresoever therefore the
Gospel of Christ is preached, this his Kingdom is nigh at hand. It is not far
from every one of you. Ye may this Hour enter thereinto, if so be ye hearken to
his Voice, Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.

II. 1. This is the Way. Walk ye in it. And first, Repent, that is, Know
yourselves. This is the first Repentance, previous to Faith; even Conviction,
or Self-Knowledge. Awake then thou that sleep. Know thyself to be a Sinner,
and what Manner of Sinner thou art. Know that Corruption of thy inmost Nature,
whereby thou art very far gone from Original Righteousness, whereby the Flesh
lusts always contrary to the Spirit, through that carnal Mind which is Enmity
against God, which is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Know that thou art corrupted in every Power, in every Faculty of thy Soul; that
thou art totally corrupted in every one of these, all the Foundations being out
of Course. The Eyes of thine Understanding are darkened, so that they cannot
discern God or the Things of God. The Clouds of Ignorance and Error rest upon
thee, and cover thee with the Shadow of Death. Thou know nothing yet, as
thou ought to know, neither God, nor the World, nor thyself. Thy Will is no
longer the Will of God, but is utterly perverse and distorted, averse from all
Good, from all which God loves, and prone to all Evil, to every Abomination
which God hates. Thy Affections are alienated from God, and scattered abroad
over all the Earth. All thy Passions, both thy Desires and Aversions, thy Joys
and Sorrows, thy Hopes and Fears, are out of Frame, are either undue in their
Degree, or placed on undue Objects. So that there is no Soundness in thy Soul;
but from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot (to use the strong
Expression of the Prophet) there are only Wounds and Bruises and putrefying
Sores.

2. Such is the inbred Corruption of thy Heart, of thy very inmost Nature. And
what Manner of Branches can thou expect to grow, from such an evil Root?
Hence springs Unbelief, ever departing from the living God: Saying, "Who is the
Lord that I should serve him? Tush! Thou, God, carest not for it." Hence
Independence, affecting to be like the Most High; hence Pride, in all its
Forms, teaching thee to say, "I am rich, and increased in Goods, and have need
of nothing." From this evil Fountain flow forth the bitter streams of Vanity,
Thirst of Praise; Ambition, Covetousness; the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of
the Eye, and the Pride of Life. From this arise Anger, Hatred, Malice, Revenge,
Envy, Jealousy, evil Surmisings: From this all the foolish and hurtful Lusts,
that now pierce thee through with many Sorrows, and if not timely prevented,
will at length drown thy Soul in everlasting Perdition.

3. And what Fruits can grow on such Branches as these? Only such as are bitter
and evil continually. Of Pride comes Contention, vain boasting, seeking and
receiving Praise of Men, and so robbing God of that Glory which he cannot give
unto another. Of the Lust of the Flesh come Gluttony or Drunkenness, Luxury or
Sensuality: Fornication, Uncleanness, variously defiling that Body, which was
designed for a Temple of the Holy Ghost: Of Unbelief, every evil Word and Work.
But the Time would fail, should thou reckon up all; all the idle Words thou
have spoken, provoking the Most High, grieving the holy One of Israel: All the
evil Works thou have done, either wholly evil in themselves, or at least, not
done to the Glory of God. For thy actual Sins are more than thou art able to
express, more than the Hairs of thy Head. Who can number the Sands of the Sea,
or the Drops of Rain, or thy Iniquities?

4. And know thou not that the Wages of Sin is Death? Death not only
temporal, but eternal. The Soul that sins, it shall die: For the Mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. It shall die the second Death. This is the Sentence,
to be punished with never-ending Death, with everlasting Destruction from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. Know thou not that
every Sinner, (...); not properly is in Danger of Hellfire, that Expression is
far too weak: But rather, is under the Sentence of Hell Fire, doomed already,
just dragging to Execution. Thou art guilty of everlasting Death. It is the
just Reward of thy Inward and Outward Wickedness. It is just, that the Sentence
should now take place. Do thou see, do thou feel this? Art thou thoroughly
convinced, that thou deservest God's Wrath and everlasting Damnation? Would God
do thee no wrong, if he now commanded the Earth to open and swallow thee up? If
thou were now to go down quick into the Pit, into the Fire that never shall be
quenched? If God has given thee truly to repent, thou have a deep Sense that
these Things are so; and that it is of his mere Mercy thou art not consumed,
swept away from the Face of the Earth.

5. And what will thou do to appease the Wrath of God, to atone for all thy
Sins, and to escape the Punishment thou have so justly deserved? Alas, thou
can do nothing: Nothing that will in any wise make amends to God, for one
evil Work, or Word, or Thought. If thou could now do all Things well, if from
this very Hour, till thy Soul should return to God, thou could perform
perfect uninterrupted Obedience, even this would not atone for what is past.
The not increasing thy Debt would not discharge it. It would still remain as
great as ever. Yea, the present and future Obedience of all the Men upon Earth,
and all the Angels in Heaven, would never make Satisfaction to the Justice of
God for one single Sin. How vain then was the Thought, of atoning for thy own
Sins by any Thing thou could do? It costeth far more to redeem one Soul,
than all Mankind is able to pay. So that were there no other Help for a guilty
Sinner, without Doubt he must have perished everlastingly.

6. But suppose perfect Obedience for the time to come, could atone for the
Sins that are past, this would profit thee nothing; for thou art not able to
perform it; no, not in any one Point. Begin now. Make the Trial. Shake off that
outward Sin that so easily besetteth thee. Thou can not. How then will thou
change thy Life from all Evil to all Good? Indeed, it is impossible to be done,
unless first thy Heart be changed. For so long as the Tree remains evil, it
cannot bring forth good Fruit. But art thou able to change thy own Heart, from
all Sin to all Holiness? To quicken a Soul that is dead in Sin? Dead to God and
alive only to the World? No more than thou art able to quicken a dead Body, to
raise to Life him that lies in the Grave. Yea, thou art not able to quicken
thy Soul in any Degree, no more than to give any Degree of Life to the dead
Body. Thou can do nothing more or less, in this Matter; thou art utterly
without Strength. To be deeply sensible of this, how helpless thou art, as well
as how guilty and how sinful, this is that Repentance not to be repented of,
which is the Forerunner of the Kingdom of God.

7. If to this lively Conviction of thy inward and outward Sins, of thy utter
Guiltiness and Helplessness, there be added suitable Affections, Sorrow of
Heart, for having despised thy own Mercies, Remorse and Self-condemnation,
having the Mouth stopped, ashamed to lift up thine Eyes to Heaven; Fear of the
Wrath of God abiding on thee, of his Curse hanging over thy Head, and of the
fiery Indignation ready to devour those who forget God, and obey not our Lord
Jesus Christ: Earnest Desire to escape from that Indignation, to cease from
evil and learn to do well: Then I say unto thee in the Name of the Lord, Thou
art not far from the Kingdom of GOD. One Step more and thou shall enter in.
Thou do repent. Now, Believe the Gospel.

8. The Gospel (that is, good Tidings, good News for guilty, helpless Sinners)
in the largest Sense of the Word, means, the whole Revelation made to Men by
Jesus Christ: And sometimes the whole Account of what our Lord did and
suffered, while he tabernacled among Men. The Substance of all is, Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners. Or, GOD so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, to the End we might not perish, but have everlasting
Life. Or, he was bruised for our Transgressions, he was wounded for our
Iniquities: The Chastisement of our Peace was upon Him, and with his Stripes we
are healed.

9. Believe this and the Kingdom of God is thine. By Faith thou attainest the
Promise. "He pardons and absolveth all that truly repent and unfeignedly
believe his holy Gospel." As soon as ever God has spoken to thy Heart, "Be of
good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee," his Kingdom com^^; thou have
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy (...) the Holy Ghost.

10. Only beware thou do not deceive thy own Soul, with regard to the Nature of
this Faith. It is not (as some have fondly conceived) a bare Assent to the
Truth of the Bible, of the Articles of our Creed, or of all that is contained
in the Old and New Testament. The Devils believe this, as well as I or thou?
and yet they are Devils still. But it is, over and above this, a sure Trust in
the Mercy of God through Christ Jesus. It is a Confidence in a pardoning God.
It is a Divine Evidence or Conviction, that GOD was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing to them their former Trespasses: And in
particular, that the Son of God has loved me and given himself for me: and
that I, even I, am now reconciled to God by the Blood of the Cross.

11. Do thou thus believe? Then the Peace of God is in thy Heart, and Sorrow
and Sighing flee away. Thou art no longer in doubt for the Love of God: It is
clear as the Noonday Sun. Thou cryest out, My Song shall be always of the
Loving Kindness of the Lord: with my Mouth will Liver to ^^^ing of thy Truth,
from one Generation to another. Thou art no longer afraid of Hell, or Death, or
him that had once the Power of Death, the Devil: No, nor painfully afraid of
God himself; only thou have a tender, filial Fear of offending him. Do thou
believe? Then thy Soul does magnify the Lord, and thy Spirit rejoiceth in God
thy Savior. Thou rejoicest in that thou have Redemption through his Blood, ever
the forgiveness of Sins. Thou rejoicest in that Spirit of Adoption, which
cries in thy Heart, Abba, Father! Thou rejoicest in a Hope full of
Immortality, in reaching forth unto the Mark of the Prize of thy high Calling;
in an Earnest Expectation of all the good Things which God has prepared for
them that love him.

12. Do thou now believe? Then the Love of God is now shed abroad in thy
Heart. Thou love him, because he first loved us. And because thou love God,
thou love thy Brother also. And being filled with Love, Peace, Joy, thou art
also filled with Long suffering, Gentleness, Fidelity, Goodness, Meekness,
Temperance, and all the other Fruits of the same Spirit: in a Word, with
whatever Dispositions are holy, are heavenly, or divine. For while thou
beholdest with open uncovered Face, (the Veil now being taken away) the Glory
of the Lord, his glorious Love, and glorious Image wherein thou wast created,
thou art changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, by the Spirit of the
Lord.

13. This Repentance, this Faith, this Peace, Joy, Love; this Change from Glory
to Glory, is what the Wisdom of the World has voted to be Madoess, mere
Enthusiasm, utter Distraction, But thou, O Man of God, regard them not: Be thou
moved by none of these Things. Thou know in whom thou have believed. See
that no Man take thy Crown. Whereunto thou have already attained hold fast; and
follow, till thou attain all the great and precious Promises. And thou who have
not yet known him, let not vain men make thee ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.
Be thou in nothing terrified by those who speak evil of the Things which they
know not. God will soon turn thy Heaviness into Joy. O let not thy Hands hang
down. Yet a little longer, and he will take away thy Fears, and give thee the
Spirit of a sound Mind. He is nigh that justifies: Who is he that condemns?
It is Christ that died; yea rather that rose again; who is even now on the
Right hand of God, making Intercession for thee. Now cast thyself on the Lamb
of God, with all thy Sins, how many soever they be; and an Entrance shall now
be ministered unto thee, into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ!

The First Fruits of the Spirit. A SERMON On ROMANS viii. 1.
ROMANS viii. 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


1. BY them which are in Christ Jesus, St. Paul evidently means, Those who
truly believe in him: Those who being justified by Faith, have Peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. They who thus believe do no longer walk after
the Flesh, no longer follow the Motions of corrupt Nature: But after the
Spirit: Both their Thoughts, Words and Works, are under the Direction of the
blessed Spirit of God.

2. There is therefore now no Condemnation to these. There is no Condemnation
to them from God: For he has justified them freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus. He has forgiven all their iniquities, and blotted
out all their Sins. And there is no Condemnation to them from within: For they
have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God,
that they might know the Things which are freely given to them of God: 1 Cor.
ii. 12.
Which Spirit bears Witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children of
God. And to this is added, 2 Cor. i. 12.
the Testimony of their Conscience: that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not
with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, they have had their Conversation
in the World.

3. But because this Scripture has been so frequently misunderstood, and that
in so dangerous a Manner, because such Multitudes of unlearned and unstable
Men, ((...), Men untaught of God, and consequently unestablished in the truth
which is after Godliness) have wrested it to their own Destruction. I propose
to show as clearly as I can, First. Who those are which are in Christ Jesus,
and walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and Secondly, How there is
no Condemnation to these. I shall conclude with some practical Inferences.

I. 1. First I am to show, Who those are that are in Christ Jesus. And are they
not, Those who believe in his Name? Those who are found in him, not having
their own Righteousness, but the Righteousness which is of God by Faith? These,
who have Redemption through his Blood, are properly said, to be in Him. For
they dwell in Christ and Christ in them. They are joined unto the Lord in one
spirit. They are ingrafted into him as Branches into the Vine. They are united,
as Members to their Head, in a manner which words cannot express, nor could it
before enter into their Hearts to conceive.

2. Now whosoever abides in him, sins not: walks not after the Flesh. The
Flesh, in the usual Language of St. Paul, signifies corrupt Nature. In this
Sense, he uses the Word, writing to the Galatians. The Works of the Flesh are
manifest, Gal. v. 19. And a little before, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the Lust (or Desire) of the Flesh ( v. 16.) To prove which, namely, that
those who walk by the Spirit, do not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh, he
immediately adds, For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit; but the Spirit
lusts against the Flesh (for these are contrary to each other) that ye may
not do the Things which ye would. So the words are literally translated,
((...)) Not, So that ye cannot do the Things that ye would, as if the Flesh
overcame the Spirit: A Translation which has not only nothing to do with the
Original Text of the Apostle, but likewise makes his whole Argument nothing
worth, yea, asserts just the Reverse of what he is proving.

3. They who are of Christ, who abide in him, have crucified the Flesh with its
Affections and Lusts. They abstain from all those Works of the Flesh: from
Adultery and Fornication, from Uncleanness and Lasciviousness; from Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance; from Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Sedition,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings: From every Design, and
Word and Work, to which the Corruption of Nature leads. Although they feel the
Root of Bitterness in themselves, yet are they endued with Power from on High,
to trample it continually under Foot, so that it cannot spring up to trouble
them: Insomuch that every fresh Assault which they undergo, only gives them
fresh Occasion of Praise, of crying out, Thanks be unto God, who gives us the
Victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

4. They now walk after the Spirit, both in their Hearts and Lives. They are
taught of Him to love God and their Neighbor with a Love which is as a Well of
Water, springing up into everlasting Life. And by him they are led into every
holy Desire, into every divine and heavenly Temper, till every Thought which
arises in their Heart is Holiness unto the Lord.

5. They who 'walk after the Spirit,' are also led by him, into all Holiness of
Conversation. Their Speech is always in Grace, seasoned with Salt, with the
Love and Fear of God. No corrupt Communication comes out of their Mouth, but
only 'that which is good;' that which is to the Use of edifying, which is meet
to minister Grace to the Hearers. And herein likewise do they exercise
themselves Day and Night, to do only the Things which please God: in all their
outward Behavior to follow Him, who left us an Example that we might tread in
his Steps: In all their intercourse with their Neighbor to walk in Justice,
Mercy and Truth; and whatsoever they do, in every Circumstance of Life, to do
all to the Glory of God.

6. These are they who indeed walk by the Spirit. Being filled with Faith and
with the Holy Ghost, they possess in their Hearts, and show forth in their
Lives, in the whole Course of their Words and Actions, the genuine Fruits of
the Spirit of God, namely, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Fidelity, Meekness, Temperance, and whatsoever else is lovely or
praiseworthy. They adorn in all Things the Gospel of God our Savior; and give
full Proof to all Mankind, they are indeed actuated by the same Spirit, which
raised up Jesus from the Dead.

II. 1. I proposed to show, in the second Place, How there is no Condemnation
to them, which are thus in Christ Jesus, and thus walk, not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit.

And, first, To Believers in Christ, walking thus, there is no Condemnation on
Account of the^^ past Sins. God condemns them not for any of these: They are
as though they had never been. They are cast as a Stone into the Depth of the
Sea, and he remembereth them no more. God having set forth his Son to be a
Propitiation for them, through Faith in his Blood, has declared unto them, his
Righteousness, for the Remission of the Sins that are past. He lays therefore
none of these to their Charge; their Memorial is perished with them.

2. And there is no Condemnation in their own Breast; no Sense of Guilt, or
Dread of the Wrath of God. They have the Witness in themselves; they are
conscious of their Interest in the Blood of Sprinkling. They have not received
again the Spirit of Bondage unto Pear, unto Doubt and ^acking Uncertainty; but
they have received the Spirit of Adoption, crying in their Hearts, Abba,
Father. Thus being justified by Faith, they have the Peace of God ruling in
their Hearts: Flowing from a continual Sense of his Pardoning Mercy, and the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God.

3. If it be said, But sometimes a Believer in Christ, may lose his ^ight of
the Mercy of God; sometimes such Darkness may s^ll upon him, that he no longer
sees him that is invisible, no longer feels that Witness in himself of his Part
in the atoning Blood; and then he is inwardly condemned he h^^h again the
Sentence of Death in himself: I answer, supposing it so to be, supposing him
no^ to see the Mercy of God, then he is not a Believer; for Faith implies
Light; the Light of God shining upon the Soul. So far therefore as any one
loses this Light, he for the Time loses his Faith. And no doubt a true Believer
in Christ, may lose the Light of Faith. And so far as this is lost, he may for
a Time fall again into Condemnation. But this is not the Case of them who now
are in Christ Jesus, who now believe in his Name. For so long as they believe
and walk after the Spirit, neither God condemns them nor their own Heart.

5. They are not condemned, Secondly, for any Present Sins, for now
transgressing the Commandments of God. For they do not transgress them; they do
not walk after the Flesh but after the Spirit. This is the continual Proof of
their Love of God, that they keep his Commandments: Even as St. John bears
witness, Whosoever is born of God does not com^ it Sin. For his Seed remains
in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: He cannot, so long as
that Seed of God, that loving, ^o^y Faith re^^^eth in him. So long as he
keeps himself herein that wicked one touches him not. Now it is evident, ^e
is not condemned for the Sins which he does not commit at all. They therefore
who are thus had by the Spirit, are not under the Law, ( Gal. v. 18.) Not under
the Curse or Condemnation of it; for it condemns none but those who break it.
Thus, that Law of God, Thou shall not sheal, condemns none but these who do
steal. Thus, Remember the Sallath day to keep it holy, condemns those only who
do not keep it holy. Bu^ ^^ainst the Fruits of the Spirit, there is no Law; (
v. 23.) As the Apostle more largely declares, in those memorable Words of his
former Epistle to Timothy. We know, that the Law is good, if a Man use it
lawfully; Knowing this (if while he uses the Law of God, in order either to
convince or direct, he knows and remembers this) (...). (Not that the Law is
not made for a righteous Man; but) That the Law does not lie against a
righteous Man: (It has no Force against him, no Power to condemn him) but
against the Lawless and Disobedient, against the Ungodly and Sinners, against
the Unholy and Profane -- according to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God.
1 Timothy i. 8, 9, 11.

6. They are not condemned Thirdly, for Inward Sin, even though it does now
remain. That the Corruption of Nature does still remain, even in those who are
the Children of God by Faith, that they have in them the Seeds of Pride and
Vanity, of Anger, Lust and evil Desire, yea, Sin of every Kind, is too plain to
be denied, being Matter of daily Experience. And on this Account it is, That
St. Paul speaking to those, whom he had just before witnessed to be 1 Cor. i. 2.
in Christ Jesus Ver. 9.
, to have been called of God into the Fellowship (or Participation) of his Son
Jesus Christ, yet declares, Brethren, I could not speak unto you as unto
Spiritual; but as unto Carnal; even as unto Babes in Christ (1 Cor. iii. 1.)
Babes in Christ -- So we see they were in Christ; they were Believers in a low
Degree. And yet how much of Sin remained in them? Of that carnal Mind, which is
not subject to the Law of God!

7. And yet, for all this, they are not condemned. Although they seel the Flesh,
the evil Nature in them, although they are more sensible Day by Day, that their
Heart is deceitful and desperately wicked: Yet so long as they do not yield
thereto, so long as they give no Place to the Devil, so long as they maintain a
continual War, with all Sin, with Pride, Anger, Desire, so that the Flesh has
not Dominion over them, but they still walk after the Spirit: There is no
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. God is well-pleased with their
sincere, though imperfect Obedience: And they have Confidence toward God, knowing
they are his, by the Spirit which he has given them. 1 John iii. 24.

8. Nay, Fourthly, although they are continually convinced of Sin cleaving to all
they do; although they are conscious of not fulfilling the Perfect Law, either in
their Thoughts, or Words, or Works; although they know they do not love the Lord
their God, with all their Heart, and Mind, and Soul and Strength; although they
seel more or less of Pride or Self will, stealing in and mixing with their best
Duties; although even in their more immediate Intercourse with God, when they
assemble themselves with the great Congregation, and when they pour out their
Souls in secret to him, who sees all the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart,
they are continually ashamed of their ^^^^ering Thoughts, or of the Deadness
and Dullness of their Affections: Yet there is no Condemnation to them still,
either from God or from their own Heart. The Consideration of these manifold
Defects only gives them a deeper Sense, That they have always need of that
Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks for them in the Ears of God, and that
Advocate with the Father who ever lives, to make Int^^^ssion for them. So far
are these from driving them away from him, in whom they have believed, that
they rather drive them the closer to him, whom they feel the Want of every
Moment. And at the same Time, the deeper Sense they have of this Want, the more
earnest Desire do they feel, and the more diligent they are, as they have
received the Lord Jesus, so to walk in Him.

9. They are not condemned, Fifthly, (...) Sins of Infirmity, as they are
usually called. (Perhaps it were advisable rather to call them Infirmities,
that we may not seem to give any Countenance to Sin, or to extenuate it in any
Degree, by thus coupling it with Infirmity. But if we must retain so ambiguous
and dangerous an Expression) by Sins of Infirmity I would mean, such
involuntary Failings, as the saying a Thing we believe True, though in Fact it
prove to be False; or the Hurting our Neighbor, without knowing or designing
it; perhaps when we designed to do him Good. Though these are Deviations from the
holy and acceptable and perfect will of God, yet they are not properly Sins,
nor do they bring any Guilt on the Conscience of them which are in Christ
Jesus. They separate not between God and them, neither intercept the Light of
his Countenance; as being no Ways inconsistent with their general Character, of
walking not after the Flesh but after the Spirit.

10. Lastly, There is no Condemnation to them for any Thing whatever, which it
is not in their Power to help; whether it be of an inward or outward Nature,
and whether it be doing something, or leaving something undone. For Instance:
The Lord's Supper is to be administered. But you do not partake thereof. Why do
you not? You are consined by Sickness. Therefore you cannot help omitting it:
And for the same Reason, you are not condemned. There is no Guilt; because
there is no Choice. As there is a willing Mind, it is accepted, according to
that a Man has, not according to that he has not.

11. A Believer indeed may sometimes be grieved, because he cannot do what his
Soul longs for. He may cry out, when he is detained from worshipping God in the
great Congregation, Like as the Heart pants after the Water brooks, so pants
my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul is athirst for God, yea even for the living
God: when shall I come to appear in the Presence of God? He may earnestly
desire (only still saying in his Heart, Not as I will, but as thou will) to go
again with the Multitude and bring them forth into the House of God. But still,
if he cannot go, he feels no Condemnation, no Guilt, no Sense of God's
Displeasure: But can cheerfully yield up those Desires, with O my Soul, put thy
Trust in God: For I will yet give him Thanks, who is the Help of my Countenance
and my God.

12. It is more difficult to determine concerning those which are usually
styled, Sins of Surprize^ As when one who commonly in Patience possesses his
Soul, on a Sudden and violent Temptation, speaks or acts in a manner not
consistent with the Roval Law. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself.
Perhaps it is not easy to fix a General Rule, concerning Transgressions of this
Nature. We cannot say, either that Men are, or that they are not condemned, for
Sins of Surprise in general. But it seems whenever a Believer is by Surprise
over-taken in a Fault, there is more or less Condemnation, as there is more or
less Concurrence of his Will. In Proportion as a sinful Desire or Word or
Action is more or less voluntary, so we may conceive, God is more or less
displeased, and there is more or less Guilt upon the Soul.

13. But if so, then there may be some Sins of Surprise, which bring much Guilt
and Condemnation. For in some Instances, our being surprised is owing to some
wilful and culpable Neglect; or to a Sleepiness of Soul which might have been
prevented, or shaken off before the Temptation came. A Man may be previously
warned either of God or Man, That Trials and Danger are at hand: And yet may
say in his Heart, A little more Slumber, a little more Folding of the Hands to
Rest. Now if such an one afterward fall though unawares, into the Snare which he
might have avoided; that he fell unawares is no Excuse: He might have foreseen,
and have shunned the Danger. The falling even by Surprise, in such an Instance
as this, is, in effect, a wilful Sin; and as such must expose the Sinner to
Condemnation, both from God and his own Conscience.

14. On the other Hand, there may be sudden Assaults, either from the World, or
the God of this World, and frequently from our (...) evil Hearts, which we did
not, and hardly could foresee. And by these even a Believer, while weak in
Faith, may possibly be borne down, suppost into a Degree of Anger, or thinking
evil of another, with scarce any Concurrence of his Will. Now in such a Case,
the Jealous God would undoubtedly show him that he had done foolishly. He would
be convinced of having swerved from the Perfect Law, from the Mind which was in
Christ, and consequently grieved with a godly Sorrow, and lovingly ashamed
before God. Yet need he not come into condemnation. God lays not Folly to his
Charge, but has Compassion upon him, even as a Father pitieth his own
Children. And his Heart Condemns (...) not; in the midst of that Sorrow and
Shame, he (...) still say, I will trust and not be afraid. For the Lord Jehovah
is my Strength and my Song; he is also become my Salvation.

III. 1. It remains only, to draw some practical Inferences from the preceding
Considerations.

And, first, If there be no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, and
walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, on account of their past Sin:
Then why art thou fearful, O thou of little Faith? Though thy Sins were once more
in Number than the Sand, what is that to thee now thou art in Christ Jesus? Who
shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies:
Who is he that condemns? All the Sins thou have committed from thy Youth up,
until the Hour when thou wast accepted in the Beloved, are dr^^^en away as
Chaff, are gone, are lost, swallowed up, remembered no more. Thou art now born
of the Spirit: Will thou be troubled or afraid of what was done before thou
were horn? Away with thy Fears! Thou art not called to Fear; but to the Spirit
of Love and of a sound Mind. Know thy Calling. Rejoice in God thy Savior, and
give Thanks to God thy Father through him.

2. Will thou say, "But I have again committed Sin, since I had Redemption
through his Blood? And therefore it is, that I abhor myself, and repent in Dust
and Ashes." It is meet thou should abhor thyself; and it is God who has
wrought thee to this self-same Thing. But do thou now believe? Has he again
enabled thee to say, I know that my Redeemer lives: And the Life which I now
live, I live by Faith in the Son of God? Then that Faith again cancels all that
is past, and there is no Condemnation to thee. At whatsoever Time thou truly
believe in the Name of the Son of God, all thy Sins antecedent to that Hour,
vanish away as the Morning Dew. Now then, Stand thou fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made thee free. He has once more made thee free from the
Power of Sin, as well as from the Guilt and Punishment of it. O be not
entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage! Neither the vile devilish Bondage of
Sin; of evil Desires, evil Tempers, or Words or Works, the most grievous Yoke
on this Side Hell; Nor the Bondage of slavish tormenting Fear, of Guilt and
Self-condemnation.

3. But, Secondly: Do all they which abide in Christ Jesus, walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit? Then we cannot but infer, that whosoever now
commits Sin, has no Part or Lot in this Matter. He is even now condemned by
his own Heart. But if our Heart condemn us, if our own Conscience bears
Witness that we are guilty, undoubtedly God does: For he is greater than our
Heart, and knows all Things; so that we cannot doceive him, if we can
ourselves. And think not to say, "I was justified once; my Sins were once
forgiven me." I know not that: Neither will I dispute whether they were or no.
Perhaps, at this Distance of Time, it is next to impossible to know with any
tolerable Degree of Certainty, whether that was a true, genuine Work of God, or
whether thou did only deceive thy own Soul. But this I know with the utmost
Degree of Certainty, He that commits Sin is of the Devil. Therefore thou art
of thy Father the Devil. It cannot be denied: For the Works of thy Father thou
do. O flatter not thyself with vain Hopes. Say not to thy Soul, Peace, Peace!
For there is no Peace. Cry aloud! Cry unto God out of the Deep; if happily he may
hear thy Voice. Come unto him as at first, as wretched and poor, as sinful,
miserable, blind and naked. And beware thou suffer thy ^^^ul to take no Rest,
till his pardoning Love be again revealed, till he heal thy Backslidings, and
fill thee again with the Faith that works by Love.

4. Thirdly, Is there no Condemnation to them which walk after the Spirit, by
reason of inward Sin still remaining, so long as they do not give Way thereto;
nor by reason of Sin cleaving to all they do? Then fret not thyself because of
Ungodliness, though it still remain in thy Heart. Repine not, because thou still
come short of the glorious Image of God: Nor yet, because Pride, Self-will,
or Unbelief, cleave to all thy Words and Works. And be not afraid to know all
this Evil of thy Heart, to know thyself as also thou art known. Yea, desire of
God, that thou may not think of thyself more highly than thou ought to
think. Let thy continual Prayer be, "Show me, as my Soul can bear,
The Depth of inbred Sin:
All the Unbelief declare,
The Pride that lurks within!"
But when he hears thy Prayer, and unveils thy Heart, when he shows thee
thoroughly what Spirit thou art of: Then beware that thy Faith fail thee not,
that thou suffer not thy Shield to be torn from thee. Be abased. Be humbled in
the Dust. See thyself nothing, less than Nothing and Vanity. But still, let not
thy Heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Still hold fast. " I, even I,
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Rightecus. And as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so is his Love higher than even my Sins." --
Therefore God is merciful to thee a Sinner! Such a Sinner as thou art! God is
Love; and Christ has died. Therefore the Father himself loves thee. Thou art
his Child. Therefore he will withold from thee no manner of thing that is
good. Is it good, that the whole Body of Sin, which is now crucified in thee,
should be destroyed? It shall be done. Thou shall be cleansed from all
Filthiness both of ^^^sh and Spirit. It it good, that nothing should remain in
thy Heart, but the pure Love of God alone? Be of good Cheer! Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart and Mind and Soul and Strength. Faithful
is he that has promised, who also will do it. It is thy Part, patiently to
continue in the Work of Faith, and in the Labor of Love: And in cheerful
Peace, in humble Confidence, with calm and resigned, and yet earnest
Expectation, to wait till the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

5. Fourth^y, If they that are in Christ, and walk after the Spirit, are not
condemned for Sins of Infirmity, as neither for involuntary Failings, nor for
any Thing whatever which they are not able to help: Then beware, O thou that
have Faith in his Blood, that Satan herein gain no Advantage over thee. Thou
art still foolish and weak, blind and ignorant. More weak than any Words can
express, more foolish than it can yet enter into thy Heart to conceive, knowing
nothing yet as thou ought to know. Yet let not all thy Weakness and Folly,
or any Fruit thereof, which thou art not yet able to avoid, shake thy Faith,
thy filial Trust in God, or disturb thy Peace or Joy in the Lord. The Rule
which some give as to wilful Sins, and which in that Case, may perhaps be
dangerous, is undoubtedly wise and safe, if it be applied only to the Case of
Weakness and Infirmities. Art thou fallen, O Man of God? Yet do not lie there,
fretting thyself and bemoaning thy Weakness: But meekly say, Lord, (...) shall
fall thus every Moment, unless thou uphold me with thy Hand. And then arise!
Leap and Walk. Go on thy Way. Run with Patience the Race set before thee..

6. Lastly, Since a Believer need not come into Condemnation, even though he be
surprised into what his Soul abhors, (suppose his being surprised is not owing
to any Carelessness or wilful Neglect of his own:) If thou who believe, art
thus overtaken in a Fault, t^^n grieve unto the Lord; it shall be a precious
Balm: Pour out thy Heart before him, and show him of thy Trouble. And pray with
all thy Might to him who is touched with the Feeling of thy Infirmities, that
he would stablish and strenthen and settle thy Soul, and suffer thee to fall no
more. But still he condem^eth thee not. Wherefore should thou fear? Thou
have no Need of any Fear that has Torment. Thou shall love him that loves
thee, and it suffices: More Love will bring more Strength. And as soon as thou
love him with all thy Heart, thou shall be perfect and entire, lacking
nothing. Wait in Peace for that Hour, when the God of Peace shall sanctify thee
wholly, so that thy whole Spirit, and Soul and Body may be preserved blameless
unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ!

The Spirit of Bondage and of Adoption. A SERMON On ROMANS viii. 15.
ROMANS viii. 15. Ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again unto Fear: But
ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


1. ST. PAUL here speaks to those who are the Children of God by Faith, Ye,
says he, who are indeed his Children, have drank into his Spirit. Ye have not
received the Spirit of Bondage again unto Fear. But because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts. Ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

2. The Spirit of Bondage and Fear is widely distant from this loving Spirit of
Adoption. Those who are influenced only by slavish Fear, cannot be termed, The
Sons of God. Yet some of them may be styled his Servants, and are not far from
the Kinddom of Heaven.

3. But it is to be feared, the Bulk of Mankind, yea, of what is called The
Christian World, have not attained even this; but are still afar off, neither
is God in all their Thoughts. A few Names may be found of those who love God: A
few more there are that fear him. But the greater Part have neither the Fear of
God before their Eyes, nor the Love of God in their Hearts.

4. Perhaps most of you, who by the Mercy of God, now partake of a better
Spirit, may remember the Time, when ye were as they, when ye were under the
same Condemnation. But at first ye knew it not, though ye were wallowing daily in
your Sins and in your Blood: Till in due time ye received the Spirit of Fear (
ye received; for this also is the Gift of God:) And afterward, Fear vanished
away, and the Spirit of Love filled your Hearts.

5. One who is in the first State of Mind, without Fear or Love, is in
Scripture termed a natural Man. One who is under the Spirit of Bondage and
Fear, is sometimes said to be under the Law: (Although that Expression more
frequently signifies One, who is under the Jewish Dispensation, who thinks
himself obliged to observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Law.) But
one who has exchanged the Spirit of Fear for the Spirit of Love, is properly
said, To be under Grace.

Now because it highly imports us, to know what Spirit we are of, I shall
endeavor to point out distinctly, First, The State of a natural Man, Secondly,
That of one who is under the Law, and Thirdly, of one who is under Grace.

I. 1. And, First, the State of a natural Man. This the Scripture represents as
a State of Sleep. The Voice of God to him is, Awake, thou that sleep. For
his Soul is in a deep Sleep. His Spiritual Senses are not awake: They discern
neither Spiritual Good nor Evil. The Eyes of his Understanding are closed; they
are sealed together, and see not. Clouds and Darkness continually rest upon
them; for he lies in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. Hence having no Inlets
for the Knowledge of Spiritual Things, all the Avenues of his Soul being shut
up, he is in gross, stupid Ignorance of whatever he is most concerned to know.
He is utterly ignorant of God, knowing nothing concerning him as he ought to
know. He is totally a Stranger to the Law of God, as to its True, Inward,
Spiritual Meaning. He has no Conception of that Evangelical Holiness, without
which no Man shall see the Lord; nor of the Happiness, which they only find,
whose Life is hid with Christ in God.

2. And for this very Reason, because he is fast asleep, he is, in some Sense,
at Rest. Because he is blind, he is also secure: He says, Tush, there shall no
Harm happen unto me. The Darkness which covers him on every Side, keeps him in
a kind of Peace: (So far as Peace can consist with the Works of the Devil, and
with an earthly, devilish Mind.) He sees not that he stands on the Edge of the
Pit; therefore he fears it not. He cannot tremble at the Danger he does not
know. He has not understanding enough to fear. Why is it that he is in no Dread
of God? Because he is totally ignorant of him: If not saying in his Heart,
There is no God, or that he sits on the Circle of the Heavens, and humbles
not himself to behold the Things which are done on Earth: yet satisfying
himself as well, to all Epicurean Intents and Purposes, by saying, "God is
Merciful:" Confounding and swallowing up at once, in that unweildly Idea of
Mercy, all his Holiness and Essential Hatred of Sin, all his Justice, Wisdom
and Truth. He is in no Dread of the Vengeance denounced against those who obey
not the blessed Law of God, because he understands it not. He imagines the main
Point is, To do thus, to be outwardly blameless: And sees not that it extends
to every Temper, Desire, Thought, Motion of the Heart. Or he fancies, that the
Obligation hereto is ceased; that Christ came to destroy the Law and the
Prophets; to save his People, in, not from their Sins; to bring them to Heaven,
without Holiness. Notwithstanding his own Words, Not one Jot or Tittle of the
Law shall pass away, till all Things are fulfilled: And, Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord! shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

3. He is secure, because he is utterly ignorant of himself. Hence he talks of
"repenting by and by," he does not indeed exactly know when; but some time or
other before he dies: Taking it for granted, That this is quite in his own
Power. For what should hinder his doing it, if he will? If he does but once set
a Resolution, no fear but he will make it good.

4. But this Ignorance never so strongly glares, as in those who are termed,
Men of Learning, If a Natural Man be one of these, he can talk at large of his
Rational Faculties; of the Freedom of his Will, and the absolute Necessity of
such Freedom, in order to constitute a Man a Moral Agent. He reads and argues,
and proves to a Demonstration, That every Man may do as he will; may dispose
his own Heart to Evil or Good, as it seems best in his own Eyes. Thus the God
of this World spreads a double Veil of Blindness over I^^. Heart, lest by any
Means the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine upon it.

5. From the same Ignorance of himself and God there may sometimes arise in the
Natural Man, a kind of Joy, in congratulating himself, upon his own Wisdom and
Goodness. And what the World calls Joy, he may often possess. He may have
Pleasure in various Kinds; either in gratifying the Desires of the Flesh, or
the Desire of the Eye, or the Pride of Life: Particularly if he has large
Possessions; if he enjoy an affluent Fortune. Then he may cloth himself in
Purple and fine Linen, and fare sumptuously every Day. And so long as he thus
does well unto himself, Men will doubtless speak good of him. They will say, He
is a happy Man: For indeed this is the Sum of Wordly Happiness: To dress, and
visit, and talk, and eat, and drink, and rise up to play.

6. It is not surprising, if one in such Circumstances as these, dozed with the
Opiates of Flattery and Sin, should imagine, among his other waking Dreams,
That he walks in great Liberty. How easily may he persuade himself, that he is
at Liberty from all Vulgar Errors, and from the Prejudice of Education, judging
exactly right, and keeping clear of all Extremes. "I am free (may he say) from
all the Enthusiasm of weak and narrow Souls: From Superstition, the Disease of
Fools and Cowards, always righteous over much; and from Bigotry, continually
incident to those who have not a free and generous Way of Thinking." And too
sure it is, That he is altogether free, from the Wisdom which comes from
Above, from Holiness, from the Religion of the Heart, from the whole Mind which
was in Christ.

7. For all this Time, he is the Servant of Sin. He commits Sin, more or less
Day by Day. Yet he is not troubled: He "is in no Bondage;" (as some speak) he
feels no Condemnation. He contents himself, (even though he should profess to
believe, that the Christian Revelation is of God?) with, "Man is frail. We are
all weak. Every Man has his Infirmity." Perhaps he quotes Scripture: "Why, does
not Solomon say, "The Righteous Man falls into Sin seven Times a Day (...). And
doubtless, they are all Hypocrites or Enthusiasts who pretend to be better than
their Neighbors." If at any Time a serious Thought fixes upon him, he stifles
it as soon as possible, with, "Why should I fear, since God is merciful, and
Christ died for Sinners?" Thus he remains a willing Servant of Sin, content
with the Bondage of Corruption; inwardly and outwardly unholy, and satisfied
therewith; not only not conquering Sin, but not striving to conquer,
particularly That Sin, which does so easily beset him.

8. Such is the State of every Natural Man; whether he be a gross, scandalous
Transgressor, or a more reputable and decent Sinner, having the Form, though not
the Power of Godliness. But how can such an one be convinced of Sin? How is he
brought to repent? To be under the Law? To receive the Spirit of Bondage unto
Fear? This is the Point which is next to be considered.

II. 1. By some awful Providence, or by his Word applied with the Demonstration
of his Spirit, God touches the Heart of him that lay asleep in Darkness and in
the Shadow of Death. He is terribly shaken out of his Sleep, and awakes into a
Consciousness of his Danger. Perhaps in a Moment, perhaps by Degrees, the Eyes
of his Understanding are opened, and now first (the Veil being in Part removed)
discern the real State he is in. Horrid Light breaks in upon his Soul; such
Light, as may be conceived to gleam from the bottomless Pit, from the lowest
Deep, from a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone. He at (...) sees the Loving,
the Merciful God, is also ^^consuming Fire; that he is a just God and a
terrible, rendering to every Man according to his Works, entering into Judgment
with the Ungodly for every idle Word, yea, and for the Imaginations of the
Heart. He now clearly perceives, that the great and holy God is of purer Eyes
than is behold Iniquity; that he is an Avenger of every one who rebelleth
against him, and repayeth the Wicked to his Face; and that it is a fearful
Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God.

3. The Inward, Spiritual Meaning of the Law of God now begins to glare upon
him. He perceives the Commandment is exceeding broad, and there is nothing hid
from the Light thereof. He is convinced, that every Part of it relates not
barely to outward Sin or Obedience, but to what passes in the secret Recesses
of the Soul, which no Eye but God's can penetrate. If he now hears, Thou shall
not kill, God speaks in Thunder, He that hates his Brother is a Murderer. He
that says unto his Brother, Thou Fool, is obnoxious to Hellfire. If the Law
say, Thou shall not commit Adultery, the Voice of the Lord sounds in his Ears,
He that looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her
already in his Heart. And thus in every Point, he feels the Word of God, quick
and powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword. It pierces even to the dividing
asunder of his Soul and Spirit, his Joints and Marrow. And so much the more,
because he is conscious to himself of having neglected so great Salvation; of
having trodden under Foot the Son of God, who would have saved him from his
Sins, and counted the Blood of the Covenant an (...) holy, a common,
unsanctifying, Thing.

4. And as he knows all Things are naked (...) open unto the Eyes of him with
whom we have to do, so he sees himself, naked, stripped of all the Fig Leaves
which he had sewed together, of all his poor Pretenses to Religion or Virtue,
and his wretched Excuses for sinning against God. He now sees himself like the
ancient Sacrifices, (...), cleft in sunder, as it were, from the Neck downward,
so that all within him stands confessed. His Heart is bare, and he sees it is all
Sin, deceitful above all Things, desperately wicked; that it is altogether
corrupt and abominable, more than it is possible for Tongue to express: that
there dwells therein no good Thing, but Unrighteousness and Ungodliness only;
every Motion thereof, every Temper and Thought, being only (...) continually.

5. And he not only sees, but feels in himself, by an Emotion of Soul which he
cannot describe, that for the Sins of his Heart, were his Life without Blame
(which yet it is not, and cannot be: seeing an evil Tree cannot bring forth
good Fruit) he deserves to be cast into the Fire that never shall be quenched.
He feels, that the Wages, the just Reward of Sin, of his Sin above all, is
Death; even the Second Death, the Death which dies not, the Destruction of
Body and Soul in Hell.

6. Here ends his pleasing Dream, his delusive Rest, his false Peace, his vain
Security His Joy now vanishes as a Cloud; Pleasures, once loved, delight no
more. They pall upon the Taste; he loathes the nauseous Sweet; he is weary to
bear them. The shadows of Happiness flee away, and sink into Oblivion. So that
he is stripped of all, and wanders to and fro, seeking Rest, but finding none.

7. The Fumes of those Opiates being now dispelled, he feels the Anguish of a
wounded Spirit. He finds that Sin let loose upon the Soul (whether it be Pride,
Anger, or Evil Desire, whether Self-will, Malice, Envy, Revenge, or any other)
is perfect Misery. He feels Sorrow of Heart for the Blessings he has lost, and
the Curse which is come upon him; Remorse sor having thus destroyed himself,
and despised his own Mercies; Fear,from a lively Sense of the Wrath of God, and
of the Consequences of his Wrath; of the Punishment which he has justly
deserved, and which he sees hanging over his Head; Fear of Death, as being to
him the Gate of Hell, the Entrance of Death eternal; Fear of the Devil, the
Executioner of the Wrath and righteous Vengeance of God; Fear of Men, who if
they were able to kill his Body, would thereby plunge both Body and Soul into
Hell; Fear, sometimes arising to such a Height, that the poor, sinful, guilty
Soul, is terrified with every Thing, with Nothing, with Shades, with a Leaf
shaken of the Wind. Yea sometimes it may even border upon Distraction, making a
Man drunken, though not with Wine, suspending the Exercise of the Memory, of the
Understanding, of all the Natural Faculties. Sometimes it may approach to the
very Brink of Despair: So that he who trembles at the Name of Death, may yet be
ready to plunge into it every Moment, to choose strangling rather than Life.
Well may such a Man roar, like him of old, for the very Disquietness of his
Heart. Well may he cry out, The Spirit of a Man may sustain his Infirmities;
but a wounded Spirit who can bear?

8, Now he truly desires to break loose from Sin, and begins to struggle with
it. But though h^ strive with all his Might, he cannot conquer: Sin is mightier
than he. He would fain escape; but he is so fast in Prison, that he cannot get
forth. He resolves against Sin, but yet Sins on: He sees the Snare, and abhors,
and runs into it. So much does his boasted Reason avail! Only to i^^^nce his
Guilt, and increase his Misery. Such is the Freedom of his Will! Free only to
Evil; (...) to drink in Iniquity like Water; to wander farther and farther from
the living God, and do more Despite to the Spirit of Grace!

9. The more he strives, wishes, labors to be free, the more does he feel his
Chains, the grievous Chains of Sin, wherewith Satan binds and leads him Captive
at his Will: His Servant he is, though he repine ever so much; though he rebel, he
cannot prevail. He is still in Bondage and Fear, (...) reason of Sin:
Generally, of some outward Sin, to which he is peculiarly disposed, either by
Nature, Custom, or Outward Circumstances; But always, of some inward Sin, some
Evil Temper or unholy Affection. And the more he frets against it, the more it
prevails; he may bite, but cannot break his Chain. Thus he toils without End,
repenting and sinning, and repenting and finning again, till at length the poor
sinful, helpless Wretch is even at his Wit's End, and can barely groan, O
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death?

10. This whole Struggle of one who is under the Law, under the Spirit of Fear
and Bondage, is beautifully described by the Apostle in the fore^^ing Chapter,
speaking in the Person of an ^^akened Man. I (says he) was alive without (...)
Law once, ver. 9. I had much Life, Wisdom, Strength and Virtue; so I thought:
But when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died. When the Commandment,
in its spiritual Meaning, came to my Heart, with the Power of God, my inbred
Sin was stirred up, fretted, inflamed, and all my Virtue died away. And the
Commandment, which was ordained to Life, I found to be unto Death, For Sin,
taking Occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me, ver. 10,
11. It came upon me unawares, slew all my Hopes, and plainly showed, in the
midst of Life I was in Death. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment
holy, and just and good, ver. 12. I no longer lay the Blame on this, but on the
Corruption of my own Heart. I acknowledge that the Law is Spiritual: but I am
carnal, sold under Sin, ver. 14. I now see the Spiritual Nature of the Law, and
my own carnal, devilish Heart; sold under Sin, totally inslaved: (like Slaves
bought with Money, who were absolutely at their Master's Disposal.) For that
which I do, I allow not; for what I would, I do not; but what I hate, that I
do, ver. 15. Such is the Bondage under which I groan; such the Tyranny of my
hard Master. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good,
I find not. For the good that I would, I do not; but the Evil which I would
not, that I do, ver. 18, 19. I find a Law, an inward constraining Power, that
when I would do good, Evil is present with me. For I delight in (or consent to)
the Law of God, after the inward Man. (ver. 21, 22.) In my Mind: So the Apostle
(...) plains himself in the Words that immediately (...) low; (and so (...),
the inward Man; (...) understood in all other Greek Writers.) But I (...)
another Law in my Members, another constraining Power, warring against the Law
of my Mind, or inward Man, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law, or Power,
of Sin, ver. 23. dragging me as it were at my Conqueror's Chariot-wheels, into
the very Thing which my Soul abhors. O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death! ver. 24. Who shall deliver me from this
helpless, dying Life; from this Bondage of Sin and Misery! Till this is done, I
myself (or rather, that I, (...), that Man I am now personating) with the Mind,
or inward Man, serve the Law of God; my mind, my Conscience is on God's Side:
But with the Flesh; with my Body, the Law of Sin, ver. 25. being hurried away
by a Force I cannot resist.

11. How lively a Portraiture is this of one under the Law! One who feels the
Burden he cannot shake off; who pants after Liberty, Power and Love, but is in
Fear and Bondage still! Until the Time that God answers the wretched Man,
crying out, Who shall deliver me? from this Bondage of Sin, from this Body of
Death? The Grace of God through Jesus Christ thy Lord.

III. 1. Then it is that this miserable Bondage ends, and he is no more under
the Law, but under Grace. This State we are thirdly to consider, the State of
one who has found Grace or Favor, in the Sight of God, even the Father, and
who has the Grace, or Power of the Holy Ghost, reigning in his Heart: Who has
received, in the ^anguage of the Apostle, 'the Spirit of Adoption, (...)
whereby he now cries, Abba, Father!'

2. He cried unto the Lord in his Trouble, and God delivers him out of his
Distress. His Eyes are opened in quite another Manner than before, even to see
a loving, gracious God. While he is calling, I beseech thee show me thy Glory,
he hears a Voice in his inmost Soul, I will make all my Goodness pass before
thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord: I will be gracious to whom I
will be gracious, and I will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy. And it is
not long before the Lord descends in the Cloud, and proclaims the Name of the
Lord. Then he sees (but not with the Eyes of Flesh and Blood.) The Lord, the
Lord God: Merciful and gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and
Truth: Keeping Mercy for thousands, and forgiving Iniquities and Transgressions
and Sin.

3. Heavenly, healing Light now breaks in upon his Soul. He looks on him whom
he bad pierced, and God who out of Darkness commanded Light of shine, shines
in his Heart. He sees the Light of the glorious Love of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. He has a divine Evidence of Things (...) seen by Sense, even of
the deep Things of God; More particularly of the Love of God, of his pardoning
Love to him that believes in Jesus. Overpowered with the Sight, his whole Soul
cries out, My Lord, and my God! For he sees all his Iniquities laid on him, who
bare them in his own Body on the Tree: He beholds the Lamb of God taking away
his Sins. How clearly now does he discern, that God was in Christ, reconciling
the World unto himself! Making him Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might
be made the Righteousness of God through him And that h^^ himself is reconciled
to God, by that Blood of the Covenant!

4. Here end both the Guilt and Power of Sin. He can now say, I am crucified
with Christ. Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And the
Life which I now live in the Flesh, even in this mortal Body, I live by Faith
in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. Here end Remorse and
Sorrow of Heart, and the Anguish of a wounded Spirit. God turns his Heaviness
into Joy. He made sore, and now his Hands bind up. Here ends also that Bondage
unto Fear; for his Heart stands fast, believing in the Lord. He cannot fear
any longer the Wrath of God; for he knows it is now turned away from him, and
looks upon him no more as an angry Judge, but as a loving Father. He cannot
fear the Devil, knowing he has no Power, except it be given him from above. He
fears not Hell, being an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven; consequently, he has no
Fear of Death: by reason whereof he was in Time past, for so many Years,
subject to Bondage. Rather, knowing that if the earthly House of this
Tabernacle be dissolv^^. he has a Building of God, a House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens. He groaneth earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon, with that House which is from Heaven. He groans to shake off this House
of Earth, that Mortality may be swallowed up of Life: Knowing that God has
wrought him for the self same Thing: who has also given him the Earnest of his
Spirit.

5. And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is ^iberty; Liberty not only
from Guilt and Fear, (...) from Sin, from that heaviest of all Yokes, that
basest of all Bondage. His Labor is ^ot now in vain. The Snare is broken and
he is ^^livered. He not only strives, but likewise prevails; he not only
fights, but conquers also. 'Henceforth he does not serve Sin (Chap. vi. ver. 6,
etc.) He is dead unto Sin and alive unto God. Sin does not now reign, even in
his mortal Body, nor does he obey it in the Desires thereof. He does not yield
his Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin, but as Instruments of
Righteousness unto God. For being now made free from Sin, he is become the
Servant of Righteousness.

6. Thus having Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, rejoicing in
Hope of the Glory of God, and having Power over all Sin, over every evil
Desire, and Temper, and Word, and Work, he is a living Witness of the glorious
^^^berty of the Sons of God: All of whom, being Partakers of like precious
Faith, bear Record with one Voice, We have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father!

7. It is this Spirit which continually works in the^ both to will and to do
of his good Pleasure. It (...) he that sheds the Love of God abroad in their
Hearts, and the Love of all Mankind; thereby purifying their Hearts from the
Love of the World, from the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life. It is by him they are delivered from Anger and Pride, from all
vile and inordinate Affections. In consequence, they are delivered from evil
Words and Works, from all unholiness of Conversation: doing no evil to any
Child of Man, and being zealous of all good Works.

8. To sum up all. The Natural Man neith^^ fears nor loves God; one under the
Law, fears; one under Grace, loves him. The First, has no Light in the Things
of God, but walks in utter Darkness; The Second sees the painful Light of Hell;
The Third, the joyous Light of Heaven. He that sleeps in Death, has a False
Peace. He that is awakened has no Peace at all. He that believes has true
Peace, the Peace of God filling and ruling his Heart. The Heathen, baptized or
unbaptized, has a fancied Liberty, which is indeed Licentiousness: The Jew (or
one under the Jewish Dispensation) is in an heavy, grievous Bondage: The
Christian enjoys the true glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. An unawakened
Child of the Devil, sins willingly: One that is awakened sins unwillingly: A
Child of God sins not, but keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him
not. To conclude; the Natural Man neither conquers nor fights; the Man under
the Law fights with Sin, but cannot conquer: The Man under Grace fights and
conquers, yea, is more than Conqueror, through him that loves him.

IV. 1. From this plain account of the threefold State of Man, the Natural, the
Legal, and the Evangelical, it appears, that it is not sufficient, to divide
Mankind, into Sincere and Insincere. A Man may be sincere in any of these
States; not only when he has the Spirit of Adoption, but while he has the
Spirit of Bondage unto Fear. Yea, while he has neither this Fear, nor Love. For
undoubtedly there may be sincere Heathens, as ^ell as sincere Jews or
Christians. This Circumstance then, does by no means prove, that a Man is in a
State of Acceptance with God.

Examine yourselves therefore, not only whether ye are sincere, but whether ye
be in the Faith. Examine narrowly; for it imports you much. What is the ruling
Principle in your Soul? Is it the Love of God? Is it the Fear of God? Or is it
neither one nor the other? Is it not rather, the Love of the World? the Love of
Pleasure? or Gain? of Ease, or Reputation? if so, you are not come so far as a
Jew. You are but a Heathen still. Have you Heaven in your Heart? Have you the
Spirit of Adoption, ever crying, Abba, Father? Or do you cry unto God, as out
of the Belly of Hell, overwhelmed with Sorrow and Fear? Or are you a Stranger
to this whole Affair, and cannot imagine what I mean? Heathen, pull off the
Mask. Thou have never put on Christ. Stand barefaced. Look up to Heaven. And
own before Him that lives for e^^^ and ever, thou have no Part either among
the Sons or Servants of God.

Whosoever thou art, Do thou commit Sin, or do thou not? If thou do, is
it willingly or unwillingly? In either case God has told thee whose thou art,
He that commits Sin is of the Devil. If thou committest it willingly, thou
art his Faithful Servant. He will not fail to reward thy Labor. If
unwillingly, still thou art his Servant. God deliver thee out of his Hands!

Art thou daily fighting against all Sin? and daily more than Conqueror? I
acknowledge thee for a Child of God. O stand fast in thy glorious Liberty. Art
thou fighting, but not conquering; striving for the Mastery, but not able to
attain? Then thou art not yet a Believer in Christ; but follow on; and thou
shall know the Lord. Art thou not fighting at all, but leading an easy,
indolent, fashionable Life? O how have thou dared to Name the Name of Christ?
Only to make it a Reproach among the Heathen? Awake thou Sleeper! Call upon thy
God: Before the Deep swallow thee up.

2. Perhaps one Reason why so many think of themselves more highly than they
ought to think, why they do not discern what State they are in, is, because
these several States of Soul, are often mingled together, and in some Measure
meet, in one and the same Person. Thus Experience shows, that the legal State,
or State of Fear, is frequently mixed with the Natural. For few Men are so fast
asleep in Sin, but they are sometimes, more or less awakened. As the Spirit of
God does not wait for the Call of Man, so at some times he will be heard. He
puts them in Fear, so that for a Season, at least, the Heathen know themselves
to be but Men. They feel the Burden of Sin, and earnestly desire to flee from
the Wrath to come. But not long. They seldom suffer the Arrows of Conviction to
go deep into their Souls; but quickly stifle the Grace of God, and return to
their Wallowing in the Mire.

In like Manner, the Evangelical State, or State of Love, is frequently mixed
with the Legal. For few of those who have the Spirit of Bondage and ^ear,
remain always without Hope. The wise and gracious God rarely suffers this; for
he remembereth that we are but Dust. And he wills not that the Flesh should
fail before him, or the Spirit which he has made. Therefore at such Times as
he sees Good, he gives a Dawning of Light unto them that sit in Darkness. He
causes a Part of his Goodness to pass before them, and shows he is a God that
hears the Prayer. They see the Promise which is by Faith in Christ Jesus,
though it yet be afar off: And hereby they are encouraged to run with Patience
the Race which is set before them.

3. Another Reason why many deceive themselves, is because they do not
consider, how far a Man may go, and yet be in a Natural, or at best a Legal
State. A Man may be of a compassionate and a benevolent Temper, he may be
affable, courteous, generous, friendly; he may have some Degree of Meekness,
Patience, Temperance, and of many other moral Virtues. He may feel many Desires
of shaking off all Vice, and attaining higher Degrees of Virtue. He may abstain
from much Evil; perhaps from all that is grossly contrary to Justice, Mercy or
Truth. He may do much Good, may feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked, relieve the
Widow and Fatherless. He may attend Public Worship, use Prayer in private, read
many Books of Devotion: And yet for all this, he may be a mere Natural Man,
knowing neither himself nor God; equally a Stranger to the Spirit of Fear and
to that of Love; having neither repented nor believed the Gospel.

But suppose there were added to all this, a deep Conviction of Sin, with much
Fear of the Wrath of God; vehement Desires to east off every Sin, and to fulfill
all Righteousness; frequent rejoicing in Hope, and Touches of Love often
glancing upon the Soul: Yet neither do these prove a Man to be under Grace, to
have True, Living, Christian Faith, unless the Spirit of Adoption abide in his
Heart, unless he can continually cry, Abba, Father!

4. Beware then, thou who art called by the Name of Christ, that thou come not
short of the Mark of thy high Ca^ling. Beware thou rest not, either in a
Natural State, with too many that are accounted good Christians: Or in a Legal
State, wherein those who are highly esteemed of Men, are generally content to
live and die. Nay, but God has prepared better Things for thee, if thou follow
on till thou attain. Thou art not called to fear and tremble, like Devils, but
to rejoice and love, like the Angels of God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and with all
thy Strength. Thou shall rejoice evermore. Thou shall pray without ceasing.
Thou shall in every Thing give Thanks. Thou shall do the Will of God on Earth
as it is done in Heaven. O prove thou what is that good and acceptable and
perfect Will of God. Now present thyself a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable
to God. Whereunto thou have already attained, hold fast, by reaching forth unto
those Things which are before; until the God of Peace make thee perfect in
every good Work, working in thee that which is well-pleasing in his Sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever! Amen!

The Witness of the Spirit. A SERMON On ROMANS viii. 16.
ROMANS viii. 16. The Spirit itself hears Witness with our Spirit, that we are
the Children of God.


HOW many vain Men, not understanding what they spoke, neither whereof they
affirmed, have wrested this Scripture, to the great Loss, if not the
Destruction, of their Souls? How many have mistaken the Voice of their own
Imagination, for this Witness of the Spirit of God? And thence idly presumed;
they were the Children of God, while they were doing the Works of the Devil?
These are truly and properly Enthusiasts; and indeed in the worst Sense of the
Word. But with what Difficulty are they convinced thereof? Especially, if they
have drank deep into that Spirit of Error. All Endeavors to bring them to the
Knowledge of themselves, they will then account fighting against God. And that
Vehemence (...) Impetuosity of Spirit, which they call con^^^ (...) earnestly
for the Faith, sets them so far above all the usual Methods of Conviction, that
we may well say, With Men it is impossible.

2. Who can then be surprised, if many reasonable Men, seeing the dreadful
Effects of this Delusion, and laboring to keep at the utmost Distance from it,
should sometimes lean toward another Extreme? If they are not forward to
believe any who speak of havin^ this Witness, concerning which others have so
grievously erred? If they are almost ready, to set all down for Enthusiasts,
who use the Expressions which have been so terribly abused. Yea, if they should
question, whether the Witness or Testimony here spoken of, be the Privilege of
ordinary Christians, and not rather, one of those extraordinary Gifts, which
they suppose belonged only to the Apostelick Age.

3. But is there any Necessity laid upon us, of running either into one Extreme
or the other? May we not steer a middle Course? Keep a sufficient Distance from
that Spirit of Error and Enthusiasm, without denying the Gift of God, and
giving up the great Privilege of his Children? Surely we may. In order thereto,
let us consider, in the Presence and Fear of God,

First, What is this Witness or Testimony of our Spirit? What is the Testimony
of God's Spirit? And how does he bear Witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God? Secondly, How is this joint Testimony of God's spirit and our
own, clearly and solidly distinguished, from the Presumption of a Natural Mind;
and from the Delusion of the Devil?
I. 1. Let us first consider, What is the Witness or Testimony of our Spirit.
But here I cannot but desire all those who are for swallowing up the Testimony
of the Spirit of God, in the rational Testimony of our own Spirit, to observe,
That in this Text the Apostle is so far from speaking of the Testimony of our
own Spirit only, that it may be questioned, whether he speaks of it at all?
Whether he does not speak, only of the Testimony of God's Spirit? It does not
appear, but the original Text may be fairly understood thus. Thus Apostle had
just said, in the preceding Verse, Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father, and immediately subjoins, (...) (some Copies read
(...)) (...). Which may be translated, The same Spirit bears Witness to our
Spirit, that we are the Children of God (the Proposition (...) only denoting,
that he witnesses this at the same time that he enables us to cry Abba,
Father!) But I contend not; seeing so many other Texts, with the Experience of
all real Christians, sufficiently evince, that there is, in every Believer,
both the Testimony of God's Spirit, and the Testimony of his own, that he is a
Child of God.

2. With regard to the latter, the Foundation thereof is laid in those numerous
Texts of Scripture, which describe the Marks of the Children of God, and that
so plain, that he which runs may read them. These are also collected
together, and placed in the strongest Light, by many both ancient and modern
Writers. If any need farther Light he may receive it by attending on the
Ministry of God's Word; by meditating thereon before God in secret, and by
conversing with those who have the Knowledge of his Ways. And by the Reason or
Understanding that God has given him (which Religion was designed not to
extinguish, but to perfect: According to that of the Apostle, Brethren be not
Children in Understanding; in Malice (or Wickedness) be ye Children; but in
Understanding be ye Men, (1 Cor. xiv. 20.) Every Man applying those scriptural
Marks to himself, may know, whether he is a Child of God. Thus if he know,
First, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, into all holy Tempers and
Actions, they are the Sons of God, (for which he has the infallible Assurance
of holy Writ;) Secondly, I am thus led by the Spirit of God; he will easily
conclude, Therefore I am a Son of God.

3. Agreeable to this are all those plain Declarations of St. John in his first
Epistle. Hereby we know, that we do know him, if we keep his Commandments,
Chap. ri^. ver. 3. Whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God
perfected; hereby we know that we are in him, that we are indeed the Children
of God, ver. 5. If ye know, that he is Righteous, ye know that every one that
doet^ Righteousness is born of him, ver. 29. We know, that we (...) ^^ssed from
Death unto Life, because we love the ^^^thren, Chap. iii. ver. 4. Hereby we
know, that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him, ver.
18. Namely because we love one another, not in Word, neither in Tongue; but in
Deed and in Truth. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, because he has given
us of his (loving) Spirit, Chap. iv. 13. And, Hereby we know that he abides in
us, by the (obedient) Spirit which he has given us, Chap. iii. 24.

4. It is highly probable, there never were any Children of God, from the
Beginning of the World unto this Day, who were farther advanced in the Grace of
God, and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, than the Apostle John at the
Time when he wrote these Words, and the Fathers in Christ to whom he wrote.
Notwithstanding which, it is evident, both the Apostle himself, and all those
Pillars in God's Temple, were very far from despising these Marks, of their
being the Children of God; and that they applied them to their own Souls, for
the Confirmation of their Faith. Yet all this is no other than rational
Evidence; the Witness of our Spirit, or Reason or Understanding. It all
resolves into this: Those who have these Marks, they are the Children of God.
But we have these Marks: Therefore we are Children of God.

5. But how does it appear that we have these Marks? This is a question which
still remains. How does it appear, that we do love God and our Neighbor? And
that we keep his Commandments? Observe, that the Meaning of the Question is,
How does it appear to ourselves? (not to others.) I would ask him then that
proposes this Question, How does it appear to you, That you are alive? And that
you are now in Ease and not in Pain? Are you not immediately conscious of it?
By the same immediate Consciousness you will know, if your Soul is alive to
God: If you are saved from the Pain of proud Wrath, and have the Ease of a meek
and quiet Spirit. By the same Means you cannot but perceive, if you love,
rejoice, and delight in God. By the same, you must be directly assured, if you
love your Neighbor as yourself; if you are kindly affection'd to all Mankind,
and full of Gentleness and Long-Suffering. And with regard to the Outward Mark
of the Children of God, which is (according to St. John) the keeping his
Commandments, You undoubtedly know in your own Breast, if, by the Grace of God,
it belongs to you. Your Conscience informs you from Day to Day, if you do not
take the Name of God within your Lips, unless with Seriousness and Devotion,
with Reverence and godly Fear: If you remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy:
if you honor your Father and Mother; if you do to all as you would they should
do unto you: if you possess y^^^ Body in Sanctification and Honor: and if
whether you eat or drink, you are temperate therein, and do all to the Glory of
God.

6. Now this is properly the Testimony of our own Spirit; even the Testimony of
our Conscience, that God has given us to be holy of Heart, and holy in outward
Conversation. It is a Consciousness of our having received, in and by the
Spirit of Adoption, the Tempers mentioned in the Word of God, as belonging to
his adopted Children: Even, a loving Heart toward God and toward all Mankind,
hanging with child-like Confidence on God our Father, desiring nothing but him,
casting all our Care upon him, and embracing every Child of Man, with earnest
tender affection; so as to b^^^^y to lay down our Life for our Brother, as
Christ lay down his Life for us: A Consciousness, that we are inwardly
conformed, by the Spirit of God, to the Image of his Son, and that we walk
before him in Justice, Mercy and Truth, doing the Things which are pleasing in
his Sight.

7. But what is that Testimony of God's Spirit, which is super-added to and
conjoined with this? How does he bear witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of GOD. It is hard to find Words in the Language of Men, to explain
the deep Things of GOD. Indeed there are none that will adequately express,
what the Children of God experience. But perhaps one might say (desiring any
who are taught of God, to correct, to soften or Strengthen the Expression.) The
Testimony of the Spirit, is an inward Impression on the Soul, whereby the
Spirit of God directly witnesses to my Spirit, That I am a Child of GOD; that
Jesus Christ has loved me, and given himself for me: That all my Sins are
blotted out, and I, even I, am reconciled to God.

8. That this Testimony of the Spirit of GOD must needs, in the very Nature of
Things, be antecedent to the Testimony of our own Spirit, may appear from this
single Consideration. We must be holy of Heart and holy in Life, before we can
be conscious that we are so; before we can have the Testimony of our Spirit,
that we are inwardly and outwardly Holy. But we must love God, before we can be
holy at all; this being the Root of all Holiness. Now we cannot love God, till
we know he loves us. We love Him, because he first loved us. And we cannot know
his Pardoning Love to us, till his Spirit witnesses it to our Spirit. Since
therefore this Testimony of his Spirit must precede the Love of God and all
Holiness, of Consequence it must precede our inward Consciousness thereof, or,
the Testimony of our Spirit concerning them.

9. Then, and not till then, when the Spirit of God bears that Witness to our
Spirit, "God has loved thee, and given his own Son to be the Propitiation for
thy Sins; the Son of God has loved thee, and has washed thee from thy Sins in
his Blood:" We love God, because he first loved us, and for his Sake we love
our Brother also. And of this we cannot but be conscious to ourselves: We know
the Things that are freely given to us of God. We know that we love God and
keep his Commandments. And hereby also we know that we are of God. This is that
Testimony of our own Spirit; which, so long as we continue to love God and keep
his Commandments, continues joined with the Testimony of God's Spirit, that we
are the Children of God.

10. Not that I would, by any means, be understood, by any Thing which has been
spoken concerning it, to exclude the Operation of the Spirit of God, even from
the Testimony of our own Spirit. In no wise. It is he that not only works in
us every Manner of Thing that is good, but also shines upon his own Work, and
clearly shows what he has wrought. Accordingly this is spoken of by St. Paul,
as one great End of our receiving the Spirit, That we may know the Things which
are freely given to us of God: that he may strengthen the Testimony of our
Conscience, touching our Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, and give us to discern
in a fuller and stronger Light, that we now do the Things which please him.

11. Should it still be enquired, How does the Spirit of God, bear Witness with
our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, so as to exclude all Doubt, and
evince the Reality of our Sonship? The answer is clear, from what has been
observed above. And first, as to the Witness of our Spirit. The Soul as
intimately and evidently perceives, when it loves, delights, and rejoices in
God, as when it loves and delights in any Thing on Earth. And it can no more
doubt, whether it loves, delights and rejoices, or no, than whether it exists,
or no. If therefore this be just Reasoning.

He that now loves God, that delights and rejoices in him, with an humble Joy,
an holy Delight, and an obedient Love, is a Child of God:

But I thus love, delight, and rejoice in God;

Therefore I am a Child of God: Then a Christian can in no wise doubt, of his
being a Child of God. Of the Former Proposition, he has as full an Assurance,
as he has that the Scriptures are of God. And of his thus loving God, he has an
Inward Proof, which is nothing short of Self-evidence. Thus the Testimony of
our own Spirit is with the most intimate Conviction manifested to our Hearts;
in such a Manner, as beyond all reasonable Doubt, to evince the Reality of our
Sonship.

12. The Manner how the Divine Testimony is manifested to the Heart, I do not
take upon me to explain. Such Knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me;
I cannot attain (...) it. The Wind blows: And I hear the Sound thereof, But I
cannot tell how it comes, or whither it goes. As no one knows the Things of
a Man, save the Spirit of a Man that is in him; so the Manner of the Things of
God knows no one, save the Spirit of God. But the Fact we know: namely, that
the Spirit of God does give a Believer such a Testimony of his Adoption, that
while it is present to the Soul, he can no more doub^ the Reality of his
Sonship, than he can doubt the Shining of the Sun, while he stands in the full
Blaze of his Beams.

II. 1. How this joint Testimony of God's Spirit and our Spirit, may be clearly
and solidly distinguished, from the Presumption of a natural Mind, and from the
Delusion of the Devil, is the next Thing to be considered. And it highly
imports all who desire the Salvation of God, to consider it with the deepest
Attention, as they would not deceive their own Souls. An Error in this is
generally observed to have the most fatal Consequences: the rather, because he
that errs seldom discovers his Mistake, till it is too late to remedy it.

2. And first, how is this Testimony to be distinguished from the Presumption
of a natural Mind? It is certain, one who was never convinced of Sin, is always
ready to flatter himself, and to think of himself, especially in spiritual
Things, more highly than be ought to think. And hence, it is in no wise strange
if one who is vainly puffed up by his fleshy Mind, when he hears of this
Privilege of true Christians, among whom he undoubtedly ranks himself, should
soon work himself up into a Persuasion, that he is already possessed thereof.
Such Instances now abound in the World, and have abounded in all Ages. How then
may the real Testimony of the Spirit with our Spirit, be distinguished from
this damning Presumption?

3. I answer, the Holy Scriptures abound with Marks, whereby the one may be
distinguished from the other. They describe in the plaine^ Manner the
Circumstance which go before, which accompany, and which follow, the true,
genuine Testimony of the Spirit of God with the Spirit of a Believer. Whoever
carefully weighs and attends to these, will not need to put Darkness for Light.
He will perceive so w^^^^ Difference with Respect to all these, between the
Real and Pretended Witness of the Spirit, that there will be no Danger, I might
say, no Possibility, of confounding the one with the other.

4. By these, one who vainly presumes on the Gift of God, might surely know, if
he really desired it, that he has been hitherto given up to a strong Delusion,
and suffered to believe a Lie. For the Scriptures lay down those clear, obvious
Marks as preceding, accompanying and following that Gift, which a little
Reflection would convince him, beyond all Doubt, were never found in his Soul.
For Instance, the Scripture describes Repentance, or Conviction of Sin, as
constantly going before this Witness of Pardon. So, Repent; for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at Hand, Matt iii. 2. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark i. 15.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, for the Remission of Sins, Acts ii.
38. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your ^ins may be blotted out,
Chap. iii. 19. In Conformity whereto our Church also continually places
Repentance, before Pardon or the Witness of it. "He pardons and absolveth all
them that truly repent and unfeignedly believe his Holy Gospel." "Almighty God
-- has promised Forgiveness of Sins to all of them, who with hearty Repentance
and true Faith return unto him." But he is a Stranger even to this Repentance.
He has never known a broken and a contrite Heart. The Remembrance of his Sins
was never grievous unto him, nor the Burden of them intolerable. In repeating
those Words, he never meant what he said; he merely paid a Compliment to God.
And were it only from the Want of this previous Work of God, he has too great
Reason to believe, that he has grasped a mere Shadow, and never yet known the
real Privilege of the Sons of God.

5. Again, the Scriptures describe the being born of God, which must precede
the Witness that we are his Children, as a vast and mighty Change, a Change
from Darkness to Light, as well as from the Power of Satan unto God: As a
passing from Death unto Life, a Resurrection from the Dead. Thus the Apostle to
the Ephesians; You has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins,
Chap. ii. ver. 1. And again, When we were dead in Sins, he has quickened us
together with Christ; and has raised us up together, and made us sit together,
in heavenly Places, in Christ Jesus, ver. 5.6. But what knows he, concerning
whom we now speak, of any such Change as this? He is altogether unacquainted
with this whole Matter. This is a Language which he does not understand. He
tells you, "He always was a Christian. He knows no Time when he had need of
such a Change." By this also, if he give himself leave to think, may he know,
that he is not born of the Spirit: That he has never yet known God; but has
mistaken the Voice of Nature for the Voice of God.

6. But waving the Consideration of whatever he has or has not experienced in
Time past; by the present Marks may we easily distinguish a Child of God, from
a presumptuous Self-deceiver. The Scriptures describe that Joy in the Lord
which accompanies the Witness of his Spirit, as an humble Joy, a Joy that
abases to the Dust; that makes a pardoned Sinner cry out, "I am vile! What am
I, or my Father's House? -- Now mine Eye sees thee, I abhor myself in Dust and
Ashes!" And wherever Lowliness is, there is Meekness, Patience, Gentleness,
Long-suffering, There is a soft, yielding Spirit; a Mildness and Sweetness: a
Tenderness of Soul which Words canno express. But do these Fruits attend that
supposed Testimony of the Spirit, in a Presumptuous Man? Just the Reverse. The
more consident he is of the Favor of God, the more is he lifted up. The more
does he exalt himself; the more haughty and assuming is his whole Behavior.
The stronger Witness he imagines himself to have, the more overbearing is he to
all around him; the more incapable of receiving any Reproof, the more impatient
of Contradiction. Instead of being more meek, and gentle, and teachable, more
swift to hear, and slow to speak, he is more slow to hear and swift to speak,
more unready to learn of any one; more fiery and vehement in his Temper, and
eager in his Conversation. Yea, perhaps, there will sometimes appear a Kind of
Fierceness in his Air, his Manner of Speaking, his whole Deportment, as if he
were just going to take the Matter out of God's Hands, and himself to devour
the Adversaries.

7. Once more. The Scriptures teach, this is the Love of God (the sure Mark
thereof) that we keep his Commandments, 1 John ver. 3. And our Lord himself
says, he that keeps my Commandments, he it is that loves me John xiv. 21.
Love rejoices to obey; to do n^ every Point, whatever is acceptable to the
Beloved. A true Lover of God hastens to do his Will on Earth as it is done in
Heaven. But is this the Character of the presumptuous Pretender to the Love of
God? Nay, but his Love gives him a Liberty to disobey, to break, not keep, the
Commandments of God. Perhaps when he was in Fear of the Wrath of God, the did
labor to do his Will. But now looking on himself as not under the Law, he
thinks he is no longer obliged to observe it. He is therefore less zealous of
good Works, less careful to abstain from Evil; less watchful over his own
Heart, less jealous over his Tongue. He is less earnest to deny himself, and to
take up h^s Cross daily. In a Word the whole Form of his Life is changed, since
he has fancied himself to be at Liberty. He is no longer exercising himself
unto Godliness; wrestling not only with Flesh and Blood, but with
Principalities and F^wers, enducing Hardships, agonizing to enter in at the
strait Gate. No; he has found an easier W^y to Heaven; a broad, smooth, flowery
Path; in which he can say to his Soul. "Soul, take thy F^se; eat, drin^, and be
merry." It follows with undeniable Evidence, that he has not the true Testimony
of his own Spirit. He cannot be conscious of having those Marks which he has
not; that Lowliness, Meekness, and Obedience. Nor yet can the Spirit of the God
of Truth bear Witness to a lie; or testify that he is a Child of God, when he
is manifestly a Child of the Devil.

8. Discover thyself, thou poor Self-deceiver! Thou who art confident of being
a Child of God, thou who say, "I have the Witness in myself," and therefore
defiest all thy Enemies. Thou art weighed in the Balance and found wanting;
even in the Balance of the Sanctuary. The Word of the Lord has tried thy Soul,
and proved thee to be reprobate Silver. Thou art not lowly of Heart. Therefore
thou have not received the Spirit of Jesus unto this Day. Thou art not gentle
and meek; therefore thy Joy is nothing worth: It is not Joy in the Lord. Thou
do not keep his Commandments; therefore thou love him not, neither art thou
Partaker of the Holy Ghost. It is consequently, as certain and as evident, as
the Oracles of God can make it, his Spirit does not bear Witness with thy
Spirit, that thou art a Child of God. O cry unto him that the Seals may fall
off thine Eyes, that thou may know thyself as thou art known; that thou
may receive the Sentence of Death in thyself, till thou hear the Voice that
raises the Dead, saying, "be of good Cheer: Thy Sins are forgiven; thy Faith
has made thee whole."

9. "But how may one who has the real Witness in himself distinguish it from
Presumption:" How, I pray, do you distinguish Day from Night? How do you
distinguish Light from Darkness? Or the Light of a Star, or glimmering Taper,
from the Light of the Noonday Sun? Is there not an inherent, obvious,
essential Difference between the one and the other? And do you not, immediately
and directly perceive that Difference, provided your Senses are rightly
disposed? In like Manner, there is an inhorent, essential Difference between
Spiritual Light and Spiritual Darkness; And between the Light wherewith the Sun
of Righteousness shines upon our Hearts, and that glimmering Light, which
arises only from Sparks of our own kindling. And this Difference also is
immediately and directly perceived, if our Spiritual Senses are rightly
disposed.

10. To require a more minute and philosophical Account of the Manner whereby
we distinguish these, and of the Criteria, or intrinsic Marks, whereby we know
the Voice of God, is to make a Demand which can never be answered; no, not by
one who has the deepest Knowledge of God. Suppose, when Paul answered before
Agrippa, the wise Roman had said, "Thou talkest of hearing the Voice of the Son
of God. How do thou know, it was his Voice? By what Criteria, what intrinsic
Marks do thou know the Voice of God? Explain to me, the Manner of
distinguishing this, from a Human or Angelic Voice." Can you believe, the
Apostle himself would have once attempted to answer so Idle a Demand? And yet
doubtless the Moment he heard that Voice, he knew it was the Voice of God. But
how he knew this who is able to explain? Perhaps neither Man nor Angel.

11. To come yet closer. Suppose God were now to speak to any Soul, "Thy Sins
are forgiven thee." He must be willing that Soul should know his Voice;
otherwise he would speak in vain. And he is able to effect this; for whenever
he wills, to do is present with him. And he does effect it. That Soul is
absolutely assured "This Voice is the Voice of God." (...) yet he who has that
Witness in himself, cannot explain it to one who has not. Nor indeed is it to
be expected that he should. Were there any natural Medium to prove, or natural
Method to explain the Things of God, to unexperienced Men; then the natural Man
might discern and know the Things of the Spirit of God. But this is utterly
contrary to the Assertion of the Apostle, that he cannot know them; because
they are spiritually discerned; even by spiritual Senses, which the natural Man
has not.

12. "But how shall I know, that my spiritual Senses are rightly disposed? This
also is a Question of vast Importance. For it a Man mistake in this, he may run
on in endless Error and Delusion. And how am I assured, that this is not my
Case; and that I do not mistake the Voice of the Spirit?" Even by the Testimony
of your own Spirit; by the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. By the
Fruits which he has wrought in your Spirit you shall know the Testimony of the
Spirit of God. Hereby you shall know, that you are in no Delusion, that you
have not deceived your own Soul. The immediate Fruits of the Spirit, ruling in
the Heart, are Love, Joy, Peace; Bowels of Mercies, Humbleness of Mind,
Meekness, Gentleness, Long-suffering, And the outward Fruits are, The doing
Good to all Men; the doing no Evil to any; and the walking in the Light; a
zealous, uniform Obedience to all the Commandments of God.

13. By the same Fruits shall you distinguish this Voice of God, from any
Delusion of ^e Devil. That proud Spirit cannot humble the^ before God. He
neither can nor would soften thy Heart, and melt it first into earnest Mourning
after God, and then into filial Love. It is not the Adversary of God and Man,
that enables she to (...) the Neighbor; or to put on Meekness, Gentleness,
Patience, Temperance, and the whole Armor of God. He is not divided against
himself, or a Destroyer of Sin, his own Work. No; it is none but the Son of God
who comes to destroy the Works of the Devil. As surely therefore as Holiness
is of God, and as Sin is the Work of the Devil, so surely the Witness thou have
in thyself is not of Satan, but of God.

14. Well then may thou say, Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift!
Thanks be unto God, who gives me to know in whom I have believed: Who has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into my Heart, crying, Abba, Father, and even
now bearing Witness with my Spirit, that I am a Child of God! And see, that not
only thy Lips, but thy Life show for his Praise. He has sealed thee for his
own; glorify him then in thy Body and thy Spirit which are his. Beloved, if
thou have this Hope in thyself; purify thyself as he is pure. White thou
beholdest what manner of Love the Father has given thee, that thou should
^e called a Child of God; cleanse thyself from all Filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God: And let all thy Thoughts,
Words, and Works be a spiritual Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God through
Christ Jesus!

The Witness of our own Spirit. A SERMON On 2 COR. i. 12.
2 COR. i. 12. This is our Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
GOD, we have had our Conversation in the World.


1. SUCH is the Voice of every true Believer in Christ, so long as he abides in
Faith and Love. He that follows me, says our Lord, ^^^^eth not in Darkness:
And while he has the Li^^^, he rejoiceth therein. As he has received the Lord
Jesus Christ, so he walks in him. And while (...) walks in him, the
Exhortation of the Apostle takes place in his Soul Day by Day, Rejoice in (...)
Lord always, and again I say, rejoice.

2. But that we may not build our House upon the Sand, (lest when the Rains
descend, and the Winds blow, and the Floods arise and beat upon it, it fall,
and great be the Fall thereof) I intend, in the following Discourse, to show,
what is the Nature and Ground of a Christian's Joy. We know, in general, It is
that happy Pea^e, that calm Satisfaction of Spirit, which arises from such a
Testimony of his Conscience, as is here described by the Apostle. But in order
to understand this the more thoroughly, it will be requisite to w^^gh all his
Words: Whence will easily appear, both what we are to understand by Conscience,
and what, by the Testimony thereof; and also, How he that has this Testimony
rejoiceth evermore.

3. And, first, What are we to understand by Conscience? What is the Meaning of
this World that is in every one's Mouth? One would imagine, it was an exceeding
difficult Thing, to discover this, when we consider, how large and numerous
Volumes have been from time to time wrote on this Subject: And how all the
Treasures of ancient and modern Learning have been ransacked, in order to
explain it. And yet it is to be feared, it has not received much Light from all
those elaborate Enquiries. Rather, have not most of those Writers puzzled the
Cause, darkening Counsel by Words without Knowledge; perplexing a Subject,
plain in itself, and easy to be understood? For set aside but hard Words, and
every Man of an honest Heart will soon understand the Thing.

4. God has made us Thinking Beings, capable of perceiving what is present, and
of reflecting or looking back on what is past. In particular, we are capable of
perceiving, whatsoever passes in our own Hearts or Lives; of knowing whatsoever
we feel or do; and that either while it passes, or when it is past. This we
mean when we say, Man is a conscious Being: He has a Consciousness or inward
Perception, both of Things present and past relating to himself, of his own
Tempers and outward Behavior. But what we usually term Conscience, implies
somewhat more than this. It is not barely, The Knowledge of our present, or the
Remembrance of our preceding Life. To remember, to bear witness either of past
or present Things, is only one, and the least Office of Conscience. Its main
Business is to excuse or accuse, to approve or disapprove, to acquit or condemn.

5. Some late Writers indeed have given a new Name to this, and have chose to
style it, a moral Sense. But the old Word seems preferable to the new, were it
only on this Account, That it is more common and familiar among Men, and
therefore easier to be understood. And to Christians it is undeniably
preferable, on another Account also; namely, because it is Scriptural; because
it is the Word which the Wisdom of God has chose to use in the Inspired
Writings.

And according to the Meaning wherein it is generally used there, particularly
in the Epistles of St. Paul, we may understand by Conscience, A Faculty or
Power, implanted by God in every Soul that comes into the World, of perceiving
what is Right or Wrong in his own Heart or Life, in his Temper, Thoughts, Words
and Actions.

6. But what is the Rule whereby Men are to judge of Right and Wrong? Whereby
their Conscience is to be directed? The Rule of Heathens, (as the Apostle
teaches elsewhere) is the Law written in their Hearts. These, says he, not
having the (outward) Law, are a Law unto themselves: Who show the Work of the
Law (that which the outward Law prescribes) written in their Heart, by the
Finger of God; their Conscience also bearing witness, whether they walk by this
Rule, or not; and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing,
acquitting, defending them, ((...)) Romans ii. 14, 15. But the Christian Rule of
Right and Wrong is the Word of God, the Writings of the Old and New Testament:
All which the Prophets and Holy Men of Old wrote as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: All that Scripture which was given by Inspiration of God, and which is
indeed profitable for Doctrine, or teaching the whole Will of God: for Reproof
of what is contrary thereto; for Correction of Error, and for Instruction (or
training us up) in Righteousness. 2 Timothy iii. 16.

This is a Lanthorn unto a Christian's Feet, and a Light in all his Paths. This
alone he receives as his Rule of Right or Wrong, of whatever is really Good or
Evil. He esteems nothing Good, but what is here enjoined, either directly or by
plain Consequence. He accounts nothing Evil but what is here forbidden, either
in Terms, or by undeniable Inference. Whatever the Scripture neither forbids
nor enjoins, (either directly, or by plain Consequence) he believes to be of an
indifferent Nature, to be in itself neither Good nor Evil: This being the whole
and sole outward Rule, whereby his Conscience is to be directed in all Things.

7. And if it be directed thereby in fact, then has he the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God. A good Conscience is what is elsewhere termed by the
Apostle, a Conscience void of Offense. So, what he at one time expresses thus,
I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this Day, Acts xxiii. 1.
he denotes at another, by that Expression, Herein do I exercise myself, to have
always a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man, Chap. xxiv. 16.
Now in order to this, there is absolutely required, First, A Right
Understanding of the Word of God, of his holy and acceptable and perfect Will
concerning us, as it is revealed therein. For it is impossible we should walk
by a Rule, if we do not know what it means. There is, Secondly, required (which
how few have attained?) a true Knowledge of ourselves; a Knowledge both of our
Hearts and Lives, of our inward Tempers and outward Conversation: seeing if we
know them not, it is not possible that we should compare them with our Rule.
There is required, Thirdly, an Agreement of our Hearts and Lives, of our
Tempers and Conversation, of our Thoughts and Words and Works with that Rule,
with the written Word of God. For without (...) if we have any Conscience at
all, it can be ^^ly an evil Conscience. There is, Fourthly, ^^quired, and
inward Perception, of this Agreement with our Rule. And this habitual
Perception, this inward Consciousness itself, is properly a Good Conscience; or
(in the other Phrase of the Apostle) A Conscience void of Offense, toward God
and toward Man.

8. But whoever desires to have a Conscience thus void of Offense, let him see
that he lay the right Foundation. Let him remember, Other Foundation of this
can no Man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ. And let him also be
mindful, that no Man builds on him but by a Living Faith; that no Man is a
Bartaker of Christ, until he can clearly testify, The Life which I now live, I
live (...) Faith in the Son of God; in him who is n^^ ^^aled in my Heart; who
loved me, and gave himself for me. Faith alone is that Evidence, that
Conviction, that Demonstration of Things invisible, whereby the Eyes of our
Understanding being opened, and Divine Light poured in upon them, we see the
wondrous Things of God's Law, the Excellency and Purity of it; the Height and
Depth, and Length and Breadth thereof, and of every Commandment contained
therein. It is by Faith, that beholding the Light of the Glory of God, in the
Face of Jesus Christ, we perceive, as in a Glass, all that is in ourselves,
yea, the inmost Motions of our Souls. And by this alone can that blessed Love
of God be shed abroad in our Hearts, which enables us so to love one another as
Christ loved us. By this, is that gracious Promise fulfilled, unto all the
Israel of God, I will put my Laws into their Minds, and write (or (...) grave)
them in their Hearts, Heb. viii. 10. Her^^ by producing in their Souls, an
entire Agreement with his holy and perfect Law, and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.

And as an evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, so a good Tree cannot bring
forth evil Fruit. As the Heart therefore of a Believer, so likewise his Life is
thoroughly conformed to the Rule of God's Commandments. In a Consciousness
whereof, he can give Glory to God, and say, with the Apostle, This is our
Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the World.

9. We have had our Conversation. The Apostle in the Original, expresses this
by one single Word ((...).) But the Meaning thereof it exceeding broad, taking
in our whole Deportment, yea, every inward as well as outward Circumstance,
whether relating to our Soul or Body. It includes every Motion of our Heart, of
our Tongue, of our Hands and bodily Members. It extends to all our Actions and
Words; to the Employment of all our Powers and Faculties; to the Manner of
using every Talent we have received, with respect either to God or Man.

10. We have had our Conversation in the World; even in the World of the
Ungodly: Not o^^y among the Children of God (that were, comparatively, a little
Thing:) But among the Children of the Devil, among those that lie in
Wickedness, (...), in the Wicked one. What a World is this! How thoroughly
impregnated with ^e Spirit it continually breathes! as our God is good and does
good, so the God of this World, and all his Children, are evil, and do evil,
(so far as they are suffered) to all the Children of God. Like their Father,
they are always lying in wait, or walking about, seeking whom they may devour:
Using Fraud or Force, secret Wites or open Violence, to destroy those who are
not of the World: Continually warring against our Souls, and by old or new
Weapons and Devices of every kind, laboring to bring them back into the Snare
of the Devil, into the broad Road th^^ leads to Destruction.

11. We have had our, whole Conversation in ^^ch a World, in Simplicity and
godly Sincerity, First, in Simplicity. This is what our Lo^^ recommends, under
the (...) of a Sing^^ ^^^e. The Light of the Body, (...) is the Exe^. If
therefore thine (...) be sing^^ (...) whole body shall be full of Light. The
Meaning whereof is this. What the Eye is to the Body, that the Intention is, to
all the Words and Actions. If therefore this Eye of thy Soul be single, all thy
Actions and Conversation, shall be full of Light, of the Light of Heaven; of
Love and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

We are then simple of Heart, when the Eye of our Mind is singly fixed on God:
When in all Things we aim at God alone, as our God, our Portion, our Strength,
our Happiness, our exceeding great Reward, our All, in Time and Eternity. This
is Simplicity; when a steady View, a single Intention of promoting his Glory,
of doing and suffering his blessed Will, runs through our whole Soul, fills all
our Heart, and is the constant Spring of all our Thoughts, Desires and Purposes.

12. We have had our Conversation in the World, Secondly, in godly Sincerity.
The Difference between Simplicity and Sincerity seems to be chiefly this:
Simplicity regards the Intention itself, Sincerity, the Execution of it. And
this Sincerity relates not barely to our Words, but to our whole ^onversation,
as described above. It is not here to be understood in that narrow Sense,
wherein St. Paul himself sometimes uses it, for speaking the Truth, or
abstaining from Guile, from Craft and Dissimulation. But in a more extensive
Meaning, as actually hitting the Mark which we a^m at by Simplicity.
Accordingly it implies (...) this Place, that we do in fact speak and do all to
the Glory of God; that all our Words are not only pointed at this, but actually
con^^^^ve thereto; that all our Actions flow on in an even Stream, uniformly
subservient to this great End: And that in our whole Lives, we are moving
strait toward God, and that continually; walking steadily on in the Highway of
Holiness, in the Paths of Justice, Mercy and Truth.

13. This Sincerity is termed by the Apostle, Godly Sincerity, or the Sincerity
of God, ((...)) to prevent our mistaking or confounding it with the Sincerity
of the Heathens: (For they had also a kind of Sincerity among them, for which
they professed no small Veneration) likewise to denote the Object and End of
this, as of every Christian Virtue; seeing whatever does not ultimately tend to
God, sinks among the beggarly Elements of the World. By styling it, the
Sincerity of God, he also points out the Author of it, the Father of Light,
from whom every good and perfect Gift descends: Which is still more clearly
declared in the following Words, Not with fleshly Wisdom, (...) the Grace of
God.

14. Not with fleshly Wisdom. As if he had said, We cannot thus converse in the
World, by any natural Strength of understanding, neither by any
naturally-acquired Knowledge or Wisdo^^ We cannot gain this Simplicity, or
practice this Sincerity, by the Force either of Good Sense, Good Nature, or
Good Breeding. It overshoots all our Native Courage and Resolution, (...) as
all our Precepts of Philosophy. The Power (...) Custom is not able to train us
up to this, no^ the most exquisite Rules of Human Education. Neither could I
Paul ever attain hereto, notwithstanding all the Advantages I enjoyed, so long
as I was in the Flesh, in my natural State, and pursued it only by fleshly,
natural Wisdom.

And yet surely, if any Man could, Paul himself might have attained thereto by
that Wisdom. For we can hardly conceive any, who was more highly favored with
all the Gifts both of Nature and Education. Besides his natural Abilities,
probably not inferior to those of any Person then upon the Earth, he had all
the Benefits of Learning, studying at the University of Tarsus, afterward
brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel, a Person of the greatest Account both for
Knowledge and Integrity, that was then in the whole Jewish Nation. And he had
all the possible Advantages of Religious Education, being a Pharisee, the Son
of a Pharisee, trained up in the very straitest Sect or Profession,
distinguished from all others by a more eminent Strictness. And herein he had
profited above many others, who were his Equals in Years, being more abundantly
zealous of whatever he Thought would please God, and as touching the
Righteousness of the Law blameless. But it could not be, that he should hereby
attain (...) Simplicity and godly Sincerity. It was all but (...) Labor; in a
deep, piercing Sense of which ^e was a^^ength constrained to cry out, The
Things which were Gain to me, those I counted Loss for Christ. Yea doubtless,
and I count all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord. Phil. iii. 7, 8.

15. It could not be that ever he should attain to this, but by the excellent
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, our Lord: Or by the Grace of God; another Expression
of nearly the same Import. By the Grace of God is sometimes to be understood,
that free Love, that unmerited Mercy, by which I a Sinner, through the Merits of
Christ, am now reconciled to God. But in this Place it rather means, that Power
of God the Holy G^ost, which works in us both to will and to do, of his good
Pleasure. As soon as ever the Grace of God, in the former Sense, his pardoning
Love is manifested to our Soul, the Grace of God, in the latter Sense, the
Power of his Spirit, takes Place therein. And now we can perform, through God,
what to Man was impossible. Now we can order our Conversation aright. We can do
all Things in the Light and Power of that Love, through Christ which
strengthens us. We now have the Testimony of our Conscience, which we could
never have by fl^shly Wisdom, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity we have
our Conversation in the World.

16. This is properly the Ground of a Christian's Joy. We may now therefore
readily conceive, How he that has this Testimony in himself, rejoiceth
evermore. My Soul, may he say, does magnify the Lord and my Spirit rejoiceth in
God my Savior. I rejoice in him, who of his own unmerited Love, of his own
free and tender Mercy, has called me into this State of Salvation, wherein
through his Power I now stand. I rejoice because his Spirit bears witness, to
my Spirit, that I am bought with the Blood of the Lamb, and that believing in
him, "I am a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom
of Heaven." I rejoice because the Sense of God's Love to me, has by the same
Spirit wrought in me to love him, and to love for his Sake every Child of Man,
every Soul that he has made. I rejoice, because he gives me^^o feel in myself
the Mind that was in Christ: Simplicity, a single Eye to him, in every Motion
of my Heart; Power always to fix the loving Eye of my Soul on him who loved me,
and gave himself for me, to aim at him alone, at his glorious Will, in all I
think or speak or do: Purity, desiring nothing more but God, crucifying the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, setting my Affections on Things above, not
on Things of the Earth: Holiness, a Recovery of the Image of God, a Renewal of
Soul after his Likeness: and godly Sincerity, directing all my Words and Works,
so as to conduce to his Glory. In this I likewise rejoice, yea and will
rejoice, because my Conscience bears me witness in the Holy Ghost, by the
Light he continually pours in upon it, that I walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith I am called; that I abstain from all Appearance of Evil, fleeing from
Sin as from the Face of a Serpent; that as I have Opportunity, I do all
possible Good, in every kind, to all Men; that I follow my Lord in all my
Steps, and do what is acceptable in his sight. I rejoice because I both see and
feel, through the Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, that all my Works are
wrought in him, yea and that it is he who works all my Works in me. I rejoice
in seeing, through the Light of God which shines in my Heart, that I have Power
to walk in his Ways, and that through his Grace, I turn not therefrom, to the
Right Hand or to the Left.

17. Such is the Ground and the Nature of that Joy, whereby a Christian
rejoiceth evermore. And from all this we may easily infer, First. That this is
not a natural Joy. It does not arise from any natural Cause: Not from any
sudden Flow of Spirits. This may give a transient Start of Joy. But the
Christian rejoiceth always. It cannot be owing to bodily Health or Ease; to
Strength and Soundness of Constitution. For it is equally strong in Sickness
and Pain; yea perhaps far stronger than before. Many Christians have never
experienced any Joy, to be compared with that which then silled their Soul,
when the Body was well nigh worn out with Pain, or consumed away with pining
Sickness. Least of all can it be ascribed to outward Prosperity, to the Favor
of Men, or Plenty of worldly Goods. For then chiefly, when their Faith has been
tried as with Fire, by all Manner of outward Afflictions, have the Children of
God rejoiced in him, whom unseen they loved, even with Joy unspeakable. And
never surely did Men rejoice like those, who were used as the Filth and off
scouring of the World; who wandered to and two, being in want of all Things; in
Hunger, in Cold, in Nakedness: Who had Trials, not only of cru^^ Mockings, but
moreover of Bouds and Imprisonments: Yea, who at last counted not their Lives
dear unto themselves, so they might finish their Course with Joy.

18. From the preceding Considerations, we may, Secondly, infer, That the Joy
of a Christian does not arise from any Blindness of Conscience, from his not
being able to discern Good from Evil. So far from it, that he was an utter
Stranger to this Joy, till the Eyes of his Understanding were opened! that he
knew it not, until he had Spiritual Senses, fitted to discern spiritual Good
and Evil. And now the Eye of his Soul waxes not dim. He was never so
sharp-sighted before. He has so quick a Perception of the smallest Things, as
is quite amazing to the natural Man. As a Mote is visible in the Sarbeam, so to
him who is walking in the Light, in the Beams of the uncreated Sun, every Mote
of Sin is visible. Nor does he close the Eyes of his Conscience any more. That
Sleep is departed from him. His Soul is always bread awake; No more Slumber or
folding of the Hands to Rest! He is always standing on the Tower, and harkening
what his Lord will say concerning him: And always rejoicing in this very Thing,
in seeing him that is invisible.

19. Neither does the Joy of a Christian arise, Thirdly, from any Dullness or
Callousness of Conscience. A Kind of Joy, it is true, may arise from this, in
those whose foolish Hearts are darkened; whose Heart is callous, unfeeling,
dull of Sense; and consequently, without spiritual Understanding, Because of
their senseless, unseeling Hearts, they may rejoice even in committing Sin: And
this they may probably call Liberty! Which is indeed more Drunkenness of Soul:
A fatal Numbness of Spirit, the stupid Insensibility of a seared Conscience. On
the contrary, a Christian has the most exquisite Sensibility; such as he could
not have conceived before. He never had such a Tenderness of Conscience as he
has had, since the Love of God has reigned in his Heart. And this also is his
Glory and Joy; that God has heard his daily Prayer, "O that my tender Soul
might fly
The first, abhorred Approach of Ill:
Quick, as the Apple of an Eye
The slightest Touch of Sin to feel."


20. To conclude. Christian Joy, is Joy in Obedience: Joy in loving God and
keeping his Commandments. And yet not in keeping them, as if we were thereby to
fulfill the Terms of the Covenant of Works; as if by any Works or Righteousness
of ours, we were to procure Pardon and Acceptance with God. Not so: We are
already pardoned and accepted, through the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus -- Not as
if we were by our own Obedience to procure Life, Life from the Death of Sin.
This also we have already through the Grace of God. Us has he quickened, who
were dead in Sin. And now we are alive to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. But
we rejoice in knowing, That being justified through his Grace, we have not
received that Grace of God in vain; That God having freely (not for the Sake of
our willing or running, but through the Blood of the Lamb) reconciled us to
himself, we run in the Strength which he has given us, the Way of his
Commandments. He has girded us with Strength unto the War, and we gladly fight
the good Fight of Faith. We rejoice, through him who lives in our Hearts by
Faith, to lay hold of eternal Life. This is our Rejoicing: that as our Father
works hitherto, so (not by our own Might or Wisdom, but through the Power of
his Spirit freely given in Christ Jesus) we also work the Works of God. And may
he work in us, whatsoever is well-pleasing in his Sight! To whom be the Praise
for ever and ever!

The Means of Grace. A SERMON On MALACHI iii. 7.
MALACHI iii. 7. Ye are gone away from mine Ordinances, and have not kept them.


1. BUT are there any Ordinances now, since Life and Immortality were brought
to Light by the Gospel? Are there under the Christian Dispensation, any Means
ordained of God, as the usual Channels of his Grace? This Question could never
have been proposed, in the Apostolical Church, unless by one who openly avowe^
himself to be an Heathen; the whole Body of Christi^^^ being agreed, that
Christ had ordained certain outward Means, for conveying his Grace into the
Souls of Men. Their constant Practice set this beyond all Dispute; for so long
as all that believed were together, and had all Things common, (Acts ii. 44.)
they continued steadfastly in the traching of the Apostles, and in the breaking
of Bread and in Prayers, ver. 42.

2. But in Process of time, when the Love of many waxed cold, some began to
mistake the Means for the End, and to place Religion, rather in doing those
outward Works, than in a Heart renewed after the Image of God. They forgot,
that the End of every Commandment is Love, out of a pure Heart, with Faith
unfeigned: The loving the Lord their God with all their Heart, and their
Neighbor as themselves; and the being purified from Pride, Anger, and evil
Desires, by a Faith of the Operation of God. Others seemed to imagine, that
though Religion did not principally consist in these outward Means, yet there was
something in them where with God was well pleased, something that would still
make them acceptable in his Sight, though they were not exact in the weightier
Matters of the Law, in Justice, Mercy, and the Love of God.

3. It is evident, in those who abused them thus, they did not conduce ^o the
End for which they were ordained. Rather, the Things which should have been for
their Health, were to them an Occasion of falling. They were so far from
receiving any Blessing therein, that they only drew down a Curse upon their
Head: so far from growing more heavenly in Heart and Life, that they were
twofold more the Children of Hell than before. Others clearly perceiving, that
these Means did not convey the Grace (...) God to those Children of the Devil,
began from this particular Case to draw a General Conclusion, "That they were
not Means of conveying the Grace of God."

4. Yet the Number of those who abused the Ordinances of God, was far greater
than of those who despised them, till certain Men arose, not only or great
understanding, (sometimes joined with considerable Learning) but who likewise
appeared to be Men of Love, experimentally acquainted with true, Inward
Religion. Some of these were burning and shining Lights, Persons famous in
their Generations, and such as had well deserved of the Church of Christ, for
standing in the Gap against the Overflowing of Ungodliness.

It cannot be supposed, that these holy and venerable Men, intended any more at
first, than to show that Outward Religion is nothing worth, without the
Religion of the Heart: That God is a Spirit, and they who worship him, must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth: That therefore external Worship is lost
Labor, withou a Heart devoted to God: That the Outward Ordinances of God then
profit much, when they advance Inward Holiness, but when they advance it not,
are unprofitable and void, are lighter than Vanity: Yea, that when they are
used, as it were, in the Place of This, they are an utter Abomination to the
Lord.

5. Yet it is not strange, if some of these, being strongly convinced, of that
horrid Prosanation of the Ordinances of God, which had spread itself over the
whole Church, and well nigh driven True Religion out of the World; in their
fervent Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Recovery of Souls; from that fatal
Delusion, spoke as if Outward Religion were absolutely nothing, as if it had no
Place in the Religion of Christ. It is not surprising at all, if they should
not always have expressed themselves with sufficent Caution. So that unwary
Hearers might believe, they condemned all Outward Means, as altogether
unprofitable; and as not designed of God to be the Ordinary Channels of
conveying his Grace into the Souls of Men.

Nay, it is not impossible, some of these holy Men did at length themselves
fall into this Opinion: In particular, those who, not by Choice, but by the
Providence of God, were out off from all these Ordinances: Perhaps wandering up
and down, having no certain Abiding-place, or dwelling in Dens and Caves of the
Earth. These experiencing the Grace of God in themselves, though they were
deprived of all Outward Means, might infer, that the same Grace would be given
to them, who of set Purpose abstained from them.

6. And Experience shows, how easily this Notion spreads, and insinuates itself
into the Minds of Men: Especially of those who are thoroughly awakened out of
the Sleep of Death, and begin to feel the Weight of their Sins, a Burden too
heavy to be born. These are usually impatient of their present State, and
trying every Way to escape from it. They are always ready to catch at any new
Thing, any new Proposal of Ease or Happiness. They have probably tried most
Outward Means, and found no Ease in Them: It may be, more and more of Remorse
and Fear, and Sorrow and Condemnation. It is easy therefore to persuade these,
That it is better for them to abstain from all those Means. They are already
weary of striving (as it seems) in vain, of laboring in the Fire: ^^d are
therefore glad of any Pretense to east aside that, wherein their Soul has no
Pleasure; to give over the painful Strife, and sink down into an indolent
Inactivity.

II. 1. In the following Discourse, I propose to examine at large. Whether
there are any Means of Grace?

By Means of Grace I understand, Outward Signs, Words or Actions, ordained of
God, and appointed for this End, to be the Ordinary Channels whereby he might
convey to Men, preventing, justifying or sanctifying Grace.

I use this Expression, "Means of Grace," because I know none better, and
because it has been generally used in the Christian Church for many Ages: In
particular, by our own Church, which directs us to bless God, both for the "
Means of Grace and Hope of Glory;" and teaches us that a Sacrament is "An
Outward Sign of Inward Grace, and a Means whereby we receive the same."

The Chief of these Means are Prayer, whether in secret, or with the great
Congregation; searching the Scriptures (which implies Reading, Hearing and
meditating thereon) and receiving the Lord's Supper, eating Bread and drinking
Wine in Remembrance of him; and these we believe to be ordained of God, as the
ordinary Channels of conveying his Grace to the Souls of Men.

2. But we allow, That the whole Value of the Means depends on their actual
Subservience to the End of Religion; that consequently all these Means, when
separate from the End, are less than Nothing and Vanity; That if they do not
actually conduce to the Knowledge and Love of God, they are not acceptable in
his Sight; yea, rather, they are an Abomination before him; a Stink in his
Nostrils; he is weary to bear them, Above all, if they are used as a kind of
Communion for the Religion they were designed to subserve. It is not easy to
find Words for the enormous Folly and Wickedness, of thus turning God's Arms
against himself; of keeping Christianity out of the Heart by those very Means,
which were ordained for the bringing it in.

3. We allow likewise, that all Outward Means whatever, if separate from the
Spirit of God, cannot profit at all, cannot conduce in any Degree either to the
Knowledge or Love of God. Without Controversy, the Help that is done upon
Earth, he does it himself. It is He alone, who by his own Almighty Power,
works in us what is pleasing in his Sight. And all outward Things, unless he
work in them and by them, are mere weak and beggarly Elements. Whosoever
therefore imagines, there is any Intrinsic Power, in any Means whatsoever, does
greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the Power of God. We know that
there is no inherent Power, in the Words that are spoken in Prayer; in the
Letter of Scripture read, the Sound thereof heard, or the Bread and Wine
received in the Lord's Supper: But that it is God alone who is the Giver of
every good Gift, the Author of all Grace; that the whole Power is of him
whereby through any of these, there is any Blessing conveyed to our Soul. We know
likewise, that he is able to give the same Grace, though there were no Means on
the Face of the Earth. In this Sense we may affirm, that "with Regard to God,
there is no such Thing as Means:" Seeing he is equally able to work whatsoever
pleases him, by Any, or by None at all.

4. We allow farther, That the Use of all Means whatever, will never atone for
one Sin; That it is the Blood of Christ alone, whereby any Sinner can be
reconciled to God; there being no other Propitiation for our Sins, no other
Fountain for Sin and Uncleanness. Every Believer in Christ is deeply convinced,
that there is no Merit, but in Him: That there is no Merit in any of his own
Works; not in uttering the Prayer, or searching the Scripture, or hearing the
Word of God, or eating of that Bread and drinking of that Cup. So that if no
more be intended by the Expression some have used, "Christ is the only Means of
Grace," than this, That he is the only Meritorious Cause of it, it cannot be
gainsaid by any who know the Grace of God.

5. Yet once more. We allow (though it is a melancholy Truth) that a large
Proportion of those who are called Christians, do to this Day abuse the Means
of Grace, to the Destruction of their Souls. This is doubtless the Case with
all those who rest content, in the Form of Godliness without the Power. Either
they fondly presume, they are Christians already, because they do thus and
thus; although Christ was never yet revealed in their Hearts, nor the Love of God
shed abroad therein: Or else they suppose, They shall infallibly be so, barely
because they use these Means: Idly dreaming (though perhaps hardly conscious
thereof) either that there is some Kind of Power therein, whereby sooner or
later (they know not when) they shall certainly be made Holy: Or that there is
a Sort of Merit in using them, which will surely move God to give them
Holiness, or accept them without it.

6. So little do they understand that great Foundation of the whole Christian
Building, By Grace ye are saved. Ye are saved from your Sins, from the Guilt
and Power thereof, ye are restored to the Favor and Image of God, not for any
Works, Merits or Deservings of yours, but by the free Grace, the mere mercy of
God, through the Merits of his well-beloved Son. Ye are thus saved, not by any
Power, Wisdom or Strength, which is in you, or in any other Creature: but
merely through the Grace or Power of the Holy Ghost, which works all in all.

7. But the main Question remains. We know this Salvation is the Gift and the
Work of God. But how (may one say, who is convinced he has it not) may I
attain thereto? If you say, "Believe, and thou shall be saved:" He answers,
True; but how shall I believe? You reply, W^it upon God. -- Well. But how am I
to wait? In the Means of Grace, or out of them? Am I to wait for the Grace of
God which brings Salvation, by using these Means, or by laying them aside?

8. It cannot possibly be conceived, that the Word of God should give no
Direction in so important a Point: Or that the Son of God, who came down from
Heaven for us Men and for our Salvation, should have left us undetermined with
regard to a Question, wherein our Salvation is so nearly concerned.

And in Fact, he has not lest us undetermined; he has shown us the Way
wherein we should go. We have only to consult the Oracles of God, to inquire
what is written there? And if we simply abide by their Decision, there can no
possible Doubt remain.

III. 1. According to this, according to the Decision of Holy Writ, all who
desire the Grace of God, are to wait for it, in the Means which he has
ordained; in using, not in laying them aside.

And first: All who desire the Grace of God, are to wait for it in the Way of
Prayer. This is the express Direction of our Lord himself. In his Sermon upon
the Mount, after explaining at large wherein Religion consists, and describing
the main Branches of it, he adds, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened. ( Matthew. vii. 7, 8.) Here we are in the plainest Manner directed to
ask, in order to, or as a Means of receiving; to seek in order to find, the
Grace of God, the Pearl of great Price; and to knock, to continue asking and
seeking, if we would enter into his Kingdom.

2. That no Doubt might remain, our Lord labors this Point in a more peculiar
Manner. He appeals to every Man's own Heart. What Man is there of you, who if
his Son ask Bread, will give him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will he give him
a Serpent? If ye then being evil ^^ow how to give good Gifts unto your
Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, the Father of
Angels and Men, the Father of the Spirits of all Flesh, give good Things to
them that ask him? ver. 9, 10, 11. Or, as he expresses himself on another
Occasion, including all good things in one, How much more shall your Heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke xi. 13. It should be
particularly observed here, that the Persons directed to ask, had not then
received the Holy Spirit. Nevertheless our Lord directs them to use this Means,
and promises that it should be effectual; that upon asking they should receive
the Holy Spirit, from him whose Mercy is over all his Works.

3. The absolute Necessity of using this Means, if we would receive any Gift
from God, yet farther appears from that remarkable Passage which immediately
precedes these Words: And he said unto them (whom he had just been teaching,
how to pray) which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go unto him at
Midnight, and shall say unto him, Friend, lend me three Loaves -- and he from
within shall answer, Trouble me not -- I cannot rise and give thee: I say unto
you, though he will not rise and give him, because he is his Friend, yet
because of his Importunity he will rise, and give him as many as he needs.
And I say unto you, ask and it shall be given you, Luke xi. 5, 7, 8, 9. Though
he will not give him, because he is his Friend, yet because of his Importunity
he will rise and give him as many as he needs. How could our blessed Lord
more plainly declare, That we may receive of God, by this Means, by
importunately asking, what otherwise we should not receive at all.

4. He spoke also another Parable to this End, that Men ought always to pray,
and not to faint, 'till through this Means they should receive of God,
whatsoever Petition they asked of him. There was in a city a Judge which feared
not God, neither regarded Man. And there was a Widow in that City, and she came
unto him, saying, Avenge me of my Adversary. And he would not for a while; but
afterward he said with himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard Man, yet
because this Widow troubles me I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming
she weary me. Luke xviii 1 -- 4. The Application of this our Lord himself has
made. Hear what the unjust Judge says! Because she continues to ask, because
the will take no Denial, therefore I will avenge her. And shall not God avenge
his own Elect, which cry Day and Night unto him? I tell you be will avenge them
speedily -- if they pray and faint not.

5. A Direction equally full and express, to wait for the Blessings of God in
private Prayer, together with a positive Promise, that by this Means we shall
obtain the Request of our Lips, he has given us in those well-known Words:
Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee
openly, Matthew. vi. 6.

6. If it be possible for any Direction to be more clear, it is that which God
has given us by the Apostle, with regard to Prayer of every Kind, public or
private, and the Blessings annexed thereto. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him
ask of God, that gives to all Men liberally, (if they ask; otherwise ye have
not, because ye ask not, Jam. iv. 2.) and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him, chapter i. 5.

If it be objected, "But this is no Direction to Unbelievers; to them who know
not the pardoning Grace of God: For the Apostle adds, But let him ask in Faith:
otherwise, let him not think that he shall receive any Thing of the Lord." I
answer, The Meaning of the Word Faith in this Place is fixed by the Apostle
himself, (as if it were on purpose to obviate this Objection) in the Words
immediately following: Let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering, nothing
doubting, (...). Not doubting but God hears his Prayer, and will fulfill the
Desire of his Heart.

The gross, blasphemous Absurdity of supposing Faith in this Place to be taken
in the full Christian Meaning, appears hence: It is supposing the Holy Ghost to
direct a Man who knows he has not this Faith, (which is here termed Wisdom) to
ask it of God, with a positive Promise that it shall be given him; and then
immediately to subjoin, That it shall not be given him, unless he have it
before he asks for it! But who can bear such a Supposition; from this
Scripture, therefore, as well as those cited above, we must infer, that all who
desire the Grace of God, are to wait for it in the Way of Prayer.

7. Secondly, All who desire the Grace of God, are to wait for it in searching
the Scriptures.

Our Lord's Direction with regard to the Use of this Means, is likewise plain
and clear. Search the Scriptures, faith he to the unbelieving Jews, -- for they
testify of me, John v. 39. And for this very End did he direct them to search
the Scriptures, that they might believe in him.

The Objection, "That this is not a Command, but only an Assertion, that they
did search the Scriptures," is shamelesly false. I desire those who urge it, to
let us know, how a Command can be more clearly expressed, than in those Terms,
(...). It is as peremptory as so many Words can make it.

And what a Blessing from God attends the Use of this Means, appears from what
is recorded concerning the Bereans; who after hearing St. Paul, searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those Things were so? Therefore many of them
believed; found the Grace of God, in the Way which he had ordained. Acts xvii.
12, 13.

It is probable, indeed, that in some of those who had received the Word with
all Readiness of Mind, Faith came (as the same Apostle speaks) by hearing, and
was only confirmed by reading the Scriptures. But it was observed above, that
under the general Term of searching the Scriptures, both Hearing, Reading, and
Meditating, are contained.

8. And that this is a Means whereby God not only gives, but also confirms and
increases true Wisdom, we learn from the Words of St. Paul to Timothy: From a
Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. iii. 15. The same
Truth (namely, that this is the great Means God has ordained for conveying his
manifold Grace to Man) is delivered, in the fullest Manner that can be
conceived, in the Words which immediately follow: All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God; (consequently, all Scripture is infallibly true;) and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness: To the End that the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works, ver. 16, 17.

9. It should be observed, that this is spoken primarily and directly, of the
Scriptures which Timothy had known from a Child; which must have been those of
the Old Testament, for the New was not then wrote. How far then was St. Paul
(though he was not a whit behind the very Chief of the Apostles, not therefore,
I presume, behind any Man now upon Earth) from making light of the Old
Testament! Behold this, lest ye one Day wonder and perish, ye who make so small
Account of one Half of the Oracles of God! Yea, and that Half of which the Holy
Ghost expressly declares, That it is profitable, as a Means ordained of God,
for this very Thing, for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction
in Righteousness: To the End the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good Works.

10. Nor is this prositable only for the Men of God, for those who walk already
in the Light of his Countenance; but also for those who are yet in Darkness,
seeking him whom they know not. Thus St. Peter, We have also a more sure Word
of Prophecy: (Literally, and we have the prophetic Word more sure: (...),
confirmed by our being Eye witnesses of his Majesty, and hearing the Voice
which came from the Excellent Glory) unto which (prophetic Word; so he styles
the holy Scriptures) ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines
in a dark Place, until the Day down, and the Day star arise in your Hearts, 2
Pet. i. 19. Let all, therefore, who desire that Day to dawn upon their Hearts,
wait for it in searching the Scriptures.

11. Thirdly, All who desire an Increase of the Grace of God, are to wait for
it in partaking of the Lord's Supper. For this also is a Direction himself has
given. The same Night in which he was betrayed, he took Bread, and brake it,
and said, Take, eat: This is my Body (that is, the sacred Sign of my Body) This
do in Remembrance of me. Likewise, he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New
Testament, or Covenant, in my Blood, (the sacred sign of that Covenant) this do
ye, in Remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, ye do show forth the Lord's Death till he come, 2 Cor. xi. 23, etc. Ye
openly exhibit the same, by these visible Signs, before God, and Angels, and
Men. Ye manifest your solemn Remembrance of his Death, till he comes in the
Clouds of Heaven.

Only let a Man first examine himself, whether he understands the Nature and
Design of this holy Institution, and whether he really desire to be himself
made conformable to the Death of Christ: and so, nothing doubting, let him eat
of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, ver. 28.

Here then the Direction first given by our Lord, is expressly repeated by the
Apostle. Let him eat; let him drink: ((...) both in the Imperative Mood.) Words
not implying a bare Permission only, but a clear explicit Command; a Command to
all those, either who already are filled with Peace and Joy in believing, or
who can truly say, "The Remembrance of our Sins is grievous unto us, the Burden
of them is intolerable."

12. And that this is also an ordinary stated Means of receiving the Grace of
God, is evident from those Words of the Apostle, which occur in the preceding
Chapter. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion, or
Communication, of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? (1 Cor. x. 16.) Is not the eating of that
Bread, and the drinking of that Cup, the outward, visible Means, whereby God
conveys into our Souls all that Spiritual Grace, that Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost, which were purchased by the Body of Christ once
broken, and the Blood of Christ once shed for us? Let all, therefore, who truly
desire the Grace of God, eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup.

IV. 1. But as plainly as God has pointed out the Way ^^nerein he will be
inquired after, innumerable are the Objections which Men, wise in their own
Eyes, have from Time to Time raised against it. It may be needful to consider a
few of these; not because they are of Weight in themselves, but because they
have so often been used, especially of late Years, to turn the Lame out of the
Way; yea, to trouble and subvert those who did run well, till Satan appeared as
an Angel of Light.

The first and Chief of these is, "You cannot use these Means (as you call
them) without trusting in them." I pray, where is this written? I expect you
should show me plain Scripture for your Assertion. Otherwise I dare not receive
it: Because I am not convinced, that you are wiser than God.

If it really had been as you assert, it is certain Christ must have known it.
And if he had known it, he would surely have warned us, he would have revealed
it long ago. Therefore because he has not, because there is no Tittle of this
in the whole Revelation of Jesus Christ, I am as fully assured your Assertion
is false, as that this Revelation is of God.

"However, leave them off for a short Time, to see whether you trusted in them
or no." So I am to disobey God, in order to know, whether I trust in obeying
him! And do you avow this Advice? Do you deliberately teach, to do Evil that
Good may come? O tremble at the Sentence of God against such Teachers! Their
Damnation is just.

"Nay, if you are troubled, when you leave them off, it is plain, you trusted
in them." By no means. If I am troubled when I wilfully disobey God, it is
plain his Spirit is still stroving with me. But if I am not troubled at wilful
Sin, it is plain, I am given up to a reprobate Mind.

But what do you mean by " Trusting in them?" Looking for the Blessing of God
therein? Believing, that If I wait in this Way I shall attain, what otherwise I
should not? So I do. And so I will, God being my Helper, even to my Life's End.
By the Grace of God, I will thus trust in them, till the Day of my Death; that
is, I will believe that whatever God has promised, he is faithful (...) to
perform. And seeing he has promised to bless me in this Way, I trust it shall
be according to his Word.

2. It has been, secondly, objected, "This is seeking Salvation by Works." Do
you know the Meaning of the Expression you use? What is, "seeking Salvation by
Works?" In the Writings of St. Paul, it means, either seeking to be saved by
observing the ritual Works of the Mosaic Law, or expecting Salvation for the
Sake of our own Works, by the Merit of our own Righteousness. But how is either
of these implied, in my waiting in the Way God has ordained, and expecting that
he will meet me there, because he has promised so to do?

I do expect, that he will fulfill his Word, that he will meet and bless me in
this (...). Yet not for the Sake of any Works which (...) have done, nor for
the Merit of my Righteousness: But merely through the Merits and Sufferings and
Love of his Son, in whom he is always well-pleased.

3. It has been vehemently objected. Thirdly, "that Christ is the only Means of
Grace." I answer, this is mere playing upon Words. Explain your Term, and the
Objection vanishes away. When we say, "Prayer is a Means of Grace," we
understand, a Channel through which the Grace of God is conveyed. When you say,
"Christ is the Means of Grace," you understand, the sole Price and Purchaser of
it: Or, that no Man comes unto the Father, but through him. And who denies it?
But this us utterly wide of the Question.

4. But does not the Scripture (it has been objected, Fourthly) direct us to
wait for Salvation? Does not David say, My Soul waits upon GOD: for of him
comes my Salvation? And does not Isaiah teach us the same Thing, saying, O
Lord, we have waited for thee? All this cannot be denied. Seeing it is the Gift
of God, we are undoubtedly to wait on him for Salvation. But how shall we wait
i^ If God himself has appointed a Way, can you find a better Way of waiting for
him? But, that he has appointed a Way, has been shown at large, and also what
that Way is. The very Words of the Prophet which you cite, put this out of all
Question. For the whole Sentence runs thus: In the Way of thy Judgments, or
Ordinances, O Lord, have we waited for thee. (Isai. xxvi. 8.) And in the very
same Way did David wait, as his own Words abundatly testify: I have waited for
thy saving Health, O Lord, and have kept thy Law. Teach me, O Lord, the Way of
thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the End.

5. "Yea, say some, but God has appointed another Way, stand still and see the
Salvation of GOD."

Let us examine the Scriptures to which you refer. The first of them, with the
Context, runs thus:

And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the Children of Israel lift up their Eyes -- and
they were sore afraid. And they said unto Moses, Because there were no Graves
in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the Wilderness? And Moses said unto
the People, Fear ye not: Stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord. And
the Lord said unto Moses, speak unto the Children of Israel, that they go
forward. But lift thou up thy Rod, and stretch out thine Hand over the Sea and
divide it. And the Children of Israel shall go on dry Ground through the Midst
of the Sea, Exodus xiv, 10, etc.

This was the Salvation of God, which they stood still to see, by marching
forward with all their Might!

The other Passage wherein this Expression occurs, stands thus. There came some
that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There comes a great Multitude against thee,
from beyond the Sea. And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord,
and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah. And Judah gathered themselves
together to ask Help of the Lord, even out of all the Cities they came to seek
the Lord. And Jehoshaphat stood in the Congregation, in the House of the Lord
-- Then upon Jahaziel came the Spirit of the Lord -- And he said -- Be not
dismayed by Reason of this great Multitude -- Tomorrow go ye down against
them, ye shall not need to fight in this Battle. Set yourselves: Stand ye
still, and see the Salvation of the Lord -- And they rose early in the Morning
and went forth. And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set
Ambushments against the Children of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir -- and every
one helped to destroy another, 2 Chronicles. xx. 2, etc.

Such was the Salvation which the Children of Judah saw. But how does all this
prove, that we ought not to wait for the Grace of God, in the Means which he
has ordained?

6. I shall mention but one Objection more, which indeed does not properly
belong to this Head. Nevertheless, because it has been so frequently urged, I
may not wholly pass it by.

"Does not St. Paul say, If ye be dead with Christ, why are ye subject to
Ordinances? Col. ii. 20. Therefore a Christian, one that is dead with Christ,
need not use the Ordinances any more."

So you say, "If I am a Christian, I am not subject to the Ordinances of
Christ!" Surely, by the Absurdity of this, you must see at the first Glance,
that the Ordinances here mentioned cannot be the Ordinances of Christ! That
they must needs be the Jewish Ordinances, to which it is certain, a Christian
is no longer a Subject.

And the same undeniably appears from the Words immediately following, Touch
not, taste not, handle not -- all evidently referring to the ancient Ordinances
of the Jewish Law.

So that this Objection is the weakest of all. And in Spite of all, that great
Truth must stand unshaken, That all who desire the Grace of God, are to wait
for it, in the Means which he has ordained.

V. 1. But this being allowed, that all who desire the Grace of God, are to
wait for it in the Means he has ordained: It may still be enquired, how those
Means should be used, both as to the Order, and the Manner of using them;

With regard to the former, we may observe, there is a Kind of Order, wherein
God himself is generally pleased, to use these Means, in bringing a Sinner to
Salvation. A stupid, senseless Wretch is going on in his own Way, not having
God in all his Thoughts, when God comes upon him unawares, perhaps by an
awakening Sermon or Conversation, perhaps by some awful Providence; or it may
be by an immediate Stroke of his convincing Spirit, without any outward Means
at all. Having now a Desire to flee from the Wrath to come, he purposely goes
to hear, how it may be done. If he find a Preacher who speaks to the Heart, he
is amazed, and begins searching the Scriptures, whether these Things are so?
The more he hears and reads the more convinced he is; and the more he meditates
thereon, Day and Night. Perhaps he finds some other Book, which explains and
inforces what he has heard and read in Scripture. And by all these Means, the
Arrows of Conviction sink deeper into his Soul. He begins also to talk of the
Things of God, which are ever uppermost in his Thoughts: Yea, and to talk with
God, to pray to him, although through Fear and Shame, he scarce knows what to
say. But whether he can speak or no, he cannot but pray, were it only in Grouns
which cannot be uttered. Yet being in doubt, whether the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth Eternity will regard such a Sinner as him, he wants to pray
with those who know God, with the Faithful, in the Great Congregation. But here
he observes others go up to the Table of the Lord. He considers, Christ has
said, "Do this!" How is it, that I do not! I am too great a Sinner. I am not
fit. I am not worthy. After struggling with these Scruples a while, he breaks
through. And thus he continues in God's Way, in hearing, reading, meditating,
praying, and partaking of the Lord's Supper, till God, in the Manner that
pleases him, speaks to his Heart, Thy Faith has saved thee! Go in Peace.

2. By observing this Order of God, we may learn what Means to recommend to any
particular Soul. If any of these will reach a stupid careless Sinner, it is
probably Hearing or Conversation. To such therefore we might recommend those,
if he has ever any Thought about Salvation. To one who begins to feel the
Weight of his Sins, not only Hearing the Word of God, but Reading it too, and
perhaps other serious Books may be a Means of deeper Conviction. May you not
advise him also, to meditate on what he reads, that it may have its full Force
upon his Heart? Yea, and to speak thereof and not be ashamed, particularly
among those who walk in the same Path. When Trouble and Heaviness take hold
upon him, should you not then earnestly exhort him, to pour out his Soul before
God! Always to pray and not to faint? And when he feels the Worthlessness of
his own Prayers, are you not to work together with God, and remind him of going
up into the House of the Lord, and praying with all them that fear him? But if
he does this, the dying Word of his Lord, will soon be brought to his
Remembrance: A plain Intimation, that this is the Time, when we should second
the Motions of the Blessed Spirit. And thus may we lead him Step by Step,
through all the Means which God has ordained; not according to our own Will,
but just as the Providence and the Spirit of God go before and open the Way.

3. Yet as we find no Command in Holy Writ, for any particular Order to be
observed herein, so neither do the Providence and the Spirit of God, adhere to
any without Variation: But the Means into which different Men are led, and in
which they find the Blessing of God, are varied, transposed and combined
together, a thousand different Ways. Yet still our Wisdom is, to follow the
Leadings of his Providence and his Spirit: To be guided herein (more especially
as to the Means wherein we ourselves seek the Grace of God) partly by his
outward Providence, giving us the Opportunity of using sometimes one Means,
sometimes another: Partly by our Experience, which it is whereby his free
Spirit is pleased most to work in our Heart. And in the mean time, the sure and
general Rule for all who groan for the Salvation of God, is this, Whenever
Opportunity serves, use all the Means which God has ordained. For who knows, in
which God will meet thee, with the Grace that brings Salvation?

4. As to the Manner of using them, whereon indeed it wholly depends, whether
they should convey any Grace at all to the User, it behooves us, First, always
to retain a lively Sense, that God is above all Means. Have a Care therefore of
limiting the Almighty. He does whatsoever and whenever it pleases him. He
can convey his Grace, either in or out of any of the Means which he has
appointed. Perhaps he will. Who has known the Mind of the Lord? Or who has
been his Counselor? Look then every Moment for his Appearing! Be it at the
Hour you are employed in his Ordinances; or before, or after that Hour. Or when
you are hindered therefrom. He is not hindered. He is always ready: Always
able, always willing to save. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good!

Secondly, Before you use any Means, let it be deeply impressed on your Soul,
"There is no Power in this. It is in itself a poor, dead, empty Thing: Separate
from God; it is a dry Leaf, a Shadow. Neither is there any Merit in my using
this; nothing intrinsically pleasing to God, nothing whereby I deserve any
Favor at his hands, no, not a Drop of Water to cool my Tongue. But because God
bids, therefore I do; because he directs me to wait in his Way, therefore here
I wait for his free Mercy, whereof comes my Salvation.

Settle this in your Heart, that the Opus Operatum, the mere Work done
profits nothing: That there is no Power to save, but in the Spirit of God; no
Merit, but in the Blood of Christ: That consequently, even what God ordains,
conveys no Grace to the Soul, if you trust not in him alone. On the other Hand,
he that does truly trust in him, cannot fall short of the Grace of God, even
though he were cut off from every Outward Ordinance, though he were shut up in the
Center of the Earth.

Thirdly, In using all Means, seek God alone. In and through every Outward
Thing, look singly to the Power of his Spirit, and the Merits of his Son.
Beware you do not stick in the Work itself; if you do, it is all lost Labor.
Nothing short of God can satisfy your Soul. Therefore eye him, in all, through
all, and above all.

Remember also, to use all Means, as Means: As ordained, not for their own
Sake, but in order to the Renewal of your Soul in Righteousness and true
Holiness. If therefore they actually tend to this, well. But if not, they are
Dung and Dross. Lastly, After you have used any of these, take care, how you
value yourself thereon: How you congratulate yourself, as having done some
great Thing. This is turning all into Poison. Think, "If God was not there,
what does this avail? Have I not been adding Sin to Sin? How long! O Lord! save
or I perish! O lay not this Sin to my Charge!" If God was there, if his Love
flowed into your Heart, you have forgot, as it were, the Outward Work. You see,
you know, you feel, God is All in All. Be abased. Sink down before him. Give
him all the Praise. Let God in all Things be glorified through Christ Jesus.
Let all your Bones cry out, My Song shall be always of the Loving Kindness of
the Lord: With my Mouth will I ever be telling of thy Truth, from one
Generation to another!

The Circumcision of the Heart. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Mary's, Oxford, BEFORE
THE UNIVERSITY, On January 1, 1733.
ROMANS ii. 29. Circumcision is tha^ of the Heart, in the Spirit and not to the
Letter.


1. IT IS the melancholy Remark of an excellent Man, That "he who now preaches
the most essen^ial Duties of Christianity, runs the Hazard of being esteemed by
a great Part of his Hearers, a setter forth of new Doctrines." Most Men have so
lived away the Substance of that Religion, the Profession whereof they still
retain, that no sooner are any of those Truths proposed, which difference the
Spirit of Christ from the Spirit of the World, then they cry (...) Thou
bring strange Things to our Ears (...) know what these Things mean. -- (...)
preaching to them 'Jesus and (...) with the necessary Consequence (...) be
risen, ye ought then to die un^^^ (...) and to live wholly unto God.

2. A hard Saying this to th^^^ (...) Man, who is alive unt^^ the World, (...)
unto God, and one that He will not (...) be persuaded, to receive (...) Truth
of God, unless it be so qualified in (...) ^erpretation, as to have neither Use
nor Sig^^^^cy left. He receives not the Words of the Spirit of GOD, taken in
their plain and obvious Meaning. They are Foolishness unto him: Neither indeed
can he know them because they are spiritually discerned: They are perceivable
only by that spiritual Sense, which in him was never yet awakened; for Want of
which he must reject as idle Fan^^^ (...) Men, what are both the Wisdom and the
Power of GOD.

3. That Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit and not in the
Letter; that the distinguishing Mark of a true Follower of Christ, of one who
is in a State of Acceptance with God, is not either outward Circumcision of
Baptism, or any other outward Form, but a right State of Soul, a Mind and
Spirit renewed after the Image of Him that created it, is one of those
important Truths, that can only be spiritually discerned, And this the Apostle
himself intimates in the next Words, Whose Praise is not of Men, but of GOD. As
if he had said, "Expect not, whoever thou art, who thus followest thy great
Master, that the World, the Men who follow him not, will say, Well done, good
and faithful Servant! K^^^^^ (...) the Circumcision of the Heart, the Seal
(...), is Foolishness with the World. Be cont^^^ (...) thy Applause, 'till the
Day of thy L^^^ (...) ^^^ring. In that Day shall thou have Pr^^^ (...) GOD, in
the great Assembly of Men and (...).

I design, fi^^^ particularly to enquire, wherein this Circumcision of Heart
consis^^: And, secondly, to mention some Reflection^^ that naturally arise from
such an Enquiry.

I. 1. I am, first, to enquire, wherein that Circumcision of Heart consists,
which will receive the Praise of God. In general we may observe, it is that
habitual Disposition of Soul, which in the Sacred Writings is termed Holiness,
and which directly implies, the being cleansed from Sin from all Filthiness
both of Flesh and Spirit, and by Consequence, the being endued with those
Virtues, which were also in Christ Jesus, the being so renewed in the Image of
our Mind, as to be perfect, as our Father in Heaven is perfect.

2. To be more particular, Circumcision of Heart implies, Humility, Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Humility, a right Judgment of ourselves, cleanses our Minds
from those high Conceits of our own Perfections, from that undue Opinion of our
own Abilities and Seize, which are the genuine Fruit of a corrupted
Nature. This entirely cuts off that vain Thought, I am rich and wise, and have
Need of nothing; and convinces us, that we are by Nature wretched. and poor,
and miserable, and blind, and naked. It convinces us, that in our best Estate,
we are of ourselves all Sin and Vanity; that Confusion, and Ignorance, and
Error, reign over our Understanding; that unreasonable, earthly, sensual,
devilish Passions, usurp Authority over our Will: In a Word, that there is no
whole Part in our Soul, that all the Foundations of our Nature are out of
Course.

3. At the same Time we are convinced, that we are not sufficient of ourselves
to help ourselves; th^^ (...) the Spirit of God we can do nothing but add Sin
to Sin: that it is He alone who works in us by his almighty Power, either to
will (...) do that which is good; it being as impossible for us even to think a
good Thought, without the supernatural Assistance of his Spirit, as to create
ourselves, or to renew our whole Souls in Righteousness and true Holiness.

4. A sure Effect of our having formed this right Judgment, of the Sinfulness
and Helplessness of our Nature, is a Disregard of that Honor which comes of
Man, which is usually paid to some supposed Excellency in us. He who knows
himself, neither desires nor values the Applause which he knows he deserves
not. It is therefore a very small Thing with him, to be judged by Man's
Judgment. He has all Reason to think, by comparing what it has said either for
or against him, with what he feels in his own Breast, that the World, as well
as the God of this World, was a Liar from the Beginning. And even as to those
who are not of the World, though he would choose, if it were the Will of God,
that they should account of him as of one desirous to be sound a faithful
Steward of his Lord's Goods, if happily this might be a Means of enabling him to
be of more Use to his Fellow Servants, yet as this is the one End of his
wishing for their Approbation, so he does not at all rest upon it. For he is
assured, that whatever God wills, He can never want Instruments to perform;
since He is able, even of these Stones, to raise up Servants to do his Pleasure.

5. This is that Lowliness of Mind, which they have learned of Christ, who
follow his Example and tread in his Steps. And this Knowledge of their Disease,
whereby they are more and more cleansed from one Part of it, Pride and Vanity,
disposes them to embrace, with a willing Mind, the second Thing implied in
Circumcision of Heart, that Faith which alone is able to make them whole, which
is the one Medicine given under Heaven to (...) their Sickness.

6. The best Guide of the Blind, the s^^^est Light of them that are in
Darkness, the most ^^^fect Instruct or of the Foolish, is Faith. But it must be
such a Faith as is mighty through GOD, to the pulling down of Strong holds, to
the overturning all the Prejudices of corrupt Reason, all the false Maxims
revered among Men; all evil Customs and Habits; all that Wisdom of the World
which is Foolishness with GOD; as casts down Imaginations (Reasonings) and
every high Thing that exalts itself against the Knowledge of GOD, and
brings into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.

7. All Things are possible to him that thus believes: The Eyes of his
Understanding being enlightened, he sees what is his Calling, even to glorify
GOD, who has bought him with so high a Price, in his Body and in his Spirit,
which now are GOD's by Redemption, as well as by Creation. He feels what is the
exceeding Greatness of his Power, who as He raised up Christ from the Dead, so
is able to quicken us, dead in Sin, by his Spirit which dwells in us. This is
the Victory which overcomes the World, even our Faith: That Faith which is not
only an unshaken Assent to all that God has revealed in Scripture, and in
particular to those important Truths, Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners; He bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree; He is the Propitiation
for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World:
N. B. The following Part of this Paragraph is now added (...) the Sermon
formerly proached.
But likewise the Revelation of Christ in our Hearts; a divine Evidence or
Conviction of his Love, his free, unmerited Love to me a Sinner; a sure
Confidence in his pardoning Mercy, wrought in us by the Holy Ghost: A
Confidence, whereby every true. Believer is enabled to bear Witness, I know
that my Redeemer lives; that I have an Advocate with the Father; that Jesus
Christ the righteous is my Lord, and the Propitiation for my Sins. I know He
has loved me, and given Himself for me. He has reconciled me, even me to GOD;
and I have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins.

8. Such a Faith as this, cannot fail to show evidently the Power of Him that
inspires it, by delivering his Children from the Yoke of Sin, and purging their
Consciences from dead Works: By strengthening them so, that they are no longer
constrained to obey Sin in the Desires thereof; but instead of yielding their
Members unto it, as Instruments of Unrighteousness, they now yield themselves
entirely unto GOD, as those that are alive from the Dead.

9. Those who are thus by Faith born of GOD, have also strong Consolation
through Hope. This is the next Thing which the Circumcision of the Heart
implies; even the Testimony of their own Spirit, with the Spirit which
witnesses in their Hearts, that they are the Children of God. Indeed it is the
same Spirit who works in them that clear and cheerful Confidence, that their
Heart is upright toward God; that good Assurance, that they now do, through his
Grace, the Things which are acceptable in his Sight; that they are now in the
Path which leads to Life, and shall, by the Mercy of God, endure therein to
the End. It is he who gives them a lively Expectation of receiving all good
Things at God's Hand; a joyous Prospect of that Crown of Glory, which is
reserved in Heaven for them. By this Anchor a Christian is kept steady in the
Midst of the Waves of this troublesome World, and preserved from striking upon
either of those fatal Roc^^, Presumption or Despair. He is neither discouraged
by the misconceived Severity of his Lord, nor does he despise the Richness of
his Goodness. He neither apprehends the Difficulties of the Race set before
him, to be greater than he has Strength to conquer, nor expects them to be so
little as to yield him the Conquest, 'till he has put forth all his Strength.
The Experience he already has in the Christian Warfare, as it assures him, his
Labor is not in vain, if whatever his Hand finds to do, he does it with his
Might; so it forbids his entertaining so vain a Thought, as that he can
otherwise gain any Advantage, as that any Virtue can be shown, any Praise
attained, by faint Hearts and feeble Hands: Or indeed by any but those who
pursue the same Course with the great Apostle of the Gentiles, I, says he, so
run, not as uncertainly, so fight I, not as one that beats the Air. But I
keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection; lest by any Means when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a Cast away.

10. By the same Discipline is every good Soldier of Christ, to innure himself
to endure Hardships. Confirmed and strengthened by this, he will be able not
only to renounce the Works of Darkness, but every Appetite too and every
Affection, which is not subject to the Law of God. For every one, says St.
John, who has this Hope, purifieth himself even as He is pure. It is his daily
Care, by the Grace of God in Christ, and through the Blood of the Covenant, to
purge the Inmost Recesses of his Soul, from the Lusts that before possessed and
defiled it: from Uncleanness, and Envy, and Malice, and Wrath, from every
Passion and Temper, that is after the Flesh, that either springs from, or
cherishes his Native Corruption: As well knowing, that he whose very Body is
the Temple of GOD, ought to admit into it nothing common or unclean; and that
Holiness becomes that House for ever, where the Spirit of Holiness vouchsafes
to dwell.

11. Yet lackest thou one Thing, whosoever thou art, that to a deep Humility,
and a steadfast Faith, have joined a lively Hope, and thereby in a good Measure
cleansed thy Heart from its inbred Pollution. If thou will be perfect, add to
all these Charity; add Love, and thou have the Circumcision of the Heart. Love
is the fulfilling of the Law, the End of the Commandment. Very excellent Things
are spoken of Love; it is the Essence, the Spirit, the Life of all Virtue. It
is not only the first and great Command, but it is all the Commandments in one.
Whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever Things are pure, whatsoever Things are
amiable or honorable; if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, they are
all comprised in this one Word, Love. In this is Perfection and Glory and
Happiness: The Royal Law of Heaven and Earth is this, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and
with all thy Strength.

12. Not that this forbids us to love any Thing besides God: It implies, that
we love our Brother also. Nor yet does it forbid us (as some have strangely
imagined) to take Pleasure in any Thing but God. To suppose this, is to suppose
the Fountain of Holiness, is directly the Author of Sin: Since he has
inseparably annexed Pleasure to the Use of those Creatures, which are necessary
to sustain the Life he has given us. This therefore can never be the Meaning of
his Command. What the real Sense of it is, both our blessed Lord and his
Apostles tell us too frequently and too plainly to be misunderstood. They all
with one Mouth bear Witness, that the true Meaning of those several
Declarations, The Lord thy God is One Lord. Thou shall have no other Gods but
Me; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Strength; Thou shall cleave
unto Him; The Desire of the Soul shall be to his Name: Is no other than this.
The one perfect Good shall be your one ultimate End. One Thing shall ye desire
for its own Sake, The Fruition of Him that is All in All. One Happiness shall
ye propose to your Souls, even an Union with him that made them: The having
Fellowship with the Father and the Son: The being joined to the Lord in one
Spirit. One Design ye are to pursue to the End of Time, The Enjoyment of God in
Time and in Eternity. Desire other Things, so far as they tend to this. Love
the Creature -- as it leads to the Creator. But in every Step you take, be this
the glorious Point that terminates your View. Let every Affection, and Thought,
and Word, and Work, be subordinate to this. Whatever ye desire or fear,
whatever ye seek or shun, whatever ye think, speak, or do, be it in order to
your Happiness in God, the sole End (...) well as Source of your Being.

13. Have no End, no ultimate End but God. Thus our Lord, One Thing is needful.
And if thine Eye be singly fixed on this one Thing, thy whole Body shall be full
of Light. Thus St. Paul, This one Thing I do; I press toward the Mark, for the
Prize of the high Calling in Christ Jesus. Thus St. James, Cleanse your Hands,
ye Sinners, and purify your Hearts, ye Double-minded. Thus St. John, Love not
the World, neither the Things that are in the World. For all that is in the
World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, is
not of the Father, but is of the World. The seeking Happiness in what gratifies
either the Desire of the Flesh, by agreeably striking upon the out ward Senses,
the Desire of the Eye, of the Imagination, by its Novelty, Greatness, or
Beauty; or the Pride of Life, whether by Pomp, Grandeur, Power, or the usual
Consequence of them, Applause and Admiration: Is not of the Father, comes not
from, neither is approved by the Father of Spirits; but of the World; it is the
distinguishing Mark of those, who will not have Him to reign over them.

II. 1. Thus have I particularly inquired, what that Circumcision of Heart is,
which will obtain the Praise or God. I am, in the second Place, to mention some
Reflections, that naturally arise from such an Inquiry, as a plain Rule whereby
every Man may judge of himself, whether he be of the World or of God.

And, first, it is clear, from what has been said, That no Man has a Title to
the Praise of God, unless his Heart is circumcised by Humility, unless he is
little, and base, and vile in his own Eyes: unless he is deeply convinced of
that inbred "Corruption of his Nature, whereby he is very far gone from
Original Righteousness," being prone to all Evil, averse to all Good, corrupt
and abominable; having a carnal Mind. which is Enmity against GOD, and is not
subject to the Law of GOD; nor indeed can be: Unless he continually feels in
his in most Soul, that without the Spirit of God resting upon him, he can
neither think, nor desire, nor speak, nor act, any Thing good or well-pleasing
in his Sight.

No Man, I say, has a Title to the Praise of God, 'till he feels his Want of
God: Nor indeed, 'till he seeks that Honor, which comes of GOD only: And
neither desires nor pursues that which comes of Man, unless so far, only as it
tends to this.

2. Another Truth which naturally follows from what has been said, is, that
none shall obtain the Honor that comes of God, unless his Heart be
circumcised by Faith; even a Faith of the Operation of GOD: unless refusing to
be any longer led by his Senses, Appetites or Passions, or even by that blind
Leader of the Blind, so idolized by the World, natural Reason, he lives and
walks by Faith, directs every Step, as seeing Him that is invisible, looks not
at the Things that are seen, which are temporal, but at the Things that are not
seen which are eternal; and governs all his Desires, Designs and Thoughts, all
his Actions and Conversations, as one who is entered in within the Veil, where
Jesus sits at the Right Hand of God.

3. It were to be wished, that they were better acquainted with this Faith, who
employ much of their Time and Pains, in laying another Foundation; in grounding
Religion, on "the Eternal Fitness of Things," on "the intrinsic Excellence of
Virtue," and the Beauty of Actions flowing from it: On the Reasons, as they
term them, of Good and Evil, and the Relations of Beings to each other. Either
these Accounts of the Grounds of Christian Duty, coincide with the Scriptural,
or not. If they do, why are well-meaning Men perplexed, and drawn from the
weightier Matters of the Law, by a Cloud of Terms, whereby the easiest Truths
are explained into Obscurity. If they are not, then it behooves them to
consider, who is the Author of this New Doctrine: Whether he is likely to be an
Angel from Heaven, who preaches another Gospel than that of Christ Jesus:
Though, if he were, God, not we, has pronounced his Sentence, Let him be
accursed.

4. Our Gospel, as it knows no other Foundation of Good Works than Faith, or of
Faith than Christ, so it clearly informs us, we are not his Disciples, while we
either deny Him to be the Author, or his Spirit to be the Inspirer and
Perfecter both of our Faith and Works. If any Man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. He alone can quicken those who are dead unto God,
can breathe into them the Breath of Christian Life, and so prevent, accompany,
and follow them with his Grace, as to bring their good Desires to good Effect.
And as many as are thus led, by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
This is God's short and plain Account of true Religion and Virtue; and other
Foundation can no Man lay.

5. From what has been said we may, Thirdly, learn, That none is truly led by
the Spirit, unless that Spirit bear Witness with his Spirit, that he is a Child
of God: unless he see the Prize and the Crown before him, and rejoice in Hope
of the Glory of God: So greatly have they erred, who have taught that in
serving God, we ought not to have a View to our own Happiness. Nay, but we are
often and expressly taught of God, to have Respect unto the Recompense of
Reward; to balance the Toil with the Joy set before us, these light Afflictions
with that exceeding Weight of Glory. Yea, we are Aliens to the Covenant of
Promise, we are without God in the World, until God of his abundant Mercy, has
begotten us again, unto a living Hope, of the Inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away.

6. But if these Things are so, it is high Time for those Persons to deal
faithfully with their own Souls, who are so far from finding in themselves this
joyful Assurance, that they fulfill the Terms and shall obtain the Promises of
that Covenant, as to quarrel with the Covenant itself, and blaspheme the Terms
of it: To complain, "They are too severe, and that no Man ever did, or shall
live up to them!" What is this, but to reproach God, as if He were an hard
Master, requiring of (...) Servants more than he enables them to perform: as if
He had mocked the helpless Works of his Hands, by binding them to
Impossibilities; by commanding them to overcome, where neither their own
Strength, nor his Grace was sufficient for them?

7. These Blasphemers might almost persuade those, to imagine themselves
guiltless, who, in the contrary Extreme, hope to fulfill the Commands of God,
without taking any Pains at all. Vain Hope! that a Child of Adam should ever
expect, to see the Kingdom of Christ and of God, without striving, without
agonizing first, to enter in at the strait Gate! that one who was conceived and
born in Sin, and whose inward Parts are very Wickedness, should once entertain
a Thought, of being purified as his Lord is pure, unless he treads in his
Steps, and take up his Cross daily; unless he cut off his Right Hand, and pluck
out the Right Eye and cast it from him; that he should ever dream of shaking
off his old Opinions, Passions, Tempers, of being sanctified throughout in
Spirit, Soul, and Body, without a constant and continued Course of general
Self-denial!

8. What less than this can we possibly infer from the above cited Words of St.
Paul? Who "living in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in
Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's Sake, who being full of Signs and
Wonders and mighty Deeds, who having been caught up into the third Heaven;" yet
reckoned (as a late Author strongly expresses it) that all his Virtues would be
unsecure, and even his Salvation in Danger, without this constant Self-denial.
his Salvation in Danger, without this constant Self-denial. So run I, says he,
not as uncertainly, so fight I, not as one that beats the Air. By which he
plainly reaches us, That he who does not thus run, who does not thus deny
himself daily, does run uncertainly, and fights to as little Purpose as he
that heateth the Air."

9. To as little Purpose does he talk of fighting the Fight of Faith, as vainly
ho^^ to attain the Crown of Incorruption (as we may, lastly, infer from the
preceding Observations) whose Heart is not circumcised by Love. Cutting off
both the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life,
engaging the whole Man, Body, Soul and Spirit, in the ardent Pursuit of that
one Object, is so essential to a Child of God, that "without it, whosoever
lives is counted dead before Him." Though I speak with the Tongue of Men and
Angels, and have not Love, I am as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. Though
I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries and all Knowledge,
and though I have all Faith so as to remove Mountains, and have not Love, I am
noshing. Nay, though I give all my Goods to feed the Poor, and my Body to be
burned, and have not Love, it profits me nothing?

10. Here then is the Sum of the Perfect Law, this is the true Circumcision of
the Heart. Let the Spirit return to God that gave it, with the whole Train of
its Affections. Unto the Place from whence all the Rivers came, thither let
them flow again. Other Sacrifices from us He would not; but the living
Sacrifice of the Heart he has chosen. Let it be continually offered up to God
through Christ, in Flames of holy Love. And let no Creature be suffered to
share with Him: For he is a jealous God. His Throne will he not divide with
another: He will reign without a Rival. Be no Design, no Desire admitted there,
but what has Him for its ultimate Object. This is the Way wherein those
Children of God once walked, who being dead, still speak to us, "Desire not to
live but to praise his Name; let all your Thoughts, Words and Works, tend to
his Glory. Set your Heart firm on Him, and on other Things, only as they are in
and from Him." Let your Soul be filled with so entire a Love of Him, that you
may love nothing but for his Sake." "Have a pure Intention of Heart, a
steadfast Regard to his Glory in all your Actions." "Fix your Eye upon the
blessed Hope of your Calling, and make all the Things of the World minister
unto it." For then, and not till then, is that Mind in us which was also in
Christ Jesus, when in every Motion of our Heart, in every Word of our Tongue,
in every Work of our Hands, we "pursue nothing but in Relation to Him, and in
Subordination to his Pleasure:" When we too, neither think, nor speak, nor act,
to fulfill our own Will, but the Will of Him that sent us: When whether we eat
or drink, or whatever we do, we do all to the Glory of God.

The Marks of the New Birth. A SERMON On JOHN iii. (...).
JOHN iii. 8. So is every one that is born of the Spirit.


HOW is every one that is born of the Spirit? That is born again? Born of God?
What is meant by the being born again? The being bor^ of God? Or, being born of
the Spirit? What is implied in, The Being a Son or a Child of God? Or, Having
the Spirit of Adoption? That these Privileges, by the free Mercy of God, are
ordinarily annexed to Baptism, (which is thence termed by our Lord in the
preceding Verse, the being born of Water and of the Spirit) we know: But we
would Gal. iii. 26.
know what these Privileges are? What is The New Birth?

2. Perhaps it is not needful to give a Definition^ of this, seeing the
Scripture gives none. But (...) the Question is of the deepest Concern, to
every Child of Man, (since except a Man be born again, born of the Spirit, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God) I propose to lay down the Marks of it in the
plainest Manner, just as I find them laid down in Scripture.

I. 1. The first of these (and the Fo^^^tion of all the rest) is Faith. So St.
Paul, (...) ^^are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. So St.
John, John i. 12, 13.
To them gave He Power ((...) Right, or Privilege, it might rather be
translated) to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name:
Which were born when they believed, ( not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, not by natural Generation, nor of the Will of Man, like those Children
adopted by Men, in whom no inward Change is thereby wrought but) of God. And
again in his General Epistle, John v. I.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.

2. But it is not a barely notional or speculative Faith, that is here spoken
of by the Apostles. It is not a bare Assent to this Proposition, " Jesus is the
Christ;" nor indeed to all the Propositions contained in our Creed, or in the
Old and New Testament. It is not merely "an Assent, to any, or all these
credible Things as credible." To say this, were to say, (which who could hear?)
that the Devils were born of God. For they have this Faith. They trembling
believe, both that Jesus is the Christ, and that all Scripture having been
given by Inspiration of God, is true as God is true. It is not only "an Assent
to Divine Truth, upon the Testimony of God," or "upon the Evidence of
Miracles." For they also heard the Words of his Mouth, and knew Him to be a
faithful and true Witness. They could not but receive the Testimony He gave,
both of Himself, and of the Father which sent Him. They saw likewise the mighty
Works which he did, and thence believed that (...) came forth from God. Yet not
withstanding this Faith, they are still reserved in Chains of Darkness, unto
the Judgment of the great Day.

3. For all this is no more than a dead Faith. The True, Living, Christian
Faith, which whosoever has is born of God, is not only an Assent, an Act of
the Understanding, but a Disposition which God has wrought in his Heart; "a
sure Trust and Confidence in God, that through the Merits of Christ, his Sins
are forgiven, and he reconciled to the Favor of God." This implies, that a Man
first renounces himself; that in order to be found in Christ, to be accepted
through Him, he totally rejects all Confidence in the Flesh; that having
nothing to pay, having no Trust in his own Works of Righteousness of any Kind,
he comes to God, as a lost, miserable, self-destroyed, self-condemned, undone,
helpless Sinner; as one whose Mouth is utterly stopped, and who is altogether
guilty before God. Such a Sense of Sin (commonly called Despair, by those who
speak Evil of the Things they know not together with a full Conviction, such as
no Words can express, That of Christ only comes our Salvation, and an earnest
Desire of that Salvation, must precede a Living Faith: A Trust in Him, who "for
us paid our Ransom by his Death, and for us fulfilled the Law in his Life."
This Faith then, whereby we are born of God, is "not only a Belief of all the
Articles of our Faith, but also a true Confidence of the Mercy of God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ."

4. An immediate and constant Fruit of this Faith, whereby we are born of G^^^^
(...) ^it which can in no wise be separated from it, no not for an Hour, is
Power over Sin: Power over outward Sin, of every King; over every evil Word and
Work; for wheresoever the Blood of Christ is thus applied, it purges the
Conscience from dead Works: And over inward Sin; for it purifieth the Hears
from every unholy Desire and Temper. This Fruit of Faith, St. Paul has largely
described, in the sixth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans. Romans i. 6. etc.
How shall we (says he) who by Faith are dead to Sin, live any longer therein?
Our old Man is crucified with Christ, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve Sin. -- Likewise reckon ye yourselves to be
dead unto Sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Let not
Sin therefore reign, even in your mortal Body, but yield yourselves unto God,
as those that are alive from the Dead. For Sin shall not have Dominion over
you. -- God be thanked, that ye were the Servants of Sin -- But being made free
-- the plain Meaning is, God be thanked, that though ye were in Time past the
Servants of Sin, yet now being free from Sin, ye are become the Servants of
Righteousness.

5. The same invaluable Privilege of the Sons of God, is as strongly asserted
by St. John; particularly, with Regard to the former Branch of it, namely,
Power over outward Sin. After he had been crying out, as one astonished at the
Depth of the Riches of the Goodness of God, 1 John iii. 1, etc.
Behold what Manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! Beloved, now are we the Sons of God; and it does not
yet appear what we shall b^^ but we know, that when He shall appear we shall be
like Him; for we shall see Him as He is? He soon adds, 1 John iii. 1, etc.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. But some Men will say, "True;
whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin habitually." Habitually! whence
is that? I read it not. It is not written in the Book. God plainly faith, He
does not commit Sin. And thou addest, habitually! Who art thou that mendest the
Oracles of God? That addest to the Words of this Book? Beware I beseech thee,
lest God add to thee, all the Plagues that are written therein! Especially when
the Comment thou addest is such, as quite swallows up the Text: So that by this
(...) this artful Method of Deceiving, the precious Promise is utterly lost: By
this (...), this Tricking and Shuffling of Men, the Word of God is made of none
Effect. O beware thou that thus take from the Words of this Book, that taking
away the whole Meaning and Spirit from them, leavest only what may indeed (...)
termed a dead Letter, lest God take away thy Part out of the Book of Life!

6. Suffer we the Apostle to interpret his own Words, by the whole Tenor of his
Discourse. In the fifth Verse of this Chapter he had said, Ye know that He
(Christ) was manifested, to take away our Sins; and in him is no Sin. What is
the Inference he draws from this? Ver. 9.
Whosoever abides in Him sins not: Whosoever sins has not seen Him,
neither known Him? To his Inforcement of this important Doctrine, he premises
an highly necessary Caution: Ver. 7.
Little ^hildren, let no Man deceive you, (for many will endeavor so to do; to
persuade you that you may be unrighteous, that you may commit Sin, and yet be
Children of God.) He that does Righteousness is righteous even as he is
righteous. He that commits Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from
the Beginning.' Then follows, whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin;
for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In
this, adds the Apostle, the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of
the Devil. By this plain Mark (the committing or not committing Sin) are they
distinguished from each other. To the same Effect are those Words in his fifth
Chapter, Ver. 18.
We know that whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is begotten of
God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

7. Another Fruit of this living Faith is Peace. For Romans v. 1.
being justified by Faith, having all our Sins blotted out, we have Peace with
God, through (...) Lord Jesus Christ. This indeed our Lord Himself, the Night
before his Death, solemnly bequeathed to all his Followe^^ John xiv. 27.
Peace, says He, I leave with you; (you who believe in God, and believe also
in Me) my Peace I give unto you. Not as the World gives, give I unto you. Let
not your Heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. And again, Chapter xvi. 33.
These Things have I spoken unto you, that in Me ye might have Peace. This is
that Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, that ^^^^^ity of Soul,
which it has not entered into the Heart of a natural Man to conceive, and
which it is not possible for even the spiritual Man to utter. And it is a Peace
which all the Powers of Earth and Hell are unable to take from him. Waves and
Storms beat upon it, but they shake it not; for it is founded upon a Rock. It
keeps the Hearts and Minds of the Children of God, at all Times and in all
Places. Whether they are in Ease or in Pain, in Sickness or Health, in
Abundance or Want, they are happy in God. In every State they have learned to
be content, yea, to give Thanks unto God through Christ Jesus: Being well
assured, That "whatsoever Is, is best;" because it is his Will, concerning
them. So that in all the Vicissitudes of Life, their Heart stands fast,
believing in the Lord.

II. 1. A second Scriptural Mark of those who are born of God is Hope. Thus St.
Peter, speaking to all the Children of God, who were then scattered abroad,
says, 1 Pet. i. 3.
Blessed be the G^^^ and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively Hope. (...) A lively or
living Hope, says the Apostle: Because there is also a dead Hope (as well as a
dead Faith) a Hope which is not from God, but from the Enemy of God and Man; as
evidently appears by its Fruits; for, as it is the Offspring of Pride, so it is
the Parent of every evil Word and Work. Whereas every Man that has in him this
living Hope, is holy as He that ^^^^h him is holy: Every Man that can truly say
to his Brethren in Christ, Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and we shall
see Him as He is, purifieth himself, even as He is pure.

2. This Hope termed in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. x. 22.
(...), and elsewhere, Heb. vi. 11.
(...) (in our Translation, The Full Assurance of Faith, and the full ssurance
of Hope; Expressions the best which our Language could afford, although far
weaker than those in the Original) as described in Scripture, implies, 1. The
Testimony of our own Spirit or Conscience, that we walk in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity; but, secondly and chiefly, The Testimony of the Spirit of God,
hearing Witness with, or to, our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, and
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ.

3. Let us well observe, what is here taught us by God Himself, touching the
glorious Privilege of his Children. Who is it, that is here said to bear
Witness? Not our Spirit only, but another; even the Spirit of God: He it is who
bears Witness with our Spirit. What is it, He bears Witness of? That we are
the Children of God; and if Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs
with Christ: -- if so be that we suffer with Him (if we deny ourselves, if we
take up our Cross daily, if we cheerfully endure Persecution or Reproach for
his Sake) that we may also be glorified together. And in whom does the Spirit
of God bear this Witness? In all who are the Children of God. By this very
Argument does the Apostle prove in the preceding Verses that they are so: Romans
viii. 16, 17.
As many (says he) as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again, to fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father! It follows, The
Spirit itself bears Witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God.

4. The Variation of the Phrase in the 15th Verse, is worthy our Observation.
Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father! Ye, as
many as are the Sons of God, have in Virtue of your Sonship, received that
selfsame Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. We, the Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, (for so the Word may not improperly be understood) we,
through whom you have believed, the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. As we and you have one Lord, so we have one Spirit: As we
have one Faith, so we have one Hope also. We and you are sealed with one Spirit
of Promise, the Earnest of yours and of our Inheritance: The same Spirit
bearing Witness with yours and with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God.

5. And thus is the Scripture fulfilled, Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. For it is easy to believe, that though Sorrow may precede
this Witness of God's Spirit with our Spirit, (indeed must, in some Degree,
while we groan under Fear, and a Sense of the Wrath of God abiding on us) yet
as soon as any Man feels it in himself, his Sorrow is turned into Joy.
Whatsoever his Pain may have been before, yet as soon as that Hour is come, he
remembers the Anguish no more, for Joy that he is born of God. It may be, many
of you have now Sorrow, because you are Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel; because you are conscious to yourselves that you have not this Spirit,
that you are without Hope and without God in the World. But when the Comforter
is come, John xxi. 22.
then your Heart shall rejoice; yea, your Joy shall be full, and that Joy no
Man takes from you. Romans v. 11.
We joy in God, will ye say, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the Atonement: By whom we have Access into this Grace, this State of
Grace, of Favor, of Reconciliation with God, wherein we stand, and rejoice in
Hope of the Glory of God. Ye, says St. Peter, whom 1 Pet. i. 5, etc.
God has begotten again unto a lively Hope, are kept by the Power of God unto
Salvation -- Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a Season, if Need be,
ye are in Heaviness through manifold Temptations: That the trial of your Faith
-- may be sound unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the Appearing of Jesus
Christ -- In whom, though now ye see Him not, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory. Unspeakable indeed! It is not for the Tongue of Man to
describe this Joy in the Holy Ghost. It is hidden Manna, which no Man knows,
save he that receives it. But this we know, it not only remains, but overflows
in the Depth of Affliction. Are the Consolations of God small with his
Children, when all earthly Comforts fail? Not so, But when Sufferings most
abound, the Consolation of his Spirit does much more abound: Insomuch that the
Sons of God laugh at Destruction when it comes; at Want, Pain, Hell, and the
Grave; as knowing Him who has the Keys of Death and Hell, and will shortly
cast them into the bottomless Pit^^. As hearing even now the great Voice out of
Heaven, saying, Rev. xxi. 3, 4. 4.
Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and He will dwell with them, and
they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more
Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying; neither shall there be any more Pain; for
the former Things are past away.

III. 1. A third scriptural Mark of those who are born of God, and the greatest
of all, is Love: Even Romans v. 5.
the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto them. Call. iv. 8.
Because they are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into their
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father! By this Spirit, continually looking up to God, as
their reconciled and loving Father, they cry to Him for their daily Bread, for
all Things needful whether for their Souls or Bodies. They continually pour out
their Hearts before Him, knowing 1 John v. 15.
they have the Petitions which they ask of Him. Their Delight is in Him. He is
the Joy of their Heart; their Shield, and their exceeding great Reward. The
Desire of their Soul is toward Him: It is their Meat and Drink to do his Will:
And they are Psalm. lxiii. 5.
satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, while their Mouth praises Him with
joyful Lips.

2. And, in this Sense also, John v. 1.
Every one who loves Him that begat, loves him that is begotten of Him. His
Spirit rejoiceth in God his Savior. He loves the Lord Jesus Christ in
Sincerity: He is so joined unto the Lord, as to be one Spirit. His Soul hangs
upon Him, and chooses Him as altogether lovely, the chiefest among ten
thousand. He knows, he feels what that means, Cant. ii. 16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his. Psalm. xlv. 2.
Thou art fairer than the Children of Men; full of Grace are thy Lips, because
God has anointed Thee for ever!

3. The necessary Fruit of this Love of God, is the Love of our Neighbor, of
every Soul which God has made; not excepting our enemies, not excepting those
who are now despitefully using and persecuting us: A Love, whereby we love
every Man as ourselves, as we love our own Souls. Nay, our Lord has expressed
it still more strongly, teaching us to love one another even as he has loved
us. Accordingly the Commandment written in the Hearts of all those that love
God, is no other than this, As I have loved you, so love ye one another. Now 1
John iii. 16.
herein perceive we the Love of God, in that He laid down his Life for us. We
ought then, as the Apostle justly infers, to lay down our Lives for our
Brethren. If we feel ourselves ready to do this, then do we truly love our
Neighbor. Then Ver. 14.
we know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we thus love our
Brethren. Chapter iv. 13.
Hereby know we that we are born of God, that we dwell in Him, and He in us,
because he has given us of his loving Spirit. For John iv. 7.
Love is of God, and every one that thus loves, is born of God and knows God.

4. But some may possibly ask, Does not the Apostle say, 1 John v. 3.
This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments? Yea, and this the Love
of our Neighbor also, in the same Sense as it is the Love of God. But what
would you infer from hence? That the keeping the outward Commandments, is all
that is implied in loving God with all your Heart, with all your Mind, and
Soul, and Strength, and in loving your Neighbor as yourself? That the Love of
God is not an Affection of the Soul, but merely an Outward Service? And that
the Love of our Neighbor is not a Disposition of Heart, but barely a Course of
Outward Works! To mention so wild an Interpretation of the Apostle's Words, is
sufficiently to confute it. The plain indisputable Meaning of that Text is,
this is the Sign or Proof of the Love of God, of our keeping the first and
great Commandment, to keep all the rest of his Commandments. For true Love, if
it be once shed abroad in our Heart, will constrain us so to do: Since
whosoever loves God with all his Heart, cannot but serve Him with all his
Strength.

5. A second Fruit then of the Love of God, (so far as it can be distinguished
from it) is universal Obedience to Him we love, and Conformity to his Will:
Obedience to all the Commands of God, internal and external: Obedience of the
Heart and of the Life, in every Temper, and in all Manner of Conversation. And
one of the Tempers most obviously implied herein is, the being zealous of good
Works; the hungering and thirsting to do Good, in every possible Kind, unto all
Men; The rejoicing to spend and be spent for them, for every Child of Man, not
looking for any Recompense in this World, but only in the Resurrection of the
Just.

1. Thus have I plainly laid down those Marks of the New Birth, which I find
laid down in Scripture. Thus does God Himself answer that weighty Question,
what it is to be born of God? Such, if the Appeal be made to the Oracles of
God, is every one that is born of the Spirit. This it is, in the Judgment of
the Spirit of God, to be a Son or a Child of God. It is, so to believe in God
through Christ, as not to commit Sin, and to enjoy at all Times and in all
Places, that Peace of God which passes all Understanding. It is, so to hope in
God through the Son of his Love, as to have not only the Testimony of a good
Conscience, but also the Spirit of God bearing Witness with your Spirits, that
ye are the Children of God: Whence cannot but spring the rejoicing evermore in
Him through whom ye have received the Atonement. It is so to love God who has
thus loved you, as you never did love any Creature: So that ye are constrained
to love all Men as yourselves; with a Love not only ever burning in your
Hearts, but flaming out in all your Actions and Conversations, and making your
whole Life one Labor of Love, one continued Obedience to those Commands, Be ye
merciful, as God is merciful; Be ye holy, as I the Lord am holy; Be ye perfect,
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

2. Who then are ye that are thus born of God? Ye know the Things which are
given to you of God. Ye well know, that ye are the Children of God; and can
assure your Hearts before Him. And every one of you who has observed these
Words cannot but feel and know of a Truth, whether at this Hour, (answer to God
and not to Man!) you are thus a Child of God or no? The Question is not what
you was made in Baptism: (Do not evade:) But, what you are now? Is the Spirit
of Adoption now in your Heart? To your own Heart let the Appeal be made. I ask
not, whether you was born of Water and of the Spirit. But are you now the
Temple of the Holy Ghost which dwells in you? I allow you was circumcised
with the Circumcision of Christ, (as St. Paul emphatically terms Baptism.) But
does the Spirit of Christ and of Glory now rest upon you? Else your
Circumcision is become Uncircumcision.

3. Say not then in your Heart, I was once baptized. Therefore I am now a Child
of God? Alas, that Consequence will by no Means hold. How many are the baptized
Gluttons and Drunkards, the baptized Liars and common Swearers, the baptized
Railers and Evil-speakers, the baptized Whore-mongers, Thieves, Extortioners?
What think you? Are these now the Children of God? Verily I say unto you,
whosoever you are, unto whom any one of the preceding Characters belong, ye are
of your Father the Devil, and the Works of your Father ye do. Unto you I call,
in the Name of Him whom you crucify afresh, and in his Words to your
circumcised Predecessors, Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, How can you
escape the Damnation of Hell?

4. How indeed, except ye be born again! For ye are now dead in Trespasses and
Sins. To say then, that ye cannot be born again, That there is no New Birth but
in Baptism, is to seal you all under Damnation, to consign you to Hell, without
Help, without Hope. And perhaps some may think this just and right. In their
Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, they may say, "Yea, cut off the Sinners, the
Amelekites! Let these Gibeonites be utterly destroyed! They deserve no less."
-- No; nor I: nor you. -- Mine and your Desert, as well as theirs, is Hell. And
it is more Mercy, free undeserved Mercy, that we are not now in unquenchable
Fire. You will say, "But we are washed, we were born again of Water and of the
Spirit." So were they. This therefore hinders not at all, but that ye may now
be even as they. Know ye not, that what is highly esteemed of Men is an
Abomination in the Sight of God? Come forth, ye "Saints of the World." ye that
are honored of Men, and see who will cast the first Stone at them, at these
Wretches, not fit to live upon the Earth, these common Harlots, Adultevers,
Murderers. Only learn ye first what that means, 1 John ili. 15.
He that hates his Brother is a Murderer. -- Matt, v. 28.
He that looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her
already in his Heart. -- James iv. 4.
Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not, that the Friendship of the World,
is Enmity with God?

5. Verily, verily I say unto you, ye also must be born again. Except ye also
be born again, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God. Lean no more on the Staff of
that broken Reed, that ye were born again in Baptism. Ye are now Children of
the Devil. Therefore ye must be born again. And let not Satan put it into your
Heart, to cavil at a Word, when the Thing is clear. Ye have heard, what are the
Marks of the Children of God: All ye who have them not on your Souls, baptized
or unbaptized, must needs receive them, or without Doubt ye will perish
everlastingly. And if ye have been baptized, your only Hope is this, That those
who were sederally made the Children of God by Baptism, but are now the
Children of the Devil, may yet receive Power, to become the Sons of God: That
they may receive even the Spirit of Adoption, crying in their Hearts, Abba,
Father!

6. Amen, LORD JESUS! May every one who prepares his Heart to seek thy Face,
receive now that Spirit of Adoption, and cry out, Abba, Father! Let him now
have Power, so to believe in thy Name, as to become the Child of God; as to
know and feel he has Redemption in thy Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins,
and that he cannot commit Sin, because he is born of God. Let him be now
begotten again unto a living Hope, so as to purify himself, as Thou art pure!
And because he is a Son, let the Spirit of Love and of Glory rest upon him,
cleansing him from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and teaching him to
perfect Holiness in the Fear of God!

End of the First Volume.
SERMONS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. LATE FELLOW OF LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, NO. 25, CHURCH-ALLEY, AND SOLD BY
JOHN DICKINS, NO. 44, NORTH SECOND STREET, NEAR ARCH STREET.

MDCCXCIV.

The great Privilege of those that are born of God. A SERMON On 1 JOHN iii. 9.
1 JOHN iii. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin.


1. IT has been frequently supposed, that the being born of God was all one
with the being justified; that the new birth and justification were only
different expressions, denoting the same thing: It being certain on the one
hand, that whoever is justified, is also born of God; and on the other, that
whoever is born of God, is also justified: Yea, that both these gifts of God
are given to every believer in one and the same moment. In one point of time
his sins are blotted out, and he is born again of God.

2. But though it be also wed, that justification and the new birth are in
point of time inseparable from each other, yet are they easily distinguished,
(...) being not the same, but things of a widely different nature.
Justification implies only a relative, the new birth a real change. God in
justifying us, does something for us: In begetting us again, he does the work
in us. The former changes our outward relation to God, so that of enemies we
become children. By the latter our inmost souls are changed, so that of sinners
we become saints. The one restores us to the favor, the other to the image of
God. The one is, the taking away the guilt, the other, the taking away the
power of sin. So that although they are joined together in point of time, yet
are they of wholly distinct natures.

3. The not discerning this, the not observing the wide difference there is,
between being justified and being born again, has occasioned exceeding great
confusion of thought, in many who have treated on this subject: particularly
when they have attempted to explain this great privilege of the children of
God; to show how whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin.

4. In order to apprehend this clearly, it may be necessary, first, to consider
what is the proper meaning of that expression, Whosoever is born of God; and,
secondly, to enquire, in what sense he does not commit sin.

I. 1. First, we are to consider, what is the proper meaning of that
expression, Whosoever is born of God. And in general, from all the passages of
holy writ, wherein this expression, the being born of God, occurs, we may learn
that it implies not barely the being baptized, or any outward change whatever;
but a vast inward change, a change wrought in the soul, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost: a change in the whole manner of our existence; for from the moment
we are born of God, we live in quite another manner than we did before; we are,
as it were, in another world.

2. The ground and reason of the expression, his easy to be understood. When we
under go this great change, we may with much propriety be said to be born
again, because there is so near a resemblance between the circumstances of the
natural and of the spiritual birth: so that to consider the circumstances of
the natural birth, is the most easy way to understand the spiritual.

3. The child which is not yet born, subsists indeed by the air, as does every
thing which has life; but feels it not, nor any thing else, unless in a very
dull and imperfect manner. It hears little, if at all, the organs of hearing
being as yet closed up. It sees nothing, having its eyes fast shut, and being
surrounded with utter darkness, There are, it may be, some saint beginnings of
life, when the time of its birth draws nigh; and some motion consequent
thereon, whereby it is distinguished from a mere mass of matter. But it has no
senses; all these avenues of the soul are hitherto quite shut up. Of
consequence, it has scarce any intercourse with this visible world: nor any
knowledge, conception, or idea, of the things that occur therein.

4. The reason why he that is not yet born, is wholly a stranger to the visible
world, is, not because it is afar off. It is very nigh. It surrounde him on
every side. But partly, because he has not those senses, they are not yet
opened in his soul, whereby alone it is possible to hold commerce with the
material world; and partly because so thick a veil is cast between, through which
he can discern nothing.

5. But no sooner is the child born into the world, than he exists in a quite
different manner. He now feels the air with which he is surrounded, and which
pours into him from every side, as fast as he alternately breathes it back, to
sustain the flame of life. And hence springs a continual increase of strength,
of motion and of sensation: all the bodily senses being now awakened, and
furnished with their proper objects.

His eyes are now opened to perceive the light, which silently flowing in upon
them, discovers not only itself, but an insinite variety of things, with which
before he was wholly unacquainted. His ears are unclosed, and sounds rush in,
with endless diversity. Every, sense is employed upon such objects as are
peculiarly suitable to it. And by these inlets, the soul having an open
intercourse with the visible world, acquires more and more knowledge of
sensible things, of all the things which are under the sun.

6. So it is with him that is born of God. Before that great change is wrought,
although he subsists by him, in whom all that have life live and move and have
their being, yet he is not sensible of God; he does not feel, he has no inward
consciousness of his presence. He does not perceive that divine breath of life,
without which he cannot subsist a moment. Nor is he sensible of any of the
things of God. They make no impression upon his soul. God is continually
calling to him from on high, but he hears not; his ears are shut; so that the
voice of the charmer is lost to him, charm he n^^^r so wisely. He sees not the
things of the spirit of God, the eyes of his understanding being closed, and
utter darkness covering his whole soul, surrounding him on every side. It is
true, he may have some saint dawnings of life, some small beginnings of
spiritual motion; but as yet he has no spiritual senses, capable of discerning
spiritual objects. Consequently he discerns not the things of the spirit of
God. He cannot know them; because they are spiritually discerned.

7. Hence he has scarce any knowledge of the invisible world, as he has scarce
any intercourse with it. Not that it is afar off. No: he is in the midst of it:
it encompasses him round about. The other world, as we usually term it, is not
far from every one of us. It is above, and beneath, and on every side. Only the
natural man discerns it not; partly, because he has no spiritual senses,
whereby alone we can discern the things of God; partly, because so thick a veil
is interposed, as he knows not how to penetrate.

8. But when he is born of God, born of the Spirit, how is the manner of his
existence changed? his whole soul is now sensible of God, and he can say by
sure experience, thou art about my bed, and about my path; I feel thee in all
my ways. Thou besettest me behind and before, and layest thy hand upon me. The
spirit or breath of God is immediately inspired, breathed into the newborn
soul. And the same breath which comes from, returns to God: as it is
continually received by faith, so it is continually rendered back by love, by
prayer, an praise, and thanksgiving: love and praise and prayer being the
breath of every soul which is truly born of God. And by this new kind of
spiritual respiration, spiritual life is not only sustained, but increased day
by day; together with spiritual strength and motion, and sensation. All the
senses of the soul be now awake, and capable of discerning spiritual good and
evil.

9. The eyes of his understanding are now open, and he sees him that is
invisible. He sees what is the exceeding greatness of his power, and of his
love toward them that believe. He sees that God is merciful to him a sinner;
that he is reconciled through the son of his love. He clearly perceives both
the pardoning love of God, and all his exceeding great and precious promises.
God who commands the light to shine out of darkness, has shined, and does
shine, in his heart, to enlighten him with the knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ. All the darkness is now passed away, and he abides
in the light of God's countenance.

10. His ears are now opened, and the voice of God no longer calls in vain. He
hears and obeys the heavenly calling: He knows the voice of his shepherd. All
his spiritual senses being now awakened, he has a clear intercourse with the
invisible world. And hence he knows more and more of the things which before it
could not enter into his heart to conceive. He now knows what the peace of God
is: what is joy in the Holy Ghost: what the love of God which is shed abroad in
the hearts of them that believe in him through Christ Jesus. Thus the veil being
removed, which before interrupted the light and voice, the knowledge and love
of God, he who is born of the spirit, dwelling in love, dwells in God and God
in him.

II. 1. Having considered the meaning of that expression, whosoever is born of
God, it remains in the second place to enquire, in what sense he does not
commit sin.

Now one who is so born of God as has been above described, who continually
receives into his soul the breath of life from God, the gracious influence of
his Spirit, and continually renders it back: one who thus believes and loves;
who by faith perceives the continual actings of God upon his spirit; and by a
kind of spiritual reaction, returns the grace he receives in unceasing love,
and praise, and prayer; not only does not commit sin while he thus keeps
himself; but so long as this seed remains in him, he cannot sin, because he
is born of God.

2. By sin, I here understand, outward sin, according to the plain, common
acceptance of the word: an actual, voluntary transgression of the law; of the
revealed, written law of God: of any commandment of God, acknowledged to be
such, at the time that it is transgressed. But whosoever is born of God, while
he abides in faith and love, and in the spirit of prayer and thanksgiving, not
only does not, but cannot thus commit sin. So long as he thus believes in God
through Christ, and loves him, and is pouring out his heart before him, he
cannot voluntarily transgress any command of God, either by speaking or acting
what he knows God has forbidden. So long that seed which remains in him,
that loving, praying, thankful faith compels him to refrain from whatsoever he
knows to be an abomination in the sight of God.

3. But here a difficulty will immediately occur; and one, that to many has
appeared insuperable, and induced them to deny the plain assertion of the
apostle, and give up the privilege of the children of God.

It is plain in fact, that those whom we cannot deny to have been truly born of
God (the spirit of God having given us in his word, this infallible testimony
concerning them) nevertheless not only could, but did commit sin, even gross,
outward sin. They did transgress the plain, known laws of God, speaking or
acting what they knew he had forbidden.

4. Thus David was unquestionably born of God, or ever he was anointed king
over Israel. He knew in whom he had believed; he was strong in faith, giving
glory to God. Psalm. xxiii. 1, etc.
The Lord, says he, is my shepherd; therefore can I lack nothing. He shall
feed me in green pastures, and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. Yea,
though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil;
for thou art with me. He was filled with love; such as often constrained him to
cry out, Psalm. xviii. 1.
I will love thee, O Lord, my God: the Lord is my stony rock, and my defense:
the born also of my salvation, and my refuge. He was a man of prayer, pouring
out his soul before God, in all circumstances of life; and abundant in praises
and thanksgiving; Psalm. xxxiv. 1.
thy praise, faith he, shall be ever in my mouth. Psalm. cxviii. 28.
Thou art my God, and I will thank thee; thou art my God and I will praise
thee. And yet such a child of God could and did commit sin; yea, the horrid
sins of adultery and murder.

5. And even after the Holy Ghost was more largely given, after life and
immortality were brought to light by the gospel, we want not instances of the
same melancholy kind, which were also doubtless written for our instruction.
Thus he who (probably from his Acts iv. 36, 37.
selling all that he had, and bringing the price for the relief of his poor
brethren) was by the apostles themselves surnamed Barnabas, that is, the son of
consolation; who was so honored at Antioch, as to be selected with Saul out of
all the disciples, to carry their Chapter xi. 29.
relief unto the brethren in Judea: this Barnabas, who at his return from
Judea, was by the peculiar direction of the Holy Ghost, solemnly Chapter xiii. 1,
2, 4.
separated from the other prophets and teachers, for the work whereunto God had
called him, even to accompany the great apostle among the gentiles, and to be
his fellow laborer in every place; nevertheless was afterward so Chapter xv. 35,
38, 39.
sharp in his contention with St. Paul (because he thought it not good to take
with them John, in his visiting the brethren, a second time, who had departed
from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work) that he himself
also departed from the work; that he took John, and sailed unto Cyprus;
forsaking him to whom he had been in so immediate a manner joined by the Holy
Ghost.

6. An instance more astonishing than both these is given by St. Paul in his
epistle to the Galatians. When Peter, the aged, the zealous, the first of the
apostles, one of the three most highly favored by his Lord; was come to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For before
that certain came from James, he did eat with the gentiles, the heathens
converted to the christian faith, as having been peculiarly taught of God, that
Acts xi. 28.
he should not call any man common or unclean. But Gal. ii. 11, etc.
when they were come, he separated himself, fearing them which were of the
circumcision. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. But when I saw that
they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto
Peter before them all, if thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the
gentiles, not regarding the ceremonial law of Moses, why compellest thou the
gentiles to live as do the Jews? here is also plain, undeniable sin, committed
by one who was undoubtedly born of God. But how can this be reconciled with the
assertion of St. John, if taken in the obvious literal meaning, that whosoever
is born of God, does not commit sin?

7. I answer, what has been long observed is this: so long as he that is born
of God keeps himself (which he is able to do, by the grace of God) the wicked
one touches him not. But if he keeps not himself, if he abide not in the
faith, he may commit sin even as another man.

It is easy therefore to understand, how any of these children of God might be
moved from his own stedfastness, and yet the great truth of God, declared by
the apostle, remain steadfast and unshaken. He did not keep himself by that
grace of God which was sufficient for him. He fell, step by step, first, into
negative, inward sin, not stirring up the gift of God which was in him, not
watching unto prayer, not pressing on to the mark of the prize of his high
calling: then into positive inward sin, inclining to wickedness with his heart,
giving way to some evil desire or temper. Next, he lost his faith, his sight of
a pardoning God, and consequently his love of God. And being then weak and like
another man, he was capable of committing even outward sin.

8. To explain this by a particular instance: David was born of God, and saw
God by faith. He loved God in sincerity. He could truly say, whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth (neither person, nor thing) that
I desire in comparison of thee! but still there remained in his heart that
corruption of nature, which is the seed of all evil.

He was 2 Samuel xi. 2.
walking upon the roof of his house, probably praising the God whom his soul
loved, when he looked down and saw Bathsheba. He felt a temptation, a thought
which tended to evil. The spirit of God did not fail to convince him of this.
He doubtless heard and knew the warning voice. But he yielded in some measure
to the thought, and the temptation began to prevail over him. Hereby his spirit
was sullied; he saw God still; but it was more dimly than before. He loved God
still; but not in the same degree, not with the same strength and ardor of
affection. Yet God checked him again, though his spirit was grieved; and his
voice, though fainter and fainter, still whispered, "Sin lies at the door;
look unto me, and be thou saved." But he would not hear. He looked again, not
unto God, but unto the forbidden object, till nature was superior to grace, and
kindled lust in his soul.

The eye of his mind was now closed again, and God vanished out of his sight.
Faith, the divine supernatural intercourse with God, and the love of God ceased
together. He then rust. (...) on as a horse into the battle, and knowingly
com^^ed the outward sin.

9. You see the unquestionable progress from grace to sin. Thus it goes on,
from step to step. 1. The divine seed of loving, conquering faith, remains in
him that is born of God. He keeps himself, by the grace of God, and cannot
commit sin. 2. A temptation arises, whether from the world, the flesh, or the
devil, it matters not. 3. The spirit of God gives him warning that sin is near,
and bids him more abundantly watch unto prayer. 4. He gives way in some degree
to the temptation, which now begins to grow pleasing to him. 5. The Holy Spirit
is grieved; his says is weakened, and his love of God grows cold, 6. The
spirit reproves him more sharply, and says, "This is the way; walk thou in
it." 7. He turns away from the painful voice of God, and listens to the
pleasing voice of the tempter. 8. Evil desire vanish away. He is then capable
of committing outward sin, the power of the Lord being departed from him.


10. To explain this by another instance. The apostle Peter was full of faith
and of the Holy Ghost; and hereby keeping himself, he had a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man.

Walking thus in simplicity and godly sincerity, before that certain came from
James, he did eat with the gentiles, knowing that what God had cleansed, was
not common or unclean.

But when they were come, a temptation arose in his heart, to fear those of the
circumcision (the Jewish converts, who were zealous for circumcisron and the
other rites of the Mosaic law) and regard the favor and praise of these men,
more than the praise of God.

He was warned by the spirit that sin was near. Nevertheless he yielded to it
in some degree, even to sinful fear of man, and his faith and love were
proportionably weakened.

God reproved him again for giving place to the devil. Yet he would not hearken
to the voice of his shepherd; but gave himself up to that flavish fear, and
thereby quenched the spirit.

Then God disappeared, and faith and love being extinct, he committed the
outward sin. Walking not uprightly, not according to the truth of the gospel,
he separated himself from his christian brethren, and by his evil example, if
not advice also, compelled even the Gentiles to live after the manner of the
Jews; to entangle themselves again with that yoke of bondage, from which Christ
had set them free.

Thus it is unquestionably true, that he who is born of God, keeping himself,
does not, cannot commit sin; and yet, if he keeps not himself, he may commit
all manner of sin with greediness.

III. 1. From the preceding considerations we may learn, first, To give a clear
and uncontestible answer, to a question which has frequently perplexed many,
who were sincere of heart. Does sin precede or follow the loss of faith? "Does
a child of God first commit sin, and thereby lose his faith? Or does he lose
his faith first, before he can commit sin?"

I answer, some sin of omission at least, must necessarily precede the loss of
faith: some inward sin. But the loss of says must precede the committing
outward sin.

The more any believer examines his own heart, the more will he be convinced of
this: That faith working by love, excludes both inward and outward sin from a
soul watching unto prayer: that nevertheless we are even then liable to
temptation, particularly to the sin that did easily beset us: that if the
loving eye of the soul be steadily fixed on God, the temptation soon vanishes
away: but if not, if we are James i. 14.
(...), (as the apostle James speaks) drawn out of God by our own desire, and
(...), caught by the bait of present or promised pleasure: then that desire
conceived in us, brings forth sin; and having by that inward sin destroyed our
faith, it casts us headlong into the snare of the devil, so that we may commit
any outward sin whatever.

2. From what has been said, we may learn, secondly, what the life of God in
the soul of a believer is; wherein it properly consists; and what is
immediately and necessarily implied therein. It immediately and necessarily
implies, the continual inspiration of God's Holy Spirit: God's breathing into
the soul, and the soul's breathing back what it first receives from God: a
continual action of God upon the soul, and re-action of the soul upon God: an
unceasing presence of God, the loving, pardoning God, manifested to the heart,
and perceived by faith; and an unceasing return of love, praise, and prayer,
offering up all the thoughts of our hearts, all the words of our tongues, all
the works of our hands, all our body, soul, and spirit, to be an holy
sacrifice, acceptable unto God in Christ Jesus.

3. And hence we may, thirdly, infer, the absolute necessity of this re-action
of the soul (whatsoever it be called) in order to the continuance of the divine
life therein. For it plainly appears, God does not continue to act upon the
soul, unless the soul re-acts upon God. He prevents us indeed with the
blessings of his goodness. He first loves us, and manifests himself unto us.
While we are yet afar off, he calls us to himself, and shines upon our hearts.
But if we do not then love him who first loved us, if we will not hearken to
his voice; if we turn our eye away from him, and will not attend to the light
which he pours upon us, his spirit will not always strive; he will gradually
withdraw, and leave us to the darkness of our own hearts. He will not continue
to breathe into our soul, unless our soul breathes toward him again; unless our
love, and prayer, and thanksgiving return to him, a sacrifice wherewith he is
well pleased.

4. Let us learn, lastly, to follow that direction of the great apostle, Be not
high minded, but fear. Let us fear sin more than death or hell. Let us have a
jealous (though not painful) fear, lest we should lean to our own deceitful
hearts. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. Even he who now stands
fast in the grace of God, in the faith that overcomes the world, may
nevertheless fall into inward sin, and thereby make shipwreck of his faith. And
how easily then will outward sin regain its dominion over him? Thou therefore,
O man of God, watch always; that thou may always hear the voice of God.
Watch that thou may pray without ceasing, at all times and in all places,
pouring out thy heart before him. So shall thou always believe, and always
love, and never commit sin.

DISCOURSES UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
DISCOURSE THE FIRST.
MATT. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. And seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a Mountain;
and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him:

And he opened his Mouth, and taught them, saying,

Blessed are the Poor in Spirit; for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.


OUR Lord had now Matt. iv. 23.
gone about all Galilee, beginning at the time Ver. 12.
when John was cast into prison, not only teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, but likewise healing all manner of
sickness, and all ^anner of disease among the people. It was a natural
consequence of this, that Ver. 25.
there followed him great multitudes from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from
Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from the region beyond Jordan. Matt. v. 1, etc.
And seeing the multitudes, whom no synagogue could contain, even had there
been any at hand, he went up into a mountain, where there was room for all that
came unto him from every quarter. And when he was set, as the manner of the
Jews was, his disciples came unto him. And he opened his mouth (an expression
denoting the beginning of a solemn discourse) and taught them, saying --

2. Let us observe, who it is, that is here speaking, that we may take heed how
we hear. It is the Lord of heaven and earth, the Creator of all, who as such,
has a right to dispose of all his creatures; the Lord our governor, whose
kingdom is from everlasting, and rules over all; the great lawgiver, who can
well enforce all his laws, being able to save and to destroy; yea, to punish
with everlasting destruction from his presence and from the glory of his power.
It is the eternal wisdom of the Father, who knows whereof we are made, and
understands our inmost frame; who knows how we stand related to God, to one
another, to every creature which God has made; and consequently how to adapt
every law he prescribes, to all the circumstances wherein he has placed us. It
is he who is loving unto every man, whose mercy is over all his works: The God
of love, who having emptied himself of his eternal glory, is come forth from
his Father, to declare his will to the children of men, and then goes again to
the Father: who is sent of God to open the eyes of the blind, to give light to
them that fit in darkness: it is the great prophet of the Lord, concerning whom
God had solemnly declared long ago, Deuteronomy. xviii. 19.
Whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him. Or, as the apostle expresses it, Acts iii. 23.
Every soul which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
people.

3. And what is it which he is teaching? The Son of God, who came from heaven,
is here showing us the way to heaven, to the place which he has prepared for
us, the glory he had before the world began. He is teaching us the true way to
life everlasting, the royal way which leads to the kingdom. And the only true
way; for there is none besides: all other paths lead to destruction. From the
character of the speaker we are well assured, that he has declared the full
and perfect will of God. He has uttered not one tittle too much; nothing more
than he had received of the Father. Nor too little; he has not shunned to
declare the whole counsel of God. Much less has he uttered any thing wrong,
any thing contrary to the will of him that sent him. All his words are true,
and right, concerning all things, and shall stand fast for ever and ever.

And we may easily remark, that in explaining and confirming these faithful and
true sayings, he takes care to refute not only the mistakes of the Scribes and
Pharisees which then were, the false comments whereby the Jewish teachers of
that age had perverted the word of God; but all the practical mistakes, that
are inconsistent with salvation, which should ever arise in the Christian
church: all the comments whereby the Christian teachers (so called) of any age
or nation should pervert the word of God, and teach unwary souls to seek death
in the error of their life.

4. And hence we are naturally led to observe, whom it is that he is here
teaching? Not the apostles alone; if so, he had no need to have gone up into
the mountain. A room in the house of Matthew, or any of his disciples, would
have contained the twelve. Nor does it in any wise appear, that the disciples
who came unto him, were the twelve only. O (...), without any force put upon
the expression, may be understood, of all who desired to learn of him. But to
put this out of all question, to make it undeniably plain that where it is
said, He opened his mouth and taught them, the word them includes all the
multitudes, who went up with him into the mountain, we need only observe the
concluding verses of the seventh chapter, And it came to pass, when Jesus had
ended these sayings, the multitudes, (...), were astonished at his doctrine (or
teaching). For he taught them (the multitudes) as one having authority, and not
as the scribes.

Nor was it only those multitudes who were with him on the mount, to whom he
now taught the way of salvation; but all the children of men, the whole race of
mankind, the children that were yet unborn; all the generations to come even to
the end of the world, who should ever hear the words of this life.

5. And this all men allow, with regard to some parts of the ensuing discourse.
No man, for instance, denies, that what is said of poverty of spirit, relates
to all mankind. But many have supposed, that other parts concerned only the
apostles, or the first christians, or the ministers of Christ; and were never
designed for the generality of men, who consequently, have nothing at all to do
with them.

But may we not justly enquire, who told them this? that some parts of this
discourse, concerned only the apostles? or the christians of the apostolic age?
or the ministers of Christ? bare assertions are not a sufficient proof, to
establish a point of so great importance. Has then our Lord himself taught us,
that some parts of his discourse, do not concern all mankind? without doubt,
had it been so, he would have told us; he could not have omitted so necessary
an information. But has he told us so? where? in the discourse itself? no: here
is not the least intimation of it. Has he said so elsewhere? in any other of
his discourses? not one word so much as glancing this way, can we find in any
thing he ever spoke, either to the multitudes or to his disciples. Has any of
the apostles, or other inspired writers, left such an instruction upon record?
no such thing. No assertion of this kind is to be found in all the oracles of
God. Who then are the men who are so much wiser than God? wise, so far above
that is written?

6. Perhaps they will say, "That the reason of the thing requires such a
restriction to be made." If it does, it must be on one of these two accounts;
because without such a restriction, the discourse would either be apparently
absurd, or would contradict some other scripture, But this is not the case. It
will plainly appear, when we come to examine the several particulars, that
there is no absurdity at all in applying all which our Lord has here
delivered, to all mankind. Neither will it infer any contradiction to any thing
else he has delivered, nor to any other scripture whatever. Nay, it will
farther appear, that either all the parts of this discourse are to be applied
to men in general; or no part; seeing they are all connected together, all
joined as the stones in an arch, of which you cannot take one away, without
destroying the whole fabric.

7. We may, lastly, observe, how our Lord teaches here. And surely, as at all
times, so particularly at this he speaks, as never man spoke. Not as the holy
men of old; although they also spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Not as
Peter or James, or John or Paul. They were indeed wife master builders in his
church. But still in this, in the degrees of heavenly wisdom, the servant is
not as his Lord. No, nor even as himself, at any other time, or on any other
occasion. It does not appear, that it was ever his design, at any other time or
place, to lay down at once the whole plan of his religion, to give us a full
prospect of christianity, to describe at large the nature of that holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord. Particular branches of this he has
indeed described, on a thousand different occasions. But never besides here,
did he give, of set purpose, a general view of the whole. Nay, we have nothing
else of this kind in all the bible: unless one should except that short sketch
of holiness, delivered by God in those ten words or commandments, to Moses, on
mount Sinai. But even here how wide a difference is there between one and the
other? Even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excels, 2 Cor. iii. 10.

8. Above all, with what amazing love does the son of God, here reveal his
Father's will to man! he does not bring us again to the mount that burned with
fire, nor unto blackness and darkness and tempest. He does not speak as when he
thundered out of heaven, when the Highest gave his thunder, hailstones and
coals of fire. He now addresses us with his still, small voice. Blessed or
happy are the poor in spirit. Happy are the mourners, the meek; those that
hunger after righteousness; the merciful, the pure in heart: happy in the end
and in the way; happy in this life, and in life everlasting! as if he had said,
who is he that lusts to live, and would fain see good days? behold, I show
you the thing which your soul longs for; see the way you have so long sought
in vain! the way of pleasantness; the path to calm, joyous peace, to heaven
below and heaven above!

9. At the same time with what authority does he teach! well might they say,
not as the scribes. Observe the manner (but it cannot be expressed in words)
the air, with which he speaks! not as Moses, the servant of God: not as
Abraham, his friend; not as any of the prophets; nor as any of the sons of men.
It is something more than human; more than can agree to any created being. It
speaks the creator of all, a God, a God appears! Yea, (...), the Being of
beings, Jehovah, the self-existent, the supreme, the God who is over all,
blessed for ever!

10. This discourse, delivered in the most excellent method, every subsequent
part illustrating those that precede, is commonly, and not improperly divided,
into three principal branches: the first contained in the fifth, the second in
the sixth, and the third in the seventh chapter. In the first, the sum of all
true religion is laid down in eight particulars, which are explained and
guarded against the false glosses of man, in the following parts of the fifth
chapter, In the second are rule, for that right intention, which we are to
preserve in all our outward actions; unmixed with worldly desires, or anxious
cares for even the necessaries of life. In the third, are cautions against the
main hindrances of religion, closed with an application of the whole.

I. 1. Our Lord, first, lays down the sum of all true religion in eight
particulars, which he explains and guards against the false glosses of men to
the end of the fifth chapter.

Some have supposed that he designed in these, to point out the several stages
of the christian course; the steps which a christian successively takes in his
journey to the Promised Land; others, that all the particulars here set down,
belong at all times to every christian: and why may we not allow both the one
and the other? what inconsistency is there between them? It is undoubtedly
true, that both poverty of spirit and every other tempter which is here
mentioned, are at all times found, in a greater or less degree, in every real
christian. And it is equally true, that real christianity always begins in
poverty of spirit, and goes on in the order here set down, till the man of God
is made perfect. We begin at the lowest of these gifts of God; yet so as not to
re^inquish this, when we are called of God, to come up higher: But whereunto we
have already attained, we hold fast, while we press on to what is yet behind,
to the highest blessings of God in Christ Jesus.

2. The foundation of all is poverty of spirit: here therefore our Lord begins:
Blessed, says he, are the poor in spirit, for their's is the kingdom of heaven.

It may not improbably be supposed, that our Lord, looking on those who were
round about him, and observing that not many rich were there, but rather the
poor of the world, took occasion from thence to make a transition from temporal
to spiritual things. Blessed, says he (or happy; so the word should be
rendered, both in this and the following verses) are the poor in spirit. He
does not say, they that are poor as to outward circumstances; it being not
impossible that some of these may be as far from happiness, as a monarch upon
his throne: but the poor in spirit, they who, whatever their outward
circumstances are, have that disposition of heart, which is the first step to
all real, substantial happiness, either in this world or that which is to come.

3. Some have judged, That by the poor in spirit here, are meant, those who
love poverty; those who are free from covetousness; from the love of money; who
fear, rather than desire riches. Perhaps they have been induced so to judge, by
wholly confining their thought to the very term: or by considering that weighty
observation of St. Paul, that the love of money is the root of all evil. And
hence many have wholly divested themselves, not only of riches, but of all
worldly goods. Hence also the vows of voluntary poverty, seem to have arisen in
the Romish church: it being supposed that so eminent a degree of this
fundamental grace, must be a large step toward the kingdom of heaven.

But these do not seem to have observed, First, that the expression of St. Paul
must be understood with some restriction. Otherwise it is not true: for the
love of money is not the root, the sole root of all evil. There are a thousand
other roots of evil in the world, as sad experience daily shows. His meaning
can only be, it is the root of very many evils; perhaps of more than any single
vice besides: Secondly, that this sense of the expression, poor in spirit, will
by no means suit our Lord's present design, which is to lay a general
foundation whereon the whole fabric of christianity may be built; a design
which would be in no wise answered, by guarding against one particular vice: so
that, if even this were supposed to be one part of his meaning, it could not
possibly be the whole: Thirdly, that it cannot be supposed to be any part of
his meaning, unless we charge him with manifest tautology: seeing if poverty of
spirit were only freedom from covetousness, from the love of money, or the
desire of riches, it would coincide with what he afterward mentions, it would
be only a branch of purity of heart.

4. Who then are the poor in spirit? Without question, the humble; they who
know themselves; who are convinced of sin: those to whom God has given that
first repentance, which is previous to faith in Christ.

One of these can no longer say, I am rich, and increased in goods, and have
need of nothing: as now knowing, that he is wretched, and poor, and miserable,
and blind, and naked. He is convinced that he is spiritually poor indeed;
having no spiritual good abiding in him. In me, says he, dwells no good
thing; but whatsoever is evil and abominable. He has a deep sense of the
loathsome leprosy of sin, which he brought with him from his mother's womb,
which overspreads his whole soul, and totally corrupts every power and faculty
thereof. He sees more and more of the evil tempers, which spring from that evil
root: the pride and haughtiness of spirit, the constant bias to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think: the vanity, the thirst after the
esteem or honor that comes from men: the hatred or envy, the jealousy or
revenge, the anger, malice, or bitterness; the inbred enmity both against God
and man, which appears in ten thousand shapes: the love of the world, the
self-will, the foolish and hurtful desires, which cleave to his inmost soul. He
is conscious how deeply he has offended by his tongue; if not by profane,
immodest, untrue, or unkind words, yet by discourse which was not good, to the
use of edifying, not meet to minister grace to the bearers; which consequently
was all corrupt in God's account, and grievous to his holy spirit. His evil
works are now likewise ever in his sight; if he tell them, they are more than
he is able to express. He may as well think to number the drops of rain, the
sands of the sea, or the days of eternity.

5. His guilt is now also before his face: he knows the punishment he has
deserved, were it only on account of his carnal mind, the entire, universal
corruption of his nature: how much more, on account of all his evil desires and
thoughts, of all his sinful words and actions? he cannot doubt for a moment,
but the least of these deserves the damnation of hell; the worm that dies not,
and the fire that never shall be quenched. Above all, the guilt of not
believing on the name of the only begotten Son of God, lies heavy upon him.
How, says he, shall I escape, who neglect so great Salvation! he that
believes not, is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him.

6. But what shall he give in exchange for his soul, which is forfeited to the
just vengeance of God? Wherewithal shall he come before the Lord? How shall he
pay him that he owes? were he from this moment to perform the most perfect
obedience to every command of God, this would make no amends for a single sin,
for any one act of past disobedience: seeing he owes God all the service he is
able to perform from this moment to all eternity, could he pay this, it would
make no manner of amends, for what he ought to have done before. He sees
himself therefore utterly helpless, with regard to atoning for his past sins;
utterly unable to make any amends to God, to pay any ransom for his own soul.

But if God would forgive him all that is past, on this one condition, that he
should sin no more, that for the time to come he should entirely and constantly
obey all his commands: he well knows that this would profit him nothing, being
a condition he could never perform. He knows and feels, that he is not able to
obey, even the outward commands of God: seeing these cannot be obeyed, while
his heart remains in its natural sinfulness and corruption: In as much as an
evil tree, cannot bring forth good fruit. But he cannot cleanse a sinful heart,
with men this is impossible. So that he is utterly at a loss, even how to begin
walking in the path of God's commandments. He knows not how to get one step
forward in the way. Encompassed with sin and sorrow, and fear, and finding no
way to escape, he can only cry out, Lord save, or I perish!

7. Poverty of spirit then, as it implies the first step we take in running the
race which is set before us, is, a just sense of our inward and outward sins,
and of our guilt and helplessness. This some have monstrously styled, The
virtue of humility; thus teaching us to be proud of knowing we deserve
damnation. But our Lord's expression is quite of another kind; conveying no
idea to the hearer, but that of mere want, of naked sin, of helpless guilt and
misery.

8. The great apostle, where he endeavors to bring sinners to God, speaks in a
manner just answerable to this. Romans i. 18, etc.
The wrath of God, says he, is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men: a charge which he immediately fixes on the heathen
world, and thereby proves, they were under the wrath of God. He next shows,
that the Jews were no better than they, and were therefore under the same
condemnation: and all this, not in order to their attaining "The noble virtue
of humility," but that every mouth might be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God.

He proceeds to show, that they were helpless as well as guilty; which is the
plain purport of all those expressions, therefore by the deeds of the law,
there shall no flesh be justified -- but now the righteousness of God, which is
by faith, of Jesus Christ, without the law is manifested -- we conclude, that a
man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law: expressions all
tending to the same point, even to hide pride from man: to humble him to the
dust, without teaching him to reflect upon his humility as a virtue; to inspire
him with that full piercing conviction of his utter sinfulness, guilt and
helplessness, which casts the sinner, stripped of all, lost and undone, on his
strong helper, Jesus Christ the righteous.

9. One cannot but observe here, that christianity begins, just where heathen
morality ends: poverty of spirit, conviction of sin, the renouncing ourselves,
the not having our own righteousness, the very first point in the religion of
Jesus Christ, leaving all Pagan religion behind. This was ever hid from the
wise men of this world: insomuch that the whole Roman language, even with all
the improvements of the Augustan age, does not afford so much as a name for
humility (the word from whence we borrow this, as is well known, beating in
Latin a quite different meaning): no, nor was one found in all the copious
language of Greece, till it was made by the great apostle.

10. O that we may feel what they were not able to express! sinner, awake! know
thyself! know and feel, that thou were shapen in wickedness, and that in sin
did thy mother conceive thee, and that thou thyself have been heaping sin upon
sin, ever since thou could discern good from evil. Sink under the mighty hand
of God, as guilty of death eternal: and cast off, renounce, abhor all
imagination, of ever being able to help thyself! be it all thy hope to be
washed in his blood, and renewed by his almighty spirit, who himself bare all
our sins in his own body on the tree. So shall thou witness, happy are the poor
in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

11. This is that kingdom of heaven or of God which is within us, even
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. And what is righteness, but
the life of God in the soul: the mind which was in Christ Jesus: the image of
God stamped upon the heart, now renewed after the likeness of him that created
it? What is it but the love of God because he first loved us, and the love of
all mankind, for his sake?

And what is this peace, the peace of God, but that calm serenity of soul, that
sweet repose in the blood of Jesus, which leaves no doubt of our acceptance in
him? Which excludes all fear, but the loving, filial fear of offending our
Father which is in heaven.

This inward kingdom implies also joy in the Holy Ghost, who seals upon our
hearts, the redemption which is in Jesus, the righteousness of Christ, imputed
to us for the remission of the sins that are past: who gives us now the
earnest of our inheritance of the crown which the Lord, the righteous judge
will give at that day. And well may this be termed the kingdom of heaven;
seeing it is heaven already opened in the soul; the first springing up of those
rivers of pleasure which flow at God's right hand for evermore.

12. Theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever thou art, to whom God has
given to be poor in spirit, to feel thyself lost, thou have a right thereto,
through the gracious promise of him who cannot lie. It is purchased for thee by
the blood of the Lamb. It is very nigh: thou art on the brink of heaven.
Another step, and thou enterest into the kingdom of righteousness, and peace,
and joy. Art thou all sin? Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of
the world. All unholy? See thy advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. Art thou unable to atone for the least of thy sins? He is the
propitiation for all thy sins. Now believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and all
thy sins are blotted out. Art thou totally unclean in soul and body? Here is
the fountain for sin and uncleanness. Arise and wash away thy sins: stagger no
more at the promise through unbelief. Give glory to God: dare to believe! now
cry out, from the ground of thy heart, Yes, I yield, I yield at last,
Listen to thy speaking blood;
Me with all my sins I cast
On my atoning God!


13. Then thou learnest of him to be lowly of heart. And this is the true,
genuine, Christian humility, which flows from a sense of the love of God,
reconciled to us in Christ Jesus. Poverty of spirit, in this meaning of the
word, begins where a sense of guilt and of the wrath of God ends; and is, a
continual sense of our total dependence on him, for every good thought or word
or work; of our utter inability to all good, unless he water us every moment:
and an abhorrence of the praise of men, knowing that all praise is due unto God
only. With this is joined a loving shame, a tender humiliation before God, even
for the sins which we know he has forgiven us, and for the sin which still
remains in our hearts, although we know it is not imputed to our
condemnation. Nevertheless the conviction we feel of inbred sin, is deeper and
deeper every day. The more we grow in grace, the more do we see of the
desperate wickedness of our heart. The more we advance in the knowledge and
love of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ (as great a mystery as this may
appear, to those who know not the power of God unto salvation) the more do we
discern of our alienation from God, of the enmity that is in our carnal mind,
and the necessity of our being entirely renewed in righteousness and true
holiness.

II. 1. It is true, he has scarce any conception of this, who now begins to
know the inward kingdom of heaven. In is prosperity he says, I shall never be
moved; thou Lord, have made my hill so strong. Sin is utterly bruised beneath
his feet, that he can scarce believe it remains in him. Even temptation is
silenced and speaks not again: is cannot approach, but stands afar off. He is
borne alost in the chariots of joy and love: he soars or upon the wings of an
eagle. But our Lord well knew, that this triumphant state does not often
continue long. He therefore presently subjoins, Blessed are they that mourn;
for they shall be comforted.

2. I^ot that we can imagine this promise belongs to those, who mourn only on
some worldly account: who are in sorrow and heaviness, merely on account of
some worldly trouble or disappointment; such as the loss of their reputation,
or friends; or the impairing of their fortune. As little title to it have they
who are afflicting themselves, through fear of some temporal evil: or who pipe
away with anxious care, or that desire of earthly ^^ings which makes the heart
sick. Let us not thi^^, these shall receive any thing from the Lord: he is not
in all their thoughts. Therefore it is that they thus w^lk in a vain shadow,
and disquiet themselves in ^^in. And this shall ye have of mine hand, says the
Lord, ye shall die down in sorrow.

3. The mourners of whom our Lord here speaks, are those that mourn on quite
another account: they that mourn after God, after him in whom they did rejoice,
with joy unspeakable, when he gave them to taste the good, the pardoning word,
and the powers of the world to come. But he now hides his face and they are
troubled; they cannot see him through the dark cloud. But they see temptation
and sin, which they fondly supposed were gone never to return, arising again,
following after them amain, and holding them in on every side. It is not
strange if their soul is now disquieted within them, and trouble and heaviness
take hold upon them. Nor will their great enemy fail to improve the occasion,
to ask, "Where is now thy God? where is now the blessedness whereof thou
spakest? the beginning of the kingdom of heaven? Yea, has God said, Thy sins
are forgiven thee? surely God has not said it. It was only a dream, a mere
delusion, a creature of thy own imagination. If thy sins are forgiven, why art
thou thus? can a pardoned sinner be thus unholy?" -- And if then, instead of
immediately crying to God, they reason with him that is wiser than they, they
will be in heaviness indeed, in sorrow of heart, in anguish not to be
expressed. Nay, even when God shines again upon the soul, and takes away all
doubt of his past mercy, still he that is weak in faith may be tempted and
troubled, on account of what is to come: especially, when inward sin revives,
and thrusts sore at him that he may fall. Then may he again cry out, "I have a
sin of fear, that when I Have spun
"My last thread, I shall perish on the shore!"
least I should make shipwreck of the faith, and my last state be worse than
the first: "Lest all my bread of life should fail
"And I sink down unchanged to hell."


4. Sure it is that this affliction for the present is not joyous but grievous.
Nevertheless, afterward it brings forth peaceable fruit unto them that are
exercised thereby. Blessed therefore are they that thus mourn, if they tarry
the Lore's leisure, and suffer not themselves to be turned out of the way, by
the miserable comforters of the world; if they resolutely reject all the
comforts of sin, of folly and vanity; all the idie diversions and amusements of
the world, all the pleasures which perish in the using, and which only tend to
benumb and stupify the soul, that it may neither be sensible of itself nor God.
Blessed are they who follow on to know the Lord, and steadily refuse all other
comfort. They shall be comforted by the consolations of (...) spirit, by a
fresh manifestation of his love; by such a witness of his accepting them in the
beloved, as shall never more be taken away from them. This full assurance of
faith swallows up all doubt, as well as all tormenting fear; God now giving
them a sure hope of an enduring substance, and strong consolation through grace.
Without disputing, Whether it be possible for any of those to fall away, who
were once enlightened and made partakers of the Holy Ghost, it suffices them to
say, by the power now resting upon them, Romans viii. 35, 38, 39.
Who shall separate them from the love of Christ? I am persuaded, that neither
death (...) life, nor things present, nor things to come: nor height nor depth
-- shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

5. This whole process, both of mourning for an absent God, and recovering the
joy of his countenance, seems to be shadowed out in what our Lord spoke to his
apostles, the night before his passion. John xvi. 19 -- 22.
Do ye enquire of that I said, a little while and ye shall not see me, and
again a little while and ye shall see me? Verily, verily I say unto you, that
ye shall weep and lamem, namely, when ye do not see me; but the world shall
rejoice, shall triumph over you, as though your hope were now come to an end.
And ye shall be sorrowful, through doubt, through fear, through temptation, through
vehement desire: But your sorrow shall be turned into joy, by the return of him
whom your soul loves. A woman when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her
hour is come. But as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now have
sorrow: ye mourn and cannot be comforted. But I will see you again: and your
heart shall rejoice, with calm, inward joy, and your joy no man takes from you.

6. But although this mourning is at an end, is lost in holy joy, by the return
of the comforter, yet is there another, and a blessed mourning it is, which
abides in the children of God. They still mourn for the sins and miseries of
mankind: they weep with them that weep. They weep for them that weep not for
themselves, for the sinners against their own souls. They mourn for the
weakness and unfaithfulness of those, that are in some measure saved from their
sins. Who is weak and they are not weak? Who is offended and they burn not?
They are grieved for the dishonor continually done to the Majesty of heaven
and earth. At all times they have an awful sense of this, which brings a deep
seriousness upon their spirit: a seriousness which is not a little increased,
since the eyes of their understanding were opened, by their continually seeing
the vast ocean of eternity, without a bottom or a shore, which has already
swallowed up millions of millions of men, and is gaping to devour them that yet
remain. They see here the house of God eternal in the heavens; there, hell and
destruction without a covering; and thence feel the importance of every moment,
which just appears, and is gone for ever.

7. But all this wisdom of God is foolishness with the world. The whole affair
of mourning and poverty of spirit, is with them stupidity and dullness. Nay, it
is well if they pass so favorable a judgment upon it; if they do not vote it
to be mere moping and melancholy, if not downright lunacy and distraction. And
it is no wonder at all, that this judgment should be passed by those who know
not God. Suppose as two persons were walking together, one should suddenly
stop, and with the strongest signs of fear and amazement, cry out, "On what a
precipice do we stand! See, we are on the point of being dasned in pieces!
Another step, and we fall into that huge abyss. Stop! I will not go on for all
the world." When the other, who seemed to himself at least equally
sharp-sighted, looked forward and saw nothing of all this; what would he think
of his companion? But that he was beside himself; that his head was out of
order: that much religion (if he was not guilty of much learning) had certainly
made him mad.

8. But let not the children of God, the mourners in Sion, be moved by any of
these things. Ye whose eyes are enlightened, be not troubled by those who walk
on still in darkness. Ye do not walk on in a vain shadow: God and eternity are
real things. Heaven and hell are in very deed open before you: and ye are on
the edge of the great gulf. It has already swallowed up more than words can
express. Nations, and kindreds and people, and tongues, and still yawns to
devour, whether they see it or no, the giddy, miserable children of men. O cry
aloud! Spare not! Lift up your voice, to him who grasps both time and eternity,
both for yourselves and your brethren, that ye may be counted worthy to escape
the destruction that comes as a whirlwind! That ye may be brought safe through
all the waves and storms, into the haven where you would be. Weep for
yourselves, till he wipes away the tears from your eyes. And even then weep for
the miseries that come upon the earth, till the Lord of all shall put a period
to misery and sin, shall wipe away the tears from all faces, and the knowledge
of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea.

DISCOURSE THE SECOND, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. v. 5, 6, 7. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.

Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall
be filled.

Blessed are the Merciful; for they shall obtain Mercy.


1. WHEN the winter is past, when the time of singing is come, and the voice of
the turtle is heard in the land; when he that comforts the mourners is now
returned, that he may abide with them for ever: when at the brightness of his
presence the clouds disperse, the dark clouds of doubt and uncertainty, the
storms of fear flee away, the waves of sorrow subside, and their spirit again
rejoiceth in God their Savior: then is it that this word is eminently
fulfilled, then those whom he has comforted can bear witness, Blessed, or
happy, are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.

2. But who are the meek? Not those who grieve at nothing, because they know
nothing; who are not discomposed at the evils that occur, because they discern
not evil from good. Not those who are sheltered from the shocks of life, by a
stupid insensibility; who have either by nature or art, the virtue of stocks
and stones, and resent nothing, because they feel nothing. Brute philosophers
are wholly unconcerned in this matter. Apathy is as far from meekness as from
humanity. So that one would not easily conceive, how any christians of the
purer ages, especially any of the fathers of the church, could confound these,
and mistake one of the foulest errors of heathenism, for a branch of true
christianity.

3. Nor does christian meekness imply, the being without zeal for God, any more
than it does ignorance or insensibility. No; it keeps clear of every extreme,
whether in excess or defect. It does not destroy but balance the affections,
which the God of Nature never designed should be rooted out by grace, but only
brought and kept under due regulations. It poises the mind aright. It holds an
even scale, with regard to anger, and sorrow, and fear: preserving the mean in
every circumstance of life, and not declining either to the right hand or the
left.

4. Meekness therefore seems properly to relate to ourselves. But it may be
referred either to God or our neighbor. When this due composure of mind has
reference to God, it is usually termed resignation; a calm acquiescence in
whatsoever is his will concerning us, even though it may not be pleasing to
nature; saying continually, It is the Lord; let him do what seems him good.
When we consider it more strictly with regard to ourselves, we style it
patience or contentedness. When it is exerted toward other men, then it is
mildness to the good, and gentleness to the evil.

5. They who are truly meek, can clearly discern what is evil; and they can
also suffer it. They are sensible of every thing of this kind; but still
meekness holds the reins. They are exceeding zealous for the Lord of Hosts; but
their zeal is always guided by knowledge, and tempered in every thought, and
word, and work, with the love of man as well as the love of God. They do not
desire to extinguish any of the passions, which God has for wise ends implanted
in their nature. But they have the mastery of all; they hold them all in
subjection, and employ them only in subservience to those ends. And thus even
the harsher and more unpleasing passions, are applicable to the noblest
purposes. Even hate, and anger, and fear, when engaged against sin, and
regulated by faith, and love, are as walls and bulwarks to the soul, so that
the wicked one cannot approach to hurt it.

6. It is evident, this divine temper, is not only to abide, but to increase in
us day by day. Occasions of exercising, and thereby increasing it, will never
be wanting while we remain upon earth. We have need of patience, that after we
have done and suffered the will of God, we may receive the promise. We have
need of resignation, that we may in all circumstances say, Not as I will, but
as thou will. And we have need of gentleness toward all men; but especially
toward the evil and unthankful: otherwise we shall be overcome of evil, instead
of overcoming evil with good.

7. Nor does meekness restrain only the outward act, as the scribes and
pharisees taught of old, and the miserable teachers, who are not taught of God,
will not fail to do in all ages. Our Lord guards us against this, and shows the
true extent of it in the following words: Ye have heard that it was said by
them of old time, thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the judgment, Ver. 21, etc.

But I say unto you, that whosoever shall be angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: But whosoever shall say, Thou
fool, shall be in danger of hellfire.

8. Our Lord here ranks under the head of murder, even that anger which goes no
farther than the heart; which does not show itself by any outward unkindness;
no not so much as a passionate word.

Whosoever is angry with his brother, with any man living, seeing we are all
brethren, whosoever feels any unkindness in his heart, any temper contrary to
love: whosoever is angry without a cause, without a sufficient cause, or
farther than that cause requires, shall be in danger of the judgment, (...)
shall in that moment be obnoxious to the righteous judgment of God.

But would not one be inclined to prefer the reading of those copies, which
omit the word, (...), without a cause? Is it not entirely superfluous? for if
anger at persons be a temper contrary to love, how can there be a cause, a
sufficient cause for it? any that will justify it in the sight of God?

Anger at sin we allow. In this sense we may be angry and yet we sin not. In
this sense our Lord himself, is once recorded to have been angry. He looked
round about upon them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their
hearts. He was grieved at the sinners, and angry at the sin. And this is
undoubtedly right before God.

9. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca: whosoever shall give way to
anger, so as to utter any contemptuous word. It is observed by commentators,
that raca is a Syriac word, which properly signifies, empty, vain, foolish: so
that it is as inoffensive an expression as can well be used, toward one at whom
we are displeased. And yet whosoever shall use this, as our Lord assures us,
shall be in danger of the council: rather, shall be obnoxious thereto: he shall
be liable to a severer sentence from the Judge of all the earth.

But whosoever shall say, Thou Fool -- Whosoever shall so give place to the
devil, as to break out into reviling, into designedly reproachful and
contumelious language, shall be obnoxious to hellfire, shall in that instant
be liable to the highest condemnation. It should be observed, that our Lord
describes all these, as obnoxious to capital punishment. The first to
strangling, usually inflicted on those who were condemned in one of the
inferior courts: the second to stoning, which was frequently inflicted on those
who were condemned by the great council at Jerusalem; the third to burning
alive, inflicted only on the highest offenders, in the valley of the sons of
Hin^^om. (...) from which that word is evidently taken, which we translate hell.

10. And whereas men naturally imagine, that God will excuse their defect in
some duties, for their exactness in others, our Lord next takes care to cut off
that vain, though comm^^ imagination. He shows, that it is impossible for any
sinner to commute with God: who (...) not accept one duty for another, nor take
a part of obedience for the whole. He warns us, that the performing our duty to
God, will not excuse us from our duty to our neighbor: that works of piety, as
they are called, will be so far from commending us to God, if we are wanting in
charity, that on the contrary, that want of charity will make all those works
an abomination to the Lord.

Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the aliar, and there rememberest that thy
brother has ought against thee, on account of thy unkind behavior toward him,
of thy calling him, Raca, or Thou Fool; think not that thy gift will atone for
thy anger; or that it will find any acceptance with God, so long as thy
conscience is defiled with the guilt of unrepented sin. Leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother (at least,
do all that in thee lies toward being reconciled) and then come and offer thy
gift, Ver. 23, 24.

11. And let there be no delay in what so nearly concerns thy soul. Agree
with thine adversary quickly -- Now: upon the spot -- while thou art in the way
with him -- if it be possible, before he go out of thy sight -- lest at any
time the adversary deliver thee to the judge -- lest he appeal to God, the
judge of all, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, to satan, the
executioner of the wrath of God, and thou be cast into prison, into hell, there
to be reserved to the judgment of the great day. Verily I say unto thee, thou
shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing.
But this it is impossible for thee ever to do; seeing thou have nothing to pay.
Therefore if thou art once in that prison, the smoke of thy torment must ascend
up for ever and ever.

12. Mean time the meek shall inherit the earth. Such is the foolishness of
worldly wisdom! The wise of the world had warned them again and again, "That if
they did not refent such treatment, if they would tamely suffer themselves to
be thus abused, there would be no living for them upon earth; that they would
never be able to procure the common necessaries of life, nor to keep even what
they had; that they could expect no peace, no quiet possession, no enjoyment of
any thing." Most true -- suppose there were no God in the world; or suppose he
did not conc^^^ himself with the children of men. But when God arises to
judgment, and to help all the meek upon earth, how does he laugh all this
heathen wisdom to scorn, and turn the fierceness of man to his praise! he takes
a peculiar care, to provide them with all things needful for life and
godliness. He secures to them the provision he has made, in spite of the
force, fraud or malice of men. And what he secures, he gives them richly to
enjoy. It is sweet to them, be it little or much. As in patience they possess
their souls, so they truly possess whatever God has given them. They are
always content, always pleased with what they have. It pleases them, because it
pleases God. so that while their heart, their desire, their joy is in heaven,
they may truly be said to inherit the earth.

13. But there seems to be a yet farther meaning in these words, even that they
shall have a more eminent part in the new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, in that inheritance, a general description of which (and the
particulars we shall know hereafter) St. John has given in the 20th chapter of
the revelation. And I saw an angel come down from heaven -- and he laid hold on
the dragon, that old serpent -- and bound him a thousand years -- and I saw the
souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of
God, and of them which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads or in their hands, and they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not
again, until the thousand years were expired. This is the first resurrection:
blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such the
second death has no power. But they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years.

II. 1. Our Lord has hitherto been more immediately employed, in removing the
hindrances of true religion: such is pride, the first, grand hinderance of all
religion, which is taken away by poverty of spirit; levity, and
thoughtlessness, which prevent any religion from taking root in the soul, till
they are removed by holy mourning: such are anger, impatience, discontent,
which are all healed by christian meekness. And when once these hindrances are
removed, these evil diseases of the soul, which were continually raising false
cravings therein, and filling it with sickly appetites, the native appetite of
a heaven-born spirit returns; it hungers and thirsts after righteousness: and
blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall
be filled.

2. Righteousness (as was observed before) is the image of God, the mind which
was in Christ Jesus. It is every holy and heavenly temper in one; springing
from, as well as terminating in the love of God, as our Father and Redeemer,
and the love of all men, for his sake.

3. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after this: in order fully to
understand which expression, we should observe, First, That hunger and thirst
are the strongest of all our bodily appetites. In like manner this hunger in
the soul, this thirst after the image of God, is the strongest of all our
spiritual appetites, when it is once awakened in the heart: yea, it swallows
up all the rest in that one great desire, to he renewed after the likeness of
him that created us. We should, secondly, observe, that from the time we begin
to hunger and thirst, those appetites do not cease but are more and more
craving and importunate, till we either eat and drink or die. And even so, from
the time that we begin to hunger and thirst after the whole mind which was in
Christ, these spiritual appetites do not cease, but cry after their food with
more and more importunity. Nor can they possibly cease, before they are
satisfied, while there is any spiritual life remaining. We may, Thirdly,
observe, That hunger and thirst are satisfied with nothing but meat and drink.
If you would give to him that is hungry all the world beside, all the elegance
of apparel, all the trappings of state, all the treasure upon earth, yea
thousands of gold and silver: if you would pay him ever so much honor, he
regards it not; all these things are then of no account with him. He would
still say, these are not the things I want; give me food, or else I die. The
very same is the case with every soul that truly hungers and thirsts after
righteousness. He can find no comfort in any thing but this; he can be
satisfied with nothing else. Whatever you offer besides, it is lightly
esteemed; whether it be riches, or honor, or pleasure, he still says, this is
not the thing which I want. Give me love or else I die!

4. And it is as impossible to satisfy such a soul, a soul that is a-thirst for
God, the living God, with what the world accounts religion, as with what they
account happiness. The religion of the world implies three things; First, the
doing no harm, the abstaining from outward sin; at least from such as is
scandalous, as robbery, theft, common swearing, drunkenness; Secondly, The
doing good, the relieving the poor, the being charitable, as it is called:
Thirdly, The using the means of grace; at least, the going to church and to the
Lord's supper. He in whom these three marks are found, is termed by the world a
religious man. But will this satisfy him who hungers after God? No. It is not
food for his soul. He wants a religion of a nobler kind, a religion higher and
deeper than this. He can no more feed on this poor, shallow, formal thing, than
he can fill his belly with the east wind. True, he is careful to abstain from
the very appearance of evil: he is zealous of good works. He attends all the
ordinances of God. But all this is not what he longs for. This is only the
outside of that religion, which he insatiably hungers after. The knowledge of
God in Christ Jesus, the Life which is hid with Christ in God, the being joined
unto the Lord in one spirit, the having fellowship with the Father and the Son;
the walking in the light as God is in the light, the being purified even as he
is pure: this is the religion, the righteousness he thirsts after. Nor can he
rest, till he thus rests in God.

5. Blessed are they who thus hunger and thirst after righteousness. For they
shall be filled. They shall be filled with the thing which they long for; even
with righteousness and true holiness. God shall satisfy them with the blessings
of his goodness, with the felicity of his chosen. He shall feed them with the
bread of heaven, with the manna of his love. He shall give them to drink of his
pleasures as out of the river, which he that drinks of, shall never thirst:
only for more and more of the water of life. This thirst shall endure for ever.

The painful thirst, the fond desire,
Thy joyous presence shall remove:
But my full soul shall still require
A whole eternity of love.
6. Whosoever then thou art, to whom God has given to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, cry unto him that thou may never lose that inestimable gift,
that this divine appetite may never cease. If many rebuke thee, and bid thee
hold thy peace, regard them not, yea, cry so much the more, Jesus, Master, have
mercy on me! let me not live, but to be holy as thou art holy! no more spend
thy money for that which is not bread, nor thy labor for that which satisfies
not. Can thou hope to dig happiness out of the earth? to find it in the
things of the world? O trample under foot all its pleasures, despise its
honors, count its riches as dung and dross: yea, and all the things which are
beneath the sun, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus; for the
entire renewal of thy soul in that Image of God, wherein it was originally
created. Beware of quenching that blessed hunger and thirst, by what the world
calls religion: A religion of form, of outside show, which leave^ the heart as
earthly and sensual as ever. Let nothing satisfy thee but the power of
godliness, but a religion that is spirit and life; the dwelling in God and God
in thee, the being an inhabitant of eternity; the entering in by the blood of
sprinkling within the veil, and sitting in heavenly places with Christ Jesus.

III. 1. And the more they are filled with the life of God, the more tenderly
will they be concerned, for those who are still without God in the world, still
dead in trespasses and sins. Nor shall this concern for others lose its reward.
Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.

The word used by our Lord, more immediately implies, the compassionate, the
tenderhearted; those, who far from despising, earnestly grieve for those that
do not hunger after God. This eminent part of brotherly love, is here (by a
common figure) put for the whole: so that the merciful, in the full sense of
the term, are they who love their neighbors as themselves.

2. Because of the vast importance of this love, without which, though we spoke
with the tongues of men and angels, though we had the gift of prophecy and
understood all mysteries and all knowledge, though we had all faith so as to
remove mountains; yea, though we gave all our goods to feed the poor, and our
very bodies to be burned, it would profit us nothing: the wisdom of God has
given us by the apostle Paul, a full and particular account of it: by
considering which we shall most clearly discern, who are the merciful that
shall obtain mercy.

3. Charity, or love (as it were to be wished it had been rendered throughout,
being a far plamer and less ambiguous word) the love of our neighbor as Christ
has loved us, suffers long, is patient toward all men. It suffers all the
weakness, ignorance, errors, infirmities, all the frowardness and littleness of
faith, in the children of God; all the malice and wickedness of the children of
the world. And it suffers all this, not only for a time, for a short season,
but to the end: still feeding our enemy when he hungers: if he thirst, still
giving him drink: thus continually heaping coals of fire, of melting love, upon
his head.

4. And in every step toward this desirable end, the overcoming evil with good,
love is kind ((...) a word not easily translated) it is soft, mild, benign. It
stands at the utmost distance from moroseness, from all harshness or sowerness
of spirit; and inspires the sufferer at once with the most amiable sweetness,
and the most fervent and tender affection.

5. Consequently, love envieth not, it is impossible it should, it is directly
opposite to that baneful ^^^mper. It cannot be, that he who has this tender
affection to all, who earnestly wishes all temporal and spiritual blessings,
all good things in this world and the world to come, to every soul that God
has made, should be pained at his bestowing any good gift, on any child of
man. If he has himself received the same, he does not grieve but rejoice, that
another partakes of the common benefit. If he has not, he blesses God, that his
brother at least has, and is herein happier than himself. And the greater his
love, the more does he rejoice, in the blessings of all mankind: the farther is
he removed from every kind and degree of envy toward any creature.

6. Love (...) Not vaunteth not itself, which co-incides with the very next
words, but rather (as the word likewise properly imports) is not rash or hasty
in judging. It will not hastily condemn any one. It does not pass a severe
sentence, on a slight or sudden view of things. It first weighs all the
evidence, particularly that which is brought in favor of the accused. A true
lover of his neighbor, is not like the generality of men, who even in cases of
the nicest nature, "see a little, presume a great deal, and so jump to the
conclusion." No: he proceeds with wariness and circumspection, taking heed to
every step: willingly subscribing to that rule of the ancient heathen, (O where
will the modern christian appear!) "I am so far from lightly believing what one
man says against another, that I will not easily believe what a man says
against himself. I will always allow him second thoughts, and many times
council too."

7. It follows, love is not pussed up. It does not incline or suffer any man,
to think more highly of himself than be ought to think: but rather to think
soberly. Yea, it humbles the soul unto the dust. It destroys all high conceits
engendering pride, and makes us rejoice to be as nothing, to be little and
vile, the lowest of all, the servant of all. They who are kindly affectioned
one to another with brotherly love, cannot but in honor prefer one another.
Those who having the same love are of one accord, do in lowliness of mind each
esteem other better than themselves.

8. It does not behave itself unseemly. It is not rude, or willingly offensive
to any. It renders to all their due; fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor:
courtesy, civility, humanity to all the world; in their several degrees
honoring all men. A late writer defines good-breeding, nay, the highest degree
of it, politeness, "a continual desire to please, appearing in all the
behavior. But if so, there is none so well-bred as a christian, a lover of all
mankind. For he cannot but defire to please all me^^, ^ir their good, to
edification. And (...) desires cannot be hid: ^t will necessarily appear in all
his intercourse with man. For his love is without dissimulotion; it will appear
in all his actions and conversation: yea, and will constrain him, though without
guile, to become all things to all men, if by any means he may save some.

9. And in becoming all things to all men, love seeks not her ^wn. In
stri^ing to please all men, the lover of mankind has no eye at all to his own
temporal advantage. He covets no man's silver, or gold, or apparel: he desires
nothing, but the salvation of their souls. Yea, in some sense he may be said,
not to seek his own spiritual, any more than temporal advantage. For while he
is on the full stretch to save their souls from death, he, as it were forgets
himself. He does not think of himself, so long as that zeal for the glory of
God swallows him up. Nay, at some times, he may almost seem, through an excess
of love, to give up himself, both his soul and his body: while he cries out
with Moses, Exodus xxxii. 31, 32.
Oh! this people have sinned a great sin. Yet now, if thou will, forgive their
sin. And if not, blot me out of the book which thou have written! Or with St.
Paul, Romans ix. 3.
I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen
according to the flesh!

10. No marvel that such love is not provoked: (...) Let it be observed, the
word easily, strangely inserted in the translation, is not in the (...). St.
Paul's words are absolute. Love is not provoked: It is not provoked to
unkindness toward any one. Occasions indeed will frequently occur; outward
provocations of various kinds: but love does not yield to provocation. It
triumphs over all. In all trials it looks unto Jesus, and is more that
conqueror in his love.

It is not improbable, that our translators inserted that word, as it were to
excuse the apostle; who, as they supposed, might otherwise appear to be
wanting, in the very love which he so beautifully describes. They seem to have
supposed this from a phrase in the Acts of the Apostles; which is likewise very
inaccurately translated. When Paul and Barnabas disagreed concerning John, the
translation runs thus, Acts. xv. 39.
And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed asunder. This
naturally induces the reader to suppose, that they were equally sharp therein:
that St. Paul, who was undoubtedly right, with regard to the point in question
(it being quite improper to take John with them again, who had deserted them
before) was as much provoked as Barnabas who gave such a proof of his anger, as
to leave the work for which he had been set apart by the Holy Ghost. But the
original imports no such thing; nor does it affirm, that St. Paul was provoked
at all. It simply says (...). And there was a sharpness a paroxysm of anger: in
consequence of which Barnabas left St. Paul, took John and went his own way.
Paul then chose Silas and departed, being recommended (...) the brethren to the
grace of God;; (which is not said concerning Barnabas) and he ^^^nt through
Syria and Cilicia, as he had propos^^l, confirming the churches. But to return.

11. Love prevents a thousand provocations which would otherwise arise, because
it thinks no evil. Indeed the merciful man cannot (...) knowing many things
that are evil, he cannot but see them with his own eyes and hear them with his
own ears. For love does not put out his eyes, so that it is impossible for him,
not to see that such things are done. Neither does it take away his
understanding, any more than his senses, so that he cannot but know that they
are evil. For instance: when he sees a man strike his neighbor, or hears him
blaspheme God, he cannot either question the thing done or the words spoken, or
doubt of their being evil. Yet (...) The word (...) (thinks) does not refer,
either to our seeing and hearing, or to the first and involuntary acts of our
understanding: but to our willingly thinking what we need not; our inferring
evil, where it does not appear: to our reasoning concerning things which we do
not see; our supposing what we have neither seen nor heard. This is what true
love absolutely destroys. It tears up, root and branch, all imagining what we
have not known. It casts out all jealousies, all evil surmisings, all readiness
to believe evil. It is frank, open, unsuspicious; and as it cannot design, so
neither does it fear evil.

12. It rejoiceth not in iniquity: common as this is, even among those who bear
the name of Christ; who scruple not to rejoice over their enemy, when he
falls either into affliction or error or sin. Indeed how hardly can they
avoid this, who are zealously attached to any party? how difficult is it for
them not to be pleased with any fault which they discover in those of the
opposite party? with any real or supposed blemish, either in their principles
or practice? what warm defender of any cause is clear of these? Yea, who is so
calm as to be altogether free? who does not rejoice when his adversary makes a
false step, which he thinks will advantage his own cause? only a man of love.
He alone weeps over either the sin or folly of his enemy, takes no pleasure in
hearing or in repeating it, but rather desires that it may be forgotten for
ever.

13. But he rejoiceth in the truth, wheresoever it is found, in the truth which
is after godliness, bringing forth its proper fruit, holiness of heart and
holiness of conversation. He rejoices to sind, that even those who oppose him,
whether with regard to opinions or some points of practice, are nevertheless
lovers of God, and in other respects unreprovable. He is glad to hear good of
them, and to speak all he can consistently with truth and justice. Indeed, good
in general is his glory and joy, wherever diffused throughout the race of
mankind. As a citizen of the world he claims a share in the happiness of all
the inhabitants of it. Because he is a man, he is not unconcerned in the
welfare of any man: but enjoys whatsoever brings glory to God, and promotes
peace and good will among men.

14. This love covers all things. (So without all doubt (...) should be
translated: for otherwise it would be the very same with (...) endures all
things.) Because the merciful man rejoiceth not in iniquity, neither does he
willingly make mention of it. Whatever evil he sees, hears or knows, he
nevertheless conceals, so far as he can, without making himself partaker of
other men's sins. Wheresoever or with whomsoever he is, if he sees any thing
which he approves not, it goes not out of his lips, unless to the person
concerned, if happily he may gain his brother. So far is he from making the
faults or failings of others the matter of his conversation, that of the absent
he never does speak at all, unless he can speak well. A talebearer, a
backbiter, a whisperer, an evilspeaker, is to him all one as a murderer. He
would just as soon cut his neighbor's throat, as thus murder his reputation.
Just as soon would he think of diverting himself by setting fire to his
neighbor's house, as of thus scattering abroad arrows, firebrands and death,
and saying, am I not in sport?

He makes one only exception. Sometimes he is convinced, that it is for the
glory of God, or (which comes to the same) the good of his neighbor, that an
evil should not be covered. In this case, for the benefit of the innocent, he
is constrained to declare the guilty. But even here, 1. He will not speak at
all, till love, superior love constrains him. 2. He cannot do it from a general
confused view of doing good, or promoting the glory of God, but from a clear
sight of some particular end, some determinate good which he pursues. 3. Still
he cannot speak, unless he be fully convinced, that this very means is
necessary to that end; that the end cannot be answered, at least not so
effectually, by any other way. 4. He then does it with the utmost sorrow and
reluctance, using it a the last and worst medicine, a desperate remedy in a
desperate case, a kind of poison never to be used but to expel poison.
Consequently, 5. He uses it as sparingly as possible. And this he does with
fear and trembling, lest he should transgress the law of love by speaking too
much, more than he would have done by not speaking at all.


15. Love believes all things. It is always willing to think the best; to put
the most favorable construction on every thing. It is ever ready to believe
whatever may tend to the advantage of any ones character. It is easily
convinced of (what it earnestly desires) the innocence or integrity of any man;
or, at least, of the sincerity of his repentance, if he had once erred from the
way. It is glad to excuse whatever is amiss; to condemn the offender as little
as possible, and to make all the allowance for human weakness, which can be
done without betraying the truth of God.

16. And when it can no longer believe, then love hops all things. Is any
evil related of any man? love hopes, that the relation is not true, that the
thing related was never done? Is it certain it was? -- "But perhaps it was not
done with such circumstances as are related; so that allowing the fact, there
is room to hope, it was not so ill as it is represented." Was the action
apparently, undeniably evil? love hopes the intention was not so. Is it clear,
the design was evil too? -- "Yet might it not spring from the settled temper of
the heart: but from a start of passion, or from some vehement temptation, which
hurried the man beyond himself." And even when it cannot be doubted, but all
the actions, designs and tempers are equally evil: still love hopes that God
will at last make bare his arm, and get himself the victory; and that there
shall be joy in heaven over this one sinner that repents, more than over
ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance.

17. Lastly, it endures all things. This com^^eates the character, of him that
is truly merciful. He endures not some, not many things only, not most, but
absolutely all things. Whatever the injustice, the malice, the cruelty of men,
can inflict, he is able to suffer. He calls nothing intolerable; he never says
of any thing, "This is not to be borne." No; he can, not only do, but suffer
all things through Christ which strengthens him. And all he suffers does not
destroy his love, not impair it in the least. It is proof against all. It is a
flame that burns even in the midst of the great deep. Many waters cannot quench
his love, neither can the floods drown it. It triumphs over all. It never
fails, either in time or in eternity.

"In obedience to what heaven decrees,
Knowledge shall fail and prophecy shall cease.
But lasting charity's more ample sway,
Nor bound by time, nor subject to decay,
In happy triumph shall for ever live,
And endless good diffuse, and endless praise receive."
So shall the merciful obtain mercy: not only by the blessing of God, upon all
their ways, by his now repaying the love they bear to their brethren, a
thousand sold into their own bosom: but likewise by an exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, in the kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the
world.

18. For a little while you may say, woe is me that I am constrained to dwell
with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar! you may pour
out your soul, and bemoan the loss of true, genuine love in the earth. Lost
indeed! you may well say (but not in the ancient sense) "See how these
Christians love one another!" These christian kingdoms, that are tearing out
each other's bowels, desolating one another with fire and sword! these
christian armies, that are sending each other by thousands, by ten thousands
quick into hell! these christian nations, that are all on fire with intestine
broils, party against party, faction against faction! these christian cities,
where deceit and fraud, oppression and wrong, yea, robbery and murder go not
out of their streets! these christian families, torn asunder with envy,
jealousy, anger, domestic jars, without number, without end! yea, what is most
dreadful, most to be lamented of all, these christian churches! -- churches (
Tell it not in Gath -- but alas, how can we ^^^e it, either from Jews, Turks,
or Pagans) that bear the name of Christ the prince of peace, and wage continual
war with each other! that convert sinners by burning them alive: that are drunk
with the blood of the saints! -- Does this praise belong only to Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth? nay, verily; but
reformed churches (so called) have fairly learned to tread in her steps.
Protestant churches too know how to persecute, when they have power in their
hands, even unto blood. And mean while, how do they also anathematize each
other! devote each other to the nethermost hell! what wrath, what contention,
what malice, what bitterness, is every where found among them? even where they
agree in essentials, and only differ in opinions, or in the circumstantials of
religion. Who follows after only the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another? O God! how long shall thy promise fail? fear
it not, ye little flock. Against hope believe in hope. It is your Father's good
pleasure, yet to renew the face of the earth. Surely all these things shall
come to an end, and the inhabitants of the earth shall learn righteousness.
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they know war any
more. The mountain of the Lord's house shall be established on the top of the
mountains: and all the kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of our
God. They shall not then hurt or destroy, in all his holy mountain; but they
shall call their walls salvation and their gates praise. They shall all be
without spot or blemish, loving one to another, even as Christ has loved us.
Be thou part of the first fruits, if the harvest is not yet. Do thou love thy
neighbor as thyself. The Lord God fill thy heart with such a love to every
soul, that thou may be ready to lay down thy life for his sake! May thy soul
continually overflow with love, swallowing up every unkind and unholy temper,
till he calls thee into the region of love, there to reign with him for ever
and ever!

DISCOURSE THE THIRD, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Blessed are the pure in Heart; for they shall see
God.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Children of God.

Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness-sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
Manner of Evil against you falsely for my Sake.

Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward in Heaven: for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.


1. HOW excellent things are spoken of the love of our neighbor! It is the
fulfilling of the law, the end of the commandment. Without this all we have,
all we do, all we suffer, is of no value in the sight of God. But it is that
love of our neighbor which springs from the love of God: otherwise itself is
nothing worth. It behooves us therefore to examine well upon what foundation our
love of our neighbor stands: whether it is really built upon the love of God?
whether we do love him, because (...) first loved us? whether we are pure in
heart? for this is the foundation, which shall never be moved. Blessed are the
pure in heart; for they shall see God.

2. The pure in heart are they, whose hearts God has purified even as he is
pure; who are purified through faith in the blood of Jesus, from every unholy
affection; who being cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfect
holiness in the loving fear of God. They are, through the power of his grace,
purified from pride, by the deepest poverty of spirit; from anger, from every
unkind or turbulent passion, by meekness and gentleness; from every desire but
to please and ^^joy God, to know and love him more and mo^^, by that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, which now engrosses their whole soul: so that now
they love the Lord their God, with (...) their heart, and with all their soul
and mind and strength.

3. But how little has this purity of heart been regarded, by the false
teachers of all ages? They have taught men barely, to abstain from such outward
impurities, as God has forbidden by name. But they did not strike at the
heart; and by not guarding against, they in effect, countenanced inward
corruptions.

A remarkable imbance of this, our Lord has given us, in the following words:
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery. Ver. 27.
And in explaining this, those blind leaders of the blind, only insist on men's
abstaining from the outward act. Ver. 28.
But I say unto you, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart, for God requires truth in
the inward parts. He searches the heart and tries the reins. And if thou
incline unto iniquity with thy heart, the Lord will not hear thee.

4. And God admits no excuse for retaining any thing, which is an occasion of
impurity. Therefore if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell, ver. 29. If a person as dear
to thee as thy right eye, be an occasion of thy thus offending God, a means of
exciting unholy desire in thy soul; delay not; forcibly separate from them. And
if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell, ver. 30. If any who seems as necessary to
thee as thy right hand, be an occasion of sin, of impure desire; even ^^^^^gh
it were never to go beyond the heart, never to break out in word or action;
constrain thyself to an entire and final parting: cut them off at a stroke;
give them up to God. Any loss, whether of pleasure or substance or friends, is
preferable to the loss of any soul.

Two steps only it may not be improper to take, before such an absolute and
final separation. First, try whether the unclean spirit may not be driven out
by fasting and prayer, and by carefully abstaining from every action and word
and look, which thou have found to be an occasion of evil. Secondly, if thou
art not by this means delivered, ask counsel of him that watches over thy
soul, or at least of some who have experience in the ways of God, touching the
time and manner of that separation. But confer not with flesh and blood, lest
thou be given up to a strong delusion to believe a lie.

5. Nor may marriage itself, holy and honorable as it is, be used, as a
pretense for giving a loose to our desires. Indeed, It has been said,
whosoever will put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement.
And then all was well; though he alleged no cause, but that he did not like her;
or liked another better. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his
wife, saving for the cause of fornication (that is, adultery; the word (...)
signifying unchastity in general, either in the married or unmarried state)
causes her to commit adultery, if she marry again; and whosoever shall marry
her that is put away, commits adultery, ver. 31, 32.

All polygamy is clearly forbidden in these words, wherein our Lord expressly
declares, that for any woman who has a husband alive, to marry again is
adultery. By parity of reason, it is adultery for any man to marry again, so
long as he has a wife alive. Yea, although they were divorced: unless that
divorce had been for the cause of adultery. In that only case, there is no
scripture, which forbids the innocent person to marry again.

6. Such is the purity of heart which God requires, and works in those who
believe on the son of his love. And blessed are they who are thus pure in
heart. For they shall see God. He will manifest himself unto them, not only as
he does not unto the world, but as he does not always to his own children. He
will bless them with the clearest communications of his spirit, the most
intimate fellowship with the Father and with the Son. He will cause his
presence to go continually before them, and the light of his countenance to
shine upon them. It is the ceaseless prayer of their heart, I beseech thee,
show me thy glory: and they have the petition they ask of him. They now see him
by faith (the veil of flesh being made, as it were, transparent) even in these
his lowest works, in all that surrounds them, in all that God has created and
made. They see him in the height above and in the depth beneath; they see him
filling all in all.

The pure in heart see all things full of God. They see him in the firmament of
heaven, in the moon walking in brightness, in the sun when he rejoiceth as a
giant to run his course. They see him making the clouds his chariots, and
walking upon the wings of the wind. They see him preparing rain for the earth,
and blessing the increase of it; giving grass for the cattle, and green herbs
for the use of man. They see the Creator of all, wisely governing all, and
upholding all things by the word of his power. O Lord, our governor! how
excellent is thy name in all the world!

7. In all his providence relating to themselves, to their souls or bodies,
the pure in heart do more particularly see God. They see his hand ever over
them for good; giving them all things in weight, and measure, numbering the
hairs of their head, making a hedge round about them and all that they have,
and disposing all the circumstances of their life, according to the depth both
of his wisdom and mercy.

8. But in a more especial manner, they see God in his ordinances. Whether they
appear in the great congregation, to pay him the honor due unto his name, and
worship him in the beauty of holiness; or enter into their closets and there
pour out their souls before their Father which is in secret: whether they
search the oracles of God, or hear the ambassadors of Christ proclaiming glad
tidings of salvation; or by eating of that bread, and drinking of that cup,
show forth his death till he come in the clouds of heaven: in all these his
appointed ways, they find such a near approach as cannot be expressed. They see
him, as it were, face to face, and talk with him, as a man talks with his
friend: a fit preparation for those mansions above, wherein they shall see him
as he is.

9. But how far were they from seeing God, who having beard, that it had been
said by them of old time, Ver. 33.
thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths:
interpreted it thus, thou shall not forswear thyself, when thou swearest by the
Lord Jehovah. Thou shall perform unto the Lord these thine oaths. But as to
other oaths he regards them not.

So the Pharisees taught. They not only allowed all manner of swearing in
common conversation: but accounted even forswearing a little thing, so they had
not sworn by the peculiar name of God.

But our Lord here absolutely forbids all common swearing, as well as all false
swearing: and thews the heinousness of both, by the same awful consideration,
that every creature is God's, and he is every where present, in all, and over
all.

Ver. 34.
I say unto you, swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is God's throne.
And therefore this is the same as to swear by him, who sits upon the circle
of the heavens: Ver. 35.
nor by the earth: for it is his footstool: and he is as intimately present in
earth as heaven: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king,
and God is well known in her palaces. Ver. 36.
Neither shall thou swear by thy head; because thou can not make one hair
white or black: because even this, it is plain, is not thine but God's, the
sole disposer of all in heaven and earth. Ver. 37.
But let your communication, your conversation, your discourse with each other,
be yea, yea; nay, nay: a bare, serious affirming or denying; for whatsoever is
more than these, comes of evil: (...) is of the evil one; proceeds from the
devil and is a mark of his children.

10. That our Lord does not here forbid, the swearing in judgment and truth,
when we are required so to do by a magistrate, may appear, 1. From the occasion
of this part of his discourse, the abuse he was here reproving, which was false
swearing and common swearing; the swearing before a magistrate being quite out
of the question. 2. From the very words wherein he forms the general
conclusion, let your communication, or discourse, be yea, yea; nay, nay. 3.
From his own example; for he answered himself upon oath, when required by a
magistrate. When Matt. xxvi. 63, 64.
the high priest said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell
us, whether thou be the Christ, the son of God! Jesus immediately answered in
the affirmative, thou have said (i. e. the truth.) Nevertheless (or rather,
^^^eover) I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. 4. From the example of
God, even the father, Heb. vi. 17.
who willing the more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath. 5. From the example of
St. Paul, who, we think had the spirit of God, and well understood the mind of
his master.
Romans i. 9.
God is my witness, says he, to the Romans, that without ceasing, I make
mention of you always in my prayers; to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. i. 23.
I call God to record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto
Corinth: and to the Philippians, Phil. i. 8.
God is my record how greatly I long after you, in the bowels of Jesus Christ
(hence it undeniably appears, that if the apostle knew the meaning of his
Lord's words, they do not forbid swearing on weighty occasions, even to one
another: how much less before a magistrate?) and lastly, from that assertion of
the great apostle, concerning solemn swearing in general (which it is
impossible he could have mentioned without any touch of blame, if his Lord had
totally forbidden it) Heb. vi.
men verily swear by the greater (by one greater than themselves) and on oath
for confirmation is to them the end of all strife.

11. But the great lesson which our blessed Lord inouleates here, and which he
illustrates by this example, is, that God is in all things, and that we are to
see the Creator in the glass of every creature; that we should use and look
upon nothing as separate from God, which indeed is a kind of practical atheism;
but with a true magnificence of thought, survey heaven and earth and all that
is therein, as contained by God in the hollow of his hand, who by his intimate
presence holds them all in being, who pervades and actuates the whole created
frame, and is, in a true sense, the soul of the universe.

II. 1. Thus far our Lord has been more directly employed, in teaching the
religion of the heart. He has shown, what christians are to be. He proceeds to
show, what they are to do also: how inward holiness is to exert itself in our
outward conversation. Blessed, faith he, are the peacemakers: for they shall
be called the children of God.

2. The peacemakers: The word in the original is (...) It is well known that
(...) in the sacred writings, implies all manner of good; every blessing that
relates either to the soul or the body, to time or eternity. Accordingly when
St. Paul in the titles of his epistles, wishes grace and peace to the Romans or
the Corinthians, it is as if he had said, "As a fruit of the free, undeserved
love and favor of God, may you enjoy all blessings, spiritual and temporal,
all the good things which God has prepared for them that love him."

3. Hence we may easily learn, in how wide a sense, the term peacemakers is to
be understood. In its literal meaning it implies, those lovers of God and man,
who utterly detest and abhor all strife and debate, all variance and
contention: and accordingly labor with all their might either to prevent this
fire of hell from being kindled, or when it is kindled, from breaking out, or
when it is broke out, from spreading any farther. They endeavor to calm the
stormy spirits of men, to quiet their turbulent passions, to soften the minds
of contending parties, and, if possible, reconcile them to each other. They use
all innocent arts, and employ all their strength, all the talents which God has
given them, as well to preserve peace, where it is, as to restore it, where it
is not. It is the joy of then heart, to promote, to confirm, to increase mutual
good will among men: but more especially among the children of God, however
distinguished by things of smaller importance. That as they have all one Lord,
one faith; as they are all called in one hope of their calling, so they may all
walk worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called: with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace.

4. But in the full extent of the word, a peacemaker is one, that as he has
opportunity, does good unto all men: one that being filled with the love of God
and of all mankind, cannot confine the expressions of it to his own family, or
friends, or acquaintance, or party: or to those of his own opinions; no, nor
those who are partakers of like precious faith: but steps ever all these narrow
bounds, that he may do good to every man: that he may some way or other
manifest his love to neighbors and strangers, friends and enemies. He does
good to them all, as he has opportunity, that is on every possible occasion;
redeeming the time, in order thereto, buying up every opportunity, improving
every hour, losing no moment wherein he may profit another. He does good, not
of one particular kind, but good in general: in every possible way, employing
herein all his talents of every kind; all his powers and faculties of body and
soul; all his fortune, his interest, his reputation; desiring only, that when
his Lord comes he may say, "Well done, good and faithful servant!"

5. He does good, to the uttermost of his power, even to the bodies of all men.
He rejoices to deal his bread to the hungry, and to cover the naked with a
garment. Is any a stranger? he takes him in, and relieves him according to his
necessities. Are any sick or in prison? he visits them, and administers such
help as they stand most in need of. And all this he does, not as unto man; but
remembering him that has said, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

6. How much more does he rejoice, if he can do any good to the soul of any
man! this power indeed belongs unto God. It is he only that changes the
heart, without which every other change is lighter than vanity. Nevertheless it
^^^ses him who works all in all, to help man chiefly by man; to convey his
own power and blessing and love, through one man to another. Therefore, although it
be certain; that the help which is done upon earth, God does it himself, yet
has no man need, on this account, to stand idle in his vineyard. The
peacemaker cannot: he is ever laboring therein, and as an instrument in God's
hand, preparing the ground for his master's use, or sowing the seed of the
kingdom, or watering what is already sown, if happily God may give the increase.
According to the measure of grace which he has received, he uses all diligence,
either to reprove the gross sinner, to reclaim those who run on headlong in the
broad way of destruction; or to give light to them that sit in darkness, and
are ready to perish for lack of knowledge; or to support the weak, to lift up
the hands that hang down and the feeble knees; or to bring back and heal that
which was lame and turned out of the way. Nor is he less zealous to confirm
those who are already striving to enter in at the straight gate; to strengthen
those that stand, that they may run with patience the race which is set before
them; to build up in their most holy faith, those that know in whom they have
believed: to exhort them to stir up the gift of God which is in them, that
daily growing in grace, an emtrance may be ministered unto them abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

7. Blessed are they who are thus comtinually employed, in the work of says
and the labor of love. For they shall be called, that is, shall be (a conimon
Hebraism) the children of God. God shall continue unto them the spirit of
adoption, yea, shall pour it more abundantly into their hearts. He shall bless
them with all the blessings of his children. He shall acknowledge them as sons
before angels and men; and if sons, then heirs; heirs of God and joint heirs
with Christ.

III. 1. One would imagine such a person as has been above described, so full
of genuine humility, so unaffectedly serious, so mild and gentle, so free from
all selfish design, so devoted to God, and such an active lover of men, should
be the darling of mankind. But our Lord was better acquainted with human
nature, in its present state. He therefore closes the character of this man of
God, with showing him the treatment he is to expect in the world. Blessed,
says he, are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.

2. In order to understand this thoroughly, let us, First, enquire, who are they
that are persecuted. And this we may easily learn from St. Paul: Gal. iv. 29.
as of old, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born
after the spirit, even so it is now. Tim.
Yea, says the apostle, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer parsecution. The same we are taught by St. John. 1 John iii. 13.
Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. We know that we have passed
fi^m death unto life, because we love the brethren. As if he had said, the
brethren, the christians cannot be loved, but by them who have passed from
death unto life. And most expressly, by our Lord: John xv. 18, etc.
if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye
were of the world, the world would love its own^s but because ye are not of the
world -- therefore the world hates you. Remember the word that I said unto
you, the servant is not greater than his Lord. If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you.

By all these scriptures i^ manifestly appears; who they are that are
persecuted: namely, the righteous, he that is born after the spirit; all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus: they that are passed from death unto life;
those who are not of the world: all these who are meek and lowly in heart, that
mourn for God, that hunger after his likeness; all that love God and their
neighbor, and therefore as they have opportunity, do good unto all men.

3. If it be, Secondly, enquired, why they are persecuted? the answer is
equally plain and obvious. It is for righteousness sake; because they are
righteous; because they are born after the spirit; because they will live godly
in Christ Jesus; because they are not of the world. Whatever may be pretended,
this is the real cause: be their insirmities more or less, still if it were not
for this, they would be borne with, and the world would love its own. They are
persecuted, because they are poor in spirit, that is, say the world,
"Boor-spirited, mean, dastardly souls, good for nothing, not fit to live in the
world!" because they mourn; "They are such dull heavy, lumpish creatures,
enough to sink any one's spirit that sees them! they are mere deaths-heads;
they kill innocent mirth, and spoil company wherever they come:" because they
are meek; "tame, passive fools, just fit to be trampled upon:" because they
hunger and thirst after righteousness; "A parcel of hot-brained enthusiasts,
gaping after they know not what, not content with rational religion, but
running mad after raptures and inwards feelings:" because they are merciful,
lovers of all, lovers of the evil and unthankful: "Encouraging all manner of
wickedness; nay, tempting people to do mischief by impunity: and men who, it is
to be feared, have their own religion still to seek; very loose in
their-principles:" because they are pure in heart? "Uncharitable creatures!
that damn all the world, but those that are of their own sort! blasphemous
wretches, that pretend to make God a har, to live without sin!" above all,
because they are peacemakers, because they take all opportunities of doing
good to all men. This is the grand reason why they have been persecuted in all
ages, and will be till the restitution of all things.

"If they would but keep their religion to themselves, it would be tolerable.
But it is this spreading their errors, this infecting so many others, which is
not to be endured. They do so much mischief in the world, that they ought to be
tolerated no longer. It is true, the men do some things well enough; they
relieve some of the poor. But this too, is only done to gain the more to their
party; and so, in effect, to do the more mischief." Thus the men of the world
sincerely think and speak. And the more the kingdom of God prevails, the more
the peacemakers are enabled to propagate lowliness, meekness, and all other
divine tempers; the more mischief is done, in their account. Consequently, the
more are they enraged, against the authors of this, and the more vehemently
will they persecute them.

4. Let us, Thirdly, enquire, who are they that persecute them? St. Paul
answers, he that is born after the flesh; every one who is not born of the
spirit, or at least, desirous so to be: all that do not, at least, labor to
live godly in Christ Jesus: all that are not passed from death unto life, and
consequently cannot love the brethren: the world, that is according to our
savior's account, they who know not him that sent me: they who know not God,
even the loving, pardoning God, by the teaching of his own spirit.

The reason is plain. The spirit which is in the world is directly opposite to
the spirit which is of God. It must therefore needs be that those who are of
the world, will be opposite to those who are of God. There is the utmost
contrariety between them, in all their opinions, their desires, designs, and
tempers. And hitherto the ^^pard and the kid, cannot lie down in peace
together. The proud, because he is proud, cannot but persecute the lowly; the
light and airy, those that mourn: and so in every other kind; the unlikeness of
disposition (were there no other) being a perpetual ground of earnity.
Therefore (were it only on this account) all the serrants of the devil, will
persecute the children of God.

5. Should it be enquired, fourthly, how they will persecute them? it may be
answered in general, just in that manner and measure which the wise disposer of
all, sees will be most for his glory; will tend most to his children's growth
in grace, and the enlargement of his own kingdom. There is no one branch of
God's government of the world, which is more to be admired than this. His car
is never heavy to the threatenings of the persecutor, or the cry of the
persecuted. His eye is ever open, and his hand stretched out, to direct every,
the minutest circumstance. When the storm shall begin, how high it shall rise,
which way it shall point its course, when and how it shall end, are all
determined by his unerring wisdom. The ungodly are only a sword of his: an
instrument which he uses, as it pleases him, and which itself, when the
gracious ends of his providence are answered, is cast into the fire.

At some rare times, as when christianity was planted first, and while it was
taking root in the earth; as also when the pure doctrine of Christ began to be
planted again in our nation: God permitted the storm to rise high, and his
children were called to resist unto blood. There was a peculiar reason why he
suffered this with regard to the apostles, that their evidence might be the
more unexceptionable. But from the annals of the church, we learn another, and
a far different reason, why he suffered the heavy persecutions which arose in
the second and third centuries: namely, because the mystery of iniquity did so
strongly work, because of the monstrous corruptions which even then reigned in
the church: these God chastised, and at the same time strove to heal, by those
severe but necessary visitations.

Perhaps the same: observation may be made, with regard to the grand
persecution in our own land. God had dealt very graciously with out nation; he
had poured out various blessings upon us. He had given us peace abroad and at
home; and a king wise and good, beyond his years. And above all, he had caused
the pure light of his gospel, to arise and shine amongst us. But what return
did he find? be looked for righteousness. But behold a cry! a cry of oppression
and wrong, of ambition and injustice, of malice and fraud and covetousness.
Yea, the cry of those who even then expired in the flames, entered into the
ears of the Lord of Sabbath. It was then God arose to maintain his own cause,
against those that held the truth in unrighteousness. Then he sold them into
the hands of their persecutors, by a judgment mixed with mercy: an affliction to
punish and yet a medicine to heal the grievous backslidings of his people.

6. But it is seldom God suffers the storm to rise so high, as torture or death
or bonds or imprisonment. Whereas his children are frequently called to endure
those lighter kinds of persecution; they frequently suffer the estrangement of
kinsfolks; the loss of the friends that were as their own soul. They find the
truth of their Lord's word (concerning the event, though not the design of his
coming) * Suppose ye that I am come to give peace upon earth? I tell you nay;
but rather division. And hence will naturally follow loss of business or
employment, and consequently of substance. But all these circumstances likewise
are under the wise direction of God, who allots to every one what is most
expedient for him.

7. But the persecution which attends all the children of God, is that our Lord
describes in the following words, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and
persecute you (shall persecute, by reviling you) and say all manner of evil
against you, falsely, for my sake. This cannot fail: it is the very badge of
our discipleship: it is one of the seals of our calling. It is a sure portion,
entailed on all the children of God: if we have it not, we are bastards and not
sons. Strait through evil report, as well as good report, lies the only way to
the Kingdom. The meek, serious, humble, zealous lovers of God and man, are of
good report among their brethren; but of evil report with the world, who count
and treat them as the filth and offscouring of all things.

8. Indeed some have supposed, that before the fullness of the gentiles shall
come in, the scandal of the cross will cease: that God will cause christians to
be esteemed and loved, even by those who are as yet in their sins. Yea, and
sure it is, that even now, he at sometimes suspends the contempt as well as the
fierceness of men: be makes a man's enemies to be at peace with him for a
season, Luke xii. 51.
and gives him favor with his bitterest perfecutors But setting aside this
exempt case, the scandal of the cross is not yet ceased: but a man may say
still, if I please men, I am not the servant of Christ: let no man therefore
regard that pleasing suggestion (pleasing doubtless to flesh and blood) "That
bad men only pretend to hate and depise them that are good, but do indeed love
and esteem them in their hearts." Not so: they may employ them sometimes; but
it is for their own profit. They may put confidence in them; for they know
their ways are not like other men's. But still they love them not; unless so
far as the spirit of God may be striving with them. Our Savior's words are
express: if ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but because ye
are not of the world, therefore the world hates you. Yea (setting aside what
exceptions may be made by the preventing grace or the peculiar providence of
God) it hates them as cordially and sincerely, as ever it did their master.

9. It remains only to enquire, how are the children of God to behave, with
regard to persecution? and first, they ought not knowingly or designedly, to
bring it upon themselves. This is contrary both to the example and advice of
our Lord and all his apostles; who teach us not only not to seck, but to avoid
it, as far as we can, without injuring our conscience; without giving up any
part of that righteousness, which we are to prefer before life itself. So our
Lord expressly, when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another:
which is indeed, when it can be taken, the most unexceptionable way of avoiding
persecution.

10. Yet think not, that you can always avoid it either by this, or any other
means. If ever that idle imagination steals into your heart, put it to flight
by that earnest caution, remember the word that I said unto you, the servant is
not greater th^^^ his Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also
persecute you. Be ye wise as serpents and ha^^^less as doves. But will this
screen you from per^^^ution? not unless you have more wisdom tha^ ^^^ur master,
or more innocence than the Lamb of God.

Neither desire to avoid it, to escape it wholly; for if you do, you are none
of his. If you escape the persecution, you escape the blessing; the blessing of
those who are persecuted for righteousness sake. If you are not persecuted for
righteousness sake, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. If we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him. But if we deny him, he will also deny
us.

11. Nay, rather, rejoice and be exceeding glad, when men persecute you for his
sake: when they persecute you by reviling you, and by saying all manner of evil
against you, falsely (which they will not fail to mix with every kind of
persecution; they must blacken you to excuse themselves.) For so persecuted
they the prophets which were before you, those who were most eminently holy in
heart and life; yea, and all the righteous which ever have been from the
beginning of the world. Rejoice, because by this mark also, ye know unto whom
ye belong. And because great is your reward in heaven: the reward purchased by
the blood of the covenant, and freely bestowed in proportion to your
sufferings, as well as holiness of heart and life. Be exceeding glad; knowing
that. these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work out for you a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

12. Mean time, let no persecution turn you out of the way of lowliness and
meekness, of love and beneficence. Ver. 38, etc.
Ye have heard indeed that it has been said, an eye for an eye and a tooth for
a tooth. And your miserable teachers have hence allowed you to avenge
yourselves, to return evil for evil.

But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil -- not thus; not by returning it
in kind. But (rather than do this) whosoever smites thee on thy right cheek,
turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with him twain.

So invincible let thy meekness be. And be thy love suitable thereto. Give to
him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou
away. Only, give not away that which is another man's, that which is not thine
own. Therefore, 1. Take care to owe no man any thing. For what thou owe is
not thy own but another man's. 2. Provide for those of thine own household.
This also God has required of thee: and what is necessary to sustain them in
life and godliness, is also not thine own. Then, 3. Give or lend all that
remains from day to day, or from year to year. Only first, seeing thou can
not give or lend to all, remember the household of faith.

13. The meekness and love we are to feel, the kindness we are to show to them
which persecute us for righteousness sake, our blessed Lord describes farther
in the following verses. O that they were graven upon our hearts!

Ver. 43, etc.
Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate
thy enemy. (God indeed had said only the former part, Thou shall love thy
neighbor. The children of the devil had added the latter, And hate thy enemy.)
But I say unto you, 1. Love your enemies. See that you bear a tender good will,
to those who are most bitter of spirit against you, who wish you all manner of
evil. 2. Bless them that curse you. Are there any whose bitterness of spirit
breaks forth in bitter words? who are continually cursing and reproaching you
when you are present, and saying all evil against you when absent? So much the
rather do you bless. In conversing with them, use all mildness and softness of
language. Reprove them, by repeating a better lesson before them, by showing
them how they ought to have spoken. And in speaking of them, say all the good
you can, without violating the rules of truth and justice. 3. Do good to them
that hate you. Let your actions show, that you are as real in love as they in
hatred. Re^urn good for evil. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good. 4. If you can do nothing more, at least pr^y for them that despightfully
use you and persecute you.
You can never be disabled from doing this; nor can all their malice or
violence hinder you. Pour out your souls to God not only for those, who did
this once, but now repent. This is a little thing. Luke xvii. 3.
If thy brother seven times a day, turn and say unto thee, I repent; that is,
if after ever so many relapses, he give thee reason to believe, that he is
really and thoroughly changed, then thou shall forgive him, so as to trust him,
to put him in thy bosom, as if he had never sinned against thee at all. But
pray for, wrestle with God, for those that do not repent, that now despitefully
use thee and persecute thee. Thus far forgive them, Mat. xviii. 21.
not until seven times only, but until seventy times seven. Whether they repent
or no, yea though they appear farther and farther from it, yet show them this
instance of kindness: That ye may be the ch^^^ren, that ye may approve
yourselves the genuine children of your Father which is in heaven, who shows
his goodness by giving such blessings as they are capable of, even to his
stubbornest enemies; who makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. Ver. 47.
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the
publicans the same? Who pretend to no religion; whom ye yourselves acknowledge
to be without God in the world. Ver. 48.
And if ye salute, show kindness in word or deed, to your brethren, your
friends or kinsfolk only: What do ye more than others? Than those who have no
religion at all? Do not even the publicans so? Nay, but follow ye a better
pattern than them. In patience, in long-suffering, in mercy, in beneficence of
every kind, to all, even to your bitterest persecutors: Ibid.
Be ye Christians perfect (in kind, though not in degree) even as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect.

III. Behold christianity in its native form! as delivered by its great Author!
This is the genuine religion of Jesus Christ. Such he presents it to him whose
eyes are opened. See a picture of God, so far as he is imitable by man! A
picture drawn by God's own hand! Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish! Or
rather, wonder and adore! Rather cry out, Is this the religion of Jesus of
Nazareth? The religion which I persecuted! Let me no more be found even to
fight against God. Lord, what would thou have me to do? What beauty appears
in the whole! How just a symmetry! What exact proportion in every part! How
desirable is the happiness here described? How venerable, how lovely the
holiness? -- This is the spirit of religion: The quintessence of it. These are
indeed the fundamentals of christianity. O that we may not be hearers of it
only! Like a man beholding his own face in a glass, who goes his way, and
straightway forgets what manner of man he was. Nay, but let us steadily look
into this perfect law of liberty, and continue therein. Let us not rest, until
every line thereof is transcribed into our own hearts. Let us watch and pray
and believe and love, and strive for the mastery, till every part of it shall
appear in our soul, graven there by the finger of God: till we are holy as he
which has called us is holy, perfect as our Father which is in heaven is
perfect!

DISCOURSE THE FOURTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. Ye are the Salt of the Earth. But if the Salt has
lost its Savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under Foot of Men.

Ye are the Light of the World. A City that is set on an Hill cannot be hid.

Neither do Men light a Candle and put it under a Bushel; but on a Candlestick,
and it gives Light to all that are in the House.

Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.


1. THE beauty of holiness, of that inward man of the heart, which is renewed
after the image of God, cannot but strike every eye which God has opened,
every enlightened understanding. The ornament of a meek, humble, loving spirit,
will at least excite the approbation of all those who are capable in any degree
of discerning spiritual good and evil. From the hour men begin to emerge out of
the darkness which covers the giddy, unthinking world, they cannot but perceive
how desirable a thing it is, to be thus transformed into the likeness of him
that created us. This inward religion bears the shape of God, so visibly
impressed upon it, that a soul must be wholly immersed in flesh and blood, when
he can doubt of its divine original. We may say of this, in a secondary sense,
even as of the Son of God himself, that it is the Brightness of his glory, the
express image of his person: (...). The beaming forth of his eternal glory; and
yet so tempered and softened, that even the children of men, ^^ay herein see
God and live: (...) the character, the stamp, the living impression, of his
person, who is the fountain of beauty and love, the original source of all
excellency and perfection.

3. If religion therefore were carried no farther than this, they could have no
doubt concerning it: they should have no objection against pursuing it with the
whole ardor of their souls. But why, say they, is it clogged with other things?
what need of loading it with doing and suffering? these are what damps the
vigor of the soul and sinks it down to earth again Is it not enough, to follow
after charity? to soar upon the wings of love? will it not suffice, to worship
God who is a spirit, with the spirit of our minds, without incumbering
ourselves with outward things, or even thinking of them at all? is it not
better, that the whole extent of our thought should be taken up with high and
heavenly contemplation? and that instead of busying ourselves at all about
externals, we should only commune with God in our hearts?

4. Many eminent men have spoken thus; have advised us "To cease from all
outward action;" wholly to withdraw from the world; to leave the body behind
us; to abstract ourselves from all sensible things: to have no concern at all
about outward religion, but to "work all virtues in the will," as the far more
excellent way, more perfective of the soul, as well as more acceptable to God.

5. It needed not that any should tell our Lord, of this masterpiece of the
wisdom from beneath! this fairest of all the devices wherewith satan has ever
perverted the right ways of the Lord. And O! what instruments has he found
from time to time, to employ in this his service! to wield this grand engine of
hell, against some of the most important truths of God! men that would deceive
if it were possible the very elect; the men of faith and love: yea, that have
for a season deceived and led away no inconsiderable number of them; who have
fallen in all ages into the gilded snare, and hardly escaped with the skin of
their teeth.

6. But has our Lord been wanting on his part? has he not sufficently guarded
us against this pleasing delusion? has he not armed us here with armor of
proof against satan transformed into an angel of light? yea, verily: he here
defends, in the clearest and strongest manner, the active, patient religion he
had just described: what can be fuller and plainer than the words he
immediately subjoins, to what he had said of doing and suffering? ye are the
salt of the earth. But if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under
foot of men. Ye are the light of the world: a city that is set on an hill
cannot be hid. Neither a men light a candle and put it under a bushel; but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. Let your light
so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your father
which is in heaven.

In order fully to explain and enforce these important words, I shall endeavor
to show, First, that christianity is essentially a social religion, and that to
turn it into a solitary one, is to destroy it: Secondly, that to conceal this
religion is impossible, as well as utterly contrary to the design of its
author. I shall, Thirdly, answer some objections; and conclude the whole with a
practical application.

I. 1. First, I shall endeavor to show, that christianity is essentially a
social religion; and that to turn it into a solitary religion, is indeed to
destroy it.

By christianity I mean, that method of worshipping God, which is here revealed
to man by Jesus Christ. When I say, this is essentially a social religion, I
mean not only, that it cannot subsist so well, but that it cannot subsist at
all without society, without living and conversing with other men. And in
showing this, I shall confine myself to those considerations, which will arise
from the very discourse before us. But if this be shown, then doubtless to turn
this religion into a solitary one, is to destroy it.

Not (...) we can in any wise condemn the intermixing solitude or retirement
with society. This is not only allowable, but expedient: nay, it is necessary
as daily experience shows, for every one that either already is, or desires to
be a real christian. It can hardly be that we should spend one entire day, in a
continued intercourse with men, without suffering loss in our soul, and in some
measure grieving the holy spirit of God. We have need daily to retire from the
world, at least, morning and evening, to converse with God, to commune more
freely with our Father which is in secret. Nor indeed can a man of experience
condemn, even longer seasons of religious retirement, so they do not imply any
neglect of the worldly employ, wherein the providence of God has placed us.

2. Yet such retirement must not swallow up all our time; this would be to
destroy, not advance true religion. For, that the religion described by our
Lord in the foregoing words, cannot subsist without society, without our living
and conversing with other men, is manifest from hence, that several of the most
essential branches thereof, can have no place, if we have no intercourse with
the world.

3. There is no disposition (for instance) which is more essential to
christianity than meekness. Now although this, as it implies resignation to God,
or patience in pain and sickness, may subsist in a desert, in a hermit's cell,
in total solitude; yet as it implies (which it no less necessarily does)
mildness, gentleness and long-suffering, it cannot possibly have a being, it
has no place under heaven, without an intercourse with other men. So that to
attempt turning this into a solitary virtue, is to destroy it from the face of
the earth.

4. Another necessary branch of true christianity, is peacemaking, or doing of
good. That this is equally essential with any of the other parts of the
religion of Jesus Christ, there can be no stronger argument to evince (and
therefore it would be absurd to allege any other) than that it is here inserted
in the original plan he has laid down, of the fundamentals of his religion.
Therefore to set aside this, is the same daring insait on the authority of our
great master, as to set aside mercifulness, purity of heart, or any other
branch of his institution. But this is apparently set aside, by all who call us
to the wilderness; who recommend entire solitude either to the babes, or the
young men, or the fathers in Christ. For will any man affirm, that a solitary
christian (so called, though it is little less than a contradiction in terms) can
be a merciful man? that is, one that takes every opportunity of doing all good
to all men? what can be more plain, than that this fundamental branch of the
religion of Jesus Christ, cannot possibly subsist without society, without our
living and conversing with other men?

5. But is it not expedient however (one might naturally ask) to converse only
with good men? only with those whom we know to be meek and merciful; holy of
heart and holy of life? is it not expedient to refrain from any conversation or
intercourse, with men of the opposite character? men who do not obey, perhaps
do not believe, the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? the advice of St. Paul to
the christians at Corinth, may s^^m to favor this. I 1 Cor. v. 9.
wrote unto you in an ^^^le, not to company with fornicators. And it is
certainly not advisable so to company with them, or with any of the workers of
iniquity, as to have any particular familiarity, or any strictness of
friendship with them. To contract or continue an intimacy with any such, is no
way expedient for a christian. It must necessarily expose him to abundance of
dangers and snares, out of which he can have no reasonable hope of deliverance.

But the apostle does not forbid us, to have any intercourse at all, even with
the men that know not God. For then, says he, ye must needs go out of the
world, which he could never advise them to do. But he subjoins, If Ver. 11.
any man that is called a brother, that professes himself a christian, be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner -- now I have written unto you not to keep company with him; with
such an one, no not to eat. This must necessarily imply, that we break off all
familiarity, all intimacy of acquaintance with them. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 15.
Yet count him not, says the apostle elsewhere, as an enemy, but admonish him
as a brother: plainly showing, that even in such a case as this, we are not to
renounce all fellowship with him: so that here is no advice, to separate
wholly, even from wicked men. Yea, these very words teach us quite the contrary.

6. Much more the words of our Lord: who is so far from directing us, to break
off all commerce with the world, that without it, according to his account of
christianity, we cannot be christians at all. It would be easy to show, that
some intercourse even with ungodly and unholy men, is absolutely needful in
order to the full exertion of every temper, which he has described as the way
of the kingdom: that it is indispensibly necessary in order to the complete
exercise of poverty of spirit, of mourning, and of every other disposition
which has a place here, in the genuine religion of Jesus Christ. Yea, it is
necessary to the very being of several of them; of that meekness, for example,
which instead of demanding an eye for an eye, or a tooth for a tooth, does not
resist evil; but causes us rather, when smitten on the right cheek, to turn the
other also: of that mercifulness, whereby we love our enemies, bless them that
curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully
use us and persecute us: and of that complication of love and all holy tempers,
which is exercised in su^^ering for righteousness sake. Now all these, it is
clear, could have no being, were we to have no commerce with any but real
christians.

7. Indeed were we wholly to separate ourselves from sinners, how could we
possibly answer that character, which our Lord gives us in these very words: ye
(christians, ye that are lowly, serious and meek; ye that hunger after
righteousness, that love God and man, that do good to all, and therefore suffer
evil: ye) are the salt of the earth. It is your very nature to season whatever
is round about you. It is the nature of the divine favor which is in you, to
^^^ead to whatsoever you touch; to diffuse itself, on every side, to all those
among whom you are. This is the great reason why the Providence of God has so
mingled you together with other men, that whatever grace you have received of
God may through you be communicated to others; that every holy temper, and
word, and work of yours, may have an influence on them also. By this means a
check will in some measure be given to the corruption which is in the world;
and a small part, at least, saved from the general infection, and rendered holy
and pure before God.

8. That we may the more diligently labor to season all we can, with every
holy and heavenly temper, our Lord proceeds to show the desperate state of
those, who do not impart the religion they have received; which indeed they
cannot possibly fail to do, so long as it remains in their own hearts. If the
salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good
for nothing but to be cast out, and trodden under foot of men. If ye who were
holy and heavenlyminded, and consequently zealous of good works, have no longer
that savor in yourselves, and do therefore no longer season others; if you are
grown flat, insipid, dead, both carcless of your own soul, and useless to the
souls of other men, wherewith shall ye be salted? How shall ye be recovered?
What help? What hope? Can tasteless salt be restored to its savor! No; it is
thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, even as the mire in the
streets, and to be trodden under foot of men, to be overwhelmed with
everlasting comtempt. If ye had never known the Lord, there might have been
hope, if ye had never been found in him. But what can you say to that his
solemn declaration, just parallel to what he has here spoken? John xv. 2, 5, 6.
Every branch in me that bears not fruit he (the Father) takes away. He that
abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit. -- If a man abide not
in me (or, do not bring forth fruit) be is cast out as a branch and withered;
and men gather them (not to plant them again, but) to cast them into the fire.

9. Toward those who have never tasted of the good word, God is indeed pitiful
and of tender mercy. But justice takes place with regard to those who have
tasted that the Lord is gracious, and have afterward turned back from the holy
commandment then delivered to them. Heb. vi. 4, etc.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, in whose hearts God
had once shined, to enlighten them with the knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of Jesus Christ; who have tasted of the heavenly gift, of redemption
in his blood, the forgiveness of sins; and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, of lowliness, of meekness, and of the love of God and man shed abroad in
their hearts, by the Holy Ghost which was given unto them: And have fallen
away, (...)(here is not a supposition, but a flat declaration of matter of
fact) to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

But that none may misunderstand these awful words, if should be carefully
observed, 1. Who they are that are here spoken of; namely, they, and they only,
who were once thus enlightened. They only who did taste of that heavenly gift,
and were thus made partakers of the Holy Ghost. So that all who have not
experienced these things, are wholly unconcerned in this scripture. 2. What
that falling away is which is here spoken of. It is an absolute, total
apostasy. A believer may fall, and not fall away. He may fall and rise again.
And if he should fall, even into sin, yet this case, dreadful as it is, is not
desperate. For we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous;
and he is the propitiation for our sins. But let him above all things beware,
lest his heart be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin: lest he should ^^nk
lower and lower, till he wholly fall away, till he become as salt that has
lost its savor: for if we thus sin wilfully, after we have received the
experimental knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins: But a certain, fearful looking for of fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries.

II. 1. "But although we may not wholly separate ourselves from mankind,
although it be granted, we ought to season them, with the religion which God
has wrought in our hearts, yet may not this be done insensibly? may we not
convey this into others in a secret, and almost imperceptible manner? so that
scarce any one shall be able to observe, how or when it is done? even as salt
conveys its own savor, into that which is seasoned thereby, without any noise,
and without being liable to any outward observation. And if so, although we do
not go out of the world, yet we may lie hid in it. We may thus far keep our
religion (...) ^^^selves, and not offend those whom we cannot ^^^p."

2. Of this plausible reasoning of flesh and blood, our Lord was well aware
also. And he has given a full answer to it in those words, which come now to be
considered: in explaining which I shall endeavor to show, as I proposed to do
in the second place, that so long as true religion abides in our hearts, it is
impossible to conceal it, as well as absolutely contrary to the design of its
great author.

And, First, It is impossible for any that have it, to conceal the religion of
Jesus Christ. This our Lord makes plain beyond all contradiction, by a twofold
comparison. Ye are the light of the world. A city set upon an hill cannot be
hid.

Ye christians are the light of the world, with regard both to your tempers and
actions. Your holiness makes you as conspicuous, as the sun in the midst of
heaven. As ye cannot go out of the world, so neither can ye stay in it, without
appearing to all mankind. Ye may not flee from men, and while ye are among
them, it is impossible to hide your lowliness and meekness, and those other
dispositions whereby ye aspire to be perfect, as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect. Love cannot be hid any more than light; and least of all, when it
shines forth in action; when ye exercise yourselves in the labor of love, in
beneficence of every kind. As well may men think to hide a city, as to hide a
christian: yea, as well may they conceal a city set upon a hill, as a holy,
zealous, active lover of God and man.

3. It is true, men who love darkness rather than light, because their deeds
are evil, will take all possible pains to prove, that the light which is in you
is darkness. They will say evil, all manner of evil, falsely, of the good which
is in you: they will lay to your charge that which is farthest from your
thoughts, which is the very reverse of all you are and all you do. And your
patient continuance in well-doing, your meek suffering all things for the
Lord's sake, your calm, humble joy in the midst of persecution, your unwearied
labor to overcome evil with good, will make you still more visible and
conspicuous than ye were before.

4. So impossible it is, to keep our religion from being seen, unless we cast
it away: so vain is the thought, of hiding the light, unless by putting it out.
Sure it is, that a secret, unobserved religion cannot be the religion of Jesus
Christ. Whatever religion can be concealed, is not christianity. If a christian
could be hid, he could not be compared to a city set upon an hill; to the light
of the world, the sun shining from heaven, and seen by all the world below.
Never therefore let it enter into the heart of him whom God has renewed in the
spirit of his mind, to hide that light, to keep his religion to himself;
especially considering it is not only impossible to conceal true christianity,
but likewise absolutely contrary to the design of the great author of it.

5. This plainly appears from the following words: neither do men light a
candle to put it under a bushel. As if he had said, as men do not light a
candle, only to cover and conceal it, so neither does God enlighten any soul
with his glorious knowledge and love, to have it covered or concealed, either
by prudence, falsely so called, or shame, or voluntary humility: to have it hid
either in a desert, or in the world; either by avoiding men, or in conversing
with them. But they put it on a candlestick, and it gives light to all that
are in the house. In like manner, it is the design of God, that every christian
should be in an open point of view: that he may give light to all around, that
he may visibly express the religion of Jesus Christ.

6. Thus has God in all ages spoken to the world, not only by precept but by
example also. He has not left himself without witness in any nation, where the
sound of the gospel had gone forth, without a few who testified his truth, by
their lives as well as their words. These have been as lights shining in a dark
place. And from time to time they have been the means of enlightening some, of
preserving a remnant, a little seed, which was counted unto the Lord for a
generation. They have led a few poor sheep out of the darkness of the world,
and guided their feet into the way of peace.

7. One might imagine, that where both scripture and the reason of things speak
so clearly and expressly, there could not be much advanced on the other side,
at least, not with any appearance of truth. But they who imagine thus, know
little of the depths of Satan. After all that scripture and reason have said,
so exceeding plausible are the pretenses for solitary religion, for a
christian's going out of the world, or at least hiding himself in it, that we
need all the wisdom of God to see through the snare, and all the power of God
to escape it: so many and strong are the objections which have been brought,
against being social, open, active christians.

III. 1. To answer these was the third thing which I proposed. And, first, it
has been often objected, that religion does not lie in outward things, but in
the heart, the inmost soul: that it is the union of the soul with God, the life
of God in the soul of man: that outside religion is nothing worth; seeing God
delights not in burnt-offerings, in outward services, but a pure and holy
heart is the sacrifice he will not despise.

I answer, it is most true, that the root of religion lies in the heart, in the
inmost soul: that this is, the union of the soul with God; the life of God in
the soul of man. But if this root be really in the heart, it cannot but put
forth branches. And these are, the several instances of outward obedience,
which partake of the same nature with the root; and consequently, are not only
marks or signs, but substantial parts of religion.

It is also true, that bare outside religion, which has no root in the heart,
is nothing worth; that God delights not in such outward services, no more
than in Jewish burnt-offerings, and that a pure and holy heart is a sacrifice,
with which he is always well pleased. But he is also well pleased with all that
outward service, which arises from the heart: with the sacrifice of our prayers
(whether public or private) of our p^^^ses and thanksgivings: with the
sacrifice of our goods, humbly devoted to him, and employed wholly to his
glory: and with that of our bodies, which he peculiarly claims; which the
apostle beseeches us, by the mercies of God, to present unto him, a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God.

2. A second objection, nearly related to this is, that love is all in all:
that it is the fulfilling of the saw, the end of the commandment, of every
commandment of God: that all we do and all we suffer, if we have not charity,
or love, profits us nothing: and therefore the apostle directs us, to follow
after charity, and terms this, the more excellent way.

I answer, it is granted, that the love of God and man, arising from faith
unfeigned, is all in all, the fulfilling of the law, the end of every
commandment of God. It is true, that without this whatever we do, whatever we
suffer profits us nothing. But it does not follow, that love is all in such a
sense, as to supe^cede either faith or good works. It is the fulfilling of the
law, not by releasing us from, but by constraining us to obey it. It is the end
of the commandment, as every commandment leads to and centres in it. It is
allowed, that whatever we do or suffer, without love, profits us nothing. But
withal whatever we do or suffer in love, though it were only the suffering
reproach for Christ, or the giving a cup of cold water in his name, it shall in
no wise lose its reward.

3. "But does not the apostle direct us, to follow after charity? And does he
not term it, a more excellent way?" -- He does direct us to follow after
charity. But not after that alone. His words are, 1 Cor. xiv. 1.
Follow after charity; and desire spiritual gifts. Yea, follow after charity;
and desire to spend and to be spent for your brethren. Follow after charity;
and as you have opportunity, do good to all men.

In the same verse also, wherein he terms this, The way of love, a more
excellent way, he directs the Corinthians to desire other gifts besides it:
yea, to desire them earnestly. 1 Cor. xii. 31.
Covet earnestly, says he, the best gifts: And yet I show unto you a more
excellent way. More excellent than what? Than the gifts of healing, of speaking
with tongues, and of interpreting, mentioned in the preceding verse. But not
more excellent than the way of obedience. Of this the apostle is not speaking.
Neither is he speaking of outward religion at all. So that this text is quite
wide of the present question.

But suppose the apostle had been speaking of outward as well as inward
religion, and comparing them together: suppose in the comparison he had given
the preference ever so much to the latter: suppose he had preferred (as he
justly might) a loving heart, before all outward works whatever: Yet it would
not follow, that we were to reject, either one or the other. No; God has
joined them together from the beginning of the world. And let not man put them
asunder.

4. "But God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit
and in truth. And is not this enough? Nay, ought we not to employ the whole
strength of our mind herein? Does not attending to outward things, clog the
soul, that it cannot soar aloft in holy contemplation? Does it not damp the
vigor of our thought? Has it not a natural tendency, to incumber and distract
the mind? Whereas St. Paul would have us to be without carefulness, and to wait
upon the Lord without distraction."

I answer, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth. Yea, and this is enough: we ought to employ the whole
strength of our mind therein. But then I would ask, What is it to worship God,
a Spirit, in spirit and in truth? Why, it is to worship him with our spirit; to
worship him in that manner, which none but spirits are capable of. It is, to
believe in him, as a wise, just, holy Being, of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity: and yet merciful, gracious, and long-suffering; forgiving iniquity
and transgression and sin: casting all our sins behind his back, and accepting
us in the beloved. It is, To love him, to delight in him, to desire him, with
all our heart, and mind, and soul, and strength: to imitate him we love, by
purifying ourselves, even as he is pure; and to obey him whom we love and in
whom we believe, both in thought, and word, and work. Consequently, one branch
of the worshipping God in spirit and in truth, is the keeping his outward
commandments. To glorify him therefore with our bodies as well as with our
spirits, to go through outward work with hearts lifted up to him, to make our
daily employment a sacrifice to God; to buy and sell, to eat and drink to his
glory: this is worshipping God in spirit and in truth, as much as the praying
to him in a wilderness.

5. But if so, then contemplation is only one way of worshipping God in spirit
and in truth. Therefore to give ourselves up entirely to this, would be to
destroy many branches of spiritual worship, all equally acceptable to God, and
equally profitable, not hurtful, to the soul. For it is a great mistake to
suppose, that an attention to those outward things, whereto the providence of
God has called us, is any clog to a christian, or any hinderance at all to his
always seeing him that is invisible. It does not at all damp the ardor of his
thought, it does not incumber or distract his mind; it gives him no uneasy or
hurtful care, who does it all as unto the Lord: who has learned, whatsoever he
does in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus: having only one
eye of the soul, which moves round on outward things, and one immovably fixed
on God. Learn what this means, ye poor recluses, that you may clearly discern
your own littleness of faith. Yea, that you may no longer judge others by
yourselves, go and learn what that means: Thou, O Lord, in tender love
Do all my burdens bear;
Lift my heart to things above,
And six it ever there.
Calm on tumult's wheel I sit;
Midst busy multitudes alone,
Sweetly waiting at thy feet,
Till all thy will be done.


6. But the grand objection is still behind. "We appeal, say they, to
experience. Our light did shine: we used outward things many years: and yet
they profited nothing. We attended on all the ordinances: but we were no better
for it; nor indeed any one else: nay we were the worse. For we fancied
ourselves christians for so doing, when we knew not what christianity meant."

I allow the fact. I allow that you and ten thousand more have thus abused the
ordinances of God: mistaking the means for the end: supposing that the doing
these, or some other outward works, either was the religion of Jesus Christ, or
would be accepted in the place of it. But let the abuse be taken away and the
use remain. Now use all outward things; but use them with a constant eye to the
renewal of your soul in righteousness and true holiness.

7. But this is not all. They affirm, "Experience likewise shows, that the
trying to do good is but lost labor: what does it avail to feed or cloth
men's bodies, if they are just dropping into everlasting fire? and what good
can any man do to their souls? if these are changed, God does it himself.
Besides, all men are either good, at least desirous so to be, or obstinately
evil. Now the former have no need of us. Let them ask help of God, and it shall
be given them. And the latter will receive no help from us. Nay, and our Lord
forbids, to cast our pearls before swine."

I answer, 1. Whether they will finally be lost or saved, you are expressly
commanded to feed the hungry and cloth the naked. If you can, and do not,
whatever becomes of them, you shall go away into everlasting fire. 2. Though it
is God only changes hearts, yet he generally does it by man. It is our part to
do all that in us lies, as diligently as if we could change them ourselves, and
then to leave the event to him. 3. God in answer to their prayers, builds up
his children by each other in every good gift; nourishing and strengthening the
whole body, by that which every joint supplieth. So that the eye cannot say to
the hand, I have no need of thee; no, nor even the head to the feet, I have no
need of you. Lastly, how are you assured, that the persons before you are dogs
or swine? judge them not, until you have tried. How know thou, O man, but
thou may gain thy brother? but thou may under God, save his soul from
death? when he spurns thy love and blasphemes the good word, then it is time to
give him up to God.

8. "We have tried. We have labored to reform sinners. And what did it avail?
on many we could make no impression at all: and if some were changed for a
while, yet their goodness was but as the morning dew; and they were soon as
bad, nay, worse than ever. So that we only hurt them -- and ourselves too; for
our minds were hurried and discomposed; perhaps filled with anger instead of
love. Therefore we had better have kept our religion to ourselves."

It is very possible this fact also may be true: that you have tried to do good
and have not succeeded; yea, that those who seemed reformed, relapsed into sin,
and their last state was worse than the first. And what marvel? is the servant
above his master? but how often did he strive to save sinners: and they would
not hear: or when they had followed him a while, they turned back as a dog to
his vomit. But he did not therefore desist from striving to do good: no more
should you, whatever your success be. It is your part, to do as you are
commanded: the event is in the hand of God. You are not accountable for this:
leave it to him, who orders all things well. In the morning sow thy seed, and
in the evening withold not thy hand; for thou know not whether shall
prosper, Eccles. ix. 6.

"But the trial hurries and frets your own soul." Perhaps it did so for this
very reason, because you thought you was accountable for the event, which no
man is, nor indeed can be. Or perhaps, because you was off your guard; you was
not watchful ever your own spirit. But this is no reason for disobeying God.
Try again; but try more warily than before. Do good (as you forgive) not seven
times only; but until seventy times seven. Only be wiser by experience: attempt
it every time more cautiously than before. Be more humbled before God, more
deeply convinced, that of yourself you can do nothing. Be more jealous over
your own spirit: more gentle and watchful unto prayer. Thus cast your bread
upon the waters, and you shall find it again after many days.

IV. 1. Notwithstanding all these plausible pretenses for hiding it, let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven. This is the practical application which our Lord
himself makes of the foregoing considerations.

Let your light so shine -- Your lowliness of heart, your gentleness and
meekness of wisdom: your serious, weighty concern for the things of eternity,
and sorrow for the sins and miseries of men: your earnest desire of universal
holiness and full happiness in God: your tender goodwill to all mankind, and
fervent love to your supreme benefactor. Endeavor not to conceal this light,
wherewith God has enlightened your soul: but let it shine before men, before
all with whom you are, in the whole tenor of your conversation. Let it shine
still more eminently in your actions, in your doing all possible good to all
m^n: and in your suffering for righteousness-sake, while you rejoice and are
exceeding glad, knowing that great is your reward in heaven.

2. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works: so
far let a christian be from ever designing, or desiring to conceal his
religion. On the coutrary, let it be your desire, not to conceal it; not to put
the light under a ^ushel. Let it be your care, to place it on a candlestic,
that it may give light to all that are in the house. Only take heed, not to
seek your own praise herein, not to desire any honor to yourselves. But let it
be your sole aim, that all, who see your good works, may glorify your Father
which is in heaven.

3. Be this your one ultimate end in all things. With this view, be plain,
open, undisguised, let your love be without dissimulation: why should you hide
fair, disinterested love? let there be no guile found in your mouth: let your
words be the genuine picture of your heart. Let there be no darkness or
reservedness in your conversation, no disguise in your behavior. Leave this to
those who have other designs in view; designs which will not bear the light. Be
ye artless and simple to all mankind; that all may see the grace of God which
is in you. And although some will harden their hearts, yet others will take
knowledge, that ye have been with Jesus, and by returning themselves to the
great Bishop of their souls, glorify your Father which is in heaven.

4. With this one design, that men may glorify God in you, go on in his name,
and in the power of his might. Be not ashamed, even to stand alone, so it be in
the ways of God. Let the light which is in your heart, shine in all good works,
both works of piety and works of mercy. And in order to enlarge your ability of
doing good, renounce all supersluities. Cut off all unnecessary expense, in
food, in furniture, in apparel. Be a good steward of every gift of God, even of
these his lowest gifts. Cut off all unnecessary expense of time, all needless
or useless employments. And whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might. In a word, be thou full of faith and love: do good: suffer evil. And
herein be thou steadfast, unmovable: Yea, always abounding in the work of the
Lord; forasmuch as thou know that thy labor is not in vain in the Lord.

DISCOURSE THE FIFTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. v. 17, 18, 19, 20. Think not that I am come to destroy the (...) or the
Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.

For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

For verily I say unto you, That except your Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.


1. AMONG the multitude of reproaches which fell upon him who was despised and
rejected of men, it could not fail to be one, that he was a teacher of
novelties, an introducer of a new religion. This might be affirmed with the
more color, because many of the expressions he had used, were not common among
the Jews: either they did not use them at all, or not in the same sense, not in
so full and strong a meaning. Add to this, that the worshipping God in spirit
and in truth, must always appear a new religion, to those who have hitherto
known nothing but outside worship, nothing but the form of Godliness.

2. And it is not improbable, some might hope it was so: that he was abolishing
the old religion, and bringing in another; one which they might slatter
themselves, would be an easier way to heaven. But our Lord refutes in these
words both the vain hopes of the one, and the groundless calumnies of the other.

I shall consider them in the same order as they lie, taking each verse for a
distinct head of discourse.

I. 1. And, First, Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets.
I am not come to destroy but to fulfill.

The ritual or ceremonial law, delivered by Moses to the children of Israel,
containing all the injunctions and ordinances which related to the old
sacrifices and service of the temple, our Lord indeed did come to destroy, to
dissolve and utterly abolish. To this bear all the apostles witness: not only
Barnabas and Paul, who vehemently withstood those who taught, that Christians
Acts. xv. 6.
ought to keep the law of Moses: not only St. Peter, who termed the insisting
on this, on the observance of the ritual law, a Acts xv. 10.
templing God, and putting a ^yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which
neither our fathers, says he, nor we were able to bear: But all the apostles,
elders and brethren being assembled with one accord, declared, that to command
them to keep this law, was to Ver. 24.
subver^ their souls; and that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to them, to
lay no such burdens upon them. This handwriting of ordinances our Lord did
blot out, take away and nail to his cross.

2. But the moral law, contained in the ten commandments, and enforced by the
prophets, he did not take away. It was not the design of his coming, to revoke
any part of this. This is a law which never can be broken, which stands fast as
the faithful witness in heaven. The moral stands on an entirely different
foundation, from the ceremonial or ritual law; which was only designed for a
temporary restraint upon a disobedient and stiff-necked people: whereas this
was from the beginning of the world; being written not on tables of stone, but
on the hearts of all the children of men, when they came out of the hands of
the Creator. And however the letters once wrote by the finger of God, are now
in a great measure defaced by sin, yet can they not wholly be blotted out,
while we have any consciousness of good and evil. Every part of this law must
remain in force, upon all mankind, and in all ages: as not depending either on
time or place, or any other circumstances liable to change; but on the nature
of God, and the nature of man, and their unchangeable relation to each other.

3. I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. Some have conceived our Lord to
mean, I am come to fulfill this, by my entire and perfect obedience to it. And
it cannot be doubted but he did, in this sense, fulfill every part of it. But
this does not appear to be what he intends here, being foreign to the scope of
his present discourse. Without question his meaning in this place is
(consistently with all that goes before and follows after) I am come to
establish it in its fullness, in spite of all the glosses of men. I am come to
place in a full and clear view, whatsoever was dark or obscure therein. I am
come to declare the true and full import of every part of it: to show the
length and breadth, the entire extent of every commandment contained therein;
and the height and depth, the inconceivable purity and spirituality of it in
all its branches.

4. And this our Lord has abundantly performed in the preceding and subsequent
parts of the discourse before us: in which he has not introduced a new religion
into the world, but the same which was from the beginning: a religion, the
substance of which is without question, "as old as the creation;" being coeval
with man, and having proceeded from God, at the very time when man became a
living soul (the substance, I say, for some circumstances of it, now relate to
man as a fallen creature.) A religion witnessed to both by the law, and by the
prophets in all succeeding generations. Yet was it never so fully explained,
nor so thoroughly understood, till the great author of it himself, condescen^^d
to give mankind this authentic comment on all the essential branches of it: at
the same time declaring it should never be changed, but remain in force to the
end of the world.

II. 1. For verily I say unto you (a solemn preface, which denotes both the
importance and certainty of what is spoken) till heaven and earth pass, one jot
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled.

One jot -- it is literally, not one Iota, not the most inconsiderable vowel,
or one tittle, (...), one corner, or point of a consonant. It is a proverbial
expression, which signifies that no one commandment contained in the moral law,
nor the least part of one, however inconsiderable it might seem, should ever be
disannulled.

Shall in no wise pass from the law: (...). The double negative here used,
strengthens the sense, so as to admit of no contradiction. And the word (...),
it may be observed, is not barely future; declaring what will be; but has
likewise the force of an imperative; ordering what shall be. It is a word of
authority, expressing the sovareign will and power of him that spoke: of him
whose word is the law of heaven and earth, and stands fast for ever and ever.

One jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass, till heaven and earth pass; or as
it is expressed immediately after, (...) till all (or rather all things) be
fulfilled, till the consummation of all things. Here is therefore no room for
that poor evasion (with which some have delighted themselves greatly) that "no
part of the law was to pass away, till all the law was fulfilled: but it has
been fulfilled by Christ; and therefore now must pass, for the gospel to be
established." Not so; the word all does not mean all the law, but all things in
the universe; as neither has the term fulfilled, any reference to the law, but
to all things in heaven and earth.

2. From all this we may learn, that there is no contrariety at all, between
the law and the gospel; that there is no need for the law to pass away, in
order to the establishing the gospel. Indeed neither of them supercedes the
other, but they agree perfectly well together. Yea, the very same words,
considered in different respects, are parts both of the law and of the gospel:
if they are considered as commandments, they are parts of the law; if as
promises, of the gospel. Thus, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, when considered as a commandment, is a branch of the law; when regarded
as a promise, is an essential part of the gospel: the gospel being no other
than the commands of the law, proposed by way of promises. Accordingly poverty
of spirit, purity of heart, and whatever else is enjoined in the holy law of
God, are no other, when viewed in a gospel light, than so many great and
precious promises.

3. There is therefore the closest connection that can be conceived, between the
law and the gospel. On the one hand, the law continually makes way for, and
points us to the gospel: on the other, the gospel continually leads us to a
more exact fulfilling of the law. The law, for instance, requires us to love
God, to love our neighbor, to be meek, humble or holy: we feel that we are not
sufficient for these things; yea, that with man this is impossible. But we see
a promise of God, to give us that love, and to make us humble, meek and holy.
We lay hold of this gospel, of these glad tidings; it is done unto us according
to our faith: and the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus.

We may yet farther observe, that every command in holy writ, is only a covered
promise. For by that solemn declaration, this is the covenant I will make after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my laws in your minds, and write them in
your hearts, God has engaged to give whatsoever he commands. Does he command
us then to pray without ceasing? to rejoice evermore? to be holy as he is holy?
it is enough. He will work in us this very thing. It shall be unto us according
to his word.

4. But if these things are so, we cannot be at a loss, what to think of those
who in all ages of the church, have undertaken to change or supercede some
commands of God, as they professed, by the peculiar direction of his Spirit.
Christ has here given us an infallible rule, whereby to judge of all such
pretensions. Christianity, as it includes the whole moral law of God, both by
way of injunction and of promise, if we will hear him, is designed of God, to
be the last of all his dispensations. There is no other to come after this.
This is to endure till the consummation of all things. Of consequence all such
new revelations, are of Satan and not of God; and all pretenses to another more
perfect dispensation, fall to the ground of course. Heaven and earth shall pass
away: But this word shall not pass away:

III. 1. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: But
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.

Who, what are they, that make "The preaching of the law," a character of
reproach? do they not see on whom the reproach must fall? on whose head it must
light at last? whosoever on this ground despises us, despises him that sent
us. For did ever any man preach the law like him? even when he came, not to
condemn but to save the world: when he came purposely to bring life and
immortality to light through the gospel? can any "preach the law" more
expressly, more rigorously, than Christ does in these words? and who is he that
shall amend them? who is he that shall instruct the Son of God, how to preach?
who will teach him a better way of delivering the message which he has
received of the Father?

2. Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, or one of the least
of these commandments -- These commandments, we may observe, is a term used by
our Lord as equivalent with the law: or the law and the prophets, which is the
same thing, seeing the prophets added nothing to the law; but only declared,
explained, or enforced it, as they w^^e moved by the Holy Ghost.

Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments -- especially if it be
done wilfully or presumptuously: one: -- for he th^^ keeps the whole law and
thus offends in one point, is guilty of all^^ the wrath of God abide^^ on him,
as surely as if he had broken every one. So that no allowance is made for one
darling lust; no reserve for one idol; no excuse for refraining from all
besides, and only giving way to one bosom sin. What God demands is, an entire
obedience; we are to have an eye to all his commandments: otherwise we lose all
the labor we take in keeping some, and our poor souls for ever and ever.

One of these least, or one of the least of these commandments. -- Here is
another excuse cut off, whereby many, who cannot deceive God, miserably deceive
their own souls. "This sin, says the sinner, is it not a little one? will not
the Lord spare me in this thing? surely he will not be extreme to mark this,
since I do not offend in the greater matters of the law." Vain hope! speaking
after the manner of men, we may term these great and those little commandments.
But in reality, they are not so. If we use propriety of speech, there is no
such thing as a little sin: every sin being a transgression of the holy and
perfect law, and an affront of the great majesty of heaven.

3. And shall teach men so -- In some sense it may be said, that whosoever
openly breaks any commandment, teaches others to do the same: for example
speaks, and many times louder than precept. In this sense it is apparent every
open drunkard, is a teacher of drunkenness: every sabbath-breaker is constantly
teaching his neighbor, to profane the day of the Lord. But this is not all; an
habitual breaker of the law, is seldom content to stop here. He generally
teaches other men to do so too, by word as well as example: especially when he
hardens his neck, and hates to be reproved. Such a sinner soon commences an
advocate for sin: he defends what he is resolved not to forsake. He excuses the
sin which he will not leave, and thus directly teaches every sin which he
commits.

He shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven: that is, shall have no part
therein. He is a stranger to the kingdom of heaven which is on earth; he has
no portion in that inheritance; no share of that righteousness and peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost. Nor by consequence can he have any part in the glory
which shall be revealed.

4. But if those who even thus break and teach others to break, one of the
least of these commandments, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven,
shall have no part in the kingdom of Christ and of God; if even these shall be
cast into outer darkness, where is wailing and gnashing of teeth: then where
will they appear, whom our Lord chiefly and primarily intends in these words?
they who bearing the character of teachers sent from God, do nevertheless
themselves hie^^ his commandments, yea, and openly teach others so to do; being
corrupt both in life and doctrine.

5. These are of several sorts. Of the first sort are they, who live in some
wilful, habitual sin. Now if an ordinary sinner teaches by his example, how
much more a sinful minister? Even if he does not attempt to defend, excuse or
extenuate his sin. If he does, he is a murderer indeed, yea, the
murderer-general of his congregation. He peoples the regions of death. He is
the choicest instrument of the prince of darkness. When he goes hence, hell
from beneath is moved to meet him at his coming. Nor can he sink into the
bottomless pit, without dragging a multitude after him.

6. Next to these are the good-natured, good sort of men: who live an easy,
harmless life, neither troubling themselves with outward sin, nor with inward
holiness: men who are remarkable neither one way nor the other; neither for
religion nor irreligion: who are very regular both in public and private; but
do not pretend to be any stricter than their neighbors. A minister of this
kind breaks, not one, or a few only of the least commandments of God; but all
the great and weighty branches of his law, which relate to the power of
godliness: And all that require us to pass the time of our sojourning in fear,
to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; to have our loins always
girt and our lights burning; to strive or agonize to enter in at the strait
gate. And he teaches men so, by the whole form of his life, and the general
tenor of his preaching; which uniformly tends to sooth those in their pleasing
dream, who imagine themselves christians and are not; to persuade all who
attend upon his ministry, to sleep on and take their rest. No marvel therefore
if both he and they that follow him, wake together in everlasting burnings.

7. But above all these, in the highest rank of the enemies of the gospel of
Christ, are they who openly and explicitly judge the law itself, and speak evil
of the law: Who teach men to break ((...) to dissolve, to loose, to untie the
obligation of) not one only, whether of the least, or of the greatest, but all
the commandments at a stroke: who teach, without any cover, in so many words,
"What did our Lord do with the law? He abolished it." "There is but one duty,
which is that of believing." "All commands are unfit for our times." "From any
demand of the law no man is obliged now to go one step, to give away one
farthing, to eat or omit one morsel." This is indeed carrying matters with a
high hand. This is withstanding our Lord to the face, and telling him, That he
understood not how to deliver the message on which he was sent. O Lord, lay not
this sin to their charge! Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do!

8. The most surprising of all the circumstances, that attend this strong
delusion, is that they who are given up to it really believe, that they honor
Christ, by overthrowing his law, and that they are magnifying his office, while
they are destroying his doctrine! Yea, they honor him just as Judas did, when
he said, Hail, Master, and kissed him. And he may as justly say, to every one
of them, Betrayest thou the son of Man with a kiss? It is no other than
betraying him with a kiss, to talk of his blood and take away his crown: to set
light by any part of his law, under pretense of advancing his gospel. Nor
indeed can any one escape this charge, who preaches faith in any such manner
as, either directly or indirectly, tends to set aside any branch of obedience:
who preaches Christ so as to disannull or weaken, in any wise, the least of the
commandments of God.

9. It is impossible indeed to have too high an esteem for the faith of God's
elect. And we must all declare, by grace ye are saved through faith: -- Not of
works lest any man should boast. We must cry aloud to every penitent sinner,
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. But at the same time
we must take care to let all men know, we esteem no faith but that which
works by love: and that we are not saved by faith, unless so far as we are
delivered from the power as well as the guilt of sin. And when we say, believe
and thou shall be saved; we do not mean, "believe and thou shall step from sin
to heaven; without any holiness coming between; faith supplying the place of
holiness:" But, believe and thou shall be holy; believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall have peace and power together. Thou shall have power from him in
whom thou believe, to trample sin under thy feet; power to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and to serve him with all thy strength. Thou shall have
power, by patient continuance in well-doing, to seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality. Thou shall both do and teach all the commandments of God, from the
least even to the greatest. Thou shall teach them by thy life as well as thy
words, and so be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

IV. 1. Whatever other way we teach to the kingdom of heaven, to glory, honor,
and immortality, be it called the way of faith, or by any other name, it is in
truth, the way to destruction. It will not bring a man peace at the last. For
thus says the Lord, verily I say unto you, except your righteousness shall
exceed the right eousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The scribes, mentioned so often in the new testament, as some of the most
constant and vehement opposers of our Lord, were not secretaries, or men
employed in writing only, as that term might incline us to believe. Neither
were they lawyers, in our common sense of the word (although the word (...) is
so rendered in our translation.) Their employment had no aflinity at all, to
that of a lawyer among us. They were conversant with the laws of God, and not
with the laws of man. These were their study: it was their proper and peculiar
business, to read and expourd the law and the prophets; particularly in the
synagogues. They were the ordinary, stated preachers among the Jews. So that if
the sense of the original word was attended to, we might render it, the
divines. For these were the men who made divinity their profession; and they
were generally (as their name literally imports) men of letters; men of the
greatest acc^^^t for learning th^^ were then in the Jewish nation.

2. The pharisees ^ere a very ancient (...) body of men, among the (...) called
from the Hebrew word (...) which s^^nifies, to separate or divide. Not that
they made any formal separation from, or division in the national church. They
were only distinguished from others, by greater strictness of life, by more
exactness of conversation. For they were zealous of the law in the minutest
points; paying tithes of mint, anise and cummin. And hence they were had in
honor of all the people, and generally esteemed the holiest of men.

Many of the scribes were of the sect of the pharisees. Thus St. Paul himself,
who was educated for a scribe, first at the university of Tarsus, and after
that in Jerusalem, at the feet of Gamaliel (one of the most learned scribes or
doctors of the law that were then in the nation) declares of himself before the
council, Acts xxiii. 6.
I am a pharisee, the son of a pharisee: and before king Agrippa, Chap. xxvi. 5.
after the straitest sect of our religion I lived a pharisee. And the whole
body of the scribes generally esteemed and acted in concert with the pharisees.
Hence we find our Savior so frequently coupling them together, as coming in
many respects under the same consideration. In this place they seem to be
mentioned together, as the most eminent professors of religion: the former of
whom were accounted the wisest, the latter the holiest of men.

3. What the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees really was, it is not
difficult to determine. Our Lord has preserved an authentic account, which one
of them gave of himself. And he is clear and full in describing his own
righteousness; and cannot be supposed to have omitted any part of it. He went
up indeed into the temple to pray; but was so intent upon his own virtues, that
he forgot the design upon which he came. For it is remarkable, he does not
properly pray at all. He only tells God, how wise and good he was. God, I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are; extortioners, unjust, adulterers; or even
as this publican. I fast twice in the week; I give tithes of all that I
possess. His righteousness therefore consisted of three parts, First, says he,
I am not as other men are. I am not an extortioner, not unjust, not an
adulterer; not even as this publican. Secondly, I fast twice in the week; and
Thirdly, give tithes of all that I possess.

I am not as other men are. This is not a small point. It is not every man that
can say this. It is as if he had said, I do not suffer myself to be carried
away by that great torrent, custom. I live not by custom, but by reason; not by
the examples of men, but by the word of God. I am not an extortioner, not
unjust, not an adulterer: however common these sins are, even among those who
are called the people of God: (extortion, in particular, a kind of legal
injustice; not punishable by any human law, the making gain of another's
ignorance or necessity, having filled every corner of the land) nor even as
this publican; not guilty of any open or presumptuous sin; not an outward
sinner; but a fair, honest man, of blameless life and conversation.

4. I fast twice in the week. There is more implied in this, than we may at
first be sensible of. All the stricter pharisees observed the weekly fasts;
namely, every Monday and Thursday. On the former day, they fasted in memory of
Moses receiving on that day (as their tradition taught) the two tables of stone
written by the finger of God: on the latter, in memory of his casting them out
of his hand, when he saw the people dancing round the golden calf. On these
days, they took no sustenance at all till three in the afternoon; the hour at
which they began to offer up the evening sacrifice in the temple. Till that
hour it was their custom to remain in the temple, in some of the corners,
apartments or courts thereof; that they might be ready to assist at all the
sacrifices, and to join in all the public prayers. The time between, they were
accustomed to employ, partly in private addresses to God, partly in searching
the scriptures, in reading the law and the prophets, and in meditating thereon.
Thus much is implied in, I fast twice in the week, the second branch of the
righteousness of a pharisee.

5. I give tithes of all that I possess. This the pharisees did with the utmost
exactness. They would not except the most inconsiderable thing, no, not mint,
anise and cummin. They would not keep back the least part of what they believed
properly to belong to God; but gave a full tenth of their whole substance
yearly, and of all their increase, whatsoever it was.

Yea, the stricter pharisees (as has been often observed, by those who are
versed in the ancient Jewish writings) not content with giving one tenth of
their substance to God, in his priests and levites, gave another tenth to God
in the poor, and that continually. They gave the same proportion of all they
had (...) alms, as they were (...) to give in ^^^hes. And ^his likewise they
adjusted with the u^most exactness, that they might not ^eep back any part, but
might fully render unto God the things which were God's, as they accounted this
to be. So that, upon the whole, they gave away, from year to year, an entire
fifth of all that they possessed.

6. This was the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees: a righteousness,
which in many respects, went far beyond the conception which many have been
accustomed to entertain concerning it. But perhaps, it will be said, it was all
false a (...) feigned; for they were all a company of hypocrites. -- Some of
them doubtless were; men who had really no religion at all; no fear of God, or
desire to please him: who had no concern for the honor that comes of God, but
only for the praise of men. And these are they whom our Lord so severely
condemns, so sharply reproves on many occasions. But we must not suppose,
because many pharisees were hypocrites, therefore all were so. Nor indeed is
hypocrisy by any means essential to the character of a pharisee. This is not
the distinguishing mark of their sect. It is rather this (according to our
Lord's account) they trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
despised others. This is their genuine badge. But the pharisee of this kind
cannot be a hypocrite. He must be, in the common sense, sincere: otherwise he
could not trust in himself that he is righteous. The man who was here
commending himself to God, unquestionably thought himself righteous.
Consequently, he was no hypocrite: he was not conscious to himself of any
insincerity. He now spoke to God just what he thought, ^^^^ly, that he was
abundantly better than other men.

But the example of St. Paul, were there no other, is sufficient, to put this
out of all question. He could not only say, when he was a christian, Acts xxiv.
16.
herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offense,
toward God and toward men: but even concerning the time when he was a pharisee;
Chap. xxiii. 1.
men and brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this
day. He was therefore sincere when he was a pharisee, as well as when he was a
christian. He was no more an hypocrite when he persecuted the church, than when
he preached the faith which once he persecuted. Let this then be added to the
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, a sincere belief that they are
righteous, and in all things doing God service.

7. And yet, except your righteousness, says our Lord, shall exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven. A solemn and weighty declaration! and which it behooves all
who are called by the name of Christ, seriously and deeply to consider. But
before we inquire, how our righteousness may exceed theirs, let us examine,
whether at present we come up to it?

First, a pharisee was not as other men are. In externals he was singularly
good. Are we so? do we dare to be singular at all? do we not rather swim with
the stream? do we not many times dispense with religion and reason together,
because we would not look particular? are we not often more afraid of being out
of the fashion, than being out of the way of salvation? have we courage to stem
the tide? to run counter to the world: to obey God rather than man? otherwise
the pharisee leaves us behind at the very first step. It is well if we overtake
him any more.

But, to come closer. Can we use his first plea with God, which is in
substance, "I do no harm. I live in no outward sin; I do nothing, for which my
own heart condemns me." Do you not? are you sure of that? do you live in no
practice, for which your own heart condemns you? if you are not an adulterer,
if you are not unchaste, either in word or deed, are you not unjust? the grand
measure of justice, as well as of mercy, is, do unto others as thou would
they should do unto thee. Do you walk by this rule? do you never do unto any
what you would not they should do unto you? nay, are you not grossly unjust?
are you not an extortioner? do you not make a gain of any one's ignorance or
necessity? neither in buying nor selling? suppose you are engaged in trade, do
you demand, do you receive no more than the real value of what you sell? do you
demand, do you receive no more of the ignorant than of the knowing; of a little
child, than of an experienced trader? if you do, why does not your heart
condemn you? you are a barefaced extortioner. Do you demand no more than the
usual price of the goods, of any who is in pressing want? who must have, and
that without delay the things which you only can furnish him with? if you do,
this also is flat extortion. Indeed you do not come up to the righteousness of
a ph^^^sec.

8. A pharisee, Secondly (to express his sense in our common way) used all the
means of grace. As he fasted often and much, twice in every we^^, so he
attended all the sacrifices. He was constant in public and private prayer, and
in reading and hearing the scriptures. Do you go as far as this? Do you fast
much and often? Twice in the week? I fear not. Once, at least; "on all Fridays
in the year?" (So our church clearly and peremptorily enjoins all her members
to do: to observe all these, as well as the vigils and the forty days of lent,
as "days of fasting or abstinence.") Do you fast twice in the year? I am
afraid, some among us cannot plead even this! -- Do you neglect no opportunity
of attending and partaking of the christian sacrifice? How many are they, who
call themselves christians, and yet are utterly regardless of it? Yea, do not
eat of that bread, or drink of that cup, for months, perhaps years together? Do
you every day, either hear the scriptures, or read them and meditate thereon?
Do you join in prayer with the great congregation, daily, if you have
opportunity? If not whenever you can, particularly on that day, which you
remember, to keep it holy? Do you strive to make opportunities? Are you glad
when they say unto you, we will go into the house of the Lord? Are you zealous
of, and diligent in private prayer? Do you suffer no day to pass without it?
Rather, are not some of you so far from spending therein (with the pharisee)
several hours in one day, that you think one hour full enough, if not too much?
Do you spend an hour in a day, or in a week, in praying to your Father which is
in secret? Yea, an hour in a month? Have you spent one hour together in private
prayer ever since you was born? Ah poor christian! Shall not the pharisee rise
up in the judgment against thee and condemn thee? His righteousness is as far
above thine, as the heaven is above the earth.

9. The pharisee, Thirdly, paid tithes and gave alms of all that he possessed.
And in how ample a manner? So that he was (as we phrase it) a man that did much
good. Do we come up to him here? Which of us is so abundant as he was, in good
works? Which of us gives a fifth of all his substance (...)? Both of the
principal, and of the increase? Who of us, out of (suppose) an hundred pounds a
year, gives twenty to God and the poor: Out of fifty, ten; and so in a larger
or a smaller proportion? When shall our righteousness, in using all the means
of grace, in attending all the ordinances of God, in avoiding evil and doing
good, equal at least the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees?

10. Although if it only equalled theirs, what would that profit? For verily I
say un^^ you, except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
But how can it exceed theirs? Wherein does the righteousness of a christian
exceed that of a scribe or a pharisee?

Christian righteousness exceeds theirs, First, in the extent of it. Most of
the pharisees, (...) they were rigorously exact in many things, yet were
emboldened by the traditions of the ^^ders to dispense with others of equal
importance. Thus they were extremely punctual in keeping the fourth
commandment; they would not even rub an ear of corn on the sabbath day: but not
at all in keeping the third, making little account of light, or even false
swearing. So that their righteousness was partial: whereas the righteousness of
a real christian is universal. He does not observe one, or some parts of the
law of God, and neglect the rest; but keeps all his commandments, loves them
all, values them above gold or precious stones.

11. It may be indeed, that some of the scribes and pharisees, endeavored to
keep all the commandments, and consequently were, as touching the righteousness
of the law, that is, according to the letter of it, blameless. But still the
righteousness of a christian exceeds all this righteousness of a scribe or
pharisee, by fulfilling the spirit as well as the letter of the law, by inward
as well as outward obedience. In this, in the spirituality of it, it admits of
no comparison. This is the point which our Lord has so largely proved, in the
whole tenor of this discourse. Their righteousness was external only; christian
righteousness is in the inner man. The pharisee cleansed the outside of the cup
and the platter; the christian is clean within. The pharisee labored to
present God with a good life; the christian with a holy heart. The one shook
off the leaves, perhaps the fruits of sin; the other lays the ax to the root:
as not being content with the outward form of godliness, how exact soever it
be, unless the life, the spirit, the power of God unto salvation, be felt in
the inmost soul.

Thus, to do no harm, to do good, to attend the ordinances of God (the
righteousness of a pharisee) are all external: whereas, on the contrary,
poverty of spirit, mourning, meekness, hunger and thirst after righteousness,
the love of our neighbor, and purity of heart (the righteousness of a
christian) are all internal. And even peacemaking (or doing good) and
suffering for righteousness sake, stand entitled to the blessings annexed to
them, only as they imply these inward dispositions, as they spring from,
exercise and confirm them. So that whereas the righteousness of the scribes and
pharisees was external only, it may be said, in some sense, that the
righteousness of a christian is internal only: all his actions and sufferings
being as nothing in themselves, being estimated before God only by the tempers
from which they spring.

12. Whosoever therefore thou art, who bear the holy and venerable name of a
christian, see, first, that thy righteousness fall not short of the
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees. Be not thou as other men are. Dare
to stand alone, to be

"Against example, singularly good!" If thou follow a multitude at all, it must
be, to do evil. Let not custom or fashion be thy guide, but reason and
religion. The practice of others is nothing to thee: Every man must give an
account of himself to God. Indeed if thou can save the soul of another, do:
but at least, save one, thy own. Walk not in the path of death, because it is
broad, and many walk therein. Nay, by this very token thou may know it. Is
the way wherein thou now walk, a broad, well-frequented, fashionable way?
then it infallibly leads to destruction. O be not thou "damned for company:"
cease from evil; fly from sin as from the face of a serpent. At least, do no
harm. He that commits sin is of the devil. Be not thou found in that number.
Touching outward sins, surely the grace of God is even now sufficient for thee.
Herein at least, exercise thyself to have a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward man.

Secondly, Let not thy righteousness fall short of theirs, with regard to the
ordinances of God. If thy labor or bodily strength will not allow of thy
fasting twice in the week, however, deal faithfully with thy own soul, and fast
as often as thy strength will permit. Omit no public, no private opportunity,
of pouring out thy soul in prayer. Neglect no occasion of eating that bread and
drinking that cup, which is the communion of the body and blood of Christ. Be
diligent in searching the scriptures; read as thou may, and meditate therein
day and night. Rejoice to embrace every opportunity, of hearing the word of
reconciliation declared by the ambassadors of Christ, the stewards of the
mysteries of God. In using all the means of grace, in a constant and careful
attendance on every ordinance of God, live up to (at least, till thou can go
beyond) the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees.

Thirdly, Fall not short of a pharisee in doing good. Give alms of all thou
do possess. Is any hungry? feed him. Is he athirst? give him drink. Naked?
cover him with a garment. If thou have this world's goods, do not limit thy
beneficence to a scanty proportion. Be merciful to the uttermost of thy power.
Why not, even as this pharisee? now make thyself friends, while the time is, of
the mammon of unrighteousness, that when thou failest, when this earthly
tabernacle is dissolved, they may receive thee into everlasting habitations.

13. But rest not here. Let thy righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and pharisees. Be not thou content, to keep the whole law, and offend
in one point. Hold thou fast all his commandments, and all false ways do thou
utterly abhor. Do all the things, whatsoever he has commanded, and that with
all thy might. Thou can do all things through Christ strengthening thee,
though without him thou can do nothing.

Above all, let thy righteousness exceed theirs in the purity and spirituality
of it. What is the most exact form of religion to thee? the most perfect
outside righteousness? go thou higher and deeper than all this. Let thy
religion be the religion of the heart. Be thou poor in spirit; little and base
and mean and vile in thy own eyes; amazed and humbled to the dust at the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus thy Lord. Be serious: let the whole stream of
thy thoughts, words and works, be such as flows from the deepest conviction,
that thou stand on the edge of the great gulf, thou and all the children of
men, just ready to drop in, either ^^to everlasting glory, or everlasting
burnings. Be meek: let thy soul be filled with mildness, gentleness, patience,
long-suffering toward all (...). at the same time that all which i^ (...) thee
is ath^^st ^^r God, the living God; longing to awake up after his likeness, and
to be satisfied with it. Be thou a ^ove^ of God and of all mankind. In this
spirit, do and suffer all things. Thus exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and pharisees, and ^ho^ shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

DISCOURSE THE SIXTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. vi. 1, -- 15. Take Heed that ye do not your Alms before Men, to be seen
of them: Otherwise ye have no Reward of your Father which is in Heaven.

Therefore when thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as
the Hypocrites do in the Synagogues and in the Streets, that they may have
Praise of Men. Verily I say unto you, they have their Reward.

But when thou do Alms, let not thy left Hand know what thy right Hand does:
That thine Alms may be in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, himself
shall reward thee openly.

And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are; for they love
to pray, standing in the Synagogues and in the corners of the Streets, that
they may be seen of Men. Verily I say unto you, they have their Reward.

But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the
Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; And thy Father which sees in
secret, he shall reward thee openly.

But when ye pray, use not vain Repetitions as the Heathen do; for they think
that they shall be heard for their much Speaking.

Be not ye therefore like unto them; for your Father knows what Things ye
have Need of, before you ask him.

After this Manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed
be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Give us this Day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us
from Evil. For thine is the Kingdom and the Power and the Glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

For if ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you.

But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your Trespasses.


1. IN the preceding chapter our Lord has described inward religion, in its
various branch^^. He has laid before us those dispositions of soul, which
constitute real christianity: the inward tempers contained in that holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord; the affections which, when flowing
from their proper fountain, from a living faith in God through Christ Jesus,
are intrinsically and essentially good, and acceptable to God. He proceeds to
show in this chapter, how all our actions likewise, even those that are
indifferent in their own nature, may be made holy and good and acceptable to
God, by a pure and holy intention. Whatever is done without this, he largely
declares, is of no value before God. Whereas whatever outward works are thus
consecrated to God, they are in his sight of great price.

2. The necessity of this purity of intention, he shows first, with regard to
those, which are usually accounted religious actions, and indeed are such, when
performed with a right intention. Some of these are commonly termed works of
piety; the rest, works of charity or mercy. Of the latter sort, he particularly
names almigiving; of the former, prayer and fasting. But the directions given
for these are equally to be applied to every work, whether of charity or mercy.

I. 1. And first, with regard to works of mercy. Take heed, says he, that ye
do not your alms before men, to be seen of them. Otherwise ye have no reward of
your Father which is in heaven. That ye do not your alms. Although this only is
named, yet is every work of charity included, every thing which we give, or
speak, or do, whereby our neighbor may be profited, whereby another man may
receive any advantage, either in his body or soul. The feeding the hungry, the
clothing the naked, the entertaining or assisting the stranger, the visiting
those that are sick or in prison, the comforting the afflicted; the instructing
the ignorant, the reproving the wicked, the exhorting and encouraging the
well-doer; and if there be any other work of mercy, it is equally included in
th^^ direction.

2. Take heed that ye do (...) our alms before men, to be seen of them. The
thing which is here forbidden, is not, barely the doing good in the sight of
men: this circumstance alone, that others see what we do, makes the action
neither worse nor better: but the doing it before men, to be seen of them; with
this view, from this intention only. I say, from this intention only; for this
may, in some cases, be a part of our intention; we may design that some of our
actions should be seen, and yet they may be acceptable to God. We may intend,
that our light should shine before men, when our conscience bears us witness,
in the Holy Ghost, that our ultimate end in designing they should see our good
works, is, that they may glorify our Father which is in heaven. But take heed
that ye do not the least thing with a view to your own glory. Take heed, that a
regard to the praise of men, have no place at all in your works of mercy. If ye
seek your own glory, if you have any design to gain the honor that comes of
men, whatever is done with this view is nothing worth; it is not done unto the
Lord; he accepts it not; ye have no reward for this of your Father which is
in heaven.

3. Therefore when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee as
the hypocrites do, in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have
praise of men. The word synagogue does not here mean, a place of worship, but
any place of public resort, such as the marketplace or exchange. It was a
common thing among the Jews, who were men of large fortunes, particularly among
the pharisees, to cause a trumpet to be sounded before them in the most public
parts of the city, when they were about to give any considerable alms. The
pretended reason for this was, To call the poor together to receive it: but the
real design, that they might have praise of men. But be not thou like unto
them. Do not thou cause a trumpet to be founded before thee. Use no ostentation
in doing good. Aim at the honor which comes of God only. They who seek the
praise of men, have their reward. They shall have no praise of God.

4. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
does. This is a proverbial expression, the meaning of which is, Do it in as
secret a manner as is possible: as secret as is consistent with the doing it at
all; (for it must not be left undone: omit no opportunity of doing good,
whether secretly or openly) and with the doing it in the most effectual manner.
For here is also an exception to be made. When you are fully persuaded in your
own mind, that by your not concealing the good which is done, either you will
yourself be enabled, or others excited to do the more good, then you may not
conceal it: then let your light appear, and shine to all that are in the house.
But unless where the glory of God and the good of mankind oblige you to the
contrary, act in as private and unobserved a manner, as the nature of the thing
will admit: That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, he shall reward thee openly. Perhaps in the present world; many
instances of this stand recorded in all ages: but infallibly in the world to
come, before the general assembly of men and angels.

II. 1. From works of charity or mercy, our Lord proceeds to those which are
termed works of piety. And when thou prayest, says he, thou shall not be as
the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues, and in
the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Thou shall not be as
the hypocrites are. Hypocrisy then, or insincerity, is the first thing we are
to guard against in prayer. Beware not to speak what thou do not mean. Prayer
is, the lifting up of the heart to God: all words of prayer without this are
mere hypocrisy. Whenever therefore thou attemptest to pray, see that it be thy
one design, to commune with God, to lift up thy heart to him, to pour out thy
soul before him. Not as the hypocrites, who love, or are wont, to pray standing
in the synagogues, the exchange or marketplaces, and in the corners of the
streets, wherever the most people are, that they may be seen of men: this was
the sole design, the motive and end, of the prayers which they there repeated.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. They are to expect none from
your Father which is in heaven.

2. But it is not only, the having an eye to the praise of men, which cuts us
off from any reward in heaven; which leaves us no room to expect the blessing
of God, upon our works whether of piety or mercy. Purity of intention is
equally destroyed by a view to any temporal reward whatever. If we repeat our
prayers, if we attend the public worship of God, if we relieve the poor, with a
view to gain or interest, it is not a whit more acceptable to God, than if it
were done with a view to praise. Any temporal view, any motive whatever on this
side eternity, any design but that of promoting the glory of God, and the
happiness of men, for God's sake, makes every action, however fair it may
appear to men, an abomination unto the Lord.

3. But when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret. There is a time, when thou art
openly to glorify God, to pray and praise him in the great congregation. But
when thou desire more largely and more particularly to make thy requests
known unto God, whether it be in the evening or in the morning or at noonday,
enter into thy closet and shut the door. Use all the privacy thou can. (Only
leave it not undone, whether thou have any closet, any privacy or no. Pray to
God if it be possible, when none sees but he: but if otherwise, pray to God.)
Thus pray to thy Father which is in secret; pour out all thy heart before him.
And thy Father which sees in secret, he shall reward thee openly.

4. But when ye pray, even in secret, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen
do. M (...). Do not use abundance of words without any meaning. Say not the
same thing over and over again; think not the fruit of your prayers depends on
the length of them: like the heathens; for they think they shall be heard for
their much speaking.

The thing here reproved, is not simply the length, no more than the shortness
of our prayers: but, first, length without meaning; the speaking much, and
meaning little or nothing: the using (not all repetitions; for our Lord himself
prayed thrice, repeating the same words; but) vain repetitions, as the heathens
did, reciting the names of their gods over and over: as they do among
christians (vulgarly so called) and not among the papists only, who say over
and over the same string of prayers, without ever feeling what they speak:
Secondly, the thinking to be heard for our much speaking, the fancying God
measures prayers by their length, and is best pleased with those which contain
the most words, which sound the longest in his ears. These are such instances
of superstition and solly, as all who are named by the name of Christ, should
leave to the heathens, to them on whom the glorious light of the gospel has
never shined.

5. Be not ye therefore like unto them. Ye who have tasted of the grace of God
in Christ Jesus, are thoroughly convinced, your Father knows what things ye
have need of before ye ask him. So that the end of your praving, is not to
inform God, as th^' he knew not your wants already; but rather to inform
yourselves, to fix the sense of those wants more deeply in your hearts, and the
sense of your continual dependence on him, who only is able to supply all your
wants. It is not so much to move God, who is always more ready to give than you
to ask; as to move yourselves, that you may be willing and ready to receive the
good things he has prepared for you.

III. 1. After having taught the true nature and ends of prayer, our Lord
subjoins an example of it: even that divine form of prayer, which seems in this
place to be pr^^^sed by way of pattern chiefly, as the model (...) standard of
all our prayers; after this manner therefore pray ye. Whereas elsewhere he
enjoins the use of these very words, Luke xi. 2
He said unto them, when ye pray, say --

2. We may observe in general concerning this divine prayer. First, That it
contains all we can reasonably or innocently pray for. There is nothing which
we can ask without offending him, which is not included either directly or
indirectly in this comprehensive form: Secondly, That it contains all we can
reasonably or innocently desire; whatever is for the glory of God, whatever is
needful or prositable not only for ourselves, but for every creature in heaven
and earth. And indeed our prayers are the proper test of our desires; nothing
being sit to have a place in our desires, which is not sit to have a place in
our prayers; what we may not pray for, neither should we desire: Thirdly, That
it contains all our duty to God and man; whatsoever things are pure and holy,
whatsoever God requires of the children of men, whatsoever is acceptable in his
sight, whatsoever it is whereby we may profit our neighbor, being expressed or
implied therein.

3. It consists of three parts, the preface, the petitions, and the doxology or
conclusion. The preface, Our Father which art in heaven, lays a general
foundation for prayer; comprising what we must first know of God, before we can
pray, in confidence of being heard. It likewise points out to us all those
tempers, with which we are to approach to God, which are most essentially
requisite, if we desire either our prayers or our lives should find acceptance
with him.

4. "Our Father." If he is a Father, then he is good, then he is loving to his
children. And here is the first and great reason for prayer. God is willing to
bless, let us ask for a blessing. "Our Father," -- Our Creator; the Author of
our being; he who raised us from the dust of the earth, who breathed into us
the breath of life, and we became living souls. But if he made us, let us ask
and he will not withold any good thing from the work of his own hands. "Our
Father" -- Our preserver; who day by day sustains the life he has given: of
whose continuing love, we now and every moment receive life and breath and all
things. So much the more ho^^ly (...) us come to him, and we shall find mercy
and grace to help in time of need. Above all, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of all that believe in him: who justfies us freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus: who has blotted out all our sins, and
healed all our infirmities; who has received us for his own children, by
adoption and grace, and because we are sons, has sent forth the spirit of his
Son into our hearts, crying Abba, Father: who has begotten us again of
incorruptible seed, and created us anew in Christ Jesus. Therefore we know
that he hears us always: therefore we pray to him without ceasing. We pray,
because we love. And we love him, because he first loved us.

5. "Our Father" -- Not mine only who now cry unto him; but our's, in the most
extensive sense. The God and Father of the spirits of all flesh; the Father of
angels and men: (So the very heathens acknowledged him to be, (...).) The
Father of the universe, of all the families both in heaven and earth. Therefore
with him there is no respect of persons. He loves all that he has made. He is
loving unto every man, and his mercy is over all his works. And the Lord's
delight is in them that fear him, and that put their trust in his mercy; in
them that trust in him through the Son of his love, knowing they are accepted
in the beloved. But if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Yea,
all mankind: seeing God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
even to die the death, that they might not perish but have everlasting life.

6. Which art in heaven: high and lifted up; God over all, blessed for ever.
Who sitting on the circle of the heavens, beholds all things both in heaven
and earth. Whose eye pervades the whole sphere of created being; yea, and of
uncreated night: unto whom known are all his works, and all the works of every
creature, not only from the beginning of the world (a poor, low, weak
translation) but (...) from all eternity, from everlasting to everlasting: who
constrains the host of heaven, as well as the children of men, to cry out with
wonder and amazement, O the depth! The depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and of the knowledge of God! which art in heaven -- the Lord and Ruler of all,
superintending and disposing all things: who art the King of kings, and Lord of
lords, the blessed and only Potentate: who art strong and girded about with
power, doing whatsoever pleases thee! the Almighty: for whenever thou
willest, to do is present with thee. In heaven, -- eminently there. Heaven is
thy throne, the place where thine Honor particularly dwells. But not there
alone; for thou fillest heaven and earth, the whole expanse of space. Heaven
and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high!

Therefore should we serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence. Therefore should we think, speak and act, as continually under the
eye, in the immediate presence of the Lord, the King.

7. Hallowed be thy Name. This is the first of the six petitions, whereof the
prayer itself is composed. The name of God is God himself; the nature of God,
so far as it can be discovered to man: It means therefore, together with his
existence, all his attributes or perfections -- his eternity, particularly
signified by his great and incommunicable name JEHOVAH, as the apostle John
translates it, (...) The alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, he which
is, and which was, and which is to come: -- His fullness of being, denoted by
his other great name, I am that I am -- His omniptesence -- His omnipotence;
who is indeed the only agent in the material world; all matter being
essentially dull and inactive, and moving only as it is moved by the finger of
God: and he is the spring of action in every creature, visible and invisible;
which could neither act nor exist, without the continued influx and agency of
his almighty power -- His wisdom, clearly deduced from the things that are
seen, from the goodly order of the universe -- His Trinity in Unity and Unity
in Trinity, discovered to us in the very first line of his written word (...):
literally the Gods created, a plural noun joined with a verb of the singular
number: as well as in every part of his subsequent revelations, given by the
mouth of all his holy prophets and apostles -- His essential purity and
holiness -- and above all, his love, which is the very brightness of his glory.

In praying that God, or his name may be hallowed or glorified, we pray that he
may be known, such as he is, by all that are capable thereof, by all
intelligent beings, and with affections suitable to that knowledge: that he may
be duly honored and feared and loved by all in heaven above and in the earth
beneath; by all angels and men, whom for that end he has made capable of
knowing and loving him to eternity.

8. Thy kingdom come. This has a close connection with the preceding petition.
In order that the name of God may be hallowed, we pray that his kingdom, the
kingdom of Christ may come. This kingdom then comes to a particular person,
when he repents and believes the gospel: when he is taught of God, not only to
know himself, but to know Jesus Christ and him crucified. As this is life
eternal, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, so it
is the kingdom of God begun below, set up in the believer's heart: the Lord God
omnipotent then reigns, when he is known through Christ Jesus. He takes unto
himself his mighty power; that he may subdue all things unto himself. He goes
on in the soul conquering and to conquer, till he has put all things under his
feet, till every thought is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.

When therefore God shall give his son the heathen for his inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth for his possession; when all kingdoms shall bow
before him, and all nations shall do him service; when the mountain of the
Lord's house, the church of Christ shall be established in the top of the
mountains; when the fullness of the gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall
be saved: then shall it be seen, that the Lord is king and has put on glorious
apparel appearing to every soul of man, as King of kings, and Lord of lords.
And it is meet for all those who love his appearing, to pray that he would
hasten the time: that this his kingdom, the kingdom of grace may come quickly,
and swallow up all the kingdoms of the earth; that all mankind receiving him
for their king, truly believing in his name, may be filled with righteousness
and peace and joy, with holiness and happiness, till they are removed hence
into his heavenly kingdom, there to reign with him for ever and ever.

For this also we pray in those words, Thy kingdom come: we pray for the coming
of his everlasting kingdom, the kingdom of glory in heaven, which is the
continuation and perfection of the kingdom of grace on earth. Consequently
this, as well as the preceding petition, is offered up for the whole
intelligent creation, who are all interested in this grand event, the sinal
renovation of all things, by God's putting an end to misery and sin, to
infirmity and death, for the righteous; taking all things into his own hands,
and setting up the kingdom which endures throughout all ages.

Exactly answerable to this, are those awful words, in the prayer, at the
burial of the dead; "Beseeching thee, that it may please thee of thy gracious
goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to hasten thy
kingdom: that we with all those that are departed, in the true faith of thy
holy name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul,
in thy everlasting glory."

9. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. This is the necessary and
immediate consequence, wherever the kingdom of God is come: where ever God
dwells in the soul by faith, and Christ reigns in the heart by love.

It is probable, many, perhaps the generality of men, at the first view of
these words, are apt to imagine they are only an expression of, or petition for
resignation; for a readiness to suffer the will of God, whatsoever it be
concerning us. And this is unquestionably a divine and excellent temper, a most
precious gift of God. But this is not what we pray for in this petition, at
least not in the chief and primary sense of it. We pray, not so much for a
passive, as for an active conformity to the will of God, in saying, Thy will be
done on earth as it is done in heaven.

How is it done by the angels of God in heaven? those who now circle his throne
rejoicing? they do it willingly; they love his commandments, and gladly hearken
to his words. It is their meat and drink to do his will; it is their highest
glory and joy. They do it continually; there is no interruption in their
willing service. They rest not day nor night, but employ every hour (speaking
after the manner of men; otherwise our measures of duration, days and nights
and hours, have no place in eternity) in fulfilling his commands, in executing
his designs, in performing the counsel of his will. And they do it perfectly.
No sin, no defect belongs to angelic minds. It is true; the stars are not pure
in his sight, even the morning-stars that sing together before him. In his
sight, that is in comparison of him, the very angels are not pure. But this
does not imply, that they are not pure in themselves. Doubtless they are; they
are without spot and blameless. They are altogether devoted to his will, and
perfectly obedient in all things.

If we view this in another light, we may observe, the angels of God in heaven,
do all the will of God. And they do nothing else, nothing but what they are
absolutely assured is his will Again, they do all the will of God, as he
wills, in the manner which pleases him, and no other. Yea, and they do this,
only because it is his will; for this and no other reason.

10. When therefore we pray, that the will of God may be done on earth as it is
in heaven, the meaning is, that all the inhabitants of the earth, even the
whole race of mankind, may do the will of their Father which is in heaven, as
willingly as the holy angels: that these may do it continually even as they,
without any interruption of their willing service: yea, and that they may do it
perfectly; that the God of peace, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, may make them perfect in every good work to do his will, and work in
them all which is well-pleasing in his sight.

In other words, we pray, that we and all mankind, may do the whole will of God
in all things: and nothing else, not the least thing but what is the holy and
acceptable will of God. We pray that we may do the whole will of God as he
wills, in the manner that pleases him: and lastly, that we may do it, because
it is his will: that this may be the sole reason and ground, the whole and only
motive of whatsoever we think, or whatsoever we speak or do.

11. Give us this day our daily bread. In the three former petitions, we have
been praying for all mankind. We come now more particularly to desire a supply
for our own wants. Not that we are directed even here, to confine our prayer
altogether to ourselves: but this and each of the following petitions, may be
used for the whole church of Christ upon earth.

By bread we may understand, all things needful whether for our souls or
bodies; (...) the things pertaining to life and godliness. We understand not
barely the outward bread, what our Lord terms the meat which perishes; but
much more the spiritual bread, the grace of God, the food which endures unto
everlasting life. It was the judgment of many of the ancient fathers, that we
are here to understand, the sacramental bread also: daily received in the
beginning by the whole church of Christ, and highly esteemed, till the love of
many waxed cold, as the grand channel whereby the grace of his spirit was
conveyed to the souls of all the children of God.

Our daily bread. The word we render daily has been differently explained by
different commentators. But the most plain and natural sense of it seems to be
this, which is retained in almost all translations, as well ancient as modern:
what is sufficient for this day; and so for each day, as it succeeds.

12. Give us. For we claim nothing of right, but only of free mercy. We deserve
not the air we breathe, the earth that bears, or the sun that shines upon us.
All our desert, we own, is hell But God loves us freely. Therefore we ask him
to give, what we can no more procure for ourselves, than we can merit it at his
hands.

Not that either the goodness or the power of God is a reason for us to stand
idle. It is his will, that we should use all diligence in all things, that we
should employ our utmost endeavors, as much as if our success were the natural
effect of our own wisdom and strength. And then, as though we had done nothing,
we are to depend on him, the giver of every good and perfect gift.

This day. For we are to take no thought for the morrow. For this very end has
our wise Creator divided life into these little portions of time, so clearly
separated from each other: that we might look on every day, as a fresh gift of
God, another life, which we may devote to his glory; and that every evening may
be as the close of life, beyond which we are to see nothing but eternity.

13. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. As nothing but sin can hinder the bounty of God from flowing forth upon
every creature, so this petition naturally follows the former; that all
hindrances being removed, we may the more clearly trust in the God of love,
for every manner of thing which is good.

Our trespasses. The word properly signifies our debts. Thus our sins are
frequently represented in scripture: every sin laying us under a fresh debt to
God; to whom we already owe, as it were, ten thousand talents. What then can we
answer when he shall say, Pay me that thou owe? We are utterly insolvent: we
have nothing to pay: we have wasted all our substance. Therefore if he deal
with us according to the rigor of his law, if he exact what he justly may, he
must command us to be bound hand and foot, and delivered over to the tormentors.

Indeed we are already bound hand and foot, by the chains of our own sins.
These, considered with regard to ourselves, are chains of iron and fetters of
brass. They are wounds wherewith the world, the flesh and the devil, have
gashed and mangled us all over. They are diseases that drink up our blood and
spirits, that bring us down to the chambers of the grave. But considered as
they are here, with regard to God, they are debts immense and numberless. Well
therefore, seeing we have nothing to pay, may we cry unto him, that he would
frankly forgive us all.

The word translated forgive, implies either to forgive a debt, or to unloose a
chain. And if we attain the former, the latter follows of course; if our debts
are forgiven, the chains fall off our hands. As soon as ever, through the free
grace of God in Christ, we receive forgiveness of sins, we receive likewise a
lot among those which are sanctified, by faith which is in him. Sin has lost
its power: it has no dominion over those, who are under grace, that is, in
favor with God. As there is now no condemnation for them that are in Christ
Jesus, so they are freed from sin as well as from guilt. The righteousness of
the law is fulfilled in them, and they walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit.

14. As we forgive them that trespass against us. In these words our Lord
clearly declares, both on what condition, and in what degree or manner we may
look to be forgiven of God. All our trespasses and sins are forgiven us, if we
forgive, and as we forgive others. This is a point of the utmost importance.
And our blessed Lord is so jealous, lest at any time we should let it slip out
of our thoughts, that he not only inserts it in the body of his prayer, but
presently after repeats it twice over. Ver. 14, 15.
If, says he, ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses. Secondly, God forgives us, as we forgive
others. So that if any malice or bitterness, if any taint of unkindness or
anger remains, if we do not clearly fully, and from the heart, forgive all men
their trespasses, we so far cut short the forgiveness of our own. God cannot
clearly and fully forgive us. He may show us some degree of mercy. But we will
not suffer him to blot out all our sins, and forgive all our iniquities.

In the mean time, while we do not from our hearts, forgive our neighbor his
trespasses, what manner of prayer are we offering to God, whenever we utter
these words? we are indeed setting God at open defiance: we are daring him to
do his worst. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us! that is in plain terms, "Do not thou forgive us at all: we desire
no favor at thy hands. We pray, that thou will keep our sins in remembrance,
and that thy wrath may abide upon us." But can you seriously offer such a
prayer to God? and has he not yet cast you quick into hell? O tempt him no
longer! now, even now, by his grace, forgive as you would be forgiven! now have
compassion on thy fellow servants, as God has had and will have pity on thee.

15. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Lead us not
into temptation. The word translated temptation, means trial of any kind. And
so the English word temptation was formerly taken, in an indifferent sense:
although now it is usually understood, of solicitation to sin. St. James uses
the word in both these senses; first, in its general, then in its restrained
acceptance. He takes it in the former sense when he says, Chap. i. Ver. 12,
13.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, or approved
of God, he shall receive the crown of life. He immediately adds, taking the
word in the latter sense, let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. But
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, or desire, (...),
drawn out of God, in whom alone he is safe, and enticed, caught as a fish with
a bait. Then it is, when he is thus drawn away and enticed, that he properly
enters into temptation. The temptation covers him as a cloud: it overspreads
his whole soul. Then how hardly shall he escape out of the snare? therefore we
beseech. God, no^ to lead us into temptation, that is (seeing God tempts no
man) not to suffer us to be led into it. But deliver us from evil: Rather, from
the evil one; (...). 'O (...) is unquestionably the wicked one, emphatically so
called, the prince and god of this world, who works with mighty power in the
children of disobedience. But all those who are the children of God by faith,
are delivered out of his hands. He may fight against them: and so he will. But
he cannot conquer, unless they betray their own souls. He may torment for a
time; but he cannot destroy; for God is on their side, who will not fail in the
end, to avenge his own elect, that cry unto him day and night, "Lord, when we
are tempted, suffer us not to enter into temptation. Do thou make a way for us
to escape, that the wicked one touch us not."

16. The conclusion of this divine prayer, commonly called the doxology, is a
solemn thanksgiving, a compendious acknowledgment of the attributes and works
of God. For thine is the kingdom; the sovereign right of all things that are,
or ever were created: yea, thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy
dominion endures throughout all ages. The power: the executive power, whereby
thou governest all things in thy everlasting kingdom, whereby thou do
whatsoever pleases thee, in all places of thy dominion. -- And the glory; the
praise due from every creature, for thy power and the mightiness of thy
kingdom, and for all thy wondrous works, which thou workest from everlasting,
and shall do, world without end, for ever and ever! Amen. So be it!

I believe it will not be unacceptable to the serious reader, to subjoin

A PARAPHRASE ON THE LORD'S PRAYER.
I.
FATHER of all, whose powerful voice,
Called forth this universal frame,
Whose mercies over all rejoice,
Through endless ages still the same;
Thou by thy word upholdest all;
Thy bounteous love to all is showed,
Thou hear'st thy every creature call,
And fillest every mouth with good.
II.
In heaven thou reign'st, enthroned in light,
Nature's expanse beneath thee spread;
Earth, air, and sea before thy sight,
And hell's deep gloom are open laid.
Wisdom, and might, and love are thine,
Prostrate before thy face we fall,
Confess thine attributes divine,
And hail thee Sovereign Lord of all.
III.
Thee, Sovereign Lord, let all confess
That moves in earth, or air, or sky,
Revere thy power, thy goodness bless,
Tremble before thy piercing eye.
All ye who owe to him your birth,
In praise your every hour employ:
JEHOVAH reigns! be glad, O Earth,
And shout ye morning-stars, for joy.
IV.
Son of thy sire's eternal love,
Take to thyself thy mighty power:
Let all earth's sons thy mercy prove,
Let all thy bleeding grace adore.
The triumphs of thy love display,
In every heart reign thou alone;
Till all thy foes confess thy sway,
And glory ends what grace begun.
V.
Spirit of grace, and health, and power,
Fountain of light and love below,
Abroad thine healing influence shower,
Over all the nations let it flow.
Inflame our hearts with perfect love,
In us the work of faith fulfill:
So not heaven's host shall swifter move
Than we on earth to do thy will.
VI.
Father, it is thine each day to yield
Thy children's wants a fresh supply;
Thou cloth'st the lillies of the field,
And hear the young ravens cry.
On thee we cast our care; we live
Through thee, who know our every need;
O feed us with thy grace, and give
Our souls this day the living bread.
VII.
Eternal, spotless Lamb of God,
Before the world's foundation slain,
Sprinkle us ever with thy blood,
O cleanse and keep us ever clean.
To every soul (all praise to thee)
Our bowels of compassion move:
And all mankind by this may see
God is in us; for God is love.
VIII.
Giver and Lord of life, whose power
And guardian care for all are free;
To thee in fierce temptation's hour,
From sin and Satan let us flee.
Thine, Lord, we are, and ours thou art,
In us be all thy goodness showed;
Renew, enlarge, and fill our heart
With peace and joy and heaven and God.
IX.
Blessing and honor, praise and love,
Coequal, coeternal, Three,
In earth below, in heaven above,
By all thy works be paid to thee.
Thrice holy, thine the kingdom is,
The power omnipotent is thine;
And when created nature dies,
Thy never-ceasing glories shine.
DISCOURSE THE SEVENTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. vi. 16, 17, 18. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a
sad Countenance, for they disfigure their Faces, that they may appear unto Men
to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their Reward.

But thou when thou fastest, anoint thy Head and wash thy Face.

That thou appear not unto Men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret,
and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.


1. IT has been the endeavor of Satan from the beginning of the world, to put
asunder what God had joined together; to separate inward from outward religion,
to set one of these at variance with the other. And herein he has met with no
small success, among those who were ignorant of his devices.

Many in all ages, having a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge, have
been strictly attached to the righteousness of the law, the performance of
outward duties, but in the mean time wholly regardless of inward righteousness,
the righteousness which is of God by faith. And many have run into the opposite
extreme, disregarding all outward duties, perhaps even speaking evil of the law
and judging the law, so far as it enjoins the performance of them.

2. It is by this very device of Satan, that faith and works have been so often
set at variance with each other. And many who had a real zeal for God, have for
a time fallen into the snare on either hand. Some have magnified faith to the
utter exclusion of good works, not only from being the cause of our
justification (for we know that man is justified freely by the redemption which
is in Jesus) but from being the necessary fruit of it, yea, from having any
place in the religion of Jesus Christ. Others, eager to avoid this dangerous
mistake, have run as much too far the contrary way; and either maintained, That
good works were the cause, at least the previous condition of justification; or
spoken of them as if they were all in all, the whole religion of Jesus Christ.

3. In the same manner have the end and the means of religion, been set at
variance with each other. Some well-meaning men, have seemed to place all
religion, in attending the prayers of the church, in receiving the Lord's
supper, in hearing sermons, and reading books of piety: neglecting mean-time
the end of all these, the love of God and their neighbor. And this very thing
has confirmed others in the neglect, if not contempt of the ordinances of God;
so wretchedly abused to undermine and overthrow the very end they were designed
to establish.

4. But of all the means of grace there is scarce any, concerning which men
have run into greater extremes, than that of which our Lord speaks in the
abovementioned words, I mean, religious fasting. How have some exalted this
beyond all scripture and reason? and others utterly disregarded it? as it were,
revenging themselves, by undervaluing, as much as the former had overvalued it.
Those have spoken of it, as if it were all in all; if not the end itself, yet
infallibly connected with it: these, as if it were just nothing, as if it were
a fruitless labor, which had no relation at all thereto. Whereas it is certain
the truth lies between them both. It is not all; nor yet is it nothing. It is
not the end, but it is a precious means thereto; a means which God himself has
ordained; and in which therefore, when it is duly used, he will surely give us
his blessing.

In order to set this in the clearest light, I shall endeavor to show, First,
what is the nature of fasting, and what the several sorts and degrees thereof:
Secondly, what are the reasons, grounds and ends of it: Thirdly, how we may
answer the most plausible objections against it: and Fourthly, in what manner
it should be performed.

I. 1. I shall endeavor to show, First, what is the nature of fasting, and
what the several sorts and degrees thereof. As to the nature of it, all the
inspired writers, both in the Old Testament and the New, take the word, to
fast, in one single sense, for not to eat, to abstain from food. This is so
clear, that it would be labor lost to quote the words of David, Nehemiah,
Isaiah, and the prophets which followed, or of our Lord and his apostles; all
agreeing in this, that, to fast, is not to eat for a time prescribed.

2. To this other circumstances were usually joined by them of old, which had
no necessary connection with it. Such were the neglect of their apparel, the
laying aside those ornaments which they were accustomed to wear: the putting on
mourning, the strewing ashes upon their head, or wearing sackcloth next their
skin. But we find little mention made in the new testament, of any of these
indifferent circumstances. Nor does it appear that any stress was laid upon
them, by the christians of the purer ages; however some penitents might
voluntarily use them, as outward signs of inward humiliation. Much less did the
apostles or the christians cotemporary with them, beat or tear their own flesh.
Such discipline as this was not unbecoming the priests or worshippers of Baal.
The gods of the heathens were but devils; and it was doubtless acceptable to
their devil-god, when his priests 1 Kings xviii. 28.
cried aloud, and cut themselves after this manner, till the blood gushed out
upon them: but it cannot be pleasing to Him, nor become his followers, who came
not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

3. As to the degrees or measures of fasting, we have instances of some who
have fasted several days together. So Moses, Elijah and our blessed Lord, being
endued with supernatural strength for that purpose, are recorded to have fasted
without intermission, forty days and forty nights. But the time of fasting more
frequently mentioned in scripture, is, one day, from morning till evening. And
this was the fast commonly observed among the ancient christians. But beside
these, they had also their half-fasts ( semijejunia, as Tertullian styles them)
on the fourth and sixth days of the week (Wednesday and Friday) throughout the
year: on which they took no sustenance till three in the afternoon, the time
when they returned from the public service.

4. Nearly related to this, is what our church seems peculiarly to mean by the
term abstinence: which may be used when we cannot fast entirely by reason of
sickness or hodily weakness. This is, the eating little; the abstaining in
part; the taking a smaller quantity of food than usual. I do not remember any
scriptural instance of this. But neither can I condemn it. For the scripture
does not: it may have its use, and receive a blessing from God.

5. The lowest kind of fasting, if it can be called by that name, is the
abstaining from pleasant food. Of this we have several instances in scripture
besides that of Daniel and his brethren: who from a peculiar consideration,
namely, that they might Dan, iv. 5, etc.
not defile themselves with the portion of the kings meat, nor with the wine
which he drank ( a daily provision of which the king had appointed for them)
requested and obtained of the prince of the eunuchs, pulse to eat and water to
drink. Perhaps from a mistaken imitation of this, might spring the very ancient
custom, of abstaining from flesh and wine during such times as were set apart
for fasting and abstinence. If it did not rather arise from a supposition that
these were the most pleasant food, and a belief, that it was proper to use what
was least pleasing, at those times of solemn approach to God.

6. In the Jewish church, there were some stated fasts. Such was the fast of
the seventh month, appointed by God himself, to be observed by all Israel,
under the severest penalty. Lev. xxiii. 26, etc.
The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, On the tenth day of the seventh month,
there shall be a day of atonement; and ye shall afflict your souls -- to make
an atonement for you before the Lord your God. For whatsoever soul it be that
shall not be afflicted in that same day he shall be cut off from among his
people. In after ages several other stated fasts were added to these. So
mention is made by the prophet Zechariah, of the fast, not only Zech. viii. 19.
of the seventh, but also of the sourth, of the fifth, and of the tenth month.

In the ancient christian church there were likewise stated fasts, and those
both annual and weekly. Of the former sort was that before Easter; observed by
some for eight and forty hours: by others, for an entire week; by many for two
weeks, taking no sustenance till the evening of each day. Of the latter, those
of the fourth and sixth days of the week, observed (as Epiphanius writes,
remarking it as an undeniable fact) (...) in the whole habitable earth, at
least, in every place where any christians made their abode. The annual fasts
in our church are, "The forty days of lent, the ember days at the four seasons,
the rogation days, and the vigils or eves of several solemn festivals: the
weekly, all Fridays in the year, except Christmas Day.

But beside those which were fixed, in every nation fearing God, there have
always been occasional fasts, appointed from time to time, as the particular
circumstances and occasions of each required. So 2 Chronicles. xx. 1, 3.
when the children of Moah and the children of Ammon, came against Jehoshaphat
to battle; Jehoshaphat set himself to s^eh the Lord, and proclaimed a fast
throughout all Judah. And so Jer. xxxvi. 9.
in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, in the ninth month, when
they were afraid of the king of Babylon, the princes of Judah proclaimed a fast
before the Lord, to all the people of Jerusalem.

And in like manner, particular persons, who take heed unto their ways, and
desire to walk humbly and closely with God, will find frequent occasion for
private seasons of thus afflicting their souls, before their Father which is in
secret. And it is to this kind of fasting, that the directions here given, do
chiefly and primarily refer.

II. 1. I proceed, to show, in the second place, what are the grounds, the
reasons and ends of fasting.

And, first, men who are under strong emotions of mind, who are affected with
any vehement passion, such as sorrow or fear, are often swallowed up therein,
and even forget to eat their bread. At such seasons they have little regard for
food, not even what is needful to sustain nature; much less for any delicacy or
variety, being taken up with quite different thoughts. Thus when 1 Samuel xxvsii.
15, 20.
Saul said, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make was against me, and
God is departed from me; it is recorded, he had eaten no bread, all the day nor
all the night. Thus those who were in the ship with St. Paul, when no small
tempest lay upon them, and all hope that they should be saved was taken away,
Acts xxvii. 3^.
continued fasting, having taken nothin^, no regular meal, for fourteen days
together. And thus David and all the men that were with him, when they heard
that the people were fled from the battle, and that many of the people were
fallen and dead, and Saul and Jonathan his son were dead also; 2 Samuel ^12.
mourned and wept and fasted until even for Saul and Jonathan, and for the
house of Israel.

Nay, many times they whose minds are deeply engaged, and impatient of any
interruption, and even loath their needful food, as diverting their thoughts,
from what they desire should engross their whole attention. Even as Saul, when
on the occasion mentioned before, he had fallen all along upon the earth and
there was no strength in him, yet said, I will not eat, till his servants,
together with the woman compelled him.

2. Here then is the natural ground of fasting. One who is under deep
affliction, overwhelmed with sorrow for sin, and a strong apprehension of the
wrath of God, would without any rule, without knowing or considering, whether
it were a command of God or not, forget to eat his bread, abstain not only from
pleasant, but even from needful food. Like St. Paul, who after he was led into
Damascus, was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink, Acts ix.
9.

Yea, when the storm rose high, when an horrible dread overwhelmed one who had
long been without God in the world; his soul would loath all manner of meat; it
would be unpleasing and irksome to him. He would be impatient of any thing that
should interrupt his ceaseless cry, Lord, s^ve! or I perish.

How strongly is this expressed by our church, in the first part of the homily
on fasting?

"When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see damnation to be the
reward of it, and behold with the eye of their mind the horror of hell; they
tremble, they quake, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and
cannot but accuse themselves and open their grief unto almighty God, and call
unto him for mercy. This being done seriously, their mind is so occupied (taken
up) partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be
delivered from this danger of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and
drink is laid apart, and loathsomeness (or loathing) of all worldly things and
pleasure comes in place. So that nothing then likes them more than to weep,
to lament, to mourn, and both with words and behavior of body to show
themselves weary of life."

3. Another reason or ground of fasting is this. Many of those who now fear
God, are deeply sensible how often they have sinned against him, by the abuse
of these lawful things. They know, how much they have sinned by excess of food;
how long they have transgressed the holy law of God, with regard to temperance,
if not sobriety too: how they have indulged their sensual appetites, perhaps to
the impairing even their bodily health; certainly to the no small hurt of their
soul. For hereby they continually fed and increased that sprightly folly, that
airiness of mind, that levity of temper, that gay inattention to things of the
deepest concern, that giddiness and carelessness of spirit, which were no other
than drunkenness of soul, which stupefied all their noblest faculties, no less
than excess of wine or strong drink. To remove therefore the effect, they
remove the cause: They keep at a distance from all excess. They abstain, as far
as is possible, from what had well nigh plunged them in everlasting perdition.
They often wholly refrain; always take care to be sparing and temperate in all
things.

4. They likewise well remember, how fullness of bread, increased not only
carelessess and lenity of spirit, but also foolish and unholy desires, yea,
unclean and vile affections. And this experience puts beyond all doubt. Even a
genteel; regular sensuality, is continually sensualizing the soul, and sinking
it into a level with the beasts that perish. It cannot be expressed what an
effect variety and delicacy of food have on the mind as well as the body;
making it just ripe for every pleasure of sense, as soon as opportunity shall
invite. Therefore on this ground also e^^^y wise man will refrain his foul, and
keep it low; will wean it more and more from all those indulgences of the
inferior appetites, which naturally tend to chain it down to earth, and to
pollute as well as debase it. Here is another perpetual reason for fasting: to
remove the food of lust and sensuality, to withdraw the incentives of foolish
and hurtful desires, of vile and vain affections.

5. Perhaps we need not altogether omit (although I know not if we should do
well, to lay any great stress upon it) another reason for fasting, which some
good men have largely insisted on: namely, the punishing themselves for having
abused the good gifts of God, by sometimes wholly refraining from them: thus
exercising a kind of holy revenge upon themselves, for their past folly and
ingratitude, in turning the things which should have been for their health,
into an occasion of falling. They suppose David to have had an eye to this when
he said, I wept and chastened, or punished my soul with fasting: and St. Paul,
when he mentions what revenge godly sorrow occasioned in the Corinthians.

6. A fifth, and more weighty reason for fasting, is, That it is an help to
prayer: particularly, when we set apart larger portions of time for private
prayer. Then especially it is, that God is often pleased to lift up the souls
of his servants above all the things of earth, and sometimes to wrap them up,
as it were, into the third heavens. And it is chiefly, as it is an help to
prayer, that it has so frequently been found a means in the hand of God, of
confirming and increasing not one virtue, not chastity only (as some have idly
imagined, without any ground, either from scripture, reason or experience) but
also seriousness of spirit, earnestness, sensibility, and tenderness of
conscience; deadness to the world, and consequently the love of God and every
holy and heavenly affection.

7. Not that there is any natural or necessary connection, between fasting, and
the blessings God conveys thereby. But he will have mercy as he will have
mercy: he will convey whatsoever seems him good, by whatsoever means he is
pleased to appoint. And he ha^^ in all ages appointed this, to be a means
^^ver^ing his wrath, and obtaining whatever blessings we from time to time
stand in need of.

How powerful a means this is, to avert the wrath of God, we may learn from the
remarkable instance of Ahab. There was none like him, who did sell himself;
wholly give himself up, like a slave bought with money, to work wickedness. Yet
whenever he rent his clothes and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and
went softly: The word of the Lord came to Elijah, saying, S^^st thou how Ahab
humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I will not
bring the evil in his days.

It was for this end, to avert the wrath of God, that Daniel sought God, with
fasting and sackcloth and ashes. This appears from the whole tenor of his
prayer, particularly from the solemn conclusion of it. O Lord, according to all
thy righteousnesses (or mercies) let thy anger be turned away from thy holy
mountain -- Hear the prayer of thy servant, and cause thy face to shine upon
thy sanctuary that is desolate. -- O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive: O Lord,
hearken and do, for thine own sake, Dan. ix. 3, 16, etc.

8. But it is not only from the people of God that we learn, when his anger is
moved, to seek him by fasting and prayer; but even from the heathens. When
Jonah had declared, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, the people
of Nineveh proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth From the greatest of them
unto the least. For the king of Nineveh arose from his throne, and laid his
robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. And he caused
it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, let neither man nor beast,
herd nor flock, taste any thing. Let them not feed, nor drink water. (Not that
the beast had sinned, or could repent; but that by their example man might be
admonished, considering that for his sin, the anger of God was hanging over all
creatures.) Who can tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not? -- And their labor was not in vain. The
fierce anger of God was turned away from them. God saw their works (the fruits
of that repentance and faith, which he had wrought in them by his prophet) and
God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them; and he did it
not. son. 3, 4, etc.

9. And it is a means not only of turning ^^y the wrath of God, but also of
obtaining whatever blessings we stand in need of. So when the other tribes were
smitten before the Benjamites Judge. xx. 26, etc.
all the children of Israel went up unto the house of the Lord, and wept and
fasted that day until; even; and then the Lord said, go up again; for tomorrow
I will deliver them into thine hand. So Samuel 1 Samuel vii. 6, etc.
gathered all Israel together, when they were in bondage to the Philistines,
and they fasted on that day before the Lord: and when the Philistines drew near
to battle against Israel, the Lord thundered upon them with a great thunder,
and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel. So Ezra; I Ezra.
viii. 21.
proclaimed a fast at the river Ahava, that we might afflict ourselves before
our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones -- and he
was entreated of us. So Nehemiah; I Nehem. i. 4, 11.
fasted and prayed before the God of heaven, and said, prospe^, I pray thee,
thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. And God
granted him mercy in the sight of the king.

10. In like manner, the apostles always joined fasting with prayer, when they
desired the blessing of God on any important undertaking. Thus we read, Acts
xiii. There were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and
teachers -- As they ministered to the Lord and fasted (doubtless for direction
in this very affair) the Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, for
the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had (a second time) fasted
and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away, ver. 1, 2, 3.

Thus also Paul and Barnabas themselves, as we read in the following chapter,
when they returned again to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, confirming the souls
of the disciples; and when they had ordained them elders in every church, and
had prayed with fasting, commended them to the Lord, ver. 23.

Yea, that blessings are to be obtained in the use of this means, which are no
otherwise attainable, our Lord expressly declares in his answer to his
disciples, asking, Matt. xvii. 19, etc.
Why could not we cast him out? Jesus said unto them, because of your unbelief;
for verily I say unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
shall say unto this mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove,
and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Howbeit, this kind (of devils) goes
not out, but by prayer and fasting: these being the appointed means of
attaining that faith, whereby the very devils are subject unto you.

11. These were the appointed means. For it was not merely by the light of
reason, or of natural conscience (as it is called) that the people of God have
been in all ages directed, to use fasting as a means to these ends. But they
have been from time to time taught it of God himself, by clear and open
revelations of his will. Such is that remarkable one by the prophet Joel, Joel
ii. 12, etc.
Therefore thus says the Lord, turn you unto me, with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning -- Who knows if the Lord will
return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? blow the trumpet in Zion,
sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly -- Then will the Lord be jealous over
his land, and will spare his people. Yea, I will send you corn and wine and oil
-- I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen.

Nor are they only temporal blessings which God directs his people to expect in
the use of these means. For at the same time that he promised to those who
should seek him with fasting, and weeping, and mourning, I will render you the
ears which the grasshopper has eaten, the canker-worm, and the caterpillar and
the palmer-worm, my great army, he subjoins, so shall ye eat and be satisfied,
and praise the name of the Lord your God -- Ye sh^^^ ^^^w that I am in the
midst of Israel, and (...) the Lord your God. And then immediately follows the
great gospel-promise, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions. And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids
in those days will I pour out my spirit.

12. Now whatsoever reasons there were to quicken those of old in the zealous
and constant discharge of this duty, they are of equal force still to quicken
us. But above all these we have a peculiar reason for being in fastings often,
namely, the command of him by whose name we are called. He does not indeed in
this place expressly enjoin, either fasting, giving of alms or prayer. But his
directions how to fast, to give alms, and to pray, are of the same force with
such injunctions. For the commanding us, to do any thing that, is an
unquestionable command, to do that thing; seeing it is impossible to perform it
thus, if it be not performed at all. Consequently, the saying, give alms, pray,
fast in such a manner, is a clear command to perform all those duties: as well
as to perform them in that manner, which shall in no wise lose its reward.

And this is a still farther motive and encouragement, to the performance of
this duty; even the promise which our Lord has graciously annexed to the due
discharge of it: Thy Father, which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
Such are the plain grounds, reasons and ends of fasting; such our encouragement
to persevere therein, notwithstanding abundance of objections which men, wiser
than their Lord, have been continually raising against it.

III. 1. The most plausible of these I come now to consider. And, First, It has
been frequently said, "Let a christian fast from sin, and not from food: this
is what God requires at his hands." So he does: but he requires the other also.
Therefore this ought to be done, and that not left undone.

View your argument in its full dimensions; and your will easily judge of the
strength of it.

"If a christian ought to abstain from sin, then he ought not to abstain from
food:

But a christian ought to abstain from sin:

Therefore he ought not to abstain from food."

That a christian ought to abstain from sin, is most true. But does it follow
from hence, that he ought not to abstain from food? Yea, let him do both the
one and the other. Let him, by the grace of God, always abstain from sin; and
let him often abstain from food; for such reasons and ends as experience and
scripture plainly show to be answered thereby.

2. "But is it not better (as it has, Secondly, been objected) to abstain from
pride and vanity, from foolish and hurtful desires, from peevishness, and
anger, and discontent, than from food?" Without question it is. But here again
we have need to remind you of our Lord's words, these things ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone. And indeed the latter is only in order
to the former; it is a means to that great end. We abstain from food with this
view, that by the grace of God, conveyed into our souls, through this outward
means, in conjunction with all the other channels of his grace which he has
appointed, we may be enabled to abstain from every passion and temper, which is
not pleasing in his sight. We refrain from the one, that being endued with
power from on high, we may be able to refrain from the other, so that your
argument proves just the contrary to what you designed. It proves, that we
ought to fast. For if we ought to abstain from evil tempers and desires, then
we ought thus to abstain from food: since these little instances of self-denial
are the ways God has chose, wherein to bestow that great salvation.

3. "But we do not find it so in fact: (this is a third objection.) We have
fasted much and often. But what did it avail? we were not a whit better: we
found no blessing therein. Nay, we have found it an hinderance rather than an
help. Instead of preventing anger, for instance, or fretfulness, it has been a
means of increasing them to such a height, that we could neither bear others
nor ourselves." This may very possibly be the case. It is possible, either to
fast or pray, in such a manner, as to make you much worse than before; more
unhappy, and more unholy. Yet the fault does not lie in the means itself; but
in the manner of using it. Use it still, but use it in a different manner. Do
what God commands as he commands it, and then doubtless his promise shall not
fail; his blessing shall be withheld no longer: but when thou fastest in
secret, he that sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

4. "But is it not mere superstition (so it has been, Fourthly, objected) to
imagine that God regards such little things as these?" if you say it is, you
condemn all the generation of God's children. But will you say, these were all
weak, superstitious men? can you be so hardy as to affirm this, both of Moses
and Joshua, of Samuel and David, of Jehoshaphat, Ezra, Nehemiah, and all the
prophets? Yea, of a greater than all, the Son of God himself? it is certain,
both our Master, and all these his servants, did imagine, that fasting is not a
little thing, and that he who is higher than the highest does regard it. Of the
same judgment, it is plain, were all the apostles, after they were filled with
the Holy Ghost and with wisdom. When they had the unction of the Holy One,
teaching them all things, they still approved themselves the ministers of God,
by fastings, as well as by the armor of righteousness on the right hand, and
on the left. After the Bridegroom was taken from them, then did they fast in
those days. Nor would they attempt any thing (as we have seen above) wherein
the glory of God was nearly concerned, such as the sending forth laborers into
the harvest, without solemn fasting as well as prayer.

5. "But if fasting be indeed of so great importance, and attended with such a
blessing, is it not best, say some, Fifthly, to fast always? not to do it now
and then, but to keep a continual fast? to use as much abstinence at all times,
as our bodily strength will bear?" let none be discouraged from doing this. By
all means use as little and plain food, exercise as much self-denial herein at
all times, as your bodily strength will bear. And this may conduce, by the
blessing of God, to several of the great ends abovementioned. It may be a
considerable help not only to chastity, but also to heavenly-mindedness; to the
weaning your affections from things below, and setting them on things above.
But this is not fasting, scriptural fasting: it is never termed so in all the
Bible. It in some measure answers some of the ends hereof but still it is
another thing. Practice it by all means; but not so as thereby to set aside a
command of God, and an instituted means of averting his judgment, and obtaining
the blessings of his children.

6. Use continually then as much abstinence as you please; which taken thus, is
no other than christian temperance. But this need not at all interfere with
your observing solemn times of fasting and prayer. For instance; your habitual
abstinence or temperance, would not prevent your fasting in secret, if you was
suddenly overwhelmed with huge sorrow and remorse, and with horrible fear and
dismay. Such a situation of mind would almost constrain you to fast: you would
loath your dainty food: you would scarce endure even to take such supplies, as
were needful for the body, till God lifted-you up- out of the horrible pit, and
set your feet upon a rock, and ordered your goings. The same would be the case
if you was in agony of desire vehemently wrestling with God for his blessing.
You would need none to instruct you, not to eat bread, till you had obtained
the request of your lips.

7. Again had you been at Nineveh, when it was proclaimed throughout the city,
Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock taste any thing: let them not feed or
drink water, but let them cry mightily unto God: would your continual fast have
been any reason for not bearing part in that general humiliation? doubtless it
would not. You would have been as much concerned as any other, not to taste
food on that day.

No more would abstinence, or the observing a continual fast, have excused any
of the children of Israel, from fasting on the tenth day of the seventh month,
the great annual day of atonement. There was no exception for these in that
solemn decree, Whatsoever soul it shall be, that shall not be afflicted (shall
not fast) in that day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

Lastly, had you been with the brethren in Antioch at the time when they fasted
and prayed, before the sending forth of Barnabas and Saul, can you possibly
imagine that your temperance or abstinence would have been a sufficient cause
for not jo^m^g therein? without doubt if you had not, you would soon have been
cut off from the christian community. You would have deservedly been cast out
from among them, "as bringing confusion into the church of God."

IV. 1. I am, in the last place, to show, in what manner we are to fast, that
it may be an acceptable service unto the Lord. And, first, Let it be done unto
the Lord with our eye singly fixed on him. Let our intention herein be this,
and this alone, to glorify our Father which is in heaven: to express our sorrow
and shame, for our manifold tranfgressions of his holy law: to wait for an
increase of purifying grace, drawing our affections to things above: to add
seriousness and earnestness to our prayers: to avert the wrath of God, and to
obtain all the great and precious promises, which he has made to us in Christ
Jesus.

Let us beware of mocking God, of turning our fast as well as our prayer into
an abomination unto the Lord, by the mixture of any temporal view,
particularly, by seeking the praise of men. Against this our blessed Lord more
peculiarly guards us, in the words of the text. Moreover, when ye fast, be ye
not as the hypocrites (such were too many who were called the people of God) of
a sad countenance; four, affectedly sad, putting their looks into a peculiar
form. For they disfigure their faces, not only by unnatural distortions, but
also by covering them with dust and ashes -- That they may appear unto men to
fast. This is their chief, if not only design. Verily I say unto you, they have
their reward; even the admiration and praise of men. But thou when thou
fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy fact. Do as thou art accustomed to do at
other times -- That thou appear not unto men to fast (let this be no part of
thy intention: if they know it without any desire of thine, it matters not,
thou art neither the better nor the worse) but unto thy Father which is in
secret; and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

2. But if we desire this reward, let us beware, Secondly, of fancying we merit
any thing of God by our fasting. We cannot be too often warned of this;
inasmuch as a desire to establish our own righteousness, to procure salvation
of debt, and not of grace, is so deeply rooted in all our hearts: -- Fasting is
only a way which God has ordained, wherein we wait for his unmerited mercy;
and wherein, without any desert of ours, he has promised, freely to give us
his blessing.

3. Not that we are to imagine, the performing the bare outward act, will
receive any blessing from God. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, says the
Lord: a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? are these outward acts, however strictly performed, all that is
meant by a man's afflicting his soul? Will thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? No, surely. If it be a mere external service, it is
all but lost labor. Such a performance may possibly an (...) body. But as to
the soul, it profits nothing.

4. Yea, the body may sometimes be afflicted too much, so as to be unsit for
the works of our calling. This also we are diligently to guard against: for we
ought to preserve our health, as a good gist of God. Therefore care is to be
taken, whenever we fast, to proportion the fast to our strength. For we may not
offer God murder for sacrifice, or destroy our bodies to help our souls.

But at these solemn seasons, we may even in great weakness of body, avoid that
other extreme, for which God condemns those who of old expostulated with him
for not accepting their fasts. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou
see not? -- Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure, says the Lord
-- If we cannot wholly abstain, we may at least abstain from pleasant food; and
then we shall not seek his face in vain.

5. But let us take care to afflict our souls as well as our bodies. Let every
season either of public or private fasting, be a season of exercising all those
holy affections, which are implied im a broken and contrite heart. Let it be a
season of devout mourning, of godly sorrow for sin; Such a sorrow as that of
the Corinthians, concerning which the apostle says, I rejoice, not that ye
were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance. For ye were made sorry
after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly
sorrow ((...)) the sorrow which is according to God, which is a precious gift
of his spirit, lifting the soul to God (from whom it flows) works repentance
to salvation, not to be repented of. Yea, and let our sorrowing after a godly
fort, work in us the same inward and outward repentance; the same entire change
of heart, renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness;
and the same change of life, till we are holy as he is holy in all manner of
conversation. Let it work in us the same carefulness, to be found in him,
without spot and blameless the same clearing of ourselves, by our lives rather
than words, by our abstaining from all appearance of evil; the same
indignation, vehement abhorrence of every sin; the same fear of our own
deceitful hearts; the same desire to be in all things conformed to the holy and
acceptable will of God; the same zeal for whatever may be a means of his glory,
and of our growth in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: And the same
revenge against Satan and all his works, against all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit, 2 Cor. vii. 9, etc.

6. And with fasting let us always join fervent prayer, pouring out our whole
souls before God, confessing our sins with all their aggravations, humbling
ourselves under his mighty hand, laying open before him all our wants, all our
guiltiness and helplessness. This is a season for enlarging our prayers, both
in behalf of ourselves and of our brethren. Let us now bewail the sins of our
people, and cry aloud for the city of our God: That the Lord may build up Zion,
and cause his face to shine on her desolations, Thus we may observe the men of
God in ancient times always joined prayer and fasting together. Thus the
apostles in all the instances cited above: and thus our Lord joins them in the
discourse before us.

7. It remains only, in order to our observing such a fast, as is acceptable to
the Lord, that we add alms thereto; works of mercy, after our power, both to
the bodies and fouls of men. With such sacrifices also God is well-pleased.
Thus the angel declares to Cornelius, fasting and Acts x. 4, etc.
praying in his house, Thy prayers and thine ulms are come up for a memorial
before God. And this God himself expressly and largely declares, Isa. lviii. 6,
etc.
Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to
the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? When
thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from
thy own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine
health shall spring forth speedily: And thy righteousness shall go before thee,
the glory of the Lord shall be thy rere-ward. Then shall thou call, and the
Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. -- If (when
thou fastest) thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul: Then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the
noonday. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make thy bones fat: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and
like a spring whose waters fail not.

DISCOURSE THE EIGHTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. vi. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Lay not up for yourselves Treasures upon Earth,
where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal:

But lay up for yourselves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust
does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through nor steal:

For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.

The Light of the Body is the Eye: if therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole
Body shall be full of Light.

But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness. If
therefore the Light that is within thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness!


1. FROM those which are commonly termed religious actions, and which are real
branches of true religion, where they spring from a pure and holy intention,
and are performed in a manner suitable thereto, our Lord proceeds to the
actions of common life, and shows that the same purity of intention, is as
indispensably required in our ordinary business, as in giving alms, or fasting
or prayer.

And without question the same purity of intention, "which makes our alms and
devotions acceptable, must also make our labor or employment, a proper
offering to God. If a man pursues his business, that he may raise himself to a
state of figure and riches in the world, he is no longer serving God in his
employment, and has no more title to a reward from God, than he who gives alms
that he may be seen, or prays that he may be heard of men. For vain and earthly
designs are no more allowable in our employments, than in our alms and
devotions. They are not only evil when they mix with our good works," with our
religious actions, "but they have the same evil nature when they enter into the
common business of our employments. If it were allowable to pursue them in our
worldly employments, it would be allowable to pursue them in our devotions. But
as our alms and devotions are not an acceptable service, but when they proceed
from a pure intention, so our ^^^^^on employment cannot be reckoned a service
^o him, but when it is performed with the same piety of heart."

2. This our blessed Lord declares in the liveliest manner, in those strong and
comprehensive words which he explains, enforces and enlarges upon, throughout
this whole chapter. The light of the body is the eye. If therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light: but if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. The eye is the intention: What the eye is
to the body, the intention is to the soul. As the one guides all the motions of
the body, so does the other those of the soul. This eye of the soul is then
said to be single, when it looks at one thing only; when we have no other
design, but to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent: to know him with
suitable affections, loving him as he has loved us: to please God in all
things: to serve God (as we love him) with all our heart and mind and soul and
strength: and to enjoy God in all and above all things, in time and in eternity.

3. If thine eye be thus single, thus fixed on God, thy whole body shall be
full of light. Thy whole body. -- All that is guided by the intention, as the
body is by the eye. All thou art: all thou do: thy desires, tempers,
affections; thy thoughts and words and actions. The whole of these shall be
full of light: full of true, divine knowledge. This is the first thing we may
here understand by ^ght. In his light thou shall see light. He which of old
commanded light to shine out of darkness, shall shine in thy heart. He shall
enlighten the eyes of thy understanding, with the knowledge of the glory of
God. His spirit shall reveal unto thee the deep things of God. The inspiration
of the Holy One shall give thee understanding, and cause three to know wisdom
secretly. Yea, the ano^^^ing which thou receivest of him, shall abide in thee
and teach thee of all things.

How does experience con^^^^ this? Even after God has opened the ^^es of our
understanding, if we seek or des^^^ any thing else than God, how soon is our
foolish heart darkened? then clouds again rest upon our souls. Doubts and fears
again overwhelm us. We are tossed to and fro, and know not what to do, or which
is the path wherein we should go. But when we desire and seek nothing but God,
clouds and doubts vanish away. We who were sometime darkness, are now light in
the Lord. The night now shines as the day; and we find, the path of the
upright is light. God shows us the path wherein we should go, and makes
plain the way before our face.

4. The second thing which we ^ay here understand by light, is holiness. While
thou seek God in all things, thou shall find him in all, the fountain of all
holiness, continually filling thee with his own likeness, with justice, mercy
and truth. While thou look unto Jesus and him alone, thou shall be filled
with the mind that was in him. Thy soul shall be renewed day by day, after the
image of him that created it. If the eye of thy mind be not removed from him,
if thou endurest seeing him that is invisible, and seeking nothing else in
heaven or earth, then as thou beholdest the glory of the Lord, thou shall be
transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord.

And it is also matter of daily experience, that by grace we are thus saved
through faith. It is by faith that the eye of the mind is opened, to see the
light of the glorious love of God. And as long as it is steadily fixed thereon,
on God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, we are more and more
filled with the love of God and man, with meekness, gentleness, long suffering;
with all the fruits of holiness, which are through Christ Jesus, to the glory
of God the Father.

5. This light which fills him who has a single eye, implies, Thirdly,
Happiness as well as holiness. Surely light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it
is to see the sun. But how much more to see the sun of righteousness,
continually shining upon the soul? and if there be any consolation in Christ,
in any comfort of love, if any peace that passes all understanding, if any
rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, they all belong to him whose eye is
single. Thus is his whole body full of light. He walks in the light as God is
in the light, rejoicing evermore, praying without ceasing, and in every thing
giving thanks, enjoying whatever is the will of God concerning him in Christ
Jesus.

6. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
thine eye be evil: we see there is no medium between a single and an evil eye.
If the eye be not single, then it is evil. If the intention, in whatever we do,
be not singly to God, if we seek any thing else, then our mind and conscience
are defiled.

Our eye therefore is evil, if in any thing we do, we aim at any other end than
God; if we have any view, but to know and to love God, to please and serve him
in all things: if we have any other design than to enjoy God, to be happy in
him both now and for ever.

9. If thine eye be not singly fixed on God, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness. The veil shall still remain on thy heart. Thy mind shall be more and
more blinded, by the God of this world, lest the light of the glorious gospel
of Christ should shine upon thee. Thou will be full of ignorance and error
touching the things of God, not being able to receive or discern them. And even
when thou have some desire to serve God, thou will be full of uncertainty as to
the manner of serving him; sinding doubts and difficulties on every side, and
not seeing any way to escape.

Yea, if thine eye be not single, if thou seek any of the things of earth, thou
shall be full of ungodliness and unrighteousness: thy desires, tempers,
affections, being all out of course, being all dark, and vile, and vain. And
thy conversation will be evil, as well as thy heart, not seasoned with salt, or
meet to minister grace unto the hearers, but idle, unprofitable, corrupt,
grievous to the Holy Spirit of God.

8. Both destruction and unhappiness are in thy ways; for the way of peace have
thou not known. There is no peace, no settled, solid peace, for them that know
not God. There is no true, nor lasting content for any, who do not seek him
with their whole heart. While thou aimest at any of the things that perish, all
that comes is vanity. Yea, not only vanity, but vexation of spirit, and that
both in the pursuit and the enjoyment also. Thou walk indeed in a vain
shadow, and disquietest thyself in vain. Thou walk in darkness that may be
felt. Sleep on; but thou can not take thy rest. The dreams of life can give
pain, and that thou know: but ease they cannot give. There is no rest, in
this world or the world to come, but only in God the center of spirits.

If the light which is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! If the
intention which ought to enlighten the whole soul, to fill it with knowledge,
and love, and peace, and which, in fact, does so as long as it is single, as
long as it aims at God alone: if this be darkness; if it aim at any thing
beside God, and consequently cover the soul with darkness instead of light,
with ignorance and error, with sin and misery: O how great is that darkness! it
is the very smoke which ascends out of the bottomless pit! it is the essential
night, which reigns in the lowest deep, in the land of the shadow of death.

9. Therefore lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and
rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. If you do, it is
plain your eye is evil: it is not singly fixed on God.

With regard to most of the commandments of God, whether relating to the heart
or life, the heathens of Africa or America stand much on a level, with those
that are called christians. The christians observe them (a few only being
excepted) very near as much as the heathens. For instance: the generality of
the natives of England, commonly called christians, are as sober and as
temperate, as the generality of the heathens, near the Cape of Good Hope. And
s^^^he Dutch or French christians, are as humble and as chaste, as the Choctaw
or Cherokee-Indians. It is not easy to say, when we compare the bulk of the
nations in Europe with those in America, whether the superiority lies on the
one side or the other. At least the American has not much the advantage. But we
cannot affirm this, with regard to the command now before us. Here the heathen
has far the pre-eminence. He desires and seeks nothing more than plain food to
eat, and plain raiment to put on. And he seeks this only from day to day. He
reserves, he lays up nothing; unless it be, as much corn at one season of the
year, as he will need before that season returns. This command, therefore, the
heathens, though they know it not, do constantly and punctually observe. They
lay up for themselves no treasures upon earth; no stores of purple or sine
linen, of gold or silver, which either moth or rust may corrupt, or thieves
break through and steal. But how do the christians observe, what they profess
to receive as a command of the most high God? not at all; not in any degree; no
more than if no such command had ever been given to man. Even the good
christians, as they are accounted by others as well as themselves, pay no
manner of regard thereto. It might as well be still hid in its original Greek,
for any notice they take of it. In what christian city do you find one man of
five hundred, who makes the least scruple, of laying up just as much treasure
as he can? of increasing his goods just as far as he is able? there are indeed
those who would not do this unjustly; there are many who will neither rob nor
steal; and some, who will not defraud their neighbor; nay, who will not gain,
either by his ignorance or necessity. But this is quite another point. Even
these do not scruple the thing but the manner of it. They do not scruple the
laying up treasures upon earth; but the laying them up by dishonesty. They do
not start at disobeying Christ, but at a breach of heathen morality. So that
even these honest men do no more obey this command, than a highwayman or a
house-breaker. Nay, they never designed to obey it. From their youth up, it
never entered into their thoughts. They were bred up by their christian
parents, masters and friends, without any instruction at all concerning it:
unless it were this, to break it as soon, and as much as they could, and to
continue breaking it to their lives end.

10. There is no one instance of spiritual infatuation in the world, which is
more amazing than this. Most of these very men read, or hear the bible read,
many of them every Lord's day. They have read or heard these words an hundred
times, and ye^ never suspect that they are themselves condemned thereby, any
more than by those which forbid parents to offer up their sons or daughters
unto Moloch.

O that God would speak to these miserable self-deceivers, with his own ^^e,
his mighty voice! that they may at last awake out of the snare of the devil,
and the scales may fall from their eyes!

11. Do you ask, what it is to lay up treasures on earth? it will be needful to
examine this thoroughly. And let us, first, observe, what is not forbidden in
this command, that we may then clearly discern, what is.

We are not forbidden in this command, First, to provide things honest in the
sight of all men, to provide wherewith we may render unto all their due,
whatsoever they can justly demand of us. So far from it, that we are taught of
God, to owe no man any thing. We ought therefore to use all diligence in our
calling, in order to owe no man any thing: this being no other than a plain law
of common justice, which our Lord came not to destroy, but to fulfill.

Neither, Secondly, does he here forbid the providing for ourselves, such
things as are needful for the body; a sufficiency of plain, wholesome food to
eat, and clean raiment to put on. Yea, it is our duty, so far as God puts it
into our power, to provide these things also; to the end we may eat our own
bread, and be burdensome to no man.

Nor yet are we forbidden, Thirdly, to provide for our children, and for those
of our own household. This also it is our duty to do, even upon principles of
heathen morality. Every man ought to provide the plain necessaries of life,
both for his own wife and children; and to put them into a capacity of
providing these for themselves, when he is gone hence and is no more seen. I
say, of providing these, the plain necessaries of life, not delicacies, not
superfluities: and that by their diligent labor; for it is no man's duty to
furnish them any more than himself, with the means either of luxury or
idleness. But if any man provide not thus far for his own children (as well as
for the widows of his own house; of whom primarily St. Paul is speaking, in
those well known words to Timothy:) he has practically denied the faith, and
is worse than an infidel, or heathen.

Lastly, We are not forbidden in these words, to lay up from time to time, what
is needful for the carrying on our worldly but ness, in such a measure and
degree, as is sufficient to answer the foregoing purposes: in such a measure,
as first, to owe no man any thing; secondly, to procure for ourselves the
necessaries of life; and thirdly, to furnish those of our own house with them
while we live, and with the means of procuring them when we are gone to God.

12. We may now clearly discern (unless we are unwilling to discern it) what
that is which is forbidden here. It is, The designedly procuring more of this
world's goods, than will answer the foregoing purposes: the laboring after a
larger measure of worldly substance, a larger increase of gold and silver; the
laying up any more than these ends require, is what is here expressly and
absolutely forbidden. If the words have any meaning at all, it must be this;
for they are capable of no other. Consequently, whoever he is, that owing no
man any thing, and having food and raiment for himself and his household,
together with a sufficiency to carry on his worldly business, so far as answers
these reasonable purposes: whosoever, I say, being already in these
circumstances, seeks a still larger portion on earth, he lives in an open
habitual denial of the Lord that bought him. He has practically denied the
faith, and is worse than an African or American infidel.

13. Hear ye this all ye that dwell in the world, and love the world wherein ye
dwell. Ye may be highly esteemed of men; but ye are on ^^^ination in the sight
of God. How long shall your souls cleave to the dust? How long will ye load
yourselves with thick clay? When will ye awake and see, that the open,
speculative heathens are nearer the kingdom of heaven than you? When will ye be
persuaded to choose the better part; that which cannot be taken away from you?
When will ye seek only to lay up treasures in heaven, renouncing, dreading,
abhorring all other? If you aim at laying up treasures on earth, you are not
barely losing your time, and spending your strength for that which is not
bread: for what is the fruit if you succeed? You have murdered your own soul.
You have extinguished the last spark of spiritual life therein. Now indeed, in
the midst of life you are in death. You are a living man, but a dead christian.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Your heart is sunk
into the dust: Your soul cleaves to the ground. Your affections are set, not
on things above, but on things on the earth; on poor husks that may poison, but
cannot satisfy an everlasting spirit, made for God. Your love, your joy, your
desire, are all placed on the things when perish in the using. You have thrown
away the treasure in heaven: God and Christ are lost. You have gained riches
and hellfire.

14. O how hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!
When our Lord's disciples were astonished at his speaking thus, he was so far
from retracting it that he repeated the same important truth, in stronger terms
than before. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. How hard is it for them whose
every word is applauded, not to be wise in their own eyes! how hard, for them
not to think themselves better than the poor, base, uneducated herd of men! how
hard, not to seek happiness in their riches, or in things dependent upon them;
in gratifying the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride of
life! O ye rich, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? -- only with God all
things are possible.

15. And even if you do not succeed, what is the fruit of your endeavoring to
lay up treasures on earth? They that will be rich ((...), they that desire,
that endeavor after it, whether they succeed or no) full into a temptation and
a snare, a gin, a trap of the devil, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts;
(...), desires with which reason has nothing to do; such as properly belong,
not to rational and immortal beings, but only to the brute-beasts, which have
no understanding: which drown men in destruction and perdition, in present and
eternal misery. Let us but open our eyes, and we may daily see the melancholy
proofs of this: men, who desiring, resolving to be rich, coveting after money,
the root of all evil, have already pierced themselves through with many
sorrows, and anticipated the hell to which they are going.

The cautiousness with which the apostle here speaks, is highly observable. He
does not affirm this absolutery of the rich; for a man may possibly be rich,
without any fault of his, by an overruling providence, preventing his own
choice. But he affirms it of (...). These who desire or seek to be rich.
Riches, dangerous as they are, do not always drown men in destruction and
perdition. But the desire of riches does: those who calmly desire and
deliberately seek to attain them, whether they do, in fact, gain the world or
no, do infallibly lose their own souls. These are they, that sell him who
bought them with his blood, for a few pieces of gold or silver. These enter
into a covenant with death and hell: and their covenant shall stand. For they
are daily making themselves meet to partake of their inheritance with the devil
and his angels.

16. O who shall warn this generation of vipers, to flee from the wrath to
come! not those who lie at their gate or cringe at their feet, desiring to be
fed with the crumbs that fall from their tables. Not those who court their
favor or fear their frown; none of those who mind earthly things. But if there
be a christian upon earth, if there be a man who has overcome the world, who
desires nothing but God, and fears none but him that is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell: thou, O man of God, speak and spare not; lift up thy
voice like a trumpet. Cry aloud and show these honorable sinners the desperate
condition wherein they stand. It may be, one in a thousand may have ears to
hear, may arise and shake himself from the dust; may break loose from these
chains that bind him to the earth, and at length lay up treasures in heaven.

17. And if it should be, that one of these, by the mighty power of God, awoke
and ashed, what must I do to be saved? the answer, according to the oracles of
God, is clear, full and express. God does not say to thee, sell all that thou
have. Indeed he who sees the hearts of men, saw it needful to enjoin this in
one peculiar ease, that of the young, rich ruler. But he never laid it down for
a general rule, to all rich men, in all succeeding generations. His general
direction is, First, be not high-minded. God sees not as man sees. He esteems
thee not for thy riches, for thy grandeur or equipage, for any qualification or
accomplishment which is directly or indirectly owing to thy wealth, which can
be bought or procured thereby. All these are with him as dung and dross: let
them be so with thee also. Beware thou think not thyself to be one jot wiser,
or better for all these things. Weigh thyself in another balance: estimate
thyself only by the measure of faith and love which God has given thee. If
thou have more of the knowledge and love of God than he, thou art on this
account and no other, wiser and better, more valuable and honorable than him,
who is with the dogs of thy stock. But if thou have not this treasure, thou art
more foolish, more vile more truly contemptible, I will not say, than the
lowest servant under thy roof, but than the beggar laid at thy gate full of
sores.

18. Secondly, Trust not in uncertain riches. Trust not in them for help: and
trust not in them for happiness.

First, Trust not in them for help. Thou art miserably mistaken, if thou
look for this in gold or silver. These are no more able to see thee above
the world, than to set-thee above the devil Know that both the world and the
prince of this world laugh at all such preparations against them. These will
little avail in the day of trouble: even if they remain in the trying hour. But
it is not certain, that they will: for how often do they make themselves wing?
and fly away? But if not, what support will they afford, even in the ordinary
troubles of life? the desire of thy eyes, the wife of thy youth, thy son, thine
only son, or the friend which was as thy own soul, is taken away at a stroke.
Will thy riches re-animate the breathless clay, or call back its late
inhabitant? will they secure thee from sickness, diseases, pain? do these visit
the poor only? nay; he that feeds thy flocks or tills thy ground, has less
sickness and pain than thou. He is more rarely visited by these unwelcome
guests: and if they come there at all, they are more easily driven away from
the little cot, than from "the cloud-topp'd palaces." And during the time that
thy body is chastened with pain, or consumes away with pining sickness, how do
thy treasures help thee? let the poor heathen answer.

Ut lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagrum,
Auriculas citharae collecta sorde dolentes.
19. But there is at hand a greater trouble that all these. Thou art to die.
Thou art to sink into dust; to return to the ground from which thou wast taken,
to mix with common clay. Thy body is to go to the earth as it was, while thy
spirit returns to God that gave it. And the time draws on: the years slide away
with a swift though silent pace. Perhaps your day is far spent: the noon of life
is past, and the evening shadows begin to rest upon you. You feel in yourself
sure approaching decay. The springs of life wear away apace. Now what help in
your riches? Do they sweeten death? Do they endear that solemn hour? Quite the
reverse. O death how bitter art thou, to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions? How unacceptable to him is that awful sentence, This night shall
thy soul be required of thee? -- Or will they prevent the unwelcome stroke, or
protract the dreadful hour? Can they deliver your soul that it should not see
death? Can they restore the years that are past? Can they add to your appointed
time, a month, a day, an hour, a moment? -- Or will the good things you have
chosen for your portion here, follow you over the great gulf? Not so: naked
came you into this world; naked must you return. Linquenda tellus, and domus
and placens
Uxor: nec harum quas seris arborum
Te prater invisam cupressum,
Ulla brevem dominum sequetur.
Surely were not these truths too plain to be observed, because they are too
plain to be denied; no man that is to die could possibly trust, for help in
uncertain riches?

20. And trust not in them for happiness. For here also they will be found
deceitful upon the weights. Indeed this every reasonable man may infer, from
what has been observed already. For if neither thousands of gold and silver,
not any of the advantages or pleasures purchased thereby, can prevent our being
miserable, it evidently follows, they cannot make us happy. What happiness can
they afford him, who in the midst of all is constrained to cry out, "To my new
courts sad thought does still repair,
"And round my gilded roofs hangs hovering care."
Indeed experience is here so full, strong, and undeniable, that it makes all
other arguments needless. Appeal we therefore to fact. Are the rich and great,
the only happy men? and is each of them more or less happy, in proportion to
his measure of riches? are they happy at all? I had well nigh said, they are of
all men most miserable! rich man, for once, speak the truth from thy heart.
Speak, both for thyself, and for thy brethren. "Amidst our plenty something
still --
To me, to thee, to him is wanting!
That cruel something unpossess'd
Corrodes and leavens all the rest."
Yea, and so it will, till thy wearisome days of v^^ity are shut up in the
night of death.

Surely then to trust in riches for happiness, is the greatest folly of all
that are under the sun! are you not convinced of this? Is it possible, you
should still expect to find happiness in money, or all it can procure? what!
can silver and gold, and eating and drinking, and horses and servants, and
glittering apparel, and diversions and pleasuren (as they are called) make thee
happy? they can as soon make thee immortal.

21. These are all dead show. Regard them not. Trust thou in the living God. So
shall thou be safe under the shadow of the Almighty; his faithfulness and truth
shall be thy shield and buckler. He is a very present help in time of trouble;
such an help as can never fail. Then shall thou say, if all thy other friends
die, The Lord liverth, and blessed be any strong helper! he shall remember thee
when thou lie sick upon thy bed: when vain is the help of man, when all the
things of the earth can give no support, he will make all thy bed in thy
sickness. He will sweeten thy pain; the consolations of God shall cause thee to
clap thy hands in the flames. And even when this house of earth is well nigh
shaken down, when it is just ready to drop into the dust, he will teach thee to
say, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? thanks be unto
God, who gives me the victory through my Lord Jesus Christ.

O trust in him for happiness as well as for help. All the springs of happiness
are in him. Trust in him who gives us all things richly to enjoy, (...) Who of
his own rich and free mercy, holds them out to us, as in his own hand, that
receiving them as his gift, and as pledges of his love, we may enjoy all that
we possess. It is his love gives a relish to all we taste, puts life and
sweetness into all, while every creature leads us up to the great Creator, and
all earth is a scule to heaven. He transfuses the joys that are at his own
right hand, into all he bestows on his thankful children: who having fellowship
with the Father and is son Jesus Christ, enjoy him in all and above all.

22. Thirdly, Seek not to increase in goods. Lay not up for thyself treasures
upon earth. This is a flat, positive command, full as clear, as thou shall not
commit adultery. How then is it possible for a rich man to grow richer, without
denying the Lord that bought him? yea, how can any man, who has already the
necessaries of life, gain or aim at more, and be guiltless? lay not up, faith
our Lord, treasures upon earth. If in spite of this, you do and will lay up,
money or goods, what moth or rust may corrupt, or thieves break through and
steal: if you will add house to house, or field to field, why do you call
yourself a christian? you do not obey Jesus Christ. You do not design it. Why
do you name yourself by his name? why call ye me Lord, Lord, faith he himself,
and do not the things which I say?

23. If you ask, "But what must we do with our goods, seeing we have more than
we have occasion to use, if we must not lay them up? must we throw them away?"
I answer, if you threw them into the sea, if you were to cast them into the
fire and consume them, they would be better bestowed than they are now. You
cannot find so mischievous a manner of throwing them away, (...) ^ither the
laying them up for your posterity, or the laying them out upon yourselves, in
folly and superfluity. Of all possible methods of throwing them away, these two
are the very worst; the most opposite to the godpel of Christ, and the most
pernicious to year own soul.

How pernicious to your own soul the latter of these is, has been excellently
shown by a late writer. "If we waste our money we are not only guilty of
wasting a talent which God has given us, but we do ourselves this farther harm,
we turn this useful talent into a powerful means of corrupting ourselves:
because so far as it is spent wrong so far it is spent in the support of some
wrong temper, in gratifying some vain and unreasonable desires, which as
christians we are obliged to renounce."

"As wit and fine parts cannot be only trifled away, but will expose those that
have them to greater follies: so money cannot be only trifled away, but if it
is not used according to reason and religion, will make people live a more
silly and extravagant life, than they would have done without it: if therefore
you don't spend your money in doing good to others, you must spend it to the
hurt of yourself. You act like one that refuses the cordial to his sick friend,
which he cannot drink himself without inflaming his blood. For this is the case
of superfluous money; if you give it to those who want it, it is a cordial. If
you spend it upon yourself in something that you do not want, it only inflames
and disorders your mind."

"In using riches where they have no real use, nor we any real want, we only
use them to our great hurt, in creating unreasonable desires, in nourishing ill
tempers, in indulging foolish passions, and supporting a vain turn of mind. For
high eating and drinking, fine clothes and fine houses, state and equipage, gay
pleasures and diversions, do all of them naturally hurt and disorder our heart.
They are the food and nourishment of all the folly and weakness of our nature.
They are all of them the support of something, that ought not to be supported.
They are contrary to that sobriety and piety of heart, which relishes divine
things. They are so many weights upon our mind, that make us less able and less
inclined to raise our thoughts and affections to things above."

"So that money thus spent is not merely wasted or lost, but it is spent to bad
purposes and miserable effects; to the corruption and disorder of our hearts,
to the making us unable to follow the sublime doctrines of the gospel. It is
but like keeping money from the poor, to buy poison for ourselves."

24. Equally inexcusable are those, who lay up what they do not need for any
reasonable purposes. "If a man had hands and eyes and feet, that he could give
to those that wanted them; if he should lock them up in a chest, instead of
giving them to his brethren, that were blind and lame, should we not justly
reckon him an inhuman wretch? if he should rather choose to amuse himself with
hoarding them up, than entitle himself to an eternal reward, by giving them to
those that wanted eyes and hands, might we not justly reckon him mad?"

"Now money has very much the nature of eyes and feet. If therefore we lock it
up in chests, while the poor and distressed want it for their necessary uses,
we are not far from the cruelty of him, that chooses rather to hoard up the
hands and eyes, than to give them to those that want them. If we choose to lay
it up, rather than to entitle ourselves to an eternal reward, by disposing of
our money well, we are guilty of his madness, that rather chooses to lock up
eyes and hands, than to make himself for ever blessed, by giving them to those
that want them."

25. May not this be another reason why rich men shall so hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven? a vast majority of them are under a curse, under the
peculiar curse of God: inasmuch as in the general tenor of their lives, they
are not only robbing God continually, imbezzling and wasting their Lord's
goods, and by that very means corrupting their own souls: but also robbing the
poor, the hungry, the naked, wronging the widow and the fatherless, and making
themselves accountable for all the want, affliction and distress, which they
may, but do not remove. Yea, does not the blood of all those who perish for
want, of what they either lay up, or lay out needlessly, cry against them from
the earth? O what account will they give, to him who is ready to judge both the
quick and the dead!

26. The true way of employing what you do not want yourselves, you may,
Fourthly, learn from those words of our Lord, which are the counterpart of what
went before: Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven: where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal. Put out
whatever thou can spare, upon better security than this world can afford. Lay
up thy treasures in the bank of heaven: And God shall restore them in that day.
He that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and look, what he lays
out, it shall be paid him again. Place that, says he, unto my account.
Howbeit! thou owe me thine ownself also!

Give to the poor with a single eye, with an upright heart, and "Write, so much
given to God." For inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

This is the part of a faithful and wife steward. Not, to sell either his
houses or lands, or principal stock, be it more or less, unless some peculiar
circumstance should require it; and not to desire or endeavor to increase it,
any more than to squander it away in vanity but to employ it wholly to those
wise and reasonable purposes, for which his Lord has lodged it in his hands The
wise steward, after having provided his own household, with what is needful for
life and godliness, makes himself friends with all that remains from time to
time, of the mammon of unrighteousness; that when he fails, they may receive
him into everlasting habitations: that whenever his earthly tabernacle is
dissolved, they who were before carried into Abraham's bosom, after having
eaten his bread, and worn the fleece of his flock, and praised God for the
consolation, may welcome him into paradise, and to the house of God, eternal in
the heavens.

27. We charge you therefore, who are rich in this world, as having authority
from our great Lord and Master, (...). to be habitually doing good, to live in
a course of good works. Be ye merciful as your Father which is in heaven is
merciful, who does good and cease not. Be ye merciful, -- "How far?" -- After
your power, with all the ability which God gives. Make this your only measure
of doing good, not any beggarly maxims or customs of the world. We charge you
to be rich in good works; as you have much, to give plenteously. Freely ye have
received; freely give; so as to lay up no treasure but in heaven. Be ye ready
to distribute, to every one according to his necessity. Disperse abroad, give
to the poor; deal your bread to the hungry. Cover the naked with a garment,
entertain the stranger, carry or send relief to them that are in prison. Heal
the sick; not by miracle, but through the blessing of God upon your seasonable
support. Let the blessing of him that was ready to perish through pining want,
come upon thee. Defend the oppressed, plead the cause of the fatherless, and
make the widow's heart sing for joy.

28. We exhort you, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be willing to
communicate: (...). To be of the same spirit (though not in the same outward
state) with those believers of ancient times, who remained steadfast (...) in
that blessed and holy fellowship, wherein none said, that any thing was his
own, but they had all things common. Be a steward, a faithful and wise steward,
of God and of the poor; differing from them in these two circumstances only,
That your wants are first supplied, out of the portion of your Lord's goods
which remain in your hands, and that you have the blessedness of g^^ing. Thus
lay up for yourselves a good foundation, not in the world which now is, but
rather for the time to come, that ye may lay hold on eternal life. The great
foundation indeed of all the blessings of God, whether temporal or eternal, is
the Lord Jesus Christ, his righteousness and blood, what he has done, and what
he has suffered for us. And other foundation, in this sense, can no man lay;
no not an apostle, no not an angel from heaven. But through his merits, whatever
we do in his name, is a foundation for a good reward, in the day when every man
shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor. Therefore, labor
thou not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures unto
everlasting life. Therefore whatsoever thy hand now finds to do, do it with
thy might. Therefore let "No fair occasion pass unheeded by;
"Snatching the golden moments as they fly,
"Thou by few fleeting years ensure eternity!"
By patient continuance in well-d^ing, seek thou for glory and honor and
immortality. In a constant, zealous performance of all good works, wait thou
for that happy hour, when the king shall say, I was an hungered and ye gave me
meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me drink. I was a stranger and ye took me in,
naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me; I was in prison and ye
came unto me. Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world!

DISCOURSE THE NINTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
^^TT vi. 24 -- 34. No Man can serve two Master; for either he will hate the
one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other.
Ye cannot serve GOD and Mammon.

Therefore I say unto you, Take no Thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. Is not the
Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment?

Behold the Fowls of the Air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into Barns: yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better than they?

Which of you by taking Thought can add one Cubit unto his Stature?

And why take ye Thought for Raiment? Consider the Lillies of the Field how
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:

And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed
like one of these.

Wherefore if GOD so cloth the Grass of the Fiela, which Today is, and
Tomorrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little Faith?

Therefore take no Thought, saying, What shall we eat? Or, What shall we drink?
Or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

(For after all these Things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these Th^^^

But first seek ye the Kingdom of GOD and his Righteousness, and all these
Things shall be added unto you.

Take therefore no Thought for the Morrow; for the Morrow shall take Thought
for the Things of itself: sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof.


1. IT is recorded of the Nations whom the king of Assyria, after he had
carried Israel away into captivity, placed in the cities of Samaria, they
feared the Lord, and served their own gods. These nations, says the inspired
writer, feared the Lord, performed an outward service to him, (a plain proof
that they had a fear of God though not according to knowledge) and served their
graven images, both their children and their children's children; as did their
fathers, so did they unto this day, 2. Kings xvii. 33, etc.

How nearly does the practice of most modern christians, resemble this of the
ancient heathens? they fear the Lord: they also perform an outward service to
him, and hereby show, they have some fear of God; but they likewise serve their
own gods. There are those who teach them (as there were who taught the
Assyrians) the manner of the God of the land; the God whose name the country
bears to this day, and who was once worshipped there with an holy worship.
Howbeit, they do not serve him alone; they do not fear him enough for this. But
every nation makes gods of their own, every nation in the cities wherein they
dwell. These nations fear the Lord, they have not laid aside the outward form
of worshipping him. But they serve their graven images, silver and gold, he
work of men's hands. Money, pleasure and praise, the goods of this world, more
than divide their service with the God of Israel. This is the manner both of
their children and their children's children; as did their fathers, so do they
unto this day.

2. B^^ although speaking in a loose way, after th^^ ^^^mon manner of men,
these poor heathens were said to fear the Lord, yet we may observe the Holy
Ghost immediately adds, speaking according to the truth and real nature of
things, they fear not the Lord, neither do after the law and commandment which
the Lord commanded the children of Jacob: with whom the Lord made a covenant,
and charged them, saying, ye shall not fear other gods, nor serve them. -- But
the Lord your God ye shall fear, and he shall deliver you out of the hand of
all you enemies.

The same judgment is past by the unerring spirit of God, and indeed by all,
the eyes of whose understanding he has opened, to discern the things of God,
upon these poor christians, commonly so called. If we speak according to the
truth and real nature of things, they fear not the Lord, neither do they serve
him. For they do not after the covenant the Lord has made with them; neither
after the law and commandment which he has commanded them, saying, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. They serve other gods
unto this day. And no man can serve two masters.

3. How vain is it for any man to aim at this? To attempt the serving of two
masters. Is it not easy to foresee, what must be the unavoidable consequence of
such an attempt? either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he
will hold to the one and despise the other. The two parts of this sentence,
although separately proposed, are to be understood in a connection with each
other. For the latter part is a consequence of the former. He will naturally
hold to him whom he loves. He will so cleave to him, as to perform to him a
willing, faithful, and diligent service. And in the mean time, he will so far,
at least, despise the master he hates, as to have little regard to his
commands, and to obey them, if at all, in a slight and careless manner.
Therefore, whatsoever the wise men of the world may suppose, Ye cannot serve
God and mammon.

4. Mammon was the name of one of the heathen gods, who was supposed to preside
over riches. It is here understood of riches themselves; gold and silver, or in
general, money: and by a common figure of speech, of all that may be purchased
thereby; such as ease, honor, and sensual pleasure.

But what are we here to understand, by serving God? and what, by serving
mammon?

We cannot serve God, unless we believe in him. This is the only true
foundation of serving him. Therefore, the believing in God, as reconciling the
world to himself through Christ Jesus, the believing in him, as a loving,
pardoning God, is the first great branch of his service.

And, thus to believe in God implies, to trust in him as our strength, without
whom we can do nothing, who every moment endues us with power from on high,
without which it is impossible to please him: as our help, our only help in
time of trouble, who compasses us about with songs of deliverance: as our
shield, our defender, and the lifter up of our head above all our enemies that
are round about us.

It implies, to trust in God as our happiness; as the center of spirits, the
only rest of our souls; the only good who is adequate to all our capacities,
and sufficient to satisfy all the desires he has given us.

It implies (what is nearly allied to the other) to trust in God, as our end;
to have an eye to him in all things; to use all things only as means of
enjoying him: wheresoever we are, or whatsoever we do, to see him that is
invisible, looking on us well-pleased, and refer all things to him in Christ
Jesus.

5. Thus to believe, is the first thing we are to understand by serving God.
The second is, to love him.

Now, to love God in the manner the scripture describes, in the manner God
himself requires of us, and by requiring engages to work in us, is to love him
as the one God; that is, with all our heart and with all our soul, and with all
our mind, and with all our strength: it is, to desire God alone for his own
sake; and nothing else, but with reference to him: to rejoice in God; to
delight in the Lord; not only to seek but find happiness in him: to enjoy God
as the chiefest among ten thousand; to rest in him, as our God and our all. In
a word, to have such a possession of God, as makes us always happy.

6. A third thing we are to understand by serving God, is, to resemble or
imitate him.

So the ancient father, Optimus Dei cultus, imi^ari quem colis. It is the best
worship or service of God, to imitate him you worship.

We here speak, of imitating or resembling him in the spirit of our minds. For
here the true christian imitation of God begins. God is a spirit; and they that
imitate or resemble him, must do it in spirit and in truth.

Now God is love. Therefore they who resemble him in the spirit of their minds,
are transformed into the same image. They are merciful, even as he is merciful.
Their soul is all love. They are kind, benevolent, compassionate,
tenderhearted: and that not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. Yea, they are, like him, loving unto every man, and their mercy
extends to all his works.

7. One thing more we are to understand by serving God, and that is, the
obeying him; the glorifying him with our bodies, as well as with our spirits;
the keeping his outward commandments: the zealously doing whatever he has
enjoined, the carefully avoiding whatever he has forbidden: the performing all
the ordinary actions of life, with a single eye and a pure heart; offering them
all in holy, fervent love, as sacrifices to God, through Jesus Christ.

8. Let us consider now, what we are to understand, on the other hand, by
serving mammon. And first, it implies, the trusting in riches, in money, or the
things purchaseable thereby, as our strength, the means whereby we shall
perform, whatever cause we have in hand: the trusting in them as our help, by
which we look to be comforted in, or delivered out of trouble.

It implies, the trusting in the world for happiness; the supposing that a
man's life consists (the comfort of his life) in the abundance of the things
which he possesses: the looking for rest, in the things that are seen; for
content in outward plenty; the expecting that satisfaction in the things of the
world, which can never be sound out of God.

And if we do this, we cannot but make the world our end; the ultimate end, if
not of all, at least of many of our undertakings, many of our actions and
designs: in which we shall aim only at an increase of wealth, at the obtaining
pleasure or praise; at the gaining a larger measure of temporal things, without
any reference to things eternal.

9. The serving mammon implies, Secondly, Loving the world; desiring it for its
own sake; the placing our joy in the things thereof, and setting our hearts
upon them; the seeking (what indeed it is impossible we should find) our
happiness therein; the resting with the whole weight of our souls upon the
staff of this broken reed; although daily experience shows it cannot support,
but will only enter into our hand and pierce it.

10. To resemble, to be conformed to the world, is a third thing we are to
understand by serving mammon: to have not only designs, but desires, tempers,
affections suitable to those of the world: to be of an earthly, sensual mind,
chained down to the things of earth: To be self-willed, inordinare lavers of
ourselves; to think highly of our own ^^^^ments; to desire and delight in the
praise of men: to fear, shun, and abhor reproach: To be impatient of reproof,
easy to be provok^^, and swift to ^^rn evil for evil.

11. To serve mammon is, lastly, to obey the world, by outwardly conforming to
its maxims and customs; to walk as other men walk, in the common road, in the
broad, smooth, beaten path; to be in the fashion, to follow a multitude; to do
like the rest of our neighbors; that is, to do the will of the flesh and the
mind, to gratify our appetites and inclinations; to sacrifice to ourselves; aim
at our own ease and pleasure, in the general course both of our words and
actions.

Now what can be more undeniably clear, than that we cannot thus serve God and
mammon?

12. Does not every man see, that he cannot comfortably serve both? That to
trim between God and the world, is the sure way to be disappointed in both, and
to have no rest either in one or the other? How uncomfortable a condition must
he be in, who having the fear but not the love of God, who serving him, but not
with all his heart, has only the toils and not the joys of religion? He has
religion enough to make him miserable, but not enough to make him happy: His
religion will not let him enjoy the world; and the world will not let him enjoy
God. So that by halting between both he loses both, and has no peace either in
God or the world.

13. Does not every man see, that he cannot serve both, consistently with
himself? What more glaring inconsistency can be conceived, than must
continually appear in his whole behavior, who is endeavoring to obey both
these masters, striving to serve God and mammon? He (...) indeed a sinner that
goes two ways; one step forward and another backward. He is continually
building up with one hand, and pulling down with the other. He loves sin, and
he hates it: he is always seeking, and yet always fleeing from God. He would
and he would not. He is not the same man, for one day, no, not for an hour
together. He is a motly mixture of all sorts of contrarieties; a heap of
contradictions jumbled in one. O, be consistent with thyself, one way or the
other. Turn to the right hand or to the left. If mammon be God, serve thou him;
if the Lord, then serve Him. But never think of serving either at all, unless
it be with thy whole heart

14. Does not every reasonable, every thinking man see, that he cannot possibly
serve God and mammon? Because there is the most absolute contrariety, the most
irreconcilable enmity between them. The contrariety between the most opposite
things on earth, between fire and water, darkness and light, vanishes into
nothing, when compared to the contrariety between God and mammon. So that in
whatsoever respect you serve the one, you necessarily renounce the other. Do
you believe in God through Christ? Do you trust in him as your strength, your
help, your shield, and your exceeding great reward? As your happiness? Your end
in all, above all things? Then you cannot trust in riches? It is absolutely
impossible you should, so long as you have this faith in God. Do you thus trust
in riches? Then you have denied the says. You do not trust in the living God.
Do you love God? Do you seek and find happiness in him? then you cannot love
the world; neither the things of the world. You are crucified to the world and
the world crucified to you. Do you love the world? are your affections set on
things beneath? do you seek happiness in earthly things? then it is impossible
you should love God. Then the love of the Father is not in you. Do you resemble
God? are you merciful, as your Father is merciful? are you transformed by the
renewal of your mind, into the image of him that created you? then you cannot
be conformed to the present world. You have renounced all its affections and
lusts. Are you conformed to the world? does your soul still bear the image of
the earthly? then you are not renewed in the spirit of your mind. You do not
bear the image of the heavenly. Do you obey God? are you zealous to do his will
on earth as the angels do in heaven? then it is impossible you should obey
mammon. Then you set the world at open defiance. You trample its customs and
maxims under foot, and will neither follow nor be led by them. Do you follow
the world? do you live like other men? do you please men? do you please
yourself? then you cannot be a servant of God. You are of your master and
father the devil.

15. Therefore thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou
serve. Thou shall lay aside all thoughts of obeying two masters, of serving God
and mammon. Thou shall propose to thyself no end, no help, no happiness, but
God. Thou shall seek nothing in earth or heaven but him: thou shall aim at
nothing, but to know, to love and enjoy him. And because this is all your
business below, the only view you can reasonably have, the one design you are
to pursue in all things; therefore I say unto you (as our Lord continues his
discourse) take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. A deep and weighty
direction, which it imports us well to consider and thoroughly to understand.

16. Our Lord does not here require, that we should be utterly without thought,
even touching the concerns of this life. A giddy, careless temper is at the
farthest remove from the whole religion of Jesus Christ. Neither does he
require us to be slothful in business, to be slack and dilatory therein. This
likewise is contrary to the whole spirit and genius of his religion. A
christian abhors sloth as much as drunkenness, and flees from idleness as he
does from adultery. He well knows, that there is one kind of thought and care,
with which God is well-pleased; which is absolutely needful for the due
performance of those outward works, unto which the providence of God has called
him.

It is the will of God, that every man should labor to eat his own bread: yea,
and that every man should provide for his own, for them of his own household.
It is likewise his will, that we should owe no man any thing, but provide
things honest in the sight of all men. But this cannot be done, without taking
some thought, without having some care upon our minds: yea, often, not without
long and serious thought, not without much and earnest care. Consequently, this
care, to provide for ourselves and our household, this thought, how to render
to all their dues, our blessed Lord does not condemn. Yea, it is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

It is good and acceptable to God, that we should so take thought concerning
whatever we have in hand, as to have a clear comprehension of what we are about
to do, and to plan our business before we enter upon it. And it is right that
we should carefully consider from time to time, what steps we are to take
therein; as well as that we should prepare all things before hand, for the
carrying it on in the most effectual manner. This care, termed by some, "The
care of the head," it was by no means our Lord's design to condemn.

17. What he here condemns is, "The care of the heart:" The anxious, uneasy
care: the care that has torment; all such care as does hurt, either to the
soul or body. What he forbids is, that care which sad experience shows, wastes
the blood and drinks up the spirits: which anticipates all the misery it fears,
and comes to torment us before the time. He forbids only that care, which
poisons the blessings of today, by fear of what may be tomorrow; which cannot
enjoy the present plenty, through apprehensions of future want. This care is
not only a fore disease, a grievous sickness of soul, but also an heinous
offense against God, a sin of the deepest dye. It is an high affront to the
gracious governor and wise disposer of all things; necessarily implying, that
the great judge does not do right, that he does not order all things well. It
plainly implies, that he is wanting, either in wisdom, if he does not know what
things we stand in need of: or in goodness, if he does not provide those
things, for all who put their trust in him. Beware therefore that you take not
thought in this sense: be ye anxiously careful for nothing. Take no uneasy
thought: this is a plain, sure rule, uneasy care is un^^^^ful care. With a
single eye to God do all that in you lies, to provide things honest in the
sight of all men. And then give up all into better hands: leave the whole event
to God.

18. Take no thought of this kind, no uneasy thought even for your life, what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? if then God gave
you life, the greater gift, will he not give you food to sustain it? if he has
given you the body, how can ye doubt, but he will give you raiment to cover it?
more especially, if you give yourselves up to him, and serve him with your
whole heart. Behold, see before your eyes, the fowls of the air: for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; and yet they lack nothing,
yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are not ye much better than they? ye
that are creatures capable of God? are ye not of more account in the eyes of
God? of a higher rank in the scale of beings? and which of you by taking
thought, can add one cubit to his stature? what profit have you then from this
anxious thought? it is every way fruitless and unavailing.

And why take ye thought for raiment? have ye not a daily reproof, wherever you
turn your eyes? consider the lillies of the field how they grow; they toil not,
neither do they spin. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass
of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, is cut
down, burnt up and seen no more, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little faith? you, whom he made to endure for ever and ever, to be pictures of
his own eternity! ye are indeed of little faith. Otherwise ye could not doubt
of his love and care, no, not for a moment.

19. Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, if we lay up no
treasure upon earth? what shall we drink, if we serve God with all our
strength, if our eye be singly fixed on him? wherewithal shall we be clothed,
if we are not conformed to the world, if we disoblige those by whom we might be
profited? for after all these things do the gentiles seek, the heathens who
know not God. But ye are sensible, your heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things. And he has pointed out to you an infallible way of
being constantly supplied therewith. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

20. Seek ye f^^st the kingdom of God. Before ye give place to any other
thought or care, let it be your concern, that the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who gave his only begotten Son, to the end that believing in him,
ye might not perish but have everlasting life, may reign in your heart, may
manifest himself in your soul, and dwell and rule there: that he may cast down
every high thing which exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and bring
into captivity every thought to the abedience of Christ. Let God have the sole
dominion over you. Let him reign without a rival. Let him possess all your
heart, and rule alone. Let him be your one desire, your joy, your love: so that
all that is within you may continually cry out, the Lord God omnipotent
reigns.

Seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Righteousness is the fruit of
God's reigning in the heart. And what is righteousness but love? the love of
God and of all mankind, flowing from faith in Jesus Christ, and producing
humbleness of mind, meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, patience, deadness to
the world; and every right disposition of heart, toward God and toward man. And
by these it produces all holy actions, whatsoever are lovely or of good report;
whatsoever works of faith and labor of love are acceptable to God and
profitable to man.

His righteousness: this is all his righteousness still: it is his own free
gift to us, for the sake of Jesus Christ the righteous, through whom alone it
is purchased for us: and it is his work: it is he alone that works it in us,
by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit.

21. Perhaps the well observing this may give light to some other scriptures,
which we have not always so clearly understood. St. Paul, speaking in his
epistle to the Romans, concerning the unbelieving Jews, says, They being
ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submited themselves unto the righteousness of God. They
were ignorant of God's righteousness, not only of the righteousness of Christ,
imputed to every believer, whereby all his sins are blotted out, and he is
reconciled to the favor of God: But (which seems here to be more immediately
understood) they were ignorant of that inward righteousness, of that holiness
of heart, which is with the utmost propriety termed God's righteousness, as
being borh his own free gift through Christ, and his own work, by his almighty
spirit. And because they were ignorant of this, they went about to establish
their own righteousness. They labored to establish that outside righteousness,
which might very properly be termed their own. For neither was it wrought by
the spirit of God, nor was it owned or accepted of him. They might work this
themselves, by their own natural strength: and when they had done, it was a
stink in his nostrils. And yet trusting in this, they would not submit
themselves unto the righteousness of God. Yea, they hardened themselves against
that faith whereby alone it was possible to attain it. For Christ is the end of
the law, for righteousness, to every one that believes. Christ, when he said,
It is finished, put an end to that law, to the law of external rites and
ceremonies, that he might bring in a better righteousness, through his blood, by
that one oblation of himself once offered, even the image of God, into the
inmost soul of every one that believes.

22. Nearly related to these are those words of the apostle, in his epistle to
the Philippians. I count all things but dung that I may win Christ, an entrance
into his everlasting kingdom, and be found in him, believing in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith -- Not having my own
righteousness which is of the law; a barely external righteousness, the outside
religion I formerly had, when I hoped to be accepted of God, because I was,
touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless -- But that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: That
holiness of heart, that renewal of the soul, in all its desires, tempers, and
affections, which is of God: It is the work of God and not of man, by faith;
through the faith of Christ, through the revelation of Jesus Christ in us and by
faith in his blood; whereby alone we obtain the remission of our sins, and an
inheritance among those that are sanctified.

23. Seek ye first this kingdom of God in your hearts, this righteousness,
which is the gift and work of God, the image of God renewed in your souls: And
all these things shall be added unto you: all things needful for the body; such
a measure of all, as God sees most for the advancement of his kingdom. These
shall be added, they shall be thrown in, over and above. In seeking the peace
and the love of God, you shall not only find what you more immediately seek,
even the kingdom that cannot be moved; but also what you seek not, not at all
for us own sake, but only in reference to the other. You shall find in your way
to the kingdom all outward things, so far as they are expedient for you: this
care God has taken upon himself: Cast you all your care upon him. He knows
your wants; and whatsoever is lacking, he will not fail to supply.

24. Therefore take no thought for the morrow. Not only, take ye no thought,
how to lay up treasures on earth, how to increase in worldly substance; take no
thought how to procure more food than you can eat, or more raiment than you can
put on; or more money than is required from day to day, for the plain,
reasonable purposes of life: but take no uneasy thought even concerning those
things which are absolutely needful for the body. Do not trouble yourself now,
with thinking what you shall do, at a season which is yet afar off. Perhaps
that season will never come: or it will be no concern of yours: before then you
will have passed through all the waves, and be landed in eternity. All those
distant views do not belong to you, who are but a creature of a day. Nay, what
have you to do with the morrow, more strictly speaking? Why should you perplex
yourself without need? God provides for you today what is needful to sustain
the life which he has given you. It is enough: give yourself up into his
hands: if you live another day, he will provide for that also.

25. Above all, do not make the care of future things, a pretense for
neglecting present duty. This is the most fatal way of taking thought for the
morrow. And how common is it among men? Many, if we exhort them to keep a
conscience void of offense, to abstain from what they are convinced is evil, do
not scruple to reply, "How then must we live? Must we not take care of
ourselves and of our families?" And this they imagine to be a sufficient
reason, for continuing in known, wilful sin. They say, and perhaps think, they
would serve God now; were it not that they should by and by lose their bread.
They would prepare for eternity; but they are afraid of wanting the necessaries
of life. So they serve the devil for a morsel of bread; they rush into hell,
for fear of want; they throw away their poor souls, lest they should some time
or other fall short of what is needful for their bodies.

It is not strange that they who thus take the matter out of God's hand, should
be so often disappointed of the very things they seek; that while they throw
away heaven, to secure the things of earth, they lose the one, but do not gain
the other. The jealous God, in the wise course of his providence, frequently
suffers this. So that they who will not cast their care on God, who taking
thought for temporal things, have little concern for things eternal, lose the
very portion which they have chosen. There is a visible blast on all their
undertakings: Whatsoever they do, it does not prosper. Insomuch, that after
they have forsaken God for the world, they lose what they sought, as well as
what they sought not. They fall short of the kingdom of God and his
righteousness; nor yet are other things added unto them.

26. There is another way of taking thought for the morrow, which is equally
forbidden in these words. It is possible to take thought in a wrong manner,
even with regard to spiritual things; to be so careful about what may be by and
by, as to neglect what is now required at our hands. How insensibly do we slide
into this, if we are not continually watching unto prayer? how easily are we
carried away, in a kind of waking dream, projecting distant schemes, and
drawing fine scenes in our own imagination! we think, what good we will do,
when we are in such a place, or when such a time is come! how useful we will
be, how plenteous in good works, when we are easier in our circumstances? how
earnestly we will serve God, when once such an hinderance is out of the way.

Or, perhaps, you are now in heaviness of soul: God, as it were, hides his face
from you. You see little of the light of his countenance; you cannot taste his
redeeming love. In such a temper of mind, how natural is it to say. "O how I
will praise God, when the light of his countenance shall be again lifted up
upon my soul? how will I exhort others to praise him, when his love is again
shed abroad in my heart? then I will do thus and thus: I will speak for God in
all places: I will not be ashamed of the gospel of Christ. Then I will redeem
the time. I will use to the uttermost every talent I have received." Do not
believe thyself. Thou will not do it then, unless thou do it now. He that is
faithful in that which is little, of whatsoever kind it be, whether it be
worldly substance, or the fear or love of God, will be faithful in that which
is much. But if thou now hidest one talent in the earth, thou will then hide
five: that is, if ever they are given; but there is small reason to expect they
ever will. Indeed unto him that has, that is, uses what he has, shall be
given, and he shall have more abundantly. But from him that has not, that is,
uses not the grace which he has already received, whether in a larger or
smaller degree, shall be taken away even that which he has.

27. And take no thought for the temptations of tomorrow. This also is a
dangerous snare. Think not, "When such a temptation comes, what shall I do, how
shall I stand? I feel, I have not power to resist: I am not able to conquer
that enemy." Most true: you have not now the power which you do not now stand
in need of. You are not able at this time to conquer that enemy; and at this
time he does not assault you. With the grace you have now, you could not
withstand the temptations which you have not. But when the temptation comes,
the grace will come. In greater trials you will have greater strength. When
sufferings abound, the consolations of God will in the same proportion abound
also. So that in every situation, the grace of God will be sufficient for you.
He does not suffer you to be tempted today, above that ye are able to bear.
And in every temptation he will make a way to escape. A^ thy day, so thy
strength shall be.

28. Let the morrow therefore take thought for the things of itself; that is,
when the morrow comes, then think of it. Live thou today. Be it thy earnest
care to improve the present hour. This is your own; and it is your all. The
past is as nothing, as though it had never been. The future is nothing to you:
it is not yours; perhaps it never will be. There is no depending on what is
yet to come; for you know not what a day may bring forth. Therefore live
today: lose not an hour: use this moment; for it is your portion. Who knows
the things which have been before him, or which shall be after him under the
sun? The generations that were from the beginning of the world, where are they
now? fled away: forgotten. They were; they lived their day; they were shook off
of the earth, as leaves off of their trees. They mouldered away into common
dust. Another and another race succeeded; then they followed the generation of
their fathers, and shall never more see the light. Now is thy turn upon the
earth. Rejoice, O young man, in the days of thy youth. Enjoy the very, very
now; by enjoying him, whose years fail not. Now let thine eye be singly fixed
on him, in whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Now give him thy
heart: now stay thyself on him: now be thou holy as he is holy. Now lay hold of
the blessed opportunity of doing his acceptable and perfect will. Now rejoice
to suffer the loss of all things, so thou may win Christ.

29. Gladly suffer today, sor his name's sake, whatsoever he permits this day
to come upon thee. But look not (...) the sufferings of

DISCOURSE THE TENTH, UPON OUR LORD's SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
MATT. vii. 1 -- 12. Judge not, that ye be not judged.

For with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what Measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brother's Eye, but considerest
not the Beam that is in thine own Eye?

Or how will thou say to thy Brother, Let me pull out the Mote out of thine
Eye; and behold a Beam is in thine own Eye?

Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye; and then thou
shall see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye.

Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast your Pearls before Swine;
lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn again and rent you.

Ask and it shall be given you: Seek and ye shall find: Knock and it shall be
opened unto you.

For every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened.

Or what Man is there of you, who, if his Sen ask Bread, will give him a Stone?

Or if he ask a Fish, will give him a Serpent?

If ye then being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how
much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good Things to them that
ask him?

Therefore all Things whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.


1. OUR blessed Lord, having now finished his main design, having first,
delivered the sum of true religion, carefully guarded against those glosses of
men, whereby they would make the word of God of none effect: and having, next,
laid down rules touching that right intention, which we are to preserve in all
our outward actions: now proceeds to point out the main hindrances of this
religion, and concludes all with a suitable application.

2. In the fifth chapter our great teacher has fully described inward religion
in its various branches. He has there laid before us those disposition, of
soul, which constitute real christianity; the tempers contained in that
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; the affections, which when
flowing from their proper fountain, from a living faith in God through Christ
Jesus, are intrinsically and essentially good, and acceptable to God. In the
sixth he has shown, how all our actions likewise, even those that are
indifferent in their own nature, may be made holy and good, and acceptable to
God, by a pure and holy intention. Whatever is done without this, he declares
is of no value with God: whereas whatever outward works are thus consecrated to
God, are in his sight of great price.

3. In the former part of this chapter he points out the most common and most
fatal hindrances of this holiness. In the latter, he exhorts us by various
motives, to break through all, and secure that prize of our high calling.

4. The first hinderance he cautions us against is judging. Judge not, that ye
be not judged. Judge not others, that ye be not judged of the Lord, that ye
bring not vengeance on your own heads. For with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again: a plain and equitable rule, whereby God permits you to determine for
yourselves, in what manner he shall deal with you in the judgment of the great
day.

5. There is no station of life, nor any period of time, from the hour of our
first repenting and believing the gospel, till we are made perfect in love,
wherein this caution is not needful for every child of God. For occasions of
judging can never be wanting. And the temptations to it are innumerable: many
whereof are so artfully disguised, that we fall into the sin, before we suspect
any danger. And unspeakable are the mischiefs produced hereby; always to him
that judges another: thus wounding his own soul, and exposing himself to the
righteous judgment of God: and frequently to those who are judged, whose hands
hang down, who are weakened and hindered in their course, if not wholly turned
out of the way, and caused to draw back even to perdition. Yea, how often, when
this root of bitterness springs up, are many defiled thereby: by reason whereof
the way of truth itself is evil spoken of, and that worthy name blasphemed
whereby we are called.

6. Yet it does not appear, that our Lord designed this caution, only or
chiefly for the children of God: but rather for the children of the world, for
the men who know not God. These cannot but hear of those, who are not of the
world, who sollow after the religion above-described: who endeavor to be
humble, serious, gentle, merciful and pure in heart; who earnestly desire such
measures of these holy tempers, as they have not yet attained: and wait for
them in doing all good to all men, and patiently suffering evil. Whoever go but
thus f^r, cannot be hid, no more than a city set upon a h^ll. And why do not
these, who see their good works, glorify their Father which is in heaven? what
excuse have they, for not treading in their steps? for not imitating their
example, and being followers of them, as they are also of Christ? why, in order
to provide an excuse for themselves, they condemn those whom they ought to
imitate. They spend their time in finding out their neighbor's faults, instead
of amending their own. They are so busied about others going out of the way,
that themselves never come into it at all: at least, never get forward, never
go beyond a poor dead form of godliness without the power.

7. It is to these more especially that our Lord says, Why beholdest thou the
mote that is in thy brother's eye, the infirmities, the mistakes, the
imprudence, the weakness of the children of God; but considerest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? thou considerest not the damnable impenitence, the
fanatic pride, the accursed self-will, the idolatrous love of the world, which
are in thyself, and which make thy whole life an abomination to the Lord. Above
all, with what supine carelessness and indifference art thou dancing over the
mouth of hell? and how then, with what grace, with what decency or modesty,
will thou say to thy brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, the
excess of zeal for God, the extreme self-denial, the too great disengagement
from worldly cares and employments, the desire to be day and night in prayer,
or hearing the words of eternal life? and behold a beam is in thine own eye!
not a mote, like one of these. Thou hypocrite! who pretendest to care for
others and have no care for thy own soul! who makes a show of zeal for the
cause of God, when in truth thou neither love nor fear him! first cast out
the beam out of thine own eye. Cast out the beam of impenitence. Know thyself.
See and feel thyself a sinner. Feel, that thy inward parts are very wickedness,
that thou art altogether corrupt and abominable, and that the wrath of God
abides on thee. Cast out the beam of pride. Abhor thyself. Sink down as in
dust and ashes. Be more and more little and mean, and base and vile in thine
own eyes. Cast out the beam of self-will. Learn what that means, if any man
will come after me, let him renounce himself. Deny thyself and take up thy
cross daily. Let thy whole soul cry out, I came down from heaven (for so thou
did, thou never-dying spirit, whether thou know it or no) not to do my own
will, but the will of him that sent me. Cast out the beam of love of the world.
Love not the world, neither the things of the world. Be thou crucified unto the
world, and the world crucified unto thee. Only use the world, but enjoy God.
Seek all thy happiness in him. Above all, cast out the grand beam, that supine
carelessness and indifference. Deeply consider, that one thing is needful, the
one thing which thou have scarce ever thought of. Know and feel, that thou art
a poor, vile, guilty worm, quivering over the great gulf! what art thou? a
sinner born to die: a leaf driven before the wind: a vapor ready to vanish
away: just appearing, and then scattered into air, to be no more seen! see
this, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's
eye. Then, if thou have leisure from the concerns of thy own soul, thou shall
know how to correct thy brother also.

8. But what is properly the meaning of this word, judge not? what is the
judging which is here forbidden? it is not the same as evil-speaking, although
it is frequently joined therewith. Evil-speaking is, the relating any thing
that is evil, concerning an absent person: whereas judging may indifferently
refer, either to the absent or the present. Neither does it necessarily imply
the speaking at all, but only the thinking evil of another. Not, that all kind
of thinking evil of others, is that judging which our Lord condemns. If I see
one commit robbery or murder, or hear him blaspheme the name of God, I cannot
refrain from thinking ill of the robber or murderer. Yet this is not evil
judging: there is no sin in this, nor any thing contrary to tender affection.

9. The thinking of another, in a manner that is contrary to love, is that
judging which is here condemned, and this may be of various kinds. For, first,
we may think another to blame when he is not. We may lay to his charge (at
least in our own mind) the things of which he is not guilty: the words which he
has never spoke, or the actions which he has never done. Or we may think his
manner of acting was wrong, although in reality it was not. And even where
nothing can justly be blamed, either in the thing itself, or in the manner of
doing it, we may suppose, his intention was not good, and so condemn him on
that ground; at the same time that he who searches the heart, sees his
simplicity and godly sincerity.

10. But we may not only fall into the sin of judging, by condemning the
innocent, but also, secondly, by condemning the guilty, in a higher degree than
he deserves. This species of judging is likewise an offense against justice as
well as mercy: and yet such an offense as nothing can secure us from, but the
strongest and tenderest affection. Without this, we readily suppose one who is
acknowledged to be in fault, to be more in fault than he really is. We
undervalue whatever good is found in him. Nay, we are not easily induced to
believe, that any thing good can remain in him, in whom we have found any thing
that is evil.

11. All this shows a manifest want of that love, which (...) Thinks no evil:
which never draws an unjust or unkind conclusion, from any premises whatsoever.
Love will not infer, from a person's falling once into an act of open sin, that
he is accustomed so to do, that he is habitually guilty of it. And if he was
habitually guilty once, love does not conclude, he is so still: much less, that
if he is now guilty of this, therefore he is guilty of other sins also. These
evil reasonings all pertain to that sinful judging, which our Lord here guards
us against: and which we are in the highest degree concerned to avoid, if we
love either God or our own souls.

12. But supposing we do not condemn the innocent, neither the guilty any
farther than they deserve: still we may not be altogether clear of the snare.
For there is a third sort of sinful judging, which is the condemning any person
at all where there is not a sufficient evidence. And be the facts we suppose
ever so true, yet that does not acquit us. For they ought not to have been
supposed but proved, and till they were, we ought to have formed no judgment, I
say, till they were: for neither are we excused, although the facts admit of
ever so strong proof, unless that proof be produced before we pass sentence,
and compared with the evidence on the other side. Nor can we be excused, if
ever we pass a full sentence, before the accused has spoken for himself. Even a
jew might teach us this, as a mere lesson of justice abstracted from mercy and
brotherly love. Does our law, says Nicodemus, Judge any man before it hear him
and know what he does? John. xvii. 51. Yea, a heathen could reply, when the
chief of the jewish nation desired to have judgment against his prisoner, it is
not the manner of the Romans to judge any man before he that is accused have
the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself, concerning
the crime laid against him.

13. Indeed we could not easily fall into sinful judging, were we only to
observe that rule, which Seneca.
another of those heathen Romans affirms to have been the measure of his own
practice. "I am so far, says he, from lightly believing every man's, or any
man's evidence against another, that I do not easily or immediately believe a
man's evidence against himself. I always allow him second thoughts, and many
times council too." Go thou who art called a christian, and do likewise, lest
the heathen rise and condemn thee in that day.

14. But how rarely should we condemn or judge one another, at least, how soon
would that evil be remedied, were we to walk by that clear and express rule,
which our Lord himself has taught us? If thy brother shall trespass against
thee (or if thou hear, or believe that he has) go and tell him of his fault,
between him and thee alone. This is the first step thou art to take. But if he
will not hear, take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses, every word may be established. This is the second step. If he
neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; either to the overseers thereof,
or to the whole congregation. Thou have then done thy part. Then think of it no
more, but commend the whole to God.

15. But supposing thou have, by the grace of God, cast the beam out of thine
own eye, and do now clearly see the mote or beam which is in thy brother's
eye, yet beware thou do not receive hurt thyself, by endeavoring to help him
Still give not that which is holy unto dogs. Do not lightly account any to be
of this number. But if it evidently appear, that they deserve the title, then
cast ye not your pearls before swine. Beware of that zeal which is not
according to knowledge. For this is another great hinderance in their way who
would be perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect. They who desire this,
cannot but desire that all mankind should partake of the common blessing. And
when we ourselves first partake of the heavenly gift, the divine evidence of
things not seen, we wonder, that all mankind do not see, the things which we
see so plainly, and make no doubt at all but we shall open the eyes of all we
have any intercourse with. Hence we are for attacking all we meet without
delay, and constraining them to see, whether they will or no. And by the ill
success of this intemperate zeal, we often suffer in our own souls. To prevent
this spending our strength in vain, our Lord adds this needful caution (needful
to all, but more especially to those who are now warm in their first love:)
give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine: lest they trample them under foot, and turn again and rent you.

16. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs. Beware of thinking, that any
deserve this appellation, till there is full and incontestable proof, such as
you can no longer resist. But when it is clearly and indisputably proved, that
they are unholy and wicked men, not only strangers to, but enemies to God, to
all righteousness and true holiness; Give not that which is holy, (...), the
holy thing, emphatically so called, unto these. The holy, the peculiar
doctrines of the gospel, such as were hid from the ages and generations of old,
and are now made known to us, only by the revelation of Jesus Christ, and the
inspiration of his holy spirit; are not to be prostituted unto these men, who
know not if there be any Holy Ghost. Not indeed that the ambassadors of Christ
can refrain, from declaring them in the great congregation, wherein some of
these may probably be. We must speak, whether men will hear or whether they
will forbear. But this is not the case with private christians. They do not
bear that awful character; nor are they under any manner of obligation, to
force these great and glorious truths, on them who contradict and blaspheme,
who have a rooted enmity against them. Nay, they ought not so to do, but rather
to lead them, as they are able to bear. Do not begin a discourse with these,
upon remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. But talk with them in
their own manner, and upon their own principles. With the rational, honorable,
unjust epicure, reason of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come. This
is the most probable way to make Felix tremble. Reserve higher subjects for men
of higher seize.

17. Neither cast ye your pearls before swine. Be very unwilling to pass this
judgment on any man. But if the fact be plain and undeniable, If it is clear,
beyond all dispute, if the swine do not endeavor to disguise themselves, but
rather glory in their shame, making no preter^e to purity either of heart or
life, but working all uncleanness with greediness: then cast not ye your pearls
before them. Talk not to them of the mysteries of the kingdom: of the things
which eye has not seen, nor car heard; which of consequence, as they have no
other inlets of knowledge, no spiritual senses, it cannot enter into their
hearts to conceive. Tell not them of the exceeding great and precious promises,
which God has given us, in the Son of his love. What conception can they have,
of being made partakers of the divine nature, who do not even desire to escape
the corruption that is in the world through ^^^t? just as much knowledge as swine
have of pearls, and as much relish as they have for them, so much relish have
they for the deep things of God, so much knowledge of the mysteries of the
gospel, who are immersed in the mire of this world, in worldly pleasures,
desires and cares. ^^^^s not those pearls before these, lest they trample them
under their feet, lest they utterly despise what they cannot understand, and
speak evil of the things which they know not. Nay, it is probable, this would
not be the only inconvenience which would follow. It would not be strange, if
they were, according to their nature, to turn again, and rent you: if they were
to return you evil for good, cursing for blessing, and ha^^ed for your
good will. Such is the enmity of the carnal mind, against God and all the
things of God. Such the treatment you are to expect from these, if you offer
them the unpardonable affront, of endeavoring to save their souls from death,
to pluck them as brands out of the burning!

18. And yet you need not utterly despair even of these, who for the present
turn again and rent you. For if all your arguments and persuasives fail, there
is yet another remedy left; and one that is frequently found effectual, when no
other method avails. This is prayer. Therefore whatever you desire or want,
either for others or for your own soul, ask, and it shall be given you: seek,
and ye shall find: kn^ck, and it shall be opened unto you. The neglect of this
is a third grand hinderance of holiness. Still we have not, because we ask not.
O how meek and gentle, how lowly in heart, how full of love both to God and
man, might ye have been at this day, if you had only asked? if you had
continued instant in prayer! therefore now, at least, ask, and it shall be
given unto you. Ask, that ye may thoroughly experience and perfectly practice
the whole of that religion, which our Lord has here so beatifully described. It
shall then be given you, to be holy as he is holy, both in heart and in all
manner of conversation. Seek, in the way he has ordained, in searching the
scriptures, in hearing his word, in meditating thereon, in fasting, in
partaking of the supper of the Lord, and surely ye shall find. Ye shall find
that pearl of great price, that faith which overcomes the world, that peace
which the world cannot give, that love which is the earnest of your
inheritance. Knock: continue in prayer, and in every other way of the Lord. Be
not weary or faint in your mind. Press on to the mark. Take no denial. Let him
not go until he bless you. And the door of mercy, of holiness, of heaven shall
be opened unto you.

19. It is in compassion to the hardness of our hearts, so unready to believe
the goodness of God, that our Lord is pleased to enlarge upon this head, and to
repeat and confirm what he has spoken. For every one, says he, that asks,
receives: so that none need come short of the blessing: and he that seeks,
even every one that seeks, finds, the love and the image of God: and to him
that knocks, to every one that knocks, the gate of righteousness shall be
opened. So that here is no room for any to be discouraged, as though they might
ask or seek or knock in vain. Only remember, always to pray, to seek, to knock
and not to be faint And then the promise stands sure. It is firm as the
pillars of heaven. Yea, more firm; for heaven and earth shall pass away, but
his word shall not pass away.

20. To cut off every pretense for unbelief, our blessed Lord, in the following
verses, illustrates yet farther what he had said, by an appeal to what passes
in our own breasts. What man, says he, is there of you, who, if his son ask
bread, will he give him a stone? will even natural affection permit you to
refuse the reasonable request of one you love? or if he ask a fish, will he
give him a serpent? will he give him hurtful, instead of profitable things? so
that even from what you feel and do yourselves, you may receive the fullest
assurance, as, on the one hand, that no ill effect can possibly attend your
asking, so on the other, that it will be attended with that good effect, a full
supply of all your wants. For if ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven, who is pure,
unmixed, essential goodness, give good things to them that ask him? or, (as he
expresses it on another occasion) give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him? In
him are included all good things; all wisdom, peace, joy, love: the whole
treasure of holiness and happiness: all that God has prepared for them that
love him.

21. But that your prayer may have its full weight with God, see that ye be in
charity with all men. For otherwise, it is more likely to bring a curse than a
blessing on your own head: nor can you expect, to receive any blessing from
God, while you have not charity toward your neighbor. Therefore let this
hinderance be removed without delay. Confirm your love toward one another and
toward all men. And love them, not in word only, but in deed and in truth.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would, that men should do to you, do ye even
so unto them: for this is the have and the prophets.

22. This is that royal law, that golden rule of mercy as well as justice,
which even the heathen emperor caused to be written over the gate of his
palace: a rule, which many believe to be naturally engraved on the mind of
every one that comes into the world. And thus much is certain, that it commends
itself, as soon as heard, to every man's conscience and understanding: insomuch
that no man can knowingly offend against it, without carrying his condemnation
in his own breast.

23. This is the law and the prophets. Whatsoever is written in that law which
God of old revealed to mankind; and whatsoever precepts God has given by his
holy prophets, which have been since the world began, they are all summed up in
these few words, they are all contained in this short direction. And this
rightly understood comprizes the whole of that religion, which our Lord came to
establish upon earth.

24. It may be understood, either in a positive or negative sense. If
understood in a negative sense, the meaning is, "Whatever ye would not that men
should do to you, do not ye unto them." Here is a plain rule, always ready at
hand, always easy to be applied. In all cases relating to your neighbor, make
this case your own. Suppose the circumstances to be changed, and yourself to be
just as he is now. And then beware that you indulge no temper or thought, that
no word pass out of your lips, that you take no stop which you should have
condemned in him, upon such a change of circumstances. If understood in a
direct and positive sense, the plain meaning of it is, "Whatsoever you could
reasonably desire of him, supposing yourself to be in his circumstance, that
do, to the uttermost of your power, to every child of man."

25. To apply this in one or two obvious instances. It is clear to every man's
own conscience, we would not that others should judge us, should causelessly or
lightly think evil of us. Much less would we that any should speak evil of us,
should publish our real faults or infirmities. Apply this to yourself. Do not
unto another what you would not he should do unto you; and you will never more
judge your neighbor, never causelessly or lightly think evil of any one. Much
less will you speak evil: You will never mention even the real fault of an
absent person, unless so far as you are convinced, it is absolutely needful,
for the good of other souls.

26. Again: We would that all men should love and esteem us, and behave toward
us, according to justice, mercy and truth. And we may reasonably desire, that
they should do us all the good they can do, without injuring themselves: Yea,
that in outward things (according to the known rule) their superfluities should
give way to our conveniences, their conveniences to our necessities, and
their necessities to our extremities. Now then let us walk by the same rule:
Let us do unto all, as we would they should do to us. Let us love and honor
all men. Let justice, mercy and truth govern all our minds and actions. Let our
superfluities give way to our neighbor's conveniences: (and who then will
have any superfluities left?) Our conveniences to our neighbor's necessities,
our necessities to his extremities.

27. This is pure and genuine morality. This do and thou shall live. As many as
walk by this rule, peace be to them, and mercy: for they are the Israel of God.
But then be it observed, none can walk by this rule (nor ever did from the
beginning of the world) none can love his neighbor as himself, unless he first
love God. And none can love God, unless he believe in Christ, unless he have
redemption through his blood, and the spirit of God bearing witness with his
spirit, that he is a child of God. Faith therefore is still the root of all, of
present as well as future salvation. Still we must say to every sinner, Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Thou shall be saved now,
that thou may be saved for ever; saved on earth, that thou may be saved in
heaven Believe in him and thy faith will work by love. Thou will love the Lord
thy God, because he has loved thee: Thou will love thy neighbor as thyself.
And then it will be thy glory and joy, to exert and increase this love, not
barely by abstaining from what is contrary thereto, from every unkind thought,
word and action, but by showing all that kindness to every man, which thou
would he should show unto thee.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CONTENTS OF VOL. 1.
Salvation by Faith, from Ephesians. ii. 8. Page 11 The Almost Christian, from Acts
xxvi. 28. Page 29 Awake thou that sleep, from Ephesians. v. 14. Page 45
Scriptural Christianity, from Acts iv. 31. Page 65 Justification by Faith, from
Romans iv. 5. Page 95 The Righteousness of Faith, from Romans x. 5, 6, 7, 8. Page
113 The way to the Kingdom, from Mark i. 15. Page 133 The first fruits of the
Spirit, from Romans viii. 1. Page 151 The Spirit of Bondage and Adoption, from
Romans viii. 15. Page 171 The Witness of the Spirit, from Romans viii. 16. Page 195
The witness of our own Spirit, from 2 Cor. 1, 12. Page 215 The Means of Grace,
from Malachi iii. 7. Page 233 The Circumcision of the Heart, from Romans ii. 29.
Page 257 The Marks of the New Birth, from John iii. 8. Page 275
CONTENTS OF VOL. II.
The great privilege of those that are born of God, from 1 John iii. 9. Page 5
The 1st discourse upon our Lord's Sermon on the mount, from Matt. v. 1, 2, 3,
4. Page 23 The 2d ditte, from Matt. v. 5, 6, 7. Page 49 The 3d ditto, from
Matt. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Page 77 The 4th ditto, from Matt. v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Page 105 The 5th ditto, from Matt. v. 17, 18, 19, 20. Page 133 The 6th ditto,
from Matt. vi. 1 -- 15. Page 163 The 7th ditto, from Matt. iv. 16, 17, 18. Page
193 The 8th ditto, from Matt. vi. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Page 223 The 9th ditto,
from Matt. vi. 24 -- 34. Page 253 The 10th ditto, from Matt. vii. 1 -- 12. Page
279.

