TWO SERMONS.

THE ALMOST CHRISTIAN, AND INTERCESSION EVERY CHRISTIAN's DUTY.

BY THE REVEREND GEORGE WHITEFIELD.

ELIZABETHTOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK. -- 1794.

THE ALMOST CHRISTIAN.
ACTS xxvi.28. Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
THESE words contain the ingenuous confession of King Agrippa, which having
some reference to what went before, it may not be improper to relate to you the
substance of the preceding verses, to which these words are so closely
connected. The chapter, then, out of which the text is taken, contains an
admirable account the great St. Paul gave of his wonderful conversion from
Judaism to Christianity, when he was called to make his defense before Festus
and another Gentile governor. -- Our blessed Lord had long since foretold,
that, when the SON OF MAN should be lifted up, his disciples should be brought
before kings for his name's sake, for a testimony unto them; -- and very good
was the design of Infinite Wisdom in thus ordaining it, for Christianity being,
from the very beginning, a doctrine of the cross, the princes and rulers of the
earth though it themselves too high to be instructed by such mean teachers, or too
happy to be disturbed by such unwelcome truths, and, therefore, would have
always continued strangers to Jesus Christ, and him crucified, had not the
apostles, by being arraigned before them as criminals, gained opportunities of
preaching to them Jesus and the resurrection. St. Paul knew full well that this
was the main reason why his blessed Master, at this time, permitted his enemies
to arraign him at a public bar, and, therefore, in compliance with the divine
will, thinks it not sufficient barely to make his defense, but endeavors, at
the same time, to convert his judges. And this he did with such demonstration
of the spirit, and of power, that Festus, unwilling to be convinced by the
strongest evidence, cries out, with a loud voice -- Much learning does make
thee mad -- to which the brave apostle, like a true follower of the ^oly Jesus,
meekly replies -- I am not mad, most noble F^s^us, but speak forth the words of
truth and soberness. -- But, in all probability, seeing King Agrippa more
affected with his discourse, and observing in him an inclination to know the
truth, he applies himself more particular to him, the King, says he, knows of
these things, before whom also I speak freely, for I am persuaded that none of
these things are hidden from him; and then, that i^possible he might complete
his wished-for conversion, he, with an inimitable strain of oratory, addresses
himself still more closely King Agrippa, believe thou the prophets? I know
that thou believe them: At which the passions of the king began to work so
strongly, that he was obliged, in open court, to own himself affected by the
prisoner's preaching, and ingenuously to cry out, Paul, almost thou persuadest
me to be a Christian; which words taken with the context, afford us a lively
representation of the different reception the doctrine of Christ's ministers,
who come in the power and spirit of St. Paul, meets with now adays in the
minds of men; for notwithstanding they, like this great apostle, speak forth
the words of truth and soberness, and with such energy and power, that all
their adversaries cannot justly gainsay or resist, yet too many, with the most
noble Festus beforementioned, being like him, either too proud to be taught,
or too sensual, too careless, or too worldly-minded to live up to their
doctrine, in order to excuse themselves, cry out, that much learning, much
study, or what is more unaccountable, much piety has made them mad; and
though, blessed be God, all do not thus disbelieve our report, yet amongst
those many others, who gladly receive the word, and confess that we speak the
words of truth and soberness, there are so few, who arrive at any higher degree
of piety than that of Agrippa, or are any farther persuaded than to be almost
Christians, that I cannot but think it highly necessary to warn my dear hearers
of the danger of such a state; and therefore, from the words of the text, shall
endeavor to consider these three things: I. What is meant by an almost
Christian. II. What are the chief reasons why so many are no more than almost
Christians. III. I shall consider the ineffectualness, danger, absurdity, and
uneasiness that attends those that are but almost Christians. IV. I shall
conclude with a general exhortation, to set all upon striving not only to be
almost, but altogether Christians.


I. And first I am to consider what is meant by an almost Christian.

An almost Christian, then, if we consider him in respect to his duty to God,
is one that halts between two opinions, that wavers between Christ and the
world, that would reconcile God and Mammon, that is, light and darkness, Christ
and B^lial. It is true, he has an inclination to religion, but then he is very
cautious how he goes too far in it: His false heart is always crying out --
Spare thyself, do thyself no harm. He prays, indeed, that God's will may be
done on earth, as it is in heaven; but then, notwithstanding he is very partial
in his obedience, and fondly hopes that God will not be extreme to mark every
thing that he wilfully does amiss, though an inspired apostle has told him,
that he that offends in one point is guilty of all. Above all, he is one that
depends much on outward ordinances, and upon that account looks upon himself as
righteous, and despises others; though, at the same time, he may be as great a
stranger to the divine life, as any other person whatsoever. In short, he is
fond of the form, but never experiences the power of godliness in his heart: He
goes on, year after year, feeding and attending on the means of grace; but
then, like Pharaoh's lean kine, is never the better, but rather the worse for
them.

If you consider him in respect to his neighbor, he is one that is strictly
just to all; but then this does not proceed from any love ^o God, or regard to
man, but only out of a principle of self love, because he knows dishonesty will
spoil his reputation, and consequently hinder his thriving in the world.

He is one that depends much on being negatively good, and contents himself
with the consciousness of having done no one any harm, though he reads in the
gospel, that the unprofitable servant was cast into outer darkness, and the
barren sig-tree cursed and dried up from the roots, not for bearing bad, but no
fruit.

He is no enemy to charitable contributions in public, if not too frequently
recommended; but then he is unacquainted with the kind offices of visiting the
sick and imprisoned, clothing the naked, and relieving the hungry in a private
manner. He thinks that these things belong only to the clergy, though his own
false heart tells him, that nothing but pride keeps him from exercising these
acts of humility, and that Jesus Christ, in the xxvth chapter of St. Matthew,
condemns persons to everlasting punishment, not for being fornicators,
drunkards, or extortioners, but for neglecting these charitable offices. When
the Son of Man, says our blessed Lord himself, shall come in his glory, he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goals on his left. And then
shall he say to them on his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels: For I was an hungered,
and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also say, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee? Then shall be answer them, Verily, I say unto you,
inasmuch as ye have not done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
did it not unto me: And these shall go away into everlasting punishment. I
thought proper to give you this whole passage of scripture at large, because
our Savior lays such a particular stress upon it; and yet, notwithstanding it
is so little regarded, that were we to judge by the practice of Christians, one
should be tempted to think there were no such verses in the Bible.

But to proceed in our character of an almost Christian. If we consider him in
respect of himself; as before we said he was strictly honest to his neighbor,
so he is likewise strictly sober in himself; but then both his honesty and
sobriety proceed from the same principle of a false self love. It is true he
runs not into the same excess of roit with other men, but then it is not out of
obedience to the laws of God, but either because his constitution will not away
with intemperance, or rather because he is cautious of forfeiting his
reputation, or unfitting himself for temporal business. But though he is so
prudent as to avoid intemperance and excess, for the reasons beforementioned,
yet he always goes to the extremity of what is lawful. It is true, he is no
drunkard, but then he has no Christian self-denial. He cannot think our Savior
to be so austere a master, as to deny us to indulge ourselves in some
particulars; and so by this means he is kept out of a sense of true religion,
as much as if he lived in debauchery, or any other crime whatever. As to
settling his principles as well as practice, he is guided more by the world,
than by the word of God. As for his part, he cannot think the way to heaven so
narrow as some would make it; and, therefore, considers not so much what
scripture requires, as what such and such a good man does, or what will best
suit his own corrupt inclinations. Upon this account, he is not only very
cautious himself, but likewise very careful of young converts, whose faces are
set heavenward, and, therefore, is always acting the Devil's part, and bidding
them spare themselves, though they are doing no more than what the scripture
strictly requires them to do; the consequence of which is, that he suffers not
himself to enter into the kingdom of God, and those that are entering in he
hinders.

Thus lives the almost Christian; not that I can say I have fully described him
to you, but, from these out-lines and sketches of his character, if your
cons^iences have done their proper office, and made a particular application of
what has been said to your own hearts, I cannot but fear that some of you may
observe some features in his picture, odious as it is, resembling your own,
and, therefore, cannot but hope, at the same time, that you join with the
apostle in the words immediately following the text, and wish yourselves not
only almost, but altogether Christians.

II. But I proceed to the second general thing proposed, namely, to consider
the reasons why so many are no more than almost Christians.

1. And the first reason I shall mention is -- because so many set out with
false notions of religion, and though they live in a Christian country, yet
know not what Christianity is. -- This, perhaps may be esteemed a hard saying,
but experience sadly evinces the truth of it; for some place religion in being
of this or that communion, more in morality, most in a round of duties, and a
model of performances, and few, very few, acknowledge it to be what it really
is, a thorough inward change of nature, a divine life, a vital participation of
Jesus Christ, an union of the soul with God, which the apostle expresses by
saying, He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. Hence it happens that so
many, even of the most knowing professors, when you come to converse with them
concerning the essence, the life, the soul of religion, I mean our new birth in
Jesus Christ, confess themselves quite ignorant of the matter, and cry out with
Nicodemus, How can this thing be? And no wonder then, that so many are only
almost Christians, when so many know not what Christianity is: No marvel so
many take up with the form, when they are quite strangers to the power of
godliness, or content themselves with the shadow, when they know so little
about the substance of it. And this is one cause why so many are almost, why so
few are altogether Christians.

2. A second reason that may be assigned why so many are no more than almost
Christians, is a servile fear of man Multitudes there are, and have been, who,
though awakened to a sense of the divine life, and have tasted and felt the
powers of the world to come, yet out of a base, sinful fear of being counted
singular, or contemned of men, have suffered all those good impressions to wear
off again. It is true, they have some esteem for Jesus Christ, but then, like
Nicodemus, they would come to him only by night: They are willing to serve him,
but then they would do it secretly, for fear of the Jews: They have a mind to
see Jesus, but then they cannot come to him because of the press; for fear of
being laughed at, and ridiculed by those with whom they used to sit at meat.
But well did our Savior prophesy of such persons, How can ye love me which
receive honor one of another? Alas! have they never read, that the friendship
of this world is enmity with God; and that our Lord himself has threatened,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, or of my words, in this wicked and adulterous
generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory
of his Father, and of his holy angels. But no wonder that so many are no more
that almost Christians, since so many love the praise of men more than the
honor which comes of God.

3. A third reason why so many are no more than almost Christians, is a
reigning love of money. This was the pitiable case of that forward young man in
the gospel, who came running to our blessed Lord, and kneeling before him,
enquired what he must do to inherit eternal life; to which our blessed Master
replied, Thou know the commandments, do not kill, do not commit adultery, do
not steal; to which the young man replied, All these have I kept from my youth.
But when our Lord proceeded to tell him, Yet lackest thou one thing, go sell
all that thou have and give to the poor; he was grieved at that saying, and
went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions! Poor youth! he had a good
mind to be a Christian, and to inherit eternal life, but though it it too dear, if
it could be purchased at no less an expense than of his whole estate! And thus
many, both young and old, nowadays, come running to worship our blessed Lord
in public, and kneel before him in private, and enquire at his gospel, what
must they do to inherit eternal life; but when they find they m^s^ renounce the
self-enjoyment of riches, and forsake all in affection to follow him, they cry
-- The Lord pardon us in this thing! -- We pray thee have us excused.

But is heaven so small a trifle in such men's esteem, as not to be worth a
little gilded earth? Is eternal life so mean a purchase, as not to deserve the
temporary renunciation of a few transitory riches? Sur^ly it is. But however
inconsistent such a behavior may be, this inordinate love of money is too
evidently the common and fatal cause, why so many are no more than almost
Christians.

4. Nor is the reigning love of pleasure a less uncommon, or a less fatal
cause, why so many are no more than almost Christians. Thousands and ten
thousands there are, who despise riches, and would willingly be true disciples
of Jesus Christ, would parting with their money make them so; but when they are
told, that our blessed Lord has said, that whosoever will come after him must
deny himself. Like the pitiable young man, beforementioned, they go away
sorrowful; for they have too great a love for sensual pleasures. They will,
like Herod, perhaps send for the ministers of Christ, as he did for John, and
hear them gladly; but touch them in their Herodias, tell them they must part
with such or such a darling pleasure, and with wicked Ahab they cry out -- Have
thou found us, O our enemy? Tell them of the necessity of mortification,
fasting, and self-denial, and it is as difficult to them to hear, as if you was
to bid them cut off a right hand or pluck out a right eye: They cannot think
our blessed Lord requires so much at their hands, though an inspired apostle
has commanded us to mortify our members which are upon earth; and he himself,
even after he had converted millions, and was very near arrived to the end of
his race, yet professed that it was his daily practice to keep under his body,
and bring it into subjection, lest after he had preached to others, he himself
should be a castaway!

But some men would be wiser than this great apostle, and chalk out to us what
they falsely imagine an easier way to happiness. They would flatter us we may
go to heaven without offering violence to our sensual appetites, and enter into
the strait gate without striving against our carnal inclinations. And this is
another reason why so many are only almost, and not altogether Christians.

5. The fifth and last reason I shall assign why so many are only almost
Christians, is a sickleness and instability of temper.

It has been, no doubt, the misfortune that many a minister and sincere
Christian has met with, to weep and wail over numbers of promising converts,
who seemingly began in the spirit, but after a while have fell away, and basely
ended in the flesh, and this not for want of right notions in religion, nor out
of a servile fear of man, nor out of love of money or sensual pleasure, but out
of an instability and sickleness of temper. They looked upon religion merely
for novelty, as something which pleased them for a while, but after their
curiosity was satisfied, they have laid it aside again. Like the young man that
came to see Jesus, with a linen cloth about his naked body, they have followed
him for a season, but when temptations have come to take hold on them, for want
of a little more resolution, they have been stripped of all their good
intentions, and fled away naked. They at first, like a tree planted by the
waterside, grew up and flourished for a while, but having no root in
themselves, no inward principle of holiness and piety, like Jonah's gourd, were
soon dried up, cut down, and withered. Their good intentions are but too like
the violent motions of the animal spirits of a body newly beheaded, which,
though impetuous, are not lasting. In short, they set out well in their journey
to heaven, but finding the way either narrower or longer than they expected,
through an unsteadiness of temper, they have made an eternal halt, and so
returned like the dog to his vomit, or like the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire!

But I tremble to pronounce the fate of such unstable professors, who, having
put their hands to the plow, for want of a little more resolution, shamefully
look back. How shall I repeat to them that dreadful threatening, If any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: And again, It is impossible,
that is, exceedingly difficult at least, for those that have been once
enlightened, and have tasted the good gift of God's holy spirit, and the powers
of the world to come, if they should fall away, to be renewed again unto
repentance. But notwithstanding the gospel is so severe against apostates, ^et
many that begun well, through a fi^kleness of temper, (Oh that none of us here
present may ever be such!) have been, by this means, of the number of those
that turn back unto perdition. And this is the fifth and last reason I shall
give, why so many are only almost, and not altogether Christians.

III. Proceed now to the third general thing proposed, namely, to consider the
folly of being no more than an almost Christian.

And the first proof I shall give of the folly of such a proceeding is -- that
it is ineffectual to salvation. It is true, such men are almost good, but
almost to hit the mark, is really to miss it. God requires us to love him with
all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our strength: He loves us too
well to admit any rival, because so far as our hearts are empty of God, so far
must they be unhappy. The Devil, indeed, like the false mother that came before
Solomon, would have our hearts divided, as she would have had the child, but
God, like the true mother, will have all or none. My son, give me thy heart,
thy whole heart, is the general call to all; and if this be not done, we never
can expect the divine mercy.

Persons may play the hypocrite, but God, at the great day, will strike them
dead, (as he did Ananias and Sapphira by the mouth of his servant Peter) for
pretending to offer him all their hearts, when they keep back from him the
greatest part. They may, perhaps, impose upon their fellow creatures for a
while, but he that enabled Elijah to cry out, Come in thou wife of Jeroboam,
when she came disguised to enquire about her sick son, will also discover them
through their most artful dissimulations, and if their hearts are not whole
with him, appoint them their portion with hypocrites and unbelievers.

But, secondly, what renders an halfway piety more inexcusable is, that it is
not only insufficient to our own salvation, but also most prejudicial to that
of others.

An almost Christian is one of the most hurtful creatures in the world; he is a
wolf in sheep's clothing -- he is one of those false prophets our blessed Lord
bids us beware of in his sermon on the mount, who would persuade men, that the
way to heaven is broader than it really is; and thereby, as it was observed
before, enter not into the kingdom of God themselves, and those that are
entering in they hinder. These, these are the men that turn the world into a
lukewarm Laodicean spirit -- that hang out fa^se lights, and so shipwreck
unthinking benighted souls in their voyage to the haven of eternity. These are
they that are greater enemies to the cross of Christ, than infidels themselves;
for of an unbeliever every one will be aware, but an almost Christian, through
his subtle hypocrisy, draws away many after him, and therefore must expect to
receive the greater damnation.

But, thirdly, as it is most prejudicial to ourselves, and hurtful to others,
so it is the greatest piece of ingratitude we can express toward our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ. For did he come down from heaven, and shed his precious
blood, to purchase these hearts of ours, and shall we only give him half of
them? Oh how can we say we love him, when our hearts are not wholly with him?
How can we call him our Savior, when we will not endeavor sincerely to approve
ourselves to him, and so let him see the travail of his soul, and be satisfied!

Had any of us purchased a slave at a most expensive rate, that was before
involved in the utmost miseries and torments, and so must have continued for
ever, had we shut up our bowels of compassion from him; and was this slave
afterward to grow rebellious, or deny giving us but half his service -- how,
how should we exclaim against his base ingratitude? And yet this base
ungrateful slave thou art, O man, who acknowledgest thyself to be redeemed from
infinite unavoidable misery and punishment by the death of Jesus Christ, and
yet wilt not give thyself wholly to him. But shall we deal with God, our Maker,
in a manner we would not be dealt with by a man, like ourselves? God forbid! --
No.

That I may come to the last thing proposed, namely, to add a word or two of
exhortation to be not only almost, but altogether Christians, let us scorn all
such base and treacherous treatment of our King and Savior -- nay, our God.
Let us not take some pains all our lives to go to heaven, and yet plunge
ourselves into hell at last. Let us give God our whole hearts, and no longer
halt between two opinions: If the world be God, let us serve that -- If
pleasure be a God, let us serve that; but if the Lord, he be God, let us -- Oh
let us serve him alone! Alas! why, why should we stand out any longer? -- Why
should we be so in love with slavery, as not wholly to renounce the world, the
flesh, and the Devil, which, like so many spiritual chains, bind down our
souls, and hinder them from flying up to God. Alas! what are we afraid of? Is
not God able to reward our entire obedience? If he is, as the almost
Christian's lame way of serving him seems to grant -- Why, then, will we not
serve him entirely? For the same reason we do so much, why do we not do more?
Or do you think that being only half religious will make you happy, but that
going farther will render you miserable and uneasy? Alas! this, my brethren, is
delusion all over; for what is it but this half piety -- this wavering between
God and the world, that makes so many that are seemingly well disposed, such
utter strangers to the comforts of religion? They chose just so much of
religion as will disturb them in their lusts, and follow their lusts so far as
to deprive themselves of the comforts of religion: Whereas, on the contrary,
would they sincerely leave all in affection, and give their hearts wholly to
God, they would then (and they cannot till then) experience the unspeakable
pleasure of having a mind at unity with itself, and enjoy such a peace of God,
which, even in this life, passes all understanding, and which they were entire
strangers to before. It is true, if we will devote ourselves entirely to God,
we must meet with contempt, but then it is because contempt is necessary to
heal our pride. We must renounce some (...) pleasure, but then it is because
those unfit us for spiritual ones, which are infinitely better. We must
renounce the love of the world, but then it is that we may be filled with the
love of God: And when that has once enlarged our hearts, we shall, like Jacob,
when he served for his beloved Rachel, think nothing too difficult to undergo,
no hardships too tedious to endure, because of the love we shall then have for
our dear Redeemer. -- Thus easy, thus delightful will be the ways of God even
in this life; but when once we throw off these bodies, and our souls are filled
with all the fullness of God, Oh! what heart can conceive, what tongue can
express, with what unspeakable joy and consolation we shall then look back on
our past sincere and hearty services. Think you then, my dear hearers, we shall
repent we had done too much; or rather think you not we shall be ashamed that
we did no more, and blush we were so backward to give up all to God, when he
intended hereafter to give us himself?

Let me, therefore, to conclude, exhort you, my brethren, to have always the
unspeakable happiness of enjoying God set before you: And think withal, that
every degree of holiness you neglect -- every instance of piety you pass by, is
a jewel taken out of your crown, a degree of blessedness lost in the vision of
God. Oh! do but ^lways think and act thus, and you will no longer be laboring
to compound matters between God and the world, but, on the contrary, be daily
endeavoring to give (...) yourselves more and more unto him; you will be always
watching, always praying, always aspiring after farther degrees of purity and
love, and so consequently always preparing yourselves for a fuller sight and
enjoyment of that God, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand there are pleasures for ever more. -- AMEN! AMEN!

INTERCESSION EVERY CHRISTIAN's DUTY.
I THESE. V. 25. Brethren, pray for us.
IF we enquire, why there is so little love to be found amongst Christians, why
the very characteristic, by which every one should know that we are disciples,
of the holy Jesus, is almost banished out of the Christian world -- we shall
find it, in a great measure owing to a neglect or superficial performance of
that most God-like part of secret prayer INTERCESSION, or imploring the divine
grace or mercy in behalf of others.

Some forget this duty of praying for others, because they seldom remember to
pray for themselves; and even good people, who are constant in praying to their
Father, which is in heaven, are often so constrained and selfish in their
addresses to the throne of grace, that they do not enlarge their petitions for
the welfare of their fellow Christians as they ought, and thereby fall short of
attaining that Christian charity, that unfeigned love of their brethren, which
their sac^ed profession obliges them to aspire after, and without which, though
they would bestow all their goods to feed the poor, and even give their bodies
to be burned, yet it would profit them nothing.

Since then these things are so, I shall, from the words of the text, (though
originally intended to be more confined) endeavor to show, I. That it is every
Christian's duty to pray for others, as well as for himself. II. Who are those
that we ought to pray for, and in what manner we shall do it. And, III. I shall
offer some motives to excite all Christians to abound in this great duty of
Intercession.


I. First, then, I shall endeavor to show, that it is every Christian's duty to
pray for others, as well as for himself.

Now prayer is a duty founded on natural religion; the very heathens never
neglected it, though many Christian heathens amongst us do; And it i^ so
essential to Christianity, that you might (...) reasonably expect to find a
living man without breath, as a true Christian without the spirit of prayer and
supplication: Thus, no sooner was St. Paul converted, but behold he prays,
says the Lord Almighty. And thus will it be with every child of God, as soon
as he becomes such, prayer being truly called -- The natural cry of the new
born soul.

For in the heart of every true believer there is a heavenly tendency, a divine
attraction, which as sensibly draws him to converse with God, as the lodestone
attracts the needle.

A deep sense of their own weakness, and of Christ's fullness; a strong
conviction of their natural corruption, and of the necessity of renewing grace,
will not let them rest from crying day and night to their Almighty Redeemer,
that the divine image, which they lost in Adam, may, through his all-powerful
mediation, and the sanctifying operations of his blessed spirit, be begun,
carried on, and fully perfected both in their souls and bodies.

Thus earnest, thus importunate, are all sincere Christians in praying for
themselves; but then, not having so lively, lasting, and deep a sense of the
wants of their Christian brethren, they are, for the most part, too remiss and
defective in their prayers for them; whereas was the love of God shed abroad in
our hearts, and did we love our neighbor in that manner in which the Son of
God, our Savior loved us, and according to his command and example, we could
not but be as importunate for their spiritual and temporal welfare, as for our
own, and as earnestly desire and endeavor that others should share in the
benefits of the death and passion of Jesus Christ as we ourselves.

Let not any one think, that this is an uncommon degree of charity, an high
pitch of perfection, which every one cannot attain unto, since it is no such
thing: -- For if we are all commanded to love our neighbor, that is every m^n,
(...), ^ay to lay down our lives for the brethr^^ (...) is the duty of all to
pray for their neighbors as much as for themselves, and by all possible acts
and expressions of love and affection toward them, at all times, to show their
readiness even to lay down their lives for them, if ever it should please God
to call them to it.

Our blessed Savior, as he has set us an example, that we should follow his
steps in every thing else, so has he more especially in this: For in that most
divine, that most perfect and inimitable prayer, recorded in the xviith of St.
John, which he put up just before his passion, we find but few petitions for
his own, though many for his disciples' welfare: And in that most perfect form
which he has been pleased to prescribe us, we are taught to say -- not my, but
our Father; thereby to put us in mind, that, whenever we approach the throne of
grace, we ought to pray not for ourselves alone, but for all our brethren in
Christ.

Intercession then is certainly a duty incumbent upon all Christians.

II. Whom we are to intercede for, and how this duty is to be performed, comes
next to be considered, under my second general head.

1. And first, our intercession must be universal. I will, says the apostle,
that prayers, supplications, and intercessions be made for all men: For as
God's mercy is over all his works, as Jesus Christ died to redeem a people out
of all nations and languages; so we should I pray, that all men may come to the
knowledge of the truth, and be saved. -- Many precious promises are made in
holy writ, that the gospel shall be published through the whole world, that the
earth shall be covered with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea: And therefore it is our duty not to confine our petitions to our own
nation, but to pray that all those nations, who now sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, may have the glorious gospel shine out upon them, as well as
upon us. But you need not that any man should teach you this, since ye
yourselves are taught of God, even of Jesus Christ himself, to pray, that his
kingdom may come; part of the meaning of which petition is, that God's ways may
be known upon earth, and his saving health among all nations.

2. Next to the praying for all men, we should, according to St. Paul's rule,
pray for those in au^hority, that we may lead quiet lives, in all godliness and
honesty. For if we consider how heavy the burden of government is, and how much
the welfare of any people depends on the zeal and godly conversation of those
that have the rule over them: If we set before us the many dangers and
difficulties to which governors, by their station, are exposed, and the
continual temptations they lie under to luxury and self-indulgence, we shall
not only pity but pray for them -- that he who preserved Esther, David, and
Josiah unspotted from the world, amidst the grandeur of a court, and gave
success to their designs, would also preserve them holy and unblamable, and
prosper all the works of their hands upon them.

3. But, thirdly, you ought, in a more especial manner, to pray for those, whom
the Holy Ghost has made overseers over you. This is what St. Paul begs, again
and again, of the churches to whom he writes. Brethren, says he in the text,
pray for us; and again, in his epistle to the Ephesians -- Praying always, says
he, with all manner of supplication; and for me also, that I may open my mouth
boldly, to declare the mystery of the gospel. And in another place, to express
his earnestness in this request, and the great importance of their prayers to
him, he bids the church strive, or, as the original word signifies, be in an
agony, together with him in their prayers. And surely, if the great St. Paul,
that chosen vessel, that favorite of heaven, needed the most importunate
prayers of his Christian converts, much more do the ordinary ministers of the
gospel stand in need of the intercession of their respective flocks.

And I cannot but, in a more especial manner, insist upon this branch of your
duty, because it is a matter of such importance; for, no doubt, much good is
frequently withheld from many by reason of their neglecting to pray for their
ministers, which they would have received, had they prayed for them as they
ought. Not to mention, that people often complain of the want of diligent and
faithful pastors: But how do they deserve good pastors, who will not earnestly
pray to God for such.

The church has set apart four seasons in the year for this purpose, and to
call down a blessing on those who are to be ordained to any holy function; but
by how very few are the ember days observed! And if we will not pray to the
Lord of the harvest, can it be expected, he will send forth laborers into his
harvest?

Besides, what ingratitude is it, not to pray for your ministers! For shall
they watch and labor in the word and doctrine for you, and for your salvation,
and shall not you pray for them in return? If any bestow favors on your bodies,
you think it right, meet, and your bounden duty, to pray for them; and shall
not they be remembered in your prayers, who daily feed and nourish your souls?
Add to all this, that praying for your ministers will be a manifest proof of
your believing, that though Paul plant and Apollos water, yet it is God alone
who gives the increase. And you will also find it the best means you can use,
to promote your own welfare; because God, in answer to your prayers, may impart
a double portion of his Holy Spirit to them, whereby they will be qualified to
deal out to you larger measures of knowledge in spiritual things, and be
enabled more skilfully to divide the word of truth.

Would men but constantly observe this direction, and when their ministers are
praying in their name to God, humbly beseech him to perform all their
petitions: Or, when they are speaking in God's name to them, pray that the Holy
Ghost may fall on all them that hear the word; we shall then find a more
visible good effect of their doctrine, and a greater mutual love between
ministers and their people. For ministers' hands would then be held up by the
people's intercessions, and the people will never dare to vilify or traduce
those who are the constant subjects of their prayers.

4. Next to our ministers, our friends claim a pla^e in our intercessions; but
then we should not content ourselves with praying in general terms for them,
but suit our prayers to their particular circumstances. When Meriam was
affl^cted with a leprosy from God, Moses cried and said -- Lord heal her: And
when the nobleman came to apply to apply to Jesus Christ, in behalf of his
child, he said -- Lord, my little daughter lies at the point of death, I pray
thee come, and heal her. In like manner, when any of our friends are under any
afflicting circumstances, we should endeavor to pray for them, with a
particular regard to those circumstances. For instance -- is a friend sick? We
should pray, that if it be God's good pleasure, it may not be unto death; but
if otherwise, that he would give him grace, so to take his visitation, that,
after this painful life ended, he may dwell with him in life everlasting. Is a
friend in doubt, in a matter? We should lay his case before God, as Moses did
that of the daughters of Zelophehad, and pray, that God's Holy Spirit may lead
him into all truth. Is he in w^nt? We should pray, that his faith may never
fail, and that in God's due time, he may be relieved. And in all other cases,
we should not pray for our friends, only in generals, but suit our difficult
duty, yet not impracticable to those who have renounced the things of this
present life, (from an inordinate love of which alone all enmities arise) and
who, knowing the terrible woes denounced against those who offend Christ's
little ones, can, out of real pity, and a sense of their danger, pray for those
by whom such offenses come.

6. Lastly, and to conclude this head, we should intercede for all that are any
ways afflicted in mind, body, or estate; for all who desire, and stand in need
of our prayers, and for all who do not pray for themselves.

And Oh! that all who hear me, would set apart some time every day for the due
performance of this most necessary duty! -- In order to which,

I shall now proceed to the third general thing proposed, namely,

III. To show the advantages, and offer some considerations to excite you to
the practice of daily intercession.

1. And first, it will fill you hearts with love one to another. He that every
day hear^^ly intercedes at the throne of grace for all mankind, cannot but in a
short time be filled with love and charity to all; and the frequent exercise of
his love in this manner, will insensibly enlarge his heart, and make him
partaker of that exceeding abundance of it which is in Christ Jesus our Lord!
Envy, malice, revenge and such like hellish tempers, can never long harbor in
a gracious intercessor's breast; but he will be filled with joy, peace,
meekness, long-suffering, and all other graces of the holy spirit. By
frequently laying his neighbor's wants before God, he will be touched with a
fellow feeling of them; he will rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep
with those that weep. Every blessing bestowed on others, instead of exciting
envy in him, will be looked on as an answer to his particular intercession, and
fill his soul with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Abound therefore in acts of general and particular intercessions, and when you
hear of your neighbor's faults, instead of relating them to, and exposing them
before others, lay them in secret before God, and beg of him to correct and
amend them. When you hear of a notorious sinner, instead of thinking, you do
well to be angry, beg of Jesus Christ to convert and make him a monument of his
free grace; and you cannot imagine what a blessed alteration this practice will
make in your heart, and how much you will increase, day by day, in the spirit
of love and meekness toward all mankind!

But, further to excite you to the constant practice of this duty of
intercession, consider the many instances given us in holy scripture of the
power and efficacy of it. Great and excellent things are there recorded as the
effects of this divine employ. It has stopped plagues, it has opened and shut
heaven, and has frequently turned away God's fury from his people. How was
Abimelech's house freed from the disease God sent amongst them, at the
intercession of Abraham! When Phineas stood up and prayed, how soon did the
plague cease! -- When Daniel humbled and afflicted his soul, and interceded for
the Lord's inheritance, how quickly was an angel dispatched to tell him his
prayer was heard! And to mention but one ins^ance more, how does God own
himself, as it were, quite overcome with the importunity of Moses, when he was
interceding for his idolatrous people -- Let me alone, says God!

This sufficiently shows, I could almost say, the omnipotency of intercession,
and how we may, like Jacob, wrestle with God, and by an holy violence prevail
both for ourselves and others. And no doubt it is owing to the secret and
prevailing intercessions of the few righteous souls who still remain among us,
that God has yet spared this miserably sinful nation; for were there not some
such faithful ones, like Moses, left to stand in the gap, we should soon be
destroyed, even as was Sodom, and reduced to ashes like unto Gomorrah.

But, to stir you up yet farther to this God-like exercise of intercession,
consider that, in all probability, it is the frequent employment even of the
glorified saints; for though they are delivered from the burden of the flesh,
and restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, yet as their happiness
cannot be perfectly consumm^ted 'till the resurrection of the last day, when
all their brethren will be glorified with them, we cannot but think they are
often importunate in beseeching our heavenly Father shortly to accomplish the
number of his elect, and to hasten his kingdom. And shall not we, who are on
earth, be often exercised in this divine employ with the glorious company of
the spirits of just men made perfect? Since our happiness is so much to consist
in the communion of saints in the church triumphant above, shall we not
frequently intercede for the church militant here below, and earnestly beg,
that we may all be one, even as the holy Jesus and his Father are one, that we
may also be made perfect in one?

To provoke you to this great work and labor of love, remember that it is the
never ceasing employment of the holy and highly exalted Jesus himself, who sits
at the right hand of God to hear all our prayers, and to make continual
intercession for us! So that he who is constantly employed in interceding for
others, is doing that on earth, which the eternal Son of God is always doing in
heaven.

Imagine, therefore, when you are lifting up holy hands in prayer for one
another, that you see the heavens opened, and the Son of God in all his glory,
as the great high priest of your salvation, offering up and pleading for you,
the all-sufficient merit of his sacrifice before the throne of his heavenly
Father? Join then your intercessions with his, and beseech him, that they may,
through him, come up as incense, and be received as a sweet smelling savor,
acceptable in the sight of God! This imagination will strengthen your faith,
excite a holy earnestness in your p^^yers, and make you wrestle with God as
Jacob did, when he saw him face to face, and his life was preserved; as
Abraham, when he pleaded for Sodom; and as Jesus Christ himself, when he
prayed, being in an agony, so much the more earnestly the night before his
bitter passion!

And now, brethren, what shall I say more, since you are t^ught of Jesus Christ
himself to abound in love, and in this good work of praying one for another.
Though ever so mean, though as poor as Lazarus, you will then become
benefactors to all mankind; thousands, and twenty times ten thousands, will
then be blessed for your sakes! and after you have employed a few years in this
divine exercise here, you will be translated to that happy place, where you
have so often wished others might be advanced, and be exalted to sit at the
right hand of our all-powerful, all-prevailing Intercessor, in the kingdom of
his heavenly Father hereafter!

However, I cannot but in an especial manner press this upon you now, because
all ye, amongst whom I have now been preaching, in all probability will see me
no more; for I am now going (I trust under the conduct of God's most holy
spirit) from you, knowing not what shall befall me: I need therefore your most
importunate intercessions, that nothing may move me from my duty, and that I
may not count even my life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my course
with joy; and the ministry I have received of the Lord Jesus to testify the
gospel of the grace of God!

Whilst I have been here, to the best of my knowledge I have not failed to
declare unto you the whole will of God: -- And though my preaching may have
been a savor of death unto death to some, yet I trust it has been also a
savor of life unto l^fe to others; and therefore I earnestly hope that those
will not fail to remember me in their prayers. As for my own part, the many
unmerited kindnesses I have received from you, will not suffer me to forget
you: Out of the deep, therefore, I trust, shall my cry come unto God, and
whilst the winds and storms are blowing over me, unto the Lord will I make my
supplication for you. For it is but a little while, and we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, where I must give a strict account of the
doctrine I have preached, and you of your improvement under it. And Oh! that I
may never be called out as a swift witness against any of those, for whose
salvation I have sincerely, though too faintly, longed and labored!

It is true, I have been censured by some as acting out of sinister and selfish
views; but it is a small matter with me to be judged by man's judgment: I hope
my eye is single, but I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, ^ay that it may be more so! and (...) I may (...) with the increase of
grace in the knowledge and love of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And now, brethren, what shall I say more? I could wish to continue my
discourse much longer, for I can never fully express the desire of my soul
toward you! Finally, therefore, brethren, Whatsoever things are holy,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any hopes of our appearing to the comfort of each other at the awful
tribunal of Jesus Christ, think of the things that you have heard, and of those
which your pastors have declared, and will yet declare unto you: and continue
under their ministry to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; so
that, whether I shall see you any more, or whether it shall please God to bring
me back again at any time, I may always have the satisfaction of knowing that
your conversation is such as becomes the gospel of Christ.

I almost persuade myself, that I could wilhogly suffer all things, so that it
might any ways promote the salvation of your precious and immortal ^ouls: And I
beseech you, as my last request, obey them that have the rule over you in the
Lord, and be always ready to (...) on their ministry, as it ^ay our bounden
(...)* Think not that I desire to have myself exalted at the expense of
another's (...), but ^^ther think this -- Not to have (...) too much in
admiration, but esteem (...) ministers highly in love, as they justly deserve
for their work's sake.

And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance amongst all them that are
sanctified. May God reward you for all your works of faith, and labors of love,
and make you to abound more and more in every good word and work toward all
men. May he truly convert all that have been convinced, and awaken all that are
dead in trespasses and sins? May he confirm all that are wavering! And may you
all go on from one degree of grace unto another, till you arrive unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, and thereby be made meet to
stand before that God, in whose presence is the fullness of joy, at whose right
hand there are pleasures for ever more! -- AMEN! AMEN!

FINIS.

