FIFTEEN SERMONS PREACHED ON VARIOUS IMPORTANT SUBJECTS,

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. LATE OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, OXFORD.

CAREFULLY CORRECTED AND REVISED ACCORDING TO THE BEST LONDON EDITION.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A SERMON, ON THE CHARACTER, PREACHING, etc. OF THE REV.
Mr. WHITEFIELD.

BY JOSEPH SMITH, V.D.M.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed by MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118, Market-Street, 1794.

CONTENTS.
A Sermon, on the Character, Preaching, etc. of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield. By
Joseph Smith. V.D.M. Job xxxii. 17. I said, I will answer also my part, I also
will show mine opinion. 11 SERMON. I. The Lord our Righteousness. Jer. xxiii. 6.
The Lord our righteousness. 31 SERMON. II. The Seed of the Woman, and Seed of the
Serpent. Genesis iii. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. 54 SERMON. III. Persecution (...) Christian's Lot. 2 Timothy iii. (...).
Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 78
SERMON. IV. Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac. Genesis xxii. 12. And he said, Lay
not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; for now I know
that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son
from me. 98 SERMON. V. Readiness Conversion. Acts ix. 22. But Saul increased the
more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that
this is very Christ. 117 SERMON. VI. Christ, the Believer's Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Cor. i. 30. But of him are ye
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 141 SERMON. VII. The Pharisee and Publican. Luke
xviii. 14. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than
the other: for every one that exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted. 161 SERMON. VIII. The Holy Spirit convincing
the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. John xvi. 8. And ^hen he
is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness and of
judgment. 179 SERMON. IX. The Conversion of Zaccheus. Luke xix. 9, 10. And Jesus
said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house; forasmuch as he also
is the son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost. 199 SERMON. X. The Power of Christ's Resurrection. Philip. iii.
10. That I may know him and the power of his Resurrection. 210 SERMON. XI. The
indwelling of the Spirit, the common Privilege of all Believers. John vii. 37,
38, 39. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes on
me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive. 230 SERMON. XII. The eternity of Hell Torments. Matthew. xxv. 46. These
shall go away into everlasting punishment. 249 SERMON. XIII. The great Duty of
Family Religion. Joshua xxiv. 15. As for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord. 263 SERMON. XIV. The Method of Grace. Jer. vi. 14. They have healed also
the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, peace, peace, when
there is no peace. 280 SERMON. XV. The wise and foolish Virgins. Matthew xxv 13.
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the (...) hour in which the Son of man
come^^. 302
THE CHARACTER, PREACHING, etc. OF THE REVEREND Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD,
Impartially represented and supported, in a SERMON, preached in Charleston,
South Carolina, March 26th, Anno Domini, 1740, by JOSEPH SMITH, V. D. M. With a
Preface by the Rev. Dr. COLMAN, and Mr. COOPER, of Boston, New England.
TO THE READER.
THE following discourse was enclosed to us by our dear brother, the worthy
author of it; and we have read it with high pleasure and satisfaction. The
design is sufficiently intimated in the title page. It is indeed a sermon of an
extraordinary nature. To give from the pulpit, the personal and ministerial
character of a living preacher is very unusual, (...), perhaps altogether new.
But so is the occasion -- And the discourse must be looked upon to be
apologetical rather (...) encomiastic. The manifest design is to support the
cause by vindicating the man; not a private and party cause; but that of
primitive piety, and Catholic Christianity; the cause of Christ and truth, if
the peculiar doctrines of the gospel, the asserting and clearing whereof, was
the glory of the Reformation, may be so called? A cause this, in which zeal is
certainly a virtue.

As to the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, the person referred to, and named, he is the
wonder of the age; and no man more employs the pens, and fills up the
conversation of people, than he does at this day: none more admired and
applauded by some, contemned and reproached by others. The common lot of the
most excellent men the world has ever had to show!

While so many others are speaking and publishing their sentiments concerning
him with all freedom, Mr. Smith thought himself not precluded. He has had as
much opportunity as most, to inform himself concerning Mr. Whitefield's
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, charity, long-suffering, patience,
persecutions, and afflictions which have come unto him: and what he has seen
and heard, that declares he unto us: and we receive his testimony, because we
know him to be a gentleman of good sense and strict veracity; and also free
from enthusiastic impressions, unless serious religion and experimental piety
are so called, as we have melancholy occasion to observe they often are. There
appear to us plain marks of sincerity and impartiality in the following
account. And the same things have been reported to us by our Reverend brethren,
of the like character, whom we know and correspond with, in places where Mr.
Whitefield has visited and preached in.

And as to his thoughts respecting the views of providence in raising up men of
this stamp and spirit in our day, he expresses them with great modesty and
caution, and we cannot but apprehend they are countenanced from scripture,
reason, and observation.

When God is about to carry on salvation-work with any remarkable success, he
will raise up suitable instruments to work by. He will form and spirit men for
great and extraordinary undertakings when he has any great and extraordinary
purposes to serve.

Thus when God's time for the great and good work of building the second temple
was come, Joshua and others were animated to undertake it; and though they were
men wondered at, for the warmth of their zeal and the boldness of their
enterprise; that in the face of so many opposers and difficulties they should
undertake to rebuild the holy city and the temple; yet they were raised above
all discouragements, and stood firm against all opposition, being fortified
with a special promise of the Messiah, in whose strength and by whose influence
they should be successfully carried on in their work. Hear now, O Joshua the
high priest, Thou and thy fellows that sit before thee; for they are men
wondered at: for I will bring forth my servant the branch. Behold, the stone
that I have laid before Joshua: Upon one stone shall be seven eyes. I will
engrave the engraving thereof, says the Lord of hosts; and I will remove the
iniquity of that land in one day. Zech. ii. 8, 9.

So when the gospel church was to be set up in the world, and the Gentile
nations to be converted to the knowledge and faith of Jesus, a dozen poor
illiterate fishermen were endued with power from on high; and sent forth to
open men's eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God. And in them was fulfilled that which is written, Psalm viii.
(...). Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies; that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

And when the church was overspread with Popish darkness, superstition, and
idolatry, and the Romish tyranny was at its very height In the 16th century.
, it pleased God to enlighten some ecclesiastics gradually in the knowledge of
his truth, and then animate and assist them to lay open the errors and
corruptions of Popery, and boldly to assert and maintain the pure truths of the
gospel. Of this number were Zuinglius in Switzerland, and Luther in Germany;
names that will be had in everlasting remembrance in the records of the church.

The resolute opposition that was made against them, and the contempt that was
poured upon them, instead of cooling, inflamed their courage. The further
search they made into the depth of those corruptions that had overspread the
church, the more light still broke in upon them. They found its doctrines
poisoned with heresy, and its worship corrupted with superstition and idolatry;
and Christianity grown very like to Paganism. Under this conviction they loudly
called upon all that had any concern for their souls to go out of Babylon, as
they would not be partakers of her plagues. And multitudes of people were
influenced by their preaching and writings, to renounce the Romish doctrines
and superstition; and many of the princes of Europe were inclined to favor and
fall in with the Reformation.

As for Luther in particular, he was a wondrous man, and the almighty power of
God was eminently manifested in him. When he first appeared, What could be
expected from a poor friar, creeping out of a cloister? He was advised by his
friends to get into his cell again, and to ply his prayers, and not venture
upon so hazardous an undertaking, as to preach against the Pope, or attempt so
impossible a work as the reformation. But not by might, nor power but by my
Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. -- This single inconsiderable man was more
than a match for the powers of Rome, and was instrumental to produce one of the
greatest changes the world has ever had to marvel at.

And when it pleases God to renew the face of religion; when primitive
Christianity, and the power of godliness, shall be revived in the reforming
churches; when the professors of the gospel shall be recovered from the false
principles they have embraced, raised above those dead formalities they have so
long rested in, and awakened out of that lethargy they are fallen into; when
these expected times of reformation shall come on, is it not reasonable to
suppose that God will raise up those to effect it, whom he will furnish with a
good measure of the primitive apostolic spirit; whose hearts shall be inflamed
with a burning zeal for the honor of the Redeemer, and love to the souls of
men; and who shall therefore be willing to deny themselves in these things
(...) are dear to the most; shall not scruple to go out of the common road to
spread the triumphs of the gospel, and fetch in souls to Jesus Christ; and will
not be discouraged by any opposition they may meet with? Considering the
present state of things in the Christian world, how can we expect any great
change for the better, but in a way that shall be extraordinary.

And if there is any appearance of such a work at any time, or in any place,
surely we should take care not to slight and undervalue it; much less should we
reproach and censure it, or those who are used as instruments in it, so far as
it seems to be from heaven, and further it with our prayers, as those who are
waiting for the kingdom of God.

We would therefore bespeak the prayers of the faithful in Christ Jesus, into
whose hands these papers may come, both for our dear brother and the author of
this discourse; who is with great zeal contending for some important points of
the faith once delivered unto the saints, against some who openly oppose them,
and laboring to promote practical godliness, in the place where divine
providence has appointed his present station; that he may be assisted and
succeeded in all his faithful services for the Redeemer's kingdom; and also for
the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, that he may, (as he has well expressed himself in some
of his letters to us) be kept humble and dependent on our dear Lord Jesus; be
preserved in his travels, strengthened to his uncommon labors, and fortified
against all opposition: that Satan, (who cannot but have a peculiar enmity at
those who so set themselves against his kingdom) may never get advantage of
him, to the blemish or hindrance of the great and good work which we hope is
begun and going on; that God will cause him always to triumph in Christ, while
he makes manifest the favor of his knowledge by him in every place, and uses
him as an instrument to bring back many wandering sheep to the Shepherd and
Bishop of their souls; and very particularly that his purposed coming to us,
may be with as full a blessing of the gospel of Christ as other places have
experienced, and much more abundant by the will and grace of our God!

Boston, N. E. June 7, 1749. BENJAMIN COLMAN. WILLIAM COOPER.


THE CHARACTER, PREACHING, etc OF THE REVEREND Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD,
IMPARTIALLY REPRESENTED AND SUPPORTED.
JOB xxxii. 17. I said, I will answer also my part, I also will show my
opinion.
MY design from this text, is to show my impartial opinion of that Son of
Thunder, who has lately graced and warmed this desk; and would have been an
ornament, I think, ^o the best pulpit in the province. Happy shall I think
myself, if I can only clinch the nails, this great Master of Assemblies That
ministers of the gospel are called masters of Assemblies See Paul's Annotations
on Eccl. xii. 11.
has already fastened. -- Like Elihu, the gallant youth before us, I am now
full of matter; the spirit within me constrains me: my belly is as wine which
has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles, I will speak that I may be
refreshed. -- Others have freely spoken their sentiments of the wondrous man
before me; and I have heard the defaming as well as the applause of many. -- I
said therefore, I will answer also my part, I will also show my opinion -- In
this, I design no offense, nor would I give flattering titles to any man, lest
my Maker should take me away.

The scheme proposed is, I. To show my opinion of the doctrines he insisted
upon, and well established. II. To speak something of the manner of his
preaching. III. To offer my sentiments upon his personal character.


Lastly, To give my thoughts, what Providence seems ^o have in its view in
raising up men of this stamp in our day, almost every where spoken against, yet
crowded after and justly admired.

I. I shall give you my opinions of the doctrines he insisted upon among us.

To speak more generally, They were doctrines, I am of opinion agreeable to the
dictates of reason; evidently founded upon scripture; exactly correspondent
with the articles of the establishment; of great use and necessity in forming
the Christian life; which I had early imbibed from the best writers and
systems; from which I had never yet seen reason to recede, and which therefore
you are witnesses, I have not failed to introduce and inculcate, in the course
of my ministry among you.

To be more particular;

One of the doctrines, which he has hardly passed over in silence in any single
discourse, is that of original sin. A truth so manifest in scripture, that I am
almost of opinion, it is impossible any sincere, diligent and unprejudiced
inquirer should miss it: for it is written in sunbeams that a man may run and
read.

By original sin I mean nothing less than the imputation of Adam's first sin to
all his posterity by ordinary generation; which imputation is the resultance of
his being constituted to act for them in the extensive capacity of a legal
representative; the consequence of which is, that inherent corruption of (...)
and those sinful propensities, we are now born (...) into the world. -- As to
the point of imputation, it is a doctrine, it must be confessed, of more
intricacy; about which, it is therefore possible, a well meaning man may labor
under some scruples, while perhaps he allows of the depravity of human nature.
Though I must beg leave to express my surprise, that any person of judgment
should maintain this depravity, and not immediately discover its necessary
connection with the imputation, and how impossible it is to secure the justice
of God, without having recourse to it: for certainly the corruption of human
nature, so universal and inseparable, is one of the greatest punishments that
could be inflicted upon the species; and that it is inflicted, appears from
hence, that God made man at first upright. Now, if there be no previous
imputation, to lay a legal foundation for this punishment, then God has
inflicted an evident punishment upon a race of men, perfectly innocent, and
which had neither sinned personally, nor yet by imputation; and thus, while we
imagine we honor the justice of God by renouncing imputation, we in fact pour
the highest dishonor upon that sacred attribute -- This, I fear, is the grand
reason, why the adversaries of original sin labor so hard to explode the
depravity of nature; for should they once admit that, they are conscious they
must admit imputation too. I say, I fear this is the grand reason. -- How else
is it possible a man should question a truth, written in capitals upon the
moral world? A truth, we feel in every power of our soul! what we read upon our
own hearts; and is indeed stamped upon universal nature, within our horizon;
and which the more righteous any man is, the more he feels and groans under. --
We need not wonder then, our late incomparable preacher should insist upon
original sin, when we consider, not only in what an incontestible manner he
proved it, but of what vast importance it must be. For to give my opinion
freely; I cannot think, I can see, how the Christian scheme can be consistent
with itself, or supported with honor, without this basis. I look upon it, not
merely as a doctrine of the scriptures, the great fountain of truth, but a very
fundamental one; from which, I hope, God will suffer none of you to be enticed,
by any sophistry of the subtle disputers of this world, or charms of language.

But to proceed. --

Another doctrine we have lately had in the warmest language impressed upon us,
is that Pauline one of justification by faith alone. And here you will
remember, how the preacher vindicated himself from all suspicions of Antinomian
error, and opening a door to licentious manners: for while on the one hand, he
earnestly contended for our justification as the free gift of God, by faith
alone, in the blood of Christ, an article of faith delivered to the saints of
old; so on the other hand, he took special care to guard against the licentious
abuse of it, and would not make void the law, when he asserted that good works
were the necessary fruits and evidences of true faith; telling us plainly, and
with the clearest distinction, that a man was justified these three ways;
meritoriously by Christ, instrumentally by faith alone, declaratively by good
works. And believe me, my brethren, this is the true gospel of Jesus Christ,
and the writings of the apostles. For when Abraham believed God, was not it
(his faith) imputed to him for righteousness? And yet, was not Abraham our
father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar!
How shall we then reconcile this? Why very easily. The act of this (...)
justified him through Christ, and the offering Isaac justified that faith: the
first in the sight of God, the other in the sight of man. In justification
faith precedes, works follow after; for if works precede, or had any casual
influence into our justification, we might seem to have whereof to glory before
God. But here, it is the free gift of God, and boasting for ever excluded. God,
when he justifies a man, never finds, but makes him holy; without any previous
merit, of which there can be no shadow in an apostate creature. No; By grace ye
are saved, through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God.
And, could I live the most exact life ever man lived; could I even excel the
virtues of the pious preacher himself; could I produce as many good works as
the saints in all ages collected together; I would not for ten thousand worlds
put my justification upon them: I would only consider them, as bright and
pleasant evidences of the truth of my faith in Christ. Good works are valuable
things; God forbid we should lisp a word against them, in their proper place;
we plead for them, we press the practice of them, as incumbent upon all
Christians; but we cannot allow them any share in our justification before God.
They may prove we are justified; but they cannot justify us. No verily: Not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy, God saves us.
-- Hitherto then, our preacher is othodox in his doctrine, which both excludes
licentiousness, establishes the law, and exalts free grace; the evident design
and language of the gospel, and which, I am of opinion, every minister of
Christ should earnestly contend for: because the sinner must first see himself
naked, before he will come to Christ for his white raiment; the pure and fine
linen, which is the righteousness of the saints, and which I council you all to
buy of him.

Regeneration was another great doctrine, which the excellent man much insisted
upon; hardly a single sermon, but he mentioned it, sometimes more than twice;
and one, and perhaps the best of his discourses was ex professo upon this
subject. Nor can any man be surprised, that a minister of the New Testament
should so heartily espouse a principle, which our Lord himself began to speak,
and asserted as a fundamental point of Christianity, indispensibly requisite to
eternal life; and this with so much vehemence, and earnest repetition. Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again (from above) he cannot see
the kingdom of God. He assures us, We must be born of water and of the Spirit.
Our regeneration results in its necessity, from original sin. They that are
shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin, must be washed and cleansed. -- By
which is not meant the mere forms and rites of baptism; not the washing away
the filth of the flesh, as the corrupt Pharisees might wash their hands, and
the outside of the cup; but the answer of a good conscience toward God, purged
by the blood of Christ. For we can only be saved by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: the infusion of a new life, a
divine, heavenly and prolific principle. As we are by nature dead in trespasses
and sins, God must quicken us by his Spirit, and through that we must mortify
the deeds of the body, and crucify the flesh with its lusts and affections. For
until we know (until we feel the exceeding greatness of) the power of Christ's
resurrection, we have no part in him: we cannot enter into heaven; or if we
should, our first petition would be, to be dischaged as soon as possible.
Pleasure is the result of harmony; the nature must agree with the object: there
must be a great change upon the nature, to make us susceptive of the pleasures
of God's presence. --

Cavillers and scoffers, I know, there are enough, in these last days against
this doctrine. Some master of Israel may ask, How can these things be? Can a
man when he is old enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born? --
Who ever said he could? Or what would it avail, if he should? But I hope, there
may be such a thing as a spiritual birth, subsequent to the natural. -- May we
not be again begotten to a lively hope? May not God of his own will do it by
his word and Spirit? And may we no^ then become as little children and new born
babes -- Born not of blood nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the
flesh, but of God? Are we not told, in the most express language, -- that which
is born of the flesh, i^ flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is
spirit? Are not here two births, one natural, the other spiritual? -- I am
really astonished, any man should read his Bible and his own heart, and be a
stranger to this doctrine of the new birth; without which all our boasted
morality, and ethical virtues, however splendid and ^hetoricated upon, can
never adorn us in the sight of God, nor qualify us for his redeeming love.

True religion is an inward thing, a thing of the heart; it chiefly resides
there, and consists in a right disposition and sanctified temper of the will
and affections; and as we have been lately told, in righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. Which naturally introduces another doctrine, nearly
allied to this, and which was very strongly insisted on, viz.

The impressions or (which was the preacher's own phrase) inward feelings of
the Spirit. And here you remember how he guarded against the invidious censure,
of assuming the character of an apostle.

He renounced all pretensions to the extraordinary powers and signs of
apostleship, gifts of healing, speaking with tongues, the faith of miracles;
things peculiar to the age of inspiration, and extinct with them. He also
allowed these feelings of the Spirit were not in every person, or at all times,
in the same degree; and that though a full assurance were attainable, and what
every one should labor to attain, yet not of absolute necessity to the being
of a Christian. -- Only he asserted that we might feel the Spirit of God, in
his sanctifying and saving impressions, and witnessing with our own spirits.
And what is there in all this repugnant to reason! What is there in it, but
what is perfectly agreeable to scripture! How can we be led by the Spirit, or
have joy in the Holy Ghost, without some sensible perceptions of it? -- Can I
at any time feel my soul in sacred raptures, burning with the love of God, and
of Christ, and all my best passions alive? Can I feel a secret pleasure in the
word, ordinances, and communion of God? Can I taste the powers of the world to
come? Can I feel the threatenings of God impressed upon my conscience, or
promises of paradise working upon my hopes! Can I groan under the burden of my
corruptions, or exult in the liberty of spirit, I may sometimes have, in a calm
and retired hour, in the meditation of my pardon, and the contemplation of
heaven and immortality? I say, Can I have all these things in me, and do I feel
them upon my soul, and yet this doctrine of feeling the Spirit be burlesqued
and ridiculed, in an age of infidelity, and of men who love to speak evil of
the things which they know not? Indeed a sinful and adulterous generation may
seek after a sign. But what sign can we give them of things that must be known
by being felt? Or what ideas can I convey of light to the blind, and of harmony
to the deaf? -- Let God touch their hearts as he has done ours, and they shall
feel what we feel; and what I would not but feel, for millions of worlds. But
till then it is impossible in nature to represent it, in a full adequate light
to them; and they may as well ask for mathematical demonstrations in a point of
pure morality. This is a doctrine, I have been acquainted with these many
years; it is not new or surprising to me; you have heard me preach it scores of
times, though perhaps, clothed in other expressions, and the influences of the
Spirit, the impressions of grace. And however derided by some, who set up and
caress a system of rational religion, I hope to have always enthusiasm enough
to maintain that the Spirit of God may be felt. -- To conclude this head, all
the doctrines now mentioned, are primitive, protestant, puritanic ones; which
our good fathers, conformists and dissenters, have filled their writings with:
and as Dr. Watts has well observed, They fill heaven apace, for God was with
them.

Yet all that vast reverence, with which I heard these doctrines from the mouth
of our famous preacher, could not win my applause or approbation of some few
harsher epithets and expressions (you know what I mean) which dropped from his
lips. These in my opinion, may be pronounced failings; but such as often attend
a warm zeal for orthodoxy, in the points of the last importance; arise from a
principle of conscience, and are found interwoven with the brightest
characters: and he that has none, let him cast the first stone.

II. I shall next give you my opinion of the manner of his preaching.

And here I need not say, nor can my pen describe his action and gesture, in
all their strength and decencies. He is certainly a finished preacher, and a
great master of pulpit oratory and elocution, while a noble negligence ran
through his style. Yet his discourses were very extraordinary when we consider
how little they were premeditated, and how many of them he gave us, the little
time he was with us. -- Many, I trust, have felt, and will long feel the
impressions of his zeal and fire, the passion and flame of his expressions:
which were such, that I cannot think my public character of him South Carolina
Gazette, No. 107.
, in the least exceeds the bounds of truth and strict verity; only making that
allowance for figures of speech, which is always expected, upon extraordinary
occasions, and in the portraiture of great characters.

He appeared to me, in all his discourses, very deeply affected and impressed
in his own heart. How did that burn and boil within him, when he spoke of the
things he had made, touching the King? How was his tongue like the pen of a
ready writer? touching as with a coal from the altar! With what a flow of
words, what a ready profusion of language, did he speak to us upon the great
concerns of our souls? In what a flaming light did he set our eternity before
us? how earnestly did he press Christ upon us? How did he move our passions
with the constraining love of such a Redeemer? The awe, the silence, the
attention, which sat upon the face of so great an audience, was an argument,
how he could reign over all their powers. Many thought, He spoke as never man
spoke, before him. So charmed were people with his manner of address, that they
shut up their shops, forgot their secular business, and laid aside their
schemes for the world; and the oftener he preached, the keener edge he seemed
to put upon their desires of hearing (...) again! -- How awfully, with what
thunder and sound did he discharge the artillery of Heaven upon us? And yet,
how could he soften and melt even a soldier of Ulysses, with the love and mercy
of God! How close, strong, and pungent were his applications to the conscience;
mingling light and heat, pointing the arrows of the Almighty at the hearts of
sinners, while he poured in the balm upon the wounds of the contrite, and made
broken bones rejoice? Eternal themes, the tremendous solemnities of our
religion, were all alive upon his tongue! So methinks (if you will forgive the
figure) saint Paul would look and speak in a pulpit, and in some such manner, I
have been tempted to conceive of a seraph, were he sent down to preach among
us, and to tell us what things he had seen and heard above! -- How bold and
courageous did he look? He was no flatterer, would not suffer men to settle
upon their lees; did not prophecy smooth things nor sow pillows. He taught the
way of God in truth, and regarded not the person of men. The politest, the most
modish of our vices he struck at, the most fashionable entertainments;
regardless of every one's presence, but his in whose name he spoke, with this
authority -- He delivered his own soul, very sharply rebuked our balls and
midnight assemblies, that bane of all that is serious and religious: and I dare
warrant, if none would go to these diversions, till they have answered the
solemn questions he put to their consciences, our theater would soon sink and
perish.

You may be sure I was not displeased with this part of his conduct, when I
have so often myself mentioned these things, as of pernicious tendency to our
morals, religion, and prosperity. And who can blame a minister's freedom and
zeal; what hard measures, what cruel treatment would it be to censure our
plainness of speech; when our very commission requires us to lift up our voice
like a trumpet, to cry aloud, and not spare, to show people their
transgressions; and when the blood of your souls, the most insupportable thing
in the world, must be required at our hands, if we be afraid to warn! I am
sure, would people consider this, and that we cannot possibly propose any
temporal advantage to ourselves, by striking at the right eye, they would
applaud, and not censure our warmth and freedom. I must tell you, over and over
again, such things are dangerous to your souls; this cannot consist with your
Christian profession and baptism; they tend to devour the seeds and weaken all
the young springs of virtue, and to craze the most pious impressions.

But if the voice of ministers cannot be heard, at least let the circumstances
of our country, and the louder roarings of providence, awe and restrain us; for
sure I am it is now a time to mourn, and not to dance: and the scripture
severely threatens a people, that disregarded the operations of God's hands.

III. I now proceed to show my opinion of our preacher, in his personal
character and behavior.

Here I may take courage, and challenge his worst enemies to lay any thing to
the charge of his morals, or to arraign his sincerity, so visible in his whole
deportment.

While he preaches up faith alone, in our justification before God, yet he is
careful to maintain good works, and denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, to
live soberly, righteously, and godly. These things the grace of God teaches
us; and how much of this doctrine has he transcribed into his life? How rich
has he been in all good works? What an eminent pattern of piety toward God?
How holy and unblameable in all conversation and godliness? How seasoned, how
much to the use of edifying, all his discourses? How naturally does he turn
them to religion? How much is he given to meditation himself, and how does he
labor to excite it in others?

It is indisputable with me that he affects no party religion, nor sets himself
at the head of any: had this been his aim, no man living has had fairer
occasions offered; but he abhors the spirit, he endeavors to suppress it. He
is always careful to time his Sabbath discourses, so as not to interfere with
the stated hours of worship, in that church, of which he is a professed member,
and minister, and in the opinion of many people a very bright ornament;
because, as he told us, he would not tempt away hearers from their proper and
respective pastors. And is not this a noble and generous, a catholic and
Christian spirit! He is not bigoted to the modalities and lesser rites and
forms of religion, while zealous enough and very warm and jealous in all its
essentials, especially in the divine honors and godhead of his Savior. He
professes love to good men of every denomination, and told us, that the kingdom
of heaven consists not of meats and drinks. He appears to me a man full of the
Holy Ghost and of faith. Though his prayers, in this pulpit were all extempore,
yet how copious, how ardent, with what compass of thought? The spirit of grace
and supplication seemed to be poured out upon him in plenty, and to kindle and
animate his devotions. He prays in public, with that spirit, variety, and
fluency which could only be expected from a man, who was no stranger to the
sacred duty in private. -- He lives much by faith, and above the world:
despises preferments and riches; of which last, I am told, he has had great
offers in Europe -- His heart seems set upon doing good. He goes about his
great Master's work with diligence and application; and with such cheerfulness,
as would make one in love with a life of religion, which has so many inward
springs of the best comforts, and is not that gloomy, melancholy thing, which
prejudice and imagination make it. He is proof against reproach and invective.
When he is reviled, revileth not again, but prays heartily for all his enemies,
and that such as oppose the truth, may be converted to it. He professes himself
to lay down his life for Christ, and to spend and be spent in the service of
souls. -- Such a man has all imaginable claim to our highest love and honor. I
freely own he has taken my heart, and I feel his reproaches. -- God seems to be
with him of a truth; has set his seal upon him: his rod has budded, and he has
many to whom he can say, Ye are my epistle. Wherever he has preached he has
been thronged, and many have come to him pricked in their hearts, saying, What
shall we do to be saved! He has put a new face upon religion, my letters inform
me, in some populous cities and parts of our neighboring continent; given new
life to ministers and people; made sermons, once a drug, a vendible commodity
among them; evening and weekly lectures are set up, and always crowded with
persons of different persuasions; while he has put a damp upon their polite
diversions, which always dwindle as Christianity revives. Surely, no man could
do these things, I had almost said, these miracles, unless God were with him,
who gives the increase, even when Paul plants, and Apollos waters. Had
ecclesiastic preferments been his idol, fame and reputation his motive, as he
has taken a preposterous way to acqiure them, so I can never suffer myself to
think God would have owned him so visibly, or given him so many seals of his
ministry. Our Savior himself makes good fruits the general characteristic of
good ministers. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Either the fruits and
success of their ministry, the design and tendency of their doctrines, or the
fruits of the Spirit in their lives. And which of these have been wanting in
this extraordinary man? Who can object against the tendency of his doctrines?
And for success, his enemies know it to their own confusion. And who can say
his life is unfruitful, or that he has appeared like an immoral man? He renders
to all their due. While zealous for the things of God, he is a friend to
Caesar; a loyal subject to King George, heartily prays for him and his royal
house; " May it abide before God!" A prayer, to which, I doubt not* you are all
ready to say, Amen.

But to proceed with our character of the preacher, whom has he wronged or
defrauded? Whose ox or whose ass has he taken? Say, if any man has found
ought in his hands: so far from it, that he seems to live, not by bread alone,
but by the word and promise of God; without taking thought for the morrow, what
he shall eat, or drink, or put on.

And for charity, as it consists in compassion and acts of beneficence, we have
few men like minded. In this grand circle of practical religion, he seems to be
a second Job, as well as for patience; and deserves a good report of all men,
and of the truth itself. Had he been under any criminal influence of a
mercenary, covetous temper, had he collected money for himself, in his
journeying often, and itinerant preachings, under the pretext of doing it for
the poor, as he was slanderously reported, he had certainly a fair opportunity
to enrich himself. But we have seen a plain fact cannot be denied, that he cast
all into the treasury, and serves the table of the poor with it. -- Strolling
and vagabond orphans, poor and helpless, without father, without mother,
without purse, and without friend, he seeks out, picks up, and adopts into his
family: He is now building accommodations, and laying the best foundation for
their support and religious instruction, without any visible fund; encouraged
to go on in faith, from the shining example of the great professor in Germany,
who began a like pious work with almost nothing; and raised it to such
perfection, as is the wonder and astonishment of all that hear it. This is a
sacrifice well-pleasing to God: The loins of the poor will bless him, the
blessing of him that was ready to perish, will come upon him! -- He has
dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor; his righteousness ought to endure,
and be celebrated among us. After this, let none call him an uncharitable man:
for what brighter evidence of pure religion than this, to visit the fatherless
in their affliction.

And permit me here, to join in my thanks to you, and the other charitably
disposed Christian^, who have shown their bowels of mercy in the late very
large collection Six hundred pound^.
for the orphan-house in Georgia. This is an honor to our whole town. And,
believe me, you will never be a penny the poorer, for helping the poor; The^ we
have always with us, and insomuch as we have (...) it unto (...), we have done
it unto Christ, and cannot fail of a reward; at least the reflection we make
upon it, on our last bed, will give us more satisfaction, than what we
contribute to the support of balls and assemblies of music, to the pride and
luxuries of life; nor can it fail to occasion many thanksgivings unto God.

I now proceed, under the last head, to give my opinion, what views providence
may have in raising up men of this stamp, now among us.

And this I desire to do with all humility and modesty.

I pretend to no spirit of prophecy, and can only conjecture, and offer the
result of observation, reason, and the usual tendencies of things, corroborated
by the great promises scattered up and down in our Bibles, wherein glorious
things are spoken of thee, thou city of our God! The prophesies are usually too
dark and mystic to be fully understood: the seals of that book are seldom
broken, until the several periods of accomplishment, which makes time the best
and surest expositor. But certainly; if we can discern the face of the sky in
the morning, we might make some humble and faint conjectures at the times, and
seasons, which the Father keeps in his own power. Now we are none of (...)
ignorant, how far the primitive spirit of Christianity has sunk into a mere
form of godliness. Irreligion has been rushing in, even upon the Protestant
world like a flood: the dearest and most obvious doctrines of the Bible have
fallen into low contempt; the principles and systems of our good and pious
fathers have been more and more exploded. And now, behold! God seems to have
revived the ancient spirit and doctrines. He is raising up our young men, with
zeal and courage to stem the torrent. They have been in labor more abundant;
they have preached with such fire, assiduity, and success; such a solemn awe
have they struck upon their hearers; so unaccountably have they conquered the
prejudices of many persons; such deep convictions have their sermons produced;
so much have they roused and kindled the zeal of ministers and people; so
intrepidly do they push through all opposition, that my soul overflows with
joy, and my heart is too full to express my hopes. It looks as if some happy
period were opening, to bless the world with another reformation. Some great
things seem to be upon the anvil, some big prophecy at the birth: God give it
strength to bring forth! May he especially water the good seed his servant has
plentifully sown among us; may we remember how we have heard, and hold fast;
may we cherish conviction; be fixed and rooted in our Christian faith; not
rebel against the light, nor make shipwreck at last, by the various winds of
doctrine which are blowing upon us!

Thus have I answered for my part, and shown my opinion: I have done it in the
integrity of my heart; I have designed no offense; only supported the doctrines
and character of a preacher, which love and duty constrain me to honor and
defend. while I preclude no man from showing his opinion, who shall do it with
the same impartiality.

THE PREFACE.
THE following SERMONS, I think I may say, were given me by the Lord Jesus
Christ; and according to my present light, are agreeable to the form of sound
words delivered to us in the lively oracles of God. They contain the sum and
substance, I will not say word for word, of what was delivered from the pulpit;
for as I had no occasion in America, Scotland, and England, to preach upon the
same subjects, I was obliged, according to the freedom and assistance given me
from above, to enlarge, or make excursions, agreeable to the people's
circumstances amongst whom I was preaching the kingdom of God. I had no leisure
or freedom to commit any of them to writing, but during my last voyage from
America to England; nor do I expect to find leisure to write down any fresh
discourses, till it shall please God that I embark again. May the Spirit of
God, who delights out of the mouths of babes and sucklings to perfect praise,
bless them to every reader, and put it into their hearts to pray for their poor
unworthy servant in Jesus Christ,

GEORGE WHITEFIELD.

SERMON I.
The LORD our Righteousness.
JEREMIAH, xxiii. 6. The Lord our Righteousness.
WHOEVER is acquainted with the nature of mankind in general, or the propensity
of his own heart in particular, must acknowledge, that self-righteousness is
the last idol that is rooted out of the heart. -- Being once born under a
covenant of works, it is natural for us all to have recourse to a covenant of
works for our everlasting salvation. And we have contracted such a devilish
pride by our fall from God, that we would, if not wholly, yet in part at least,
glory in being the cause of our own salvation. We cry out against Popery, and
that very justly; but we are all papists, at least I am sure we are all
Arminians by nature; and therefore, no wonder so many natural men embrace that
scheme. It is true, we disclaim the doctrine of merit, are ashamed directly to
say we deserve any good at the hands of God; therefore as the apostle
excellently well observes, we go about, we fetch a circuit, to establish a
righteousness of our own, and, like the pharisees of old, will not wholly
submit to that righteousness, which is of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the sorest, though alas! the most common evil that was ever yet seen
under the sun. An evil, that in any age, especially in these dregs of time
wherein we live, cannot sufficiently be inveighed against. -- For as it is with
the people, so it is with the priests; and it is to be feared, even in those
places where once the truth, as it is in Jesus, was eminently preached, many
ministers are so sadly degenerated from their pious ancestors, that the
doctrines of grace, especially the personal, all-sufficient righteousness of
Jesus, is but too seldom, too slightly mentioned. Hence the love of many waxes
cold; and I have often thought, was it possible, that this single consideration
would be sufficient to raise our venerable forefathers again from their graves;
who would thunder in their ears their fatal error.

The righteousness of Jesus Christ is one of those great mysteries which the
angels desire to look into, and seems to be one of the first lessons that God
taught men after the fall. For what were the coats that God made to put on our
first parents, but types of the application of the merits or righteousness of
Jesus Christ to believer's hearts? We are told, that those coats were made of
ski^^ of beasts, and as beasts were not then food for men, we may fairly infer,
that those beasts were slai^ in sacrifice, in commemoration of the great
sacrifice Jesus Christ thereafter to be offered. And the skins of those beasts
thus slain, being put on Adam and Eve, they were thereby taught how their
nakedness was to be covered with the righteousness of the Lamb of God.

This is it which is meant, when we are told Abraham believed on the Lord, and
it was counted to him for righteousness. In short, this is it of which both the
law and all the prophets have spoken, especially Jeremiah in the words of the
text -- The Lord (...) righteousness. -- I propose through divine grace, I. To
consider who we are to understand by the word Lord. II. How the Lord is man's
righteousness. III. I will consider some of the chief objections that are
generally urged against this doctrine. IV. I shall show some very ill
consequences that flow naturally from denying this doctrine. V. Shall conclude
with an exhortation to all to come to Christ by faith, that they may be enabled
to say with the prophet in the text, The Lord our righteousness.


I. I am to consider who we are to understand by the word Lord -- The Lord our
Righteousness.

And if any Arians or Socinians are drawn by curiosity to hear what the babbler
has to say, let them be ashamed of denying the divinity of that Lord that has
bought poor sinners with his precious blood -- For the person mentioned in the
text under the character of Lord is Jesus Christ. -- Behold, ver. 5. the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, a King
shall reign and (...), shall execute judgment and justice in the (...) his
days, ver. 6. Judah shall be saved, and (...) shall dwell safely: and this is
his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. -- By the
righteous Branch, all agree that we are to understand Jesus Christ. -- He it is
that is called the Lord in our text. If so, if there were no other text in the
Bible to prove the divinity of Christ, that is sufficient. For if the word Lord
may properly belong to Jesus Christ, he must be God. For as you have it in the
margins of your Bibles, the word Lord is in the original Jehovah, which is the
essential title of God himself. Come then, ye Arians, kiss the Son of God, bow
down before him, and honor him, even as you honor the Father. Learn of the
angels those morning-stars, and worship him as truly God. -- For otherwise you
are as much idolaters, as those that worship the Virgin Mary. And as for you
Socinians, who say Christ was a mere man, and yet profess that he was your
Savior, according to your own principles, you are accursed. For, if Christ be
a mere man, then he is only an arm of flesh -- And it is written, Cursed is he
that trusts on an arm of flesh. -- But I would hope there are no such
monsters here. At least, that after these considerations, they would be ashamed
of broaching such monstrous absurdities any more. -- For it is plain, that by
the word Lord, we are to understand the Lord Jesus Christ, who here takes to
himself the title of Jehovah, and therefore must be very God, of very God, or,
as the apostle devoutly expresses it, God blessed for ever more.

II. How the Lord is to be man's righteousness comes next to be considered.

And that is, in one word, by imputation. -- For it pleased God, after he had
made all things by the word of his power, to create man after his own image.
And so infinite was the condescension of the high and lofty One, who inhabiteth
eternity, that although he might have insisted on the everlasting obedience of
him and his posterity, yet he was pleased to oblige himself, by a covenant or
agreement made with his own creautures, upon condition of an unsinning
obedience, to give them immortality and eternal life. -- For when it is said,
the day thou entest thereof, thou shall surely die, we may fairly infer, so
long as he continued obedient, and did not eat thereof, he should surely live.
-- The 3d of Genesis gives us a full, but mournful account, how our first
parents broke this covenant, and thereby stood in need of a better
righteousness than their own, in order to procure their future acceptance with
God -- For what must they do? They were as much under a covenant of works as
ever. And, though after their disobedience they were without strength, yet they
were obliged not only to do, but continue to do all things, and that too in the
most perfect manner which the Lord had required of them. -- And not only so,
but to make satisfaction to God's infinitely offended justice, for the breach
they had already been guilty of -- Here then opens the amazing scene of divine
philanthropy -- I mean, God's love to man -- For behold, what man could not do,
Jesus Christ, the Son of his Father's love, undertakes to do for him. And that
God might be just in justifying the ungodly, though he was in the form of God,
and therefore thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he took upon him
the form of a servant, even human nature -- In that nature he obeyed, and
thereby fulfilled the whole moral l^w in our stead. -- And also died a painful
(...) the cross, and thereby became a curse for, or (...) of, those whom the
Father had given him. A God, he (...) at the same time that he obeyed, and
suffered a^ (...); and being God and man, in one person, wrought out a full,
perfect, and sufficient righteousness for all to whom it was to be imputed.

Here then we see the meaning of the word righteousness. It implies the active,
as well as passive obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ. We generally, when
talking of the merits of Christ, only mention the latter, viz. -- his death;
whereas the former, viz. his life and active obedience, is equally necessary.
Christ is not such a Savior as becomes us, unless we join both together. --
Christ not only died, but lived; not only suffered, but obeyed, for or instead
of poor sinners. And both these jointly make up that complete righteousness
which is to be imputed to us, as the disobedience of our first parents was made
ours by imputation. In this sense, and no other, are we to understand that
parallel which St. Paul draws in the 5th of the Romans, between the first and
second Adam. This is what he elsewhere terms our being made the righteousness
of God in him. This is the sense wherein the prophet would have us to
understand the words of the text; therefore Jer. xxxiii. verse 16. She i. e.
the church itself shall be called (having this righteousness imputed to her)
the Lord our righteousness. -- A passage, I think, worthy of the profoundest
meditation of all the sons and daughters of Abraham.

Many are the objections which the proud hearts of fallen men are continually
urging against this wholesome, this divine, this soul saving doctrine. I come
now, in the third place, to answer some few of those which I think the most
considerable.

And first, (...) say, because they would appear friends to morality, That the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness is destructive of good works, and leads to
licentiousness.

And who pray are the persons, that generally urge this objection? Are they men
full of faith, and men really concerned for good works? No, whatever few
exceptions there may be, if there be any at all, it is notorious, they are
generally men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. The best title
I can give them is, that of profane moralists or moralists falsely so called.
For I appeal to the experience of the present, as well as past ages, if
iniquity did and does not most abound where the doctrine of Christ's whole
personal righteousness is most cried down, and most seldom mentioned, --
Arminian being antichristian principles, always did and always will lead to
antichristian practices. And never was there a reformation brought about in the
church but by the preaching the doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- This,
as that man of God Luther calls it, is Articulus stantis aut cadentis
Ecclesias^^, the article by which the church stands or falls. -- And though the
preachers of this doctrine are generally branded by those on the other side
with the opprobious names of antinomians, deceivers, and what not; yet I
believe, if the truth of the doctrine on both sides was to be judged of by the
lives of the preachers and professors of it, those on our side the question
would have the advantage every way.

It is true, this, as well as every other doctrine of grace may be abused. And
perhaps the unchristian walk of some, who have talked of Christ's imputed
righteousness, justification by faith, and the like, and yet never felt it
imputed to their own souls, has given the enemies of the Lord thus cause to
blaspheme. But this is a very unsafe, as well as very unfair way of arguing --
The only question should be, Whether or not this doctrine of an imputed
righteousness does in itself cut off the occasion of good works, or lead to
licentiousness? No, in no wise. It excludes works indeed from being any cause
of our justification in the sight of God. -- But it requires good works as a
proof of our having this righteousness imputed (...) us, and as a declarative
evidence of our justification in the sight of men. And then how can the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness be a doctrine leading to licentiousness.

It is all calumny. -- St. Paul introduces an infidel making this objection in
his epistle to the Romans -- And none but infidels, that never felt the power
of Christ's resurrection upon their souls, will urge it over again -- And
therefore, notwithstanding this objection, with the prophet in the text, we may
boldly say, The Lord our Righteousness.

But Satan, (and no wonder that his servants imitate (...)) often transforms
himself into an angel of light. And therefore (such perverse things will
infidelity and Arminianism make men speak) in order to dress their objections
in the best colors, some urge, that our Savior preached no such doctrine --
that in his sermon upon the mount, he mentions only morality. and consequently
the doctrine of an imputed righteousness falls wholly to the ground.

But surely the men who urge this objection, either never read, or never
understood our blessed Lord's discourse, wherein the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness is so plainly taught, that he that runs, if he has eyes that see,
may read.

Indeed our Lord does recommend morality and good works (as all faithful
ministers will do) and clears the moral law from the many corrupt glosses put
upon it by the letter-learned Pharisees -- But then, before he comes to this,
it is remarkable, he talks of inward piety, such as poverty of spirit,
meekness, holy mourning, purity of heart, -- especially hungering and thirsting
after righteousness, and then recommends good works, as an evidence of our
having his righteousness imputed to us, and these graces and divine tempers
wrought in our hearts -- Let your light, (that is, the divine light I before
have been mentioning) shine before men, in a holy life, that they seeing your
good works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven. -- And then immediately
adds, Think not that I am come to destroy the moral law -- I came not to
destroy, to take away the force of it as a rule of life, but to fulfill, to obey
it in its whole latitude, and give the complete sense of it. -- And then he
goes on to show, how exceeding broad the moral law is. So that our Lord,
instead of disannulling an imputed righteousness in his sermon upon the mount,
not only confirms it, but also answers the foregoing objection urged against
it, by making good works a proof and evidence of its being imputed to our souls
-- He therefore that has ears to hear, let him hear what the prophet says in
the words of the text -- The Lord our Righteousness.

But as Satan not only quoted scripture, but also backed one temptation with it
after another, when he attacked Christ's person in the wilderness; so his
children generally take the same method in treating his doctrine. And therefore
they urge another objection against the doctrine of an imputed righteousness
from the example of the young man in the gospel.

We may state it thus: -- The evangelist, St. Mark, say they, chap. x. mentions
a young man that came to Christ, running and asking him what he should do to
inherit eternal life? Christ, say they, referred him to the commandments, to
know what he must do to inherit eternal life. It is plain therefore, works were
to be partly, at least, the cause of his justification: and consequently the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness is unscriptural. -- This is the objection
in all its full strength; and little strength in all its fullness. -- For, was I
to prove the necessity of an imputed righteousness, I scarce know how I could
bring a better instance to make it good.

Let us take a more intimate view of this young man, and our Lord's behavior
toward him, Mark x. 17. the evangelist tells us, That when Christ was gone
forth into the way, there came one running (it should seem it was some
nobleman, a rarity indeed, to see such a one running to Christ!) and not only
so, but he kneeled to him (though perhaps many of his rank now scarce know the
time when they kneeled to Christ) and asked him, saying, Good master, what
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? -- Then Jesus, to see whether or
not he believed him to be what he really was, truly and properly God, said unto
him; Why call thou me good? There is none good but one, that is God. -- And
that he might directly answer his question; says he, Thou know the
commandments: Do not commit adultery, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not,
Honor thy father and thy mother. This, I say, was a direct answer to his
question; namely, that eternal life was not to be attained by his doings. --
For our Lord, by referring him to the commandments, did not (as the objectors
insinuate) in the least hint, that his morality would recommend him to the
favor and mercy of God. -- But he intended thereby to make the law his
schoolmaster to bring him to himself; that the young man, seeing how he had
broken every one of these commandments, might thereby be convinced of the
insufficiency of his own, and consequently of the absolute necessity of looking
out for a better righteousness, whereon he might depend for eternal life.

This was what our Lord designed. -- The young man being self-righteous, and
willing to justify himself, said, All these have I observed from my youth --
But had he known himself, he would have confessed, All these have I broken from
my youth. -- For supposing he had not actually committed adultery, had he never
lusted after a woman in his heart? What, if he had not really killed another;
had he never been angry without a cause, or spoken unadvisedly with his lips?
If so, by breaking one of the least commandments in the least degree, he became
liable to the curse of God: For, cursed is he, (says the law) that continues
not to do all things that are written in this book. -- And therefore, as I
observed before, our Lord was so far from speaking against, that he treated the
young man in that manner on purpose to convince him of the necessity of an
imputed righteousness.

But perhaps they will reply, it is said, Jesus beholding him, loved him. And
what then? This he might do with a human love, and at the same time this young
man have no interest in his blood. -- Thus Christ is said to wonder, -- to weep
over Jerusalem, and say -- Oh that thou had KNOWN, etc. But such like
passages are to be referred only to his human nature. And there is a great deal
of difference between the love wherewith Christ loved this young man, and that
wherewith he loved Mary, Lazarus, and their sister Martha. -- To illustrate
this by a comparison. -- A minister of the Lord Jesus Christ, seeing many
amiable dispositions, such as a readiness to hear the word, a decent behavior
at public worship, a life outwardly spotless in many, cannot but so far love
them. But then there is much difference betwixt that love which a minister
feels for such, and that divine love, that union and sympathy of soul, which he
feels for those that he is satisfied are really born again of God. -- Apply
this to our Lord's case, as a saint illustration of it -- Consider what has
been said upon the young man's case in general, and then, if before you were
fond of this objection, instead of triumphing like him, you will go sorrowful
away. -- Our Savior's reply to him more and more convinces us of the truth of
the prophet's assertion in the text, viz. That the Lord is our Righteousness.

But there is a fourth and grand objection yet behind, and that is taken from
the 25th chapter of St. Matthew, where our Lord is described, as rewarding
people with eternal life, because they fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and
such like. -- Their works therefore were a cause of their justification;
consequently, the doctrine of imputed righteousness is not agreeable to
scripture.

This, I confess, is the most plausible objection that is brought against the
doctrine insisted on from the text. And in order that we may answer it in as
clear and as brief a manner as may be, we confess, with the article of the
church of England, That albeit good works do not justify us, yet they will
follow after justification, as fruits of it; and though they can claim no reward
in themselves, yet forasmuch as they spring from faith in Christ, and a renewed
soul, they shall receive a reward of grace, though not of debt; and
consequently, the more we abound in such good works, the greater will be our
reward when Jesus Christ shall come to judgment.

Take these considerations, along with us, and they will help us much to answer
the objection now before us. -- For thus St. Matthew -- Then shall the King say
to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world -- For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink. I was a
stranger, and ye took me in. Naked, and ye clothed me. I was sick, and ye
visited me. I was in prison, and ye came unto me. I will therefore reward you,
because you have done these things out of love to me, and hereby have evidenced
yourselves to be my true disciples. -- And that the people did not depend on
these good actions for their justification in the sight of God is evident. For
when saw we thee an hungered, say they, and fed thee? Or thirsty, and gave thee
drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? Or naked, and clothed
thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison and came unto thee? -- Language
and questions quite improper for persons relying on their own righteousness for
acceptance and acquittance in the sight of God.

But then they reply against this. -- In the latter part of the chapter, say
they, it is plain that Jesus Christ rejects and damns the others for not doing
these things. And therefore, if he damns those for not doing, he save^ those
for doing; and consequently the doctrine of an imputed righteousness is good
for nothing.

But that is no consequence at all -- For God may justly damn any man for
omitting the least duty of the moral law, and yet in himself is not obliged to
give any one any reward, supposing he has done all that he can. We are
unprofitable servants, we have done not near so much as it was our duty to do,
must be the language of the most holy souls living; and therefore from or in
ourselves, cannot be justified in the sight of God -- This was the frame of the
devout souls just now referred to -- Sensible of this, they were so far from
depending on their works for justification in the sight of God, that they were
filled, as it were with a holy blushing, to think our Lord should condescend to
mention, much more to reward them for their poor works of faith and labors of
love. I am persuaded their hearts would rise with a holy indignation against
those who urge this passage as an objection against the assertion of the
prophet in the words of the text, that the Lord is our Righteousness.

Thus I think we have fairly answered these grand objections, which are
generally urged against the doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- Was I to
stop here, I think I might say, we are made more than conquerors, through him
that loved us -- But there is a way of arguing which I have always admired,
because I have thought always very convincing, viz. by showing the absurdities
that will follow from denying any particular proposition in dispute.

IV. This is the next thing that was proposed. And never did greater or more
absurdities flow from the denying any doctrine, than will flow from denying the
doctrine of Christ's imputed righteousness.

And first, if we deny this doctrine, we turn the truth. I mean the word of
God, as much as we can into a lie, and utterly subvert all those places of
scripture, which say, That we are saved by grace; that it is not of works, lest
any man should boast. -- That salvation is God's free gift -- and that, He that
glories, must glory only in the Lord. For if the whole personal righteousness
of Jesus Christ be not the sole cause of my acceptance with God, if any work
done by or foreseen in me, was in the least to be joined with it, or looked
upon by God as an inducing impulsive cause of acquitting my soul from guilt,
then I have somewhat whereof I may glory in myself. Now boasting is excluded in
the great work of our redemption. But that cannot be, if we are enemies to the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- It would be endless to enumerate how
many texts of scripture must be false, if this doctrine be not true. Let it
suffice to affirm in the general, that if we deny an imputed righteousness, we
may as well deny a divine revelation all at once. -- For it is the alpha and
omega, the beginning and the end of the book of God. -- We must either
disbelieve that, or believe what the prophet has spoken in the text, That the
Lord is our Righteousness.

But farther. -- I observed at the beginning of this discourse, that we are all
Arminians and Papists by nature; -- for, as one observes, Arminianism is the
back way to Popery. And here I venture further to affirm, That if we deny the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness, whatever we may style ourselves, we are
really Papists in our hearts, and deserve no other title from men.

Sirs, What think you? -- Suppose I was to come and tell you, that you must
intercede with saints, for them to intercede with God for you, -- would you not
then say, I was justly reputed a Popish missionary by some, and deservedly
thrust out of the synagogues by others? -- I suppose you would. And why?
Because you would say, the intercession of Jesus Christ was sufficient of
itself, without the intercession of saints; and that it was blasphemous to join
theirs with his, as though it was not sufficient.

Suppose I went a little more round about, and told you, that the death of
Christ was not sufficient, without our death being added to it; that you must
die as well as Christ, join your death with his, and then it would be
sufficient. -- Might you not then, with a holy indignation, throw dust in the
air, and justly call me a setter forth of strange doctrines? And now then, if
it be not only absurd, but blasphemous, to join the intercession of saints with
the intercession of Christ, as though his intercession was not sufficient; or
our death with the death of Christ, as though his death was not sufficient;
judge ye, if it be not equally absurd, equally blasphemous, to join our
obedience, either wholly or in part with the obedience of Christ, as if that
was not sufficient. And if so, what absurdities will follow the denying that
the Lord, both as to his active and passive obedience, is our righteousness?

One more absurdity I shall mention, that will follow from the denying this
doctrine, and I have done.

I remember a story of a certain prelate, who, after many arguments in vain
urged to convince the Earl of Rochester of the invisible realities of another
world, took his leave of his lordship with some such words as these: -- Well,
my lord, says he, if there be no hell, I am safe; -- but, if there should be
such a thing, my lord, as hell, what will become of you? I apply this to tho^.
that oppose the doctrine now insisted on. If there be no such thing as the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness, those (...) hold it, and bring forth
fruit unto holiness, are safe. But if there be such a thing, (as there
certainly is) what will become of you that deny it? It is no difficult matter
to determine. -- Your portion must be in the lake of fire and brimestone for
ever and ever; since you will rely upon your works, by your works you shall be
judged. -- They shall be weighed in the balance of the sanctuary. -- They will
be found wanting. -- By your works therefore shall you be condemned; and you,
being out of Christ, shall find God to your poor wretched souls a consuming
fire.

The great Stoddard of Northampton in New England, has therefore well entitled
a book which he wrote (and which I would take this opportunity to recommend)
"The safety of appearing in the righteousness of Christ." -- For why should I
lean upon a broken reed, when I can have the rock of ages to stand upon, that
never can be moved?

And now before I come to a more particular application, give me leave, in the
apostle's language triumphantly to cry out, Where is the scribe? where the
disputer? where is the reasoning infidel of this generation? Can any thing
appear more reasonable, even according to your own way of arguing, than the
doctrine here laid down? Have you not felt a convincing power go along with the
word? Why then will you not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that so he may
become the Lord your righteousness.

But it is time for me to come a little closer to your consciences.

Brethren, though some may be offended at this doctrine, and may account at
foolishness; yet to many of you, I doubt not but it is precious, it being
agreeable to the form of sound words, which from your infancy has been
delivered to you: and coming from a quarter, you would least have expected, may
be received with more pleasure and satisfaction. But give me leave to ask you
one question, Can you say, the Lord our righteousness? -- I say, the Lord our
righteousness. For entertaining this doctrine in your heads, without receiving
the Lord Jesus Christ savingly by a lively faith into your hearts, will but
increase your damnation. -- As I have often told you, so I tell you again, an
unapplied Christ, is no Christ at all. Can you then with believing Thomas, cry
out, My Lord, and my God! Is Christ your sanctification, as well as your
outward righteousness? For the word righteousness in the text, not only implies
Christ's personal righteousness imputed to us, but also holiness of heart
wrought in us. -- These two God has joined together -- He never did, He never
does, He never will put them asunder. -- If you are justified by the BLOOD, you
are also sanctified by the Spirit of the Lord. Can you then in this sense say,
the Lord our righteousness? Were you never made to abhor yourselves for your
actual and original sins, and to loathe your own righteousness* (or as the
prophet beautifully expresses it, your righteousnesses) as filthy rags? Were
you never made to see and admire the all sufficiency of Christ's righteousness,
and excited by the spirit of God to hunger and thirst after it? Could you ever
say, my soul is athirst for Christ, yea, even for the righteousness of Christ?
Oh, when shall I come to appear before the presence of my God in the
righteousness of Christ! Oh, nothing but Christ! nothing but Christ? Give me
Christ, O God, and I am satisfied! My soul shall praise thee for ever. Was
this, I say, ever the language of your hearts? -- And after these inward
conflicts, were you ever enabled to reach out the arm of faith, and embrace the
blessed Jesus in your souls, so that you could say, My beloved is mine, and I
am his? If so, fear not, whoever you are. Hail, all hail, you happy souls! The
Lord, the Lord Christ, the everlasting God is your righteousness. -- Christ has
justified you: who is he that condemns you? Christ has died for you, nay
rather is risen again, and ever lives to make intercession for you. -- Being
now justified by his grace, you have peace with God, and shall, ere long, be
with Jesus in glory, reaping everlasting and unspeakable redemption both in
body and soul. -- For there is no condemnation to those that are really in
Christ Jesus. Whether Paul or Apollos, or life or death, all is yours, if you
are Christ's for Christ is God's -- Oh, my brethren, my heart is enlarged
toward you! -- Oh, think on the love of Christ in dying for you! -- If the
Lord be your righteousness, let the righteousness of your Lord be continually
in your mouth. Talk of, oh talk of and recommend the righteousness of Christ,
when you lie down, and when you rise up, at your going out, and coming in! --
Think of the greatness of the gift, as well as of the giver! -- Show to all the
world in whom you have believed! Let all by your fruits know, that the Lord is
your righteousness, and that you are waiting for your Lord from heaven! -- Oh
study to be holy, even as (...) who has called you, and washed you in his own
blood, is holy! -- Let not the righteousness of the Lord be evil spoken of
through you. -- Let not Jesus be wounded in the house of his friends; but grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ day by day
-- Oh, think of his dying love! Let that love constrain you to obedience!
Having much forgiven, love much. Be always asking, what shall I do to express
my gratitude to the Lord, for giving me his righteousness? Let that
self-abasing* (...) question be always in your mouths. Oh be always lisping
out, Why me. Lord! Why me? Why am I taken, and others left? Why is the Lord my
righteousness? Why is he become my salvation, who have so often deserved
damnation at his hands.

Oh, my friends, I trust I feel somewhat of a sense of God's distinguishing
love upon my heart! therefore I must divert a little from congratulating you,
to invite poor Christless sinners to come to him, and accept of his
righteousness, that they may have life.

Alas, my heart almost bleeds! What a multitude of precious souls are now
before me! How shortly must all be ushered into eternity: -- And yet, O cutting
thought! was God now to require all your souls, how few, comparatively
speaking, could really say, the Lord our Righteousness.

And think you, O sinners, that you will be able to stand in the day of
judgment, if Christ be not your righteousness! No, that alone is the
wedding garment in which you must appear. -- Oh, Christless sinners, I am
distressed for you! -- The desires of my soul are enlarged. -- Oh, that this
may be an accepted time! Oh, that the Lord may be your righteousness! -- For
whether would you flee, if death should find you naked? -- Indeed there is no
hiding yourselves from his presence. -- The pitiful fig leaves of your own
righteousness will not cover your nakedness, when God shall call you to stand
before him. -- Adam found them ineffectual, and so will you. -- Oh, think of
death! Oh, think of judgment! Yet a little while, and time shall be no more:
and then what will become of you, if the Lord be not your righteousness? Think
you, that Christ will spare you? No, He that formed you, will have no mercy on
you. If you are out of Christ, if Christ be not your righteousness, Christ
himself will pronounce you damned. -- And can you bear to think of being damned
by Christ? Can you bear to hear the Lord Jesus say unto you, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels? Can you
live, think you, in everlasting burnings? Is your flesh brass, and your bones
iron? What if they are? hellfire, that fire prepared for the devil and his
angels, will heat them through and through! And can you bear to depart from
Christ! Oh, that heart-piercing thought! Ask those holy souls, who are at any
time bewailing an absent God, who walk (...), and see no (...) though but a few
days (...) them, what it is to lose a sight and presence of Christ? -- See how
they seek him sorrowing, and go mourning after him all the day long! And if it
is so dreadful to lose the sensible presence of Christ, only for a day, what
must it (...) to be banished from him to all eternity? -- But thus it must be,
if Christ be not your righteousness. -- For God's justice must be satisfied;
and unless Christ's righteousness is imputed and applied to you here, you must
be satisfying the divine justice in hell torments eternally here after. Nay; as
I (...) before, Christ himself, the God of love, shall condemn you to that
place (...) ^^^ment. -- And oh, how (...) is that thought -- Methinks I see
poor, (...), Christless wretches, standing before the bar of God, crying out,
Lord, if we must be damned, let some angel, or some archangel pronounce the
damnatory sentence. But all in vain. -- Christ himself shall pronounce the
irrevocable sentence -- Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, let me
persuade you to close with Christ, and never rest, till you can say, the Lord
our righteousness. -- Who knows but the Lord may have mercy on, nay, abundantly
pardon you? -- Beg of God to give you faith; -- and if the Lord give you that,
you will by it receive Christ, with his righteousness, and his all. You need
not fear the greatness or number of your sins. -- For are you sinners? so am I.
Are you the chief of sinners? so am I. Are you backsliding sinners? so am I.
And yet the Lord (for ever adored (...) his rich, free, and sovereign grace)
the Lord is (...) righteousness. Come then, O young men, who (as I acted once
myself) are playing the prodigal, and wandering away afar off from your
heavenly Father's house, come home, come home, and leave your swine's trough.
-- Feed no longer on the husks of sensual delights. -- For Christ's sake, arise
and come home! -- Your heavenly Father now calls you. -- See yonder the best
robe, even the righteousness of his dear Son awaits you. -- See it, view it
again and again. -- Consider at how dear a rate it was purchased, even by the
blood of God. -- Consider what great need you have of it. -- You are lost,
undone, damned for ever, without it. -- Come then, poor, guilty prodigals. Come
home. -- Indeed I will not like the elder brother, be angry. -- No, I will
rejoice with the angels in heaven: And oh, that God would now bow the heavens,
and come down! (...), O Son of God, descend; and as thou have shown (...), the
blessed Spirit apply (...) to some prodigals now before thee, and clothe their
naked souls with thy best robe.

But I must speak a word to you, young maidens, as well as young men. -- I see
many of you adorned, as to your bodies; -- But are not your souls naked! Which
of you can say the Lord is my righteousness; Which of you was ever solicitous
to be dressed in this robe of invaluable p^ice, and without which, you are no
better than whit^d sepulchers in the sight of God? Let not then so many of you,
young maidens, any longer forget your only ornament: Oh, seek for the Lord to
be your righteousness or otherwise burning will soon be upon you instead of
beauty!

And what shall I say to you of a middle age, you busy merchants, you cumbred
Marthas, who with all your gettings, have not yet gotten the Lord to be your
righteousness? Alas! what profit will there be of all your labor under the
sun, if you do not secure this pearl of invaluable price? This one thing, so
absolutely needful, that it can only stand you in stead, when all other things
shall be taken from you. Labor therefore no longer so anxiously for the meat
which perishes, but henceforward seek for the Lord to be your righteousness --
A righteousness that will entitle you to life everlasting. -- I see also many
hoary heads here, and perhaps the most of them cannot say, the Lord is my
righteousness. -- O grey-headed sinners, I could weep over you! -- Your gray
hairs, which ought to be your crown, and in which perhaps you glory, are now
your shame. You know not that the Lord is your righteousness. Oh, haste then,
haste, ye aged sinners, and seek an interest in redeeming love! -- Alas, you
have one foot already in the grave. -- Your glass is just run out. -- Your sun
is just going down, and it will set and leave you in an eternal darkness,
unless the Lord be your righteousness! -- Flee then, oh flee for your lives! be
not afraid. -- All things are possible with God. If you come, though it be at
the eleventh hour, Christ Jesus will in no wise cast you out. Oh, seek then for
the Lord to be your righteousness, and beseech him to let you know how it is
that a man can be born again when he is old! -- But I must not forget the lambs
of the flock. -- To feed them was one of my Lord's last commands. -- I know he
will be angry with me, if I do not tell them, that the Lord may be their
righteousness; and that of such is the kingdom of heaven. -- Come then, ye
little children, come to Christ; the Lord Christ shall be your righteousness.
-- Do not think, that you are too young to be converted. -- Perhaps many of you
may be nine or ten years old, and yet cannot say the Lord is our righteousness;
which many have said, though younger than you. -- Come then, while you are
young. -- Perhaps you may not live to be old -- Do not stay for other people.
-- If your fathers and mothers will not come to Christ, do you come without
them. -- Let children lead them, and show them how the Lord may be their
righteousness. -- Our Lord Jesus loved little children -- You are his Lambs --
He bids me seed you. -- I pray God make you willing betimes to take the Lord
for your righteousness.

Here then I could conclude, -- but I must not forget the poor negroes -- No, I
must not. Jesus Christ has died for them, as well as others. Nor do I mention
you last, because I despise your souls, but because I would wish what I have to
say, to make the deeper impression upon your hearts. -- Oh that you would seek
the Lord to be your righteousness! -- Who knows but he may be found of you. For
in Jesus Christ there is neither male nor female, bond or free; even you may be
the children of God, if you believe in Jesus. Did you never read of the Eunuch
belonging to the queen of Candace? -- a negro like yourselves. -- He believed
-- The Lord was his righteousness, he was baptized. Do you also believe, and
you shall be saved. -- Christ Jesus is the same now, as he was yesterday, and
will wash you in his own blood. -- Go home then, turn the words of the text
into a prayer, and entreat the Lord to be your righteousness. -- Even so, come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, into all our souls! Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

SERMON II.
The Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent.
GENESIS iii. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel.
WHEN I read to you these words, I may address you in the language of the holy
angels, (...) ^he Shepherds that were watching their flocks by night; Behold, I
bring you glad tidings of great joy. For ^his is the first promise that was
made of a Savior to the apostate ^ace of Adam. We generally look for Christ
only in the New Testament; but Christianity, in one sense, is very near as old
as the creation. It is wonderful to observe, how gradually God revealed his Son
to mankind. He began with the promise in the text, and this the elect lived
upon till the time of Abraham; to him God made further discoveries of his
eternal counsel concerning man's redemption. Afterward, at sundry times, and
in diverse manners, God spoke to the fathers by the prophets, till at length the
Lord Jesus himself was manifested in the flesh, and came and tabernacled
amongst us.

This first promise must certainly be but dark to our first parents, in
comparison of that light which we now enjoy. And yet, dark as it was, (...) may
assure ourselves they ^^ilt upon it their (...) everlasting salvation, and by
that faith were saved.

How they came to stand in need of this promise, and what is the extent and
meaning of it, I intend, God willing, to make the subject matter of your
present meditation.

The fall of man is written in too legible characters not to be understood:
those that deny it, by their denying prove it. The very heathens confessed and
bewailed it: They could see the streams of corruption running through the whole
race of mankind, but could not trace them to the fountainhead. Before God gave
a revelation of his Son, man was a riddle to himself. And Moses unfolds more in
this one chapter (out of which the text is taken) than all mankind could have
been capable of finding out of themselves though they had studied to all
eternity.

In the foregoing chapter, he had given us a full account, how God spoke the
world into being; and especially how he formed man of the dust of the earth,
and breathed into him the breath of life, so that he became a living soul. A
council of the Trinity was called concerning the formation of this lovely
creature. The result of that council was, Let us make man in our image, after
our likeness. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
be him. Moses remarkably repeats the words, that we might take particular
notice of our divine original. Never was so much expressed in so few words.
None but a man inspired could have done so. But it is remarkable, that though
Moses mentions our being made in the image of God, yet he mentions it but
twice, and that, as it were, in a transient manner, as though he would have
said, Man was made in honor, God made him upright, in the image of God, male
and female created be them. But man so soon fell, and became like the beasts
that perish, nay, like the devil himself, that it is scarce worth mentioning.

How soon man fell after he was created, is not told us, and therefore to fix
any time, is to be wise above what is written. And, I think, they who suppose
that man fell the same day in which he w^^ made, have no sufficient ground for
their opinion. The many things which are crowded together in the former
chapter, such as the formation of Adam's wife, his giving names to the beasts,
and his being put into the garden which God had planted, I think require a
longer space of time than a day to be transacted in. However all agree in this,
"Man stood not long." How long or how short a while, I will not take upon me to
determine. It more concerns us to enquire how he came to fall from his
steadfastness, and what was the rise and progress of the temptation which
prevailed over him. The account given us in this chapter concerning it, is very
full, and it may do us much service, under God, to make some remarks upon it.

Now the serpent, says the sacred historian, was more subtle than any beast of
the field which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, yea, (...)
God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden.

Though this was a real serpent, yet he that spoke was no other than the devil;
from hence, perhaps, called the old serpent, because he took possession of the
serpent when he came to beguile our (...) parents. The devil envied the
happiness of man, who was made, as some think, to supply the place of fallen
angels. God made man upright, and with full power to stand if he would. He was
just, therefore in suffering him to be tempted: if he fell, he had no one to
blame except himself. But how must Satan effect his fall? He cannot do it by
his power, he attempts it therefore by policy. He takes possession of a
serpent, which was more subtle than all the beasts of the field, which the Lord
God had made; so that men that are full of subtility, but have no piety, are
only machines for the devil to work upon, just as he pleases.

And he said unto the Woman. Here is an instance of his subtility. He says unto
the woman, the weaker vessel, and when she was alone from her husband, and
therefore was more liable to be overcome, Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat
of every tree of the garden? These words are certainly spoken in answer to
something which the devil either saw or heard. In all probability, the woman
was now near the tree of knowledge of good and evil; (for we shall find her by
and by, plucking an apple from it,) perhaps ^he might be looking at, and
wondering what there was in that tree more than the others, that she and (...)
husband should be forbidden to taste of it. Satan seeing this, and coveting to
draw her into a parley with him (for if the devil can persuade us not to
resist, but to commune with him, he has gained a great point) he says, Yea,
has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? The first thing he
does, is to persuade her if possible, to entertain hard thoughts of God; this
is his general way of dealing with God's children. Yea, says he, has God said,
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? What! has God planted a garden
and placed you in the mid^^ of it only to teaze and perplex you? has he
planted a garden, and yet forbid you making use of any of the fruits of it at
all? It was impossible for him to ask a more ensnaring question in order to
gain his end: For Eve was here seemingly obliged to answer, and vindicate God's
goodness. And therefore,

Ver. 2. 3. The woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden: But, of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die.

The former part of the answer was good, We may eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden, God has not forbid us eating of every tree of the garden. No, we
may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden, (and it should seem even of
the tree of life, which was as a sacrament to man in a state of innocence)
there is only one tree in the midst of the garden, of which God has said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. Here she begins to
warp, and sin begins to conceive in her heart. Already has she contracted (...)
of the serpent's poison, by talking with him, which she ought not to have done
at all. For she might easily suppose, that it could be no good being, that
could put such a question unto her, and insinuate such dishonorable thoughts
of God. She should therefore have fled from him, and not stood to have parleyed
with him at all. Immediately the ill effects of it appear, she begins to soften
the divine threatening. God had said, the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die: or, dying thou shall die: But Eve says, Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. We may be assured we are fallen into,
and begin to fall by temptation, when we begin to think God will not be as good
as his word, in respect to the execution of his threatenings denounced against
sin. Satan knew this, and therefore artfully

Said unto the woman, (ver. 4.) Ye shall not surely die, in an insinuating
manner, Ye shall not surely die. Surely God will not be so cruel as to damn you
only for eating an apple: it cannot be. (...) measure, to his eating that
fruit; and therefore, if he received so much improvement, she might also expect
a like benefit from it. All this, I think, is clear; for, otherwise, I do not
see with what propriety it could be said, When the Woman saw that it was good
for food. How could she know it was good for food, unless she had seen the
serpent feed upon it?

Satan now begins to get ground apace. Lust had conceived in her heart; shortly
it will bring forth sin. Sin being conceived, brings forth death. Ver. 6. And
when the Woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband, and he did eat.

Our senses are the landing ports of our spiritual enemies. How needful is that
resolution of holy Job, I have made a covenant with mine eyes. When Eve began
to gaze on the forbidden fruit with her eyes, she soon began to long after it
with her heart. When she saw that it was good for food, and pleasant to the
eyes, (here was the lust of the flesh, and lust of the eye) but, above all, a
tree to be desired, to make one wise, wiser than God would have her be, nay, as
wise as God himself: she took of the fruit thereof, and gave also unto her
husband with her, and he did eat. As soon as ever she sinned herself, she
turned tempter to her husband. It is dreadful when those, who should be
help-mates for each other in the great work of their salvation, are only
promoters of each others damnation: but thus it is. If we ourselves are good,
we shall excite others to goodness; if we do evil, we shall entice others to do
evil also. There is a close connection between doing and teaching. How needful
then is it for us all to take heed that we do not sin any way ourselves, lest
we should become factors for the devil, and ensnare, perhaps, your nearest and
dearest relations? She gave also unto her husband with (...), and he did eat.

Alas! what a complication of crimes was there in this one single act of sin!
Here is an utter disbelief of God's threatening; the utmost ingratitude to their
Maker, who had so lately planted this garden and placed them in it, with such a
glorious and comprehensive charter. Here is the utmost neglect of their
posterity, who they knew were to stand or fall with them: here was the utmost
pride of heart; they wanted to be equal with God: here is the utmost contempt
put upon his threatening and his law; the devil is credited and obeyed before
him, and all this only to satisfy their sensual appetite. Never was a crime of
such a complicated nature committed by any here below. Nothing but the devil's
apostasy and rebellion could equal it.

And what are the consequences of their disobedience? Are their eyes opened?
Yes, their eyes are opened; but, alas! it is only to see their own nakedness.
For, we are told, ver. 7. that the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew
that they were naked: Naked of God, naked of every thing that was holy and
good; and destitute of the divine image, which they before enjoyed. They might
rightly now be termed Ichabod; for the glory of the Lord departed from them.
Oh! how low did these sons of the morning then fall; out of God into
themselves; from being partakers of the divine nature, into the nature of the
devil and the beast. Well, therefore, might they know that they were naked not
only in body but in soul.

And how do they behave now they are naked? Do they flee to God for pardon? Do
they seek to him for a robe to cover their nakedness? No. They were now dead to
God, earthly, sensual, devilish; and therefore, instead of applying to God for
mercy, they sewed, or platted fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons,
or things to gird about them. This is a lively representation of all natural
men: We see that we are naked: We, in some measure, confess it; but, instead of
looking up to God for succor, we patch up a righteousness of our own (as our
first parents platted fig leaves together) hoping to cover our nakedness by
that. But our righteousness will not stand the severity of God's judgment: It
will do ^s no more service than the fig leaves did Adam and Eve, that is none
at all.

For, ver. 8. They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the trees of the
garden, in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife (notwithstanding their
fig leaves) ^id themselves from the presence of the Lord God, among the trees
of the garden.

They heard the voice of the Lord God, or the Word of the Lord God, even the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Word that was with God, and the Word that was
God. They heard him walking in the trees of the garden, in the cool of the day.
A season, perhaps, when Adam and Eve used to go, in an especial manner, and
offer up an evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. The cool of the day.
Perhaps, the sin was committed early in the morning, or at noon; but God would
not come upon them immediately, he staid till the cool of the day. For if we
would effectually reprove others, we should not do it, when they are warmed
with passion, but wait till the cool of the day.

But what an alteration is here! Instead of rejoicing at the voice of their
Beloved, instead of answering the voice of their God, with songs of praise and
thanksgiving; having now broken his only law and divested themselves, by their
disobedience, of their perfect innocence, they, who had so openly braved the
Almighty, by the violation of his single and easy command, now, stung by
conscience and dreading the consequences of such a deliberate crime, slunk
abashed behind the shadowy trees; thus attempting to elude the search of him
who is all-seeing. Is not this then what has disrobed our souls, and thus,
contaminating the source, renders us impure by nature? assuredly it is. We
labor to cover our nakedness with the fig leaves of our own righteousness: We
hide ourselves from God as long as we can; and will not come, and never should
come, did not the Father prevent, draw, and sweetly constrain us by his grace,
as he here prevented Adam.

Ver. 9. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Adam, where art
thou?

"The Lord God called unto Adam," (for otherwise Adam would never have called
unto the Lord God) and said, Adam, where art thou? How is it that thou come
not to pay thy devotions as usual. Christians, remember the Lord keeps an
account when you fail coming to worship. Whenever, therefore, you are tempted
to withhold your attendance, let each of you fancy you heard the Lord God
calling unto you, and saying, "O man, O Woman, where art thou?" It may be
understood in another and better sense, Adam, where art thou? What a condition
is thy poor soul in? This is the first thing the Lord asks, and convinces a
sinner of, when he prevents, and calls him effectually by his grace. He also
calls him by name: For unless God speaks to us in particular, and we know where
we are, how poor, how miserable, how blind, how naked, we shall never value the
redemption wrought out for us by the death and obedience of the dear Lord
Jesus. Adam, where art thou?

Ver. 10. And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid. See
what cowards sin makes us. If we knew no sin, we should know no fear. Because I
was naked, and I hid myself. Ver. 11. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast
naked! Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I (thy Maker and Lawgiver)
commanded thee, that thou should not eat?

God knew very well that Adam was naked, and that he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit: But God would know it from Adam's own mouth. Thus God knows all our
necessities before we ask, but yet insists upon our asking for his grace, and
confessing our sins. For, by such acts, we acknowledge our dependence upon God,
take shame to ourselves, and thereby give glory to his great name.

Ver. 12. And the man said, the woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave
me of the tree, and I did eat.

Never was nature more lively delineated. See what pride Adam contracted by the
fall! How unwilling he is to lay the blame upon, or take shame to himself. This
answer is full of insolence toward God, enmity against his wife, and
disingenuity in respect to himself. For herein he tacitly reflects upon God.
The woman that THOU gave to be with me. As much as to say, If THOU had not
given me THAT WOMAN, I had not eaten the forbidden fruit. Thus when men sin,
they lay the fault upon their passions; then blame and reflect upon God for
giving them those passions. Their language is, The appetites that THOU gave
us, they deceived us, and therefore we sinned against thee. But, as God,
notwithstanding, punished Adam for hearkening to the voice of his wife, so he
will punish those who hearken to the dictates of their corrupt inclinations.
For God compels no man to sin. Adam might have withstood the solicitations of
his wife, if he would; and so, if we look up to God, we should find grace to
help in the time of need. The devil and our own hearts tempt, but they cannot
force us to consent, without the concurrence of our own wills. So that our
damnation is of ourselves, as it will evidently appear at the great day,
notwithstanding all men's present impudent replies against God, as Adam speaks
insolently in respect to God, so he speaks with enmity against his wife: The
woman, or this woman, she gave me. He lays all the fault upon her, and speaks
of her with much contempt. He does not say, my wife, my dear wife; but this
Woman. For sin disunites the most united hearts. It is the bane of holy
fellowship. Those who have been companions in sin here, if they die without
repentance, will both hate and condemn one another hereafter. All damned souls
are accusers of their brethren. Thus it is, in some degree, on this side the
grave. The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I
did eat. What a disingenuous speech was here! He makes use of no less than
fifteen words to excuse himself, and but one or two (in the original) to
confess his fault, if it may be called a confession at all. The woman which
thou gave to be with me she gave me of the tree; here are fifteen words; and
I did eat. With what reluctance do these last words come out? How soon are they
uttered? And I did eat. But thus it is with an unhumbled, unregenerate heart.
It will be laying the fault upon the dearest friend in the world, nay, upon God
himself, rather than take shame to itself. This pride we are all subject to by
the fall; and, till our hearts are broken, and made contrite by the Spirit of
our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be always (...) God foolishly. Against THEE,
and THEE only, (...) I sinned, that thou might be justified in thy sayings,
and clear when thou art judged, is the language of none but those, who, like
David, are willing to confess their faults, and are truly sorry for their sins.
This was not the case of Adam: his heart was not broken; and therefore he lays
the fault of his disobedience upon his wife and God, and not upon himself: The
woman which THOU gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

Ver. 13. And the Lord God said, what is this that thou have done? What a
wonderful concern does God express in this expostulation! What a deluge of
misery have thou brought upon thyself, thy husband, and thy posterity? What is
this that thou have done? Disobeyed thy God, obeyed the devil, and ruined thy
husband, for whom I made thee to be an help-meet? What is this that thou have
done? God would here awaken her to a sense of her crime and danger, and
therefore, as it were, thunders in her ears. For the law must be preached to
self-righteous sinners. We must take care of healing, before we see sinners
wounded, left we should say, Peace, peace, where there is no peace. Secure
sinners must hear the thundering of Mount Sinai, before we bring them to Mount
Sion. They who never preach up the law, it is to be feared, are unskilful in
delivering the glad tidings of the gospel. (...) minister should be a Boanerges
-- a son of thunder, as well as a Barnabas -- a son of consolation. There was
an earthquake and a whirlwind, before the small still voice came to Elijah: we
must first show people they are condemned, and then show them how they must be
saved. But how and when to preach the law, and when to apply the promises of
the gospel, wisdom is profitable to direct. And the Lord God said unto the
woman, What is this that thou have done?

And the woman said, the serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. She does not make
use of so many words to excuse herself, as her husband: but her heart is as
unhumbled as his. What is this, says God, that thou have done? God here charges
her with doing it. She dares not deny the fact, or say, I have not done it; but
she takes all the blame off herself, and lays it upon the serpent: The serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat. She does not say, Lord, I was to blame for talking
with the serpent; Lord, I did wrong, in not hastening to my husband, when he
put the first question to me; Lord, I plead guilty, I only am to blame; oh let
not my poor husband suffer for my wickedness! This would have been the language
of her heart, had she now been a true penitent. But both were now alike proud;
therefore neither will lay the blame upon themselves: The serpent beguiled me,
and I did eat; the woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat.

I have been the more particular in remarking this part of their behavior,
because it tends so much to the magnifying of free grace, and plainly shows us
salvation ^^meth only from the Lord. Let us take a short view of the miserable
circumstances our first parents were now in: they were legally and spiritually
dead, children of wrath, and heirs of hell; they had eaten the fruit, of which
God had commanded them, that they should not eat; and when arraigned before
God, notwithstanding their crime was so complicated, they could not be brought
to confess it. What reason can be given, why sentence of death should not be
pronounced against the prisoners at the bar? All must own they are worthy to
die. Nay, how can God, consistently with his justice, possibly forgive them? He
had threatened, that the day wherein they eat of the forbidden fruit, they
should surely die; and, if he did not execute this threatening, the devil might
then slander the Almighty indeed. And yet mercy cries, Spare these sinners,
spare the work of thine own hands. Behold then, wisdom contrives a scheme how
God may be just, and yet be merciful; be faithful to his threatening, punish
the offense, and at the same time spare the offender. An amazing scene of
divine love here opens to our view, which had been from all eternity hid in the
heart of God! Notwithstanding Adam and Eve were thus unhumbled, and did not so
much as put up one single petition for pardon, God immediately passes sentence
upon the serpent, and reveals to them a Savior.

Ver. 14. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this,
thou art accursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon
thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life, i.
e. he should be in subjection, and his power should always be limited and
restrained. His enemies shall lick the dust, says the Psalmist. Ver. 15. And I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

Before I proceed to the explanation of this verse, I cannot but take notice of
one great mistake, which the author of the Whole Duty of Man is guilty of, in
making this verse contain a covenant between God and Adam, as though God
personally treated with Adam, as before the fall. For, talking of the second
covenant, in his preface concerning caring for the soul, says he, This second
covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, presently after the fall, and is
contained in these words, Genesis iii. 15. where God declares the seed of the
woman shall break the serpent's head; and this was made up, as the first was,
of some mercies to be afforded by God, and some duties to be performed by us.
This is exceeding false divinity: For these words are not spoken to Adam; they
are directed only to the serpent. Adam and Eve stood by as criminals, and God
could not treat with them, because they had broken his covenant. And it is so
far from being a covenant, wherein, some mercies are to be afforded by God, and
some duties to be performed by us, that here is not a word looking that way; it
is only a declaration of a free gift of salvation through Jesus Christ our
Lord. God the Father and God the Son had entered into a covenant concerning the
salvation of the elect from all eternity; wherein God the Father promised, that
if the Son would offer his soul a sacrifice for sin, he should see his seed.
Now this is a^ open revelation of this secret covenant, and therefore God
speaks in the most positive terms. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. The first Adam God had treated with before; he proved false;
God therefore to secure the second covenant from being broken, puts it into the
hands of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven. Adam, after the fall, stood no
longer as our representative; he and Eve were only private persons as we are,
and were only to hold on the declaration of mercy contained in this promise by
faith (as they really did) and by that they were saved. I do not say, but we
are to believe and obey, if we are everlastingly saved. Faith and obedience are
conditions, if we only mean that they in order go before our salvation; but I
deny that these are proposed by God to Adam, or that God treats with him on
this promise, as he did before the fall under the covenant of works. For, how
could that be, when Adam and Eve were now prisoners, at the bar, without
strength to perform any conditions at all? The truth is this: God as a reward
of Christ's sufferings, promised to give the elect faith and repentance, in
order to bring them to eternal life: And both these and every thing else
necessary for their everlasting happiness, are infallibly secured to them in
this promise, as Mr. Boston, an excellent Scotch divine, sweetly and clearly
shows, in a book entitled, A view of the covenant of grace.

This is, by no means, an unnecessary distinction; it is a matter of great
importance: For want of knowing this, people have been so long misled. They
have been taught that they must Do so and so, as though they were under a
covenant of works; and then for DOING this, they should be saved. This is
plainly the whole drift of the book wrongly entitled, The Whole Duty of Man.
Whereas, on the contrary, people should be taught, that the Lord Jesus was the
second Adam, with whom the Father entered into covenant for fallen man: that
they can now do nothing of or for themselves, and should therefore come to God,
beseech him to give them faith, by which they shall be enabled to lay hold on
the righteousness of Christ; and that faith they will then show forth by their
works, out of love and gratitude to the ever-blessed Jesus, their most glorious
Redeemer, for what he has done for their souls. This is a consistent scriptural
scheme: without holding this, we must run into one of those two bad extremes; I
mean, Antinomianism on the one hand, or Arminianism on the other: from both
which may the good Lord deliver us.

But to proceed: by the seed of the woman, we are here to understand the Lord
Jesus Christ, who though very God of very God was, for us men and our
salvation, to have a body prepared for him by the Holy Ghost, and to be born of
a woman who never knew man, an^ by his obedience and death make an atonement
for man's transgression, and bring in an everlasting righteousness, work in
them a new nature, and thereby bruise the serpent's head, i. e. destroy his
power and dominion over them. By the serpent's seed, we are to understand, the
devil and all his children, who are permitted by God to tempt and sift his
children. But, blessed be God, he can reach no further than our heel.

It is not to be doubted but Adam and Eve understood this promise in this
sense; for it is plain, in the latter part of the chapter, sacrifices were
instituted. From whence should those skins come, but from beasts slain for
sacrafice, of which God made them coats? We find Abel, as well as Cain,
offering sacrifice in the next chapter: and the apostle tells us, he did it by
faith, no doubt in this promise. And Eve, when Cain was born, said, I have
gotten a man from the LORD; or, (as Mr. Henry observes, it may be rendered) I
have gotten a man, -- THE LORD, -- the promised Messiah. Some further suppose,
that Eve was the first believer; and therefore they translate it thus, the seed
(not of THE, but) of THIS woman; which magnifies the grace of God so much the
more, that she, who was the first in the transgression, should be the first
partaker of redemption. Adam believed also, and was saved: for unto Adam and
his wife did the Lord make coats of skins, and clothed THEM, which was a
remarkable type of their being clothed with the righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

This promise was literally fulfilled in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Satan bruised his heel, when he tempted him for forty days together in the
wilderness: he bruised his heel, when he raised up strong persecution against
him, during the time of his public ministry: he, in an especial manner, bruised
his heel, when our Lord complained, that his soul was exceeding sorrowful even
unto death, and be sweat great drops of blood, falling upon the ground, when
praying in the garden: he bruised his heel, when he put it in the heart of
Judas to betray him; and he bruised him yet most of all, when his emissaries
nailed him to an accursed tree, and our Lord cried out, My God, my God! why
have thou forsaken me? Yet in all this, the blessed Jesus, the seed of the
woman, bruised Satan's accursed head: for, in that he was tempted he was able
to succor those that are tempted. By his stripes we are healed. The
chastisement of our peace was upon him. By dying, he destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is the devil. He thereby spoiled principalities and
powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them upon the cross.

This promise has been, is, and will be fulfilled in the elect of God,
considered collectively, as well before, as after the coming of our Lord in the
flesh: for they may be called the seed of the woman. Marvel not, that all who
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. In this promise,
there is an eternal enmity put between the seed of the woman and the seed of
the serpent; so that those that are born after the flesh, cannot but persecute
those that are born after the Spirit. This enmity showed itself soon after this
promise was revealed, in Cain's bruising the heel of Abel: it continued in the
church through all ages before Christ came in the flesh, as the history of the
Bible and the eleventh chapter of the Hebrews plainly shows. It raged
exceedingly after our Lord's ascension; witness the Acts of the Apostles, and
the history of the primitive Christians. It now rages, and will continue to
rage and show itself, in a greater or less degree to the end of time. But let
not this dismay us; for in all this the seed of the woman is more than
conqueror, and bruises the serpent's head Thus the Israelites, the more they
were oppressed, the more they increased. Thus it was with the apostles; thus it
was with their immediate followers. So that Tertullian compares the church in
his time to a mowed field; the more frequently it is cut, the more it grows.
The blood of the martyrs was always the seed of the church. And I have often
sat down with wonder and delight, and admired how God has made the very schemes
which his enemies contrived in order to hinder, become the most effectual means
to propagate his gospel. The devil has had so little success in persecution,
that if I did not know that he and his children, according to this verse, could
not but persecute, I should think he would count it his strength to sit still.
What did he get by persecuting the martyrs in queen Mary's time? Was not the
grace of God exceedingly glorified in their support! What did he get by
persecuting the good old Puritans? Did it not prove the peopling of
New England? Or to come nearer our own times. What has he got by putting us
out of the synagogues? Has not the word of God, since that, mightily
prevailed? My dear hearers, you must excuse me for enlarging on this head; God
fills my soul generally, when I come to this topic. I can say with Luther, If
it were not for persecution, I should not understand the scripture. If Satan
should be yet suffered to bruise my heel further, and his servants should
thrust me into prison, I doubt not, but even that would only tend to the more
effectual bruising of his head. I remember a saying of the then Lord Chancellor
to the pious Bradford: Thou have done more hurt, said he, by thy exhortations
in private in prison, than thou did in preaching before thou waft put in, or
words to this effect. The promise of the text is my daily support; I will put
enmity between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel.

Further: This promise is also fulfilled, not only in the church in general,
but in every individual believer in particular. In every believer there are two
seeds, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent; the flesh lusting
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. It is with the believer,
when quickened with grace in his heart, as it was with Rebeccah, when she had
conceived Esau and Jacob in her womb; she felt a struggling, and began to be
uneasy; If it be so, says she, why am I thus? Thus grace and nature struggle,
(if I may so speak) in the womb of a believer's heart: But, as it was there
said, the elder shall serve the younger: so it is here, -- grace in the end
shall get the better of nature; the seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent's head. Many of you that have believed in Christ, perhaps may find some
particular corruption yet strong, so strong, that you are sometimes ready to
cry out with David, I shall fall one day by the hand of Saul. But fear not, the
promise in the text insures the perseverance and victory of believers over Sin,
Satan, Death, and Hell. What if indwelling corruption does yet remain, and the
seed of the serpent bruise your heel, in vexing and disturbing your righteous
souls? Fear not, though faint, yet pursue: You shall yet bruise the serpent's
head. Christ has died for you, and yet a little while, and he will send death
to destroy the very being of sin in you. Which brings me

To show the most extensive manner in which the promise of the text shall be
fulfilled, viz. At the final judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall present the
elect to his Father, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, glorified both
in body and soul.

Then shall the seed of the woman give the last and fatal blow, in bruising the
serpent's head. Satan, the accuser of the brethren, and all his accursed feed,
shall then be cast out, and never suffered to disturb the seed of the woman any
more. Then shall the righteous shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father,
and fit with Christ on thrones in majesty on high.

Let us, therefore, not be weary of well-doing; for we shall reap an eternal
harvest of comfort if we faint not. Dare, dare, my dear brethren in Christ to
follow the Captain of our salvation, who w^^ made perfect through sufferings.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. Fear not men. Be not too
much cast down at the deceitfulness of your hearts. Fear not devils; you shall
get the victory even over them. The Lord Jesus his engaged to make you more
than conquerors over all. Plead with your Savior, plead: Plead the promise in
the text. Wrestle, wrestle with God in prayer. If it has been given you to
believe, fear not if it should also be given you to suffer. Be not any wise
terrified by your adversaries; the king of the church has them all in a chain:
Be kind to them; pray for them; but fear them not. The Lord will yet bring back
his ark, though at present driven into the wilderness; and Satan, like
lightning, shall fall from heaven.

Are there any enemies of God here? The promise of the text encourages me to
bid you defiance: The seed of the woman, the ever blessed Jesus, shall bruise
the serpent's head. What signifies all your malice? You are only raging waves
of the sea, foaming out your own shame. For you, without repentance, is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. The Lord (...) sits in heaven,
ruling over all, and causing all things to work for his children's good: he
laughs you to scorn: he has you in the utmost derision, and therefore so will
I. Who are you that persecute the children of the ever blessed God. Though a
poor stripling, the Lord Jesus, the seed of the woman, will enable me to bruise
your heads.

My brethren in Christ, I think I do not speak thus in my own strength, but in
the strength of my Redeemer. I know in whom I have believed; I am persuaded he
will keep that safe, which I have committed unto him. He is faithful who has
promised, that the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. May we
all experience a daily completion of this promise, both in the church and in
our hearts, till we come to the church of the firstborn, the spirits of just
men made perfect, in the presence and actual fruition of the great God our
heavenly Father.

To whom, with the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, power,
might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON III.
Persecution every Christian's Lot.
2 TIMOTHY, iii. 12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution.
WHEN our Lord Jesus was pleased to take upon himself the form of a servant,
and go about preaching the kingdom of God, he took all opportunities in public,
and more especially in private, to caution his disciples against seeking great
things for themselves; and also to forwarn them of the many distresses,
afflictions, and persecutions which they must expect to endure and go through
for his (...) sake. The great St. Paul, therefore, the author of this epistle,
in this, as in all other things, following the steps of his blessed Master,
takes particular care, among other apostolical admonitions, to warn young
Timothy of the difficulties he must expect to meet when in the course of his
ministry: -- This know also, (says he, verse 1st of this chapter) that in the
last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. For of this sort
are they which creep into houses, and lead captive filly women laden with sins
-- lead away with diverse lusts; ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. Now, as Jannes and Jambres (two of the Egyptian
magicians) withstood Moses (by working sham miracles) so do these also resist
the truth: and (notwithstanding they keep up the form of religion) are men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But, in order to keep him from
sinking under their opposition, he tells him, that though God, for wise ends,
permitted these false teachers, as he did the magicians, to oppose for some
time, yet they should now proceed no farther. For their folly, says he, shall
be made manifest unto all men, as theirs (the magicians) also was, when they
could not stand before Moses, because of the boil; for the boil was upon the
magicians as well as upon all the Egyptians. And then to encourage Timothy yet
the more, he propounds to him his own example: But thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience,
persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at
Lystra; what persecutions I endured; But out of them all the Lord delivered me.
And then lest Timothy might think that this was only the particular case of
Paul: Yea, says he, in the words of the text, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution,

The words, without considering them as they stand in relation to the context,
contain a necessary and important truth, viz. that persecution is the common
lot of every godly man. This is a hard saying. How few can bear it? I trust
God, in the following discourse, will enable me to make it good, by showing, I.
What it is to live godly in Christ Jesus. II. The different kinds of
persecution to which they, who live godly, are exposed. III. Why it is, that
godly men must expect to suffer persecution?


Lastly, We shall apply the whole.

And first, Let us consider what it is to live godly in Christ Jesus: this
supposes, that we are made the righteousness of God in Christ, that we are born
again, and are made one with Christ by a living faith, and a vital union, even
as Jesus Christ and the Father are one. Unless we are thus converted; and
transformed by the renewing of our minds, we cannot properly be said to be in
Christ, much less to live godly in him. To be in Christ merely by baptism, and
an outward profession, is not to be in him in the strict sense of the word: No;
They that are in Christ Jesus, are new creatures; old things are passed away,
and all things are become new in their hearts. Their life is hid with Christ in
God; their souls daily feed on the invisible realties of another world. To live
godly in Christ, is to make the divine will, and not our own, the sole
principle of all our thoughts, words, and actions; so that, whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God. Those who live godly
in Christ, may not so much be said to live, as Christ to live in them; he is
their alpha and omega, their first and last, their beginning and end. They are
led by his Spirit, as a child is led by the hand of its Father; and are willing
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads them. They hear, know, and obey his
voice. Their affections are set on things above. Their hopes are full of
immortality; their citizenship is in heaven. Being born again of God, they
habitually live to, and daily walk with God. They are pure in heart; and, from
a principle of faith in Christ, are holy in all manner of conversation and
godliness.

This is to live godly in Christ Jesus: and hence we may easily learn, why so
few suffer persecution? because so few live godly in Christ Jesus. You may
attend on outward duties; you may live morally in Christ, i. e. you may do (as
they term it) no one any harm, and avoid persecution: but they that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

2. Secondly, What is the meaning of the word persecution, and how many kinds
there are of it, I come now to consider.

The word persecution is derived from a Greek word, signifying to pursue, and
generally implies, pursuing a person for the sake of his goodness, or God's
good will to him. The first kind of it, is that of the heart. We have an early
example of this in that wicked one Cain, who, because the Lord had respect to
Abel and his offering, and not to him and his offering, was very wroth, his
countenance fell, and at length he cruelly slew his envied brother. Thus the
Pharisees hated and persecuted our Lord long before they laid hold on him: and
our Lord mentions being inwardly hated of men, as one kind of persecution his
disciples were to undergo. This heart enmity (if I may so term it) is the root
of all other kinds of persecution, and is in some degree or other, to be found
in the soul of every unregenerated man; and numbers are guilty of this
persecution, who never have it in their power to persecute any other way. Nay,
numbers would be carried out actually to put in practice all other degrees of
persecution, was not the name of persecution become odious amongst mankind, and
did they not hereby run the hazard of losing their reputation. Alas! how many
at the great day, whom we know not now, will be convicted and condemned, that
all their life harbored a secret evil-will against Zion! They may now screen
it before men; but God sees the enmity of their hearts, and will judge them as
persecutors at the great and terrible day of judgment!

A second degree of persecution is that of the tongue; out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. Many I suppose think it no harm to shoot out
arrows, even bitter words, against the disciples of the Lord: they scatter the
firebrarnds, arrows, and death, saying, "Are we not in sport?" But, however
they may esteem it, in God's account, evil-speaking is a high degree of
persecution. Thus Ishmael's mocking Isaac in the Old, is termed persecuting him
in the New Testament. Blessed are ye, says our Lord, when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
name's sake. From whence we may gather, that reviling and speaking all manner
of evil falsely for Christ's sake, is a high degree of persecution. For a good
name, says the wise man, is better than precious ointment, and to many is
dearer than life itself. It is a great breach of the sixth commandment, to
slander any one; but to speak evil of and slander the disciples of Christ,
merely because they are his disciples, must be highly provoking in the sight of
God; and such who are guilty of it (without repentance) will find that Jesus
Christ will call them to an account, and punish them for all their ungodly and
hard speeches in a lake of fire and brimstone. This shall be their portion to
drink.

The third and last kind of persecution, is that which expresses itself in
actions; as when wicked men separate the children of God from their company;
blessed are ye, says our Lord, when they shall separate you from their company:
or expose them to church censures. They shall put you out of their synagogues;
threatening and prohibiting them from making an open profession of his religion
or worship; or interdicting ministers for preaching his word, as the high
priests threatened the apostles, and forbad them any more to speak in the name
of Jesus; and Paul breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord: Or when they call them into courts; you shall be called
before governors, says our Lord: Or when they fine, imprison, or punish them,
by confiscation of goods, cruel scourging, and, lastly, death itself.

It would be impossible to enumerate in what various shapes persecution has
appeared. It is a many-headed monster, insatiable as hell, cruel as the grave;
and, what is worse, it generally appears under the cloak of religion. But
cruel, insatiable, and horrid as it is, they that live godly in Christ Jesus,
must expect to suffer and encounter with it in all its forms.

This is what we are to make good under our next general head.

3. Thirdly, Why is it that godly men must expect to suffer persecution? And,

First, This appears from the whole tenor of our Lord's doctrine. We will
begin with his divine sermon on the Mount. Blessed, says he, are they who are
persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. So
that, if our Lord spoke truth, we are not so blessed as to have an interest in
the kingdom of heaven, unless we are or have been persecuted for righteousness
sake. Nay, our Lord, (it is remarkable) employs three verses in this
beautitude, and only one in each of the others; not only to show that it was a
thing which men (as men) are unwilling to believe, but also the necessary
consequence of it upon our being Christians. This is likewise evident from all
those passages, wherein our Lord informs us, that he came upon the earth, not
to send peace but a sword; and that the father-in-law shall be against the
mother-in-law, and that a man's foes shall be those of his household. Passages,
which though confined by false prophets to the first, I am persuaded will be
verified by the experience of all true Christians in this, and every age of the
church. It would be endless to recount all the places wherein our Lord forwarns
his disciples that they should be called before rulers, and thrust out of
synagogues, nay, that the time would come, wherein men should think they did
God service to kill them. For this reason he so frequently declared, that
unless a man forsake all that he had, and even hated life itself, he could not
be his disciple. And therefore it is worthy our observation; that in that
remarkable passage, wherein our Lord makes such an extensive promise to those
who left all for him, he cautiously inserts persecution. And Jesus answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake
and the gospel's, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time; houses
and brethren, and sisters and mothers, and children and lands, with
persecutions; (the word is in the plural number, including all kinds of
persecution) and in the world to come eternal life. He that has ears to hear
let him hear what Christ says in all these passages, and then confess, that all
who live godly in Christ, Jesus shall suffer persecution.

As this is proved from our Lord's doctrine, so it is no less evident from his
life. Follow him from the manager to the cross, and see whether any persecution
was like that which the Son of God, the Lord of glory, underwent whilst here on
earth. How was he hated by wicked men? How often would that hatred have excited
them to take hold of him, had it not been for fear of the people? How was he
reviled, counted and called a blasphemer, a wine biber, a Samaritan, nay, a
devil, and, in one word, had all manner of evil spoken against him falsely?
What contradiction of sinners did he endure against himself? How did men
separate from his company, and were ashamed to walk with him openly? Insomuch
that he once said to his own disciples, Will you also go away? Again, how was
he stoned, thrust out of the synagogues, arrained as a deceiver of the people,
a seditious and pestilent fellow, an enemy to Caesar, and as such scourged,
blindfolded, spit upon, and at length condemned, and nailed to an accursed
tree? Thus was the master persecuted; thus did the Lord suffer; and the servant
is not above his master, nor the disciple above his Lord: If they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you, says the blessed Jesus. And
again, every man that is perfect, that is, a true Christian, must be as his
Master, i. e. suffer as he did. For all these things our Lord has let us an
example, that we should follow his steps: and therefore, God forbid that any
who would live godly in Christ Jesus, should hence forward expect to escape
suffering persecution.

But farther: Not only our Lord's example, but the example of all the saints
that ever lived, evidently demonstrates the truth of the apostle's assertion in
the text. How soon was Abel made a martyr for his religion? How was Isaac
mocked by the son of the bondwoman! And what a large catalogue of suffering
Old Testament saints, have we recorded in the eleventh chapter of the Hebrews!
Read the Acts of the Apostles, and see how the Christians were threatened,
stoned, imprisoned, scourged, and persecuted even unto death. Examine
church history in after ages, and you will find the murder of the innocents by
Herod, was but an earnest of the innocent blood which should be shed for the
name of Jesus. Examine the experience of saints now living on earth; and if it
were possible to consult the spirits of just men made perfect, I am persuaded
each would concur with the Apostle in asserting, that all who will live godly
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

How can it be otherwise in the very nature of things? Ever since the fall,
there has been an irreconcilable enmity between the seed of the woman and the
seed of the serpent. Wicked men hate God, and therefore, cannot but hate those
who are like him: they hate to be reformed, and therefore must hate and
persecute those who, by a contrary behavior, testify of them, that their deeds
are evil. Besides, pride of heart leads men to persecute the servants of Jesus
Christ. If they commend them, they are afraid of being asked, Why do you not
follow them? And therefore because they dare not imitate, though they may
sometimes be even forced to approve their way, yet pride and envy make them
turn persecutors. Hence it is, that as it was formerly, so it is now, and so
will it be to the end of time; he that is born after the flesh the natural man,
does and will persecute him that is born after the Spirit, the regenerate man.
Because Christians are not of the world, but Christ has chosen them out of the
world, therefore the world will hate them. If it be objected against this
doctrine, that we now live in a Christian world, and therefore must not expect
such persecution as formerly; I answer, All are not Christians that are called
so; and, till the heart is changed, the enmity against God (which is the root
of all persecution) remains, and consequently Christians, falsely so called,
will persecute as well as others. I observed therefore, in the beginning of
this discourse, that Paul mentions those that had a form of religion, as
persons of whom Timothy had need be chiefly aware: for, as our Lord and his
Apostles were mostly persecuted by their countrymen the Jews, so we must expect
the like usage from the formalists of our own nation, the Pharisees, who seem
to be religious. For the most horrid and barbarous persecutions have been
carried on by those who have called themselves Christians; witness the days of
queen Mary; and the fines, banishments, and imprisonments of the children of
God in the last century, and the bitter irreconcilable hatred that appears in
thousands who call themselves Christians, even in the present days wherein we
live.

Persons who argue against persecution now, are not sufficiently sensible of
the bitter enmity of the heart of every unregenerate man against God. For my
own part, I am so far from wondering that Christians are persecuted, that I
wonder our streets do not run with the blood of the saints: was men's power
equal to their wills, such a horrid spectacle would soon appear. But,

Persecution is necessary in respect to the godly themselves. If we have not
all manner of evil spoken of us, how can we know whether we love contempt, and
seek only that honor which comes from above? If we have not persecutors, how
can our passive graces be kept in exercise? How can many Christians precepts be
put into practice? How can we love, pray for, and do good to those who despite
fully use us? How can we overcome evil with good (...) short, how can we know
we love God better than life itself? St. Paul was sensible of all this, and
therefore so positively and peremptorily asserts, that all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

Not than I (...), All are persecuted in a like degree. No: This would be
contrary both to scripture and experience. But though all Christians are not
really called to suffer every kind of persecution, yet all Christians are
liable thereto: and notwithstanding some may live in more peaceful times of the
church than others, yet all Christians, in all ages, will find by their own
experience, that, whether they act in a private or public capacity, they must,
in some degree o^ other, suffer persecution.

Here then I would pause, and, lostly, by way of application, exhort all
persons,

First, To stand a while and examine themselves. For, by what has been said,
you may gather one mark, whereby you may judge whether you are Christians or
not. Were you ever persecuted for Righteousness sake? If not, you never yet
lived godly in Christ our Lord. Whatever you may say to the contrary, the
inspired apostle, in the words of the text (the truth of which, I think, I have
sufficiently proved) positively asserts, that all that will live godly in him,
shall suffer persecution. Not that all who are persecuted are real Christians;
for many sometimes suffer, and are persecuted on other accounts than for
Righteousness (...). The great question therefore is, Whether you are ever
persecuted for living godly? You may boast (as perhaps you may think) of your
great prudence and sagacity, (and indeed these are excellent things) and glory
because you have not run such lengths, and made yourselves so singular, and
liable to such contempt, as some others have. But, alas! this i^ not a mark of
your being a Christian, but of a Laodicean spirit, neither hot nor cold, and
fit only to be spewed out of the mouth of God. That which you call prudence, is
often only cowardice, dreadful hypocrisy, pride of heart, which makes you dread
contempt; and afraid to give up your reputation for God. You are ashamed of
Christ and his gospel; and in all probability; was he to appear a second time
upon earth, in words, as well as works, you would deny him. Awake therefore,
all ye that live only formally in Christ Jesus, and no longer seek that honor
which comes of man. I do not desire to court you, but I entreat you to live
godly, and fear not contempt for the sake of Jesus Christ. Beg of God to give
you his Holy Spirit, that you may see through, and discover the latent
hypocrisy of your hearts, and no longer deceive your own souls. Remember you
cannot reconcile two irreconcilable differences. God and Mammon, the
friendship of this world, with the favor of God. Know you not who has told
you, that the friendship of this world is enmity with God? If therefore you are
in friendship with the world, notwithstanding all your specious pretenses to
piety, you are at enmity with God: you are only heart hypocrites, and, What is
the hope of the hypocrite, when God shall take away his soul? Let the words of
the text sound an alarm in your ears -- Oh let (...) sink deep into your
hearts; yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution.

Secondly, From the words of the text, I would take occaosin to speak to those,
who are about to list themselves under the banner of Christ's cross. What say
you? Are you resolved to live godly in Christ Jesus, notwithstanding the
consequence will be, that you must suffer persecution. You are beginning to
build, but have you taken our Lord's advice, to sit down first and count the
(...)? Have you well weighed with yourselves that weighty declaration, he that
loves father or mother more than ME, is not worthy of ME; and again, Unless a
man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple? Perhaps some of you
have great possessions; will not you go away sorrowful, if Christ should
require you to sell all that you have! Others of you again, may be kinsmen, or
some way related, or under obligations to the high priests, or other great
personages, who may be persecuting the church of Christ^ what say you? Will
you, with Moses, rather choose (...) suffer affliction with the people of God,
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season? Perhaps you may say, "My friends
will not oppose me." That is more than you know: in all probability your chief
enemies will be those of your own household. If therefore they should oppose
you, are you willing naked to follow a naked Christ; and to wander about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, in dens and caves of the earth, being afflicted,
destitute, tormented, rather than not be Christ's disciples? You are now all
following with zeal, as Ruth and Orpah did Naomi, and may weep under the word;
but are not your tears crocodile's ^ears? And when difficulties come, will you
not go back from following your Lord, as Orpah departed from following Naomi;
Have you really the root (...) grace in your hearts; Or, are you only
stony-ground hearers? You receive the word with joy; but, when persecution
arises because of the (...) will you not be immediately offended? Be not angry
with me for putting these questions to you. I am jealous over you, but it is
with a godly jealousy; For, alas! how many have put their hands to the plough,
and afterward have shamefully looked back? I only deal with you, as our Lord
did with the person that said, Lord I will follow thee whithersoever thou will.
The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man,
says he, has not where to lay his head. What say you? Are you willing to
endure hardness, and thereby approve yourselves good soldiers of Jesus Christ!
You now come on foot out of the towns and villages to hear the word, and
receive me as a messenger of God: But will you not by and by cry out, Away with
him, away with him; it is not fit such a fellow should live upon the earth?
Perhaps some of you, like Hazael, may say, "Are we dogs that we should do this?
But, alas! I have met with many unhappy souls, who have drawn back into
perdition, and have afterward accounted me their enemy, for dealing faithfully
with them; though once, if it were possible, they would have plucked out their
own eyes, and have given them unto me. Sit down therefore, I beseech you, and
seriously count the cost, and ask yourselves again and again, whether you count
all things but dung and dross, and are willing to suffer the loss of all thing,
so that you may win Christ, and be found in him; for you may assure yourselves,
the apostle has not spoken in vain, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution.

Thirdly, The text speaks to you that are patiently suffering for the truth's
sake: Rejoice and be exceeding glad; great shall be your reward in heaven. For
to you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer, and perhaps
remarkably too, for the sake of Jesus! This is a mark of your discipleship, an
evidence that you do live godly in Christ Jesus. Fear not therefore, neither be
dismayed. Oh, be not weary and faint in your minds! Jesus, your Lord, your
life, comes and his reward is with him. Though all men forsake you, yet will
not he: No; the Spirit of Christ and of glory shall rest upon you. In patience
therefore, possess your souls. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. Be in
nothing terrified by your adversaries: on their part Christ is evil spoken of
(...) on your part he is glorified. Be not ashamed of your glory, since others
can glory in their shame. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial,
wherewith you are or may be tried. The devil rages, knowing that he has but a
short time to reign. He or his emissaries have no more power than what is given
them from above; God sets them their bounds, which they cannot pass; and the
very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not; no one shall set upon you
to hurt you, without your heavenly Father's knowledge. Do your earthly friends
and parents forsake you? Are you cast out of the synagogues? The Lord shall
reveal himself to you, as to the man that was born blind. Jesus Christ shall
take you up. If they carry you to prison, and load you with chains, so that the
iron enter into your souls, even there shall Christ send an angel from heaven
to strengthen you, and enable you with Paul and Silaa, to sing praises at
midnight. Are you threatened to be thrown into a den of lions, or cast into a
burning fiery furnace, because you will not bow down and worship the boast?
Fear not; the God whom you serve, is able to deliver you: Or, if he should
suffer the flames to devour your bodies, they would only serve as so many fiery
chariots, to carry your souls to God. Thus it was with the martyrs of old; so
that one, when he was burning, cried out, Come, you Papists, if you want a
miracle, here, behold one! This bed of flames is to me a bed of down. Thus it
was with almost all that suffered in former times; For Jesus, notwithstanding
he withdrew his own divinity from himself, yet has always lifted up the light
of his countenance upon the souls of suffering saints. -- Fear not therefore
those that can kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but
fear him only, who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Dare, dare,
to live godly in Christ Jesus, though you suffer all manner of persecution. But,

Fourthly, Are there any true ministers of Jesus Christ here? You will not be
offended if I tell you, that the words of the text are in an especial manner
applicable to you. St. Paul wrote them to Timothy: and we, of all men, that
live godly in Christ Jesus, must expect to suffer the severest persecution.
Satan will endeavor to bruise our hoels, let who will escape: and it has been
the general way of God's providence, in times of persecution, to permit the
shepherds first to be smitten, before the sheep are scattered. Let us not
therefore show that we are only hirelings, who care not for the sheep; but,
like the great Shepherd and bishop of fouls, let us readily lay down our lives
for the sheep. Whilst others are boasting of their great preferments, let us
rather glory in our great afflictions and persecutions for the sake of Christ.
St. Paul now rejoices that he suffered afflictions and persecutions at Iconium
and Lystra: Out of all the Lord delivered him; out of all the Lord will deliver
us, and cause us hereafter to sit down with him on thrones, when he comes to
judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

I could proceed; but I am conscious in this part of my discourse, I ought more
particularly to speak to myself, knowing that Satan has desired to have me,
that he may sift me as wheat. I know I must (how can it be avoided?) suffer
great things for Christ's name sake. Without a spirit of prophecy, we may
easily discern the signs of the times. Persecution is even at the doors: The
tabernacle of the Lord is already driven into the wilderness; the ark of the
Lord is fallen into the unhallowed hands of uncircumcised Philistines. They
have long since put us out of their synagogues, and high priests have been
calling on civil magistrates to exert their authority against the disciples of
the Lord: Men in power have been breathing out threatenings: We may easily guess
what will follow, imprisonment and slaughter. The storm has been gathering some
time; it must break shortly. Perhaps it will fall on me first.

Brethren therefore whether in the ministry or not, I beseech you, pray for me,
that I may never suffer justly, as an evil-doer, but only for Righteousness
sake. Oh! pray that I may not deny my Lord in any wise, but that I may joyfully
follow him, both to prison and to death, if he is pleased to call me to seal
his truths with my blood. Be not ashamed of Christ, or of his gospel, though I
should become a prisoner of the Lord. Though I am bound, the word of God will
not be bound: No; an open, an effectual door is opened for the preaching the
everlasting gospel, and men or devils shall never be able to prevail against
it. Only pray, whether it be in life or death, Christ may be glorified in me:
Then I shall rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

And now to whom shall I address myself next?

Fifthly, To those, who persecute their neighbors for living godly in Christ
Jesus. But, what shall I say to you? Howl and weep for the miseries that shall
come upon you: for a little while the Lord permits you to ride over the heads
of his people; but, by and by, death will arrest you, judgment will find you,
and Jesus Christ shall put a question to you, which shall strike you dumb: Why
persecuted you me? You may plead your laws and your canons, and pretend what
you do is out of zeal for God; but God shall discover the cursed hypocrite and
serpentine enmity of your hearts, and give you over to the tormentors. It is
well, if in this life, God does not set some mark upon you. He pleaded the
cause of Naboth, when innocently condemned for blaspheming God and the King;
and our Lord sent forth his armies, and destroyed the city of those who killed
the prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them. If you have a mind
therefore to fill up the measure of your iniquities, go on, persecute and
despise the disciples of the Lord: but know, that, for all these things, God
shall bring you into judgment. Nay, those you now persecute, shall be in part
your judges, and sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high, whilst you are
dragged by infernal spirits into a Lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
and the smoke of your torment shall be ascending up for ever and ever. Lay down
therefore, ye rebels, your arms against the Most High God, and no longer
persecute those who live godly in Christ Jesus. The Lord will plead, the Lord
will avenge their cause. You may be permitted to bruise their heels, yet in the
end they shall bruise your accursed heads. I speak not this, as though I were
afraid of you; for I know in whom I have believed: Only out of pure love I warn
you, and because I know not but Jesus Christ may make some of you vessels of
mercy, and snatch you, even you, persecutors, as firebrarnds out of the fire.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even persecutors, the worst
of sinners: his righteousness is sufficient for them; his spirit is able to
purify and change their hearts. He once converted Saul: may the same God
magnify his power in converting all those who are causing the godly in Christ
Jesus, as much as in them lies, to suffer persecution! The Lord be with you
all, Amen.

SERMON IV.
ABRAHAM'S OFFERING UP HIS SON ISAAC.
GENESIS, xxii. 12. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do
thou any thing unto him; for now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.
THE great Apostle Paul, in one of his epistles, informs us, that whatsoever
was written aforetime was written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the holy scripture might have hope. And as without faith it is
impossible to please God, or to be accepted in Jesus, the Son of his love; we
may be assured, that whatever instances of a more than common faith are
recorded in the book of God, they were more immediately designed by the Holy
Spirit for our learning and imitation, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. For this reason, the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, in the
eleventh chapter, mentions a noble catalogue of Old Testament saints and
martyrs, who subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, stopped the mouths of
lions, etc. and are gone before us to inherit the promises. A sufficient
confutation, I think, of their error, who lightly esteem the Old Testament
saints, and would not have them mentioned to Christians, as persons whose faith
and patience we are called upon more immediately to follow. If this was true,
the apostle would never have produced such a cloud of witnesses out of the Old
Testament, to excite the Christians of the first, and consequently purest age
of the church, to continue steadfast and unmovable in the profession of their
faith. Amidst this catalogue of saints, methinks, the patriarch Abraham shines
the brightest, and differs from the others, as one star differs from another
star in glory; for he shone with such distinguished luster, that he was called
the Friend of God, the Father of the Faithful; and those who believe on Christ,
are said to be sons and daughters of, and to be blessed, with faithful Abraham.
Many trials of his faith did God send this great and good man, after he had
commanded him to get out from his country, and from his kindred, unto a land
which he should show him; but the last was the most severe of all; I mean that
of offering up his only son. This, by the divine assistance, I propose to make
the subject of your present meditation, and, by way of conclusion, to draw some
practical inferences, as God shall enable me, from this instructive story.

The sacred penman begins the narrative thus; verse 1. And it came to pass,
after these things, God did tempt Abraham. After these things, that is, after
he had underwent many severe trials before, after he was old, full of days, and
might flatter himself perhaps, that the troubles and toils of life were now
finished; after these things, God did tempt Abraham. Christians, you know not
what trials you may meet with before you die: notwithstanding you may have
suffered, and been tried much already, yet, it may be, a greater measure is
still behind, which you are to fill up. "Be not high-minded, but fear." Our
last trials, in all probability, will be the greatest: and we can never say our
warfare is accomplished, or our trials finished, till we bow down our heads,
and give up the ghost. And it came to pass, after these things, that God did
tempt Abraham.

"God did tempt Abraham." But can the scripture contradict itself? Does not the
apostle James tell us, that God tempts no man; and God does tempt no man to
evil, or on purpose to draw him into sin; for, when a man is thus tempted, he
is drawn away of his own heart's lust, and enticed. But in another sense, God
may be said to tempt, I mean, to try his servants; and in this sense we are to
understand that passage of Matthew, where we are told, that Jesus was led up by
the Spirit (the good Spirit) into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil.
And our Lord, in that excellent form of prayer which he has been pleased to
give us, does not require us to pray that we may not absolutely be led into
temptation, but delivered from the evil of it; whence we may plainly infer,
that God sees it fit sometimes to lead us into temptation, that is, to bring us
into such circumstances as will try our faith, and other Christian graces. In
this sense we are to understand the expression before us, God did tempt or try
Abraham."

How God was pleased to reveal his will at this time to his faithful servant,
whether by the Shechinah, or divine appearance, or by a small still voice, as
he spoke to Elijah, or by a whisper, like that of the Spirit to Philip, when he
commanded him to join himself to the Eunuch's chariot, we are not told, nor is
it material to enquire. It is enough that we are informed, God said unto him,
Abraham; and tha^ Abraham knew it was the voice of God: for, "he said, behold,
here I am." O what a holy familiarity (if I may so speak) is there between God
and those holy souls that are united to him by faith in Christ Jesus! God says,
Abraham: and Abraham said, (it should seem without the least surprise) "Behold,
here I am," being reconciled to God by the death and obedience of Christ, which
he rejoiced in, and saw by faith afar off; he did not, like guilty Adam, seek
the trees of the garden to hide himself from, but takes pleasure in conversing
with God, and talks with him, as a man talks with his friend. O that
CHIRIST-less sinners knew what it is to have fellowship with the Father and the
Son? They would envy the happiness of saints, and count it all joy to be termed
enthusiasts and fools for Christ's sake.

But what does God say unto Abraham; Ver. 3. Take now thy son, thine only son
Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him
there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I shall tell thee of.

Every word deserves our particular observation. Whatever he was to do, he must
do it now, immediately, without conferring with flesh and blood. But what must
he do? Take now thy son. Had God said, take now a firstling, or choicest lamb
or beast of thy flock, and offer it up for a burnt-offering, it would not have
appeared so ghastly; but for God to say, Take now thy son, and offer him up for
a burnt-offering, one would have imagined, was enough to stagger the strongest
faith. But this is not all: It must not only be a son, but thine only son
Isaac, whom thou love. If it must be a son, and not a beast, that must be
offered, why will not Ishmael do, the son of the bondwoman? No, it must be his
only son, the he^ of all, his Isaac, by interpretation laughter, the son of his
old age, in whom his soul delighted* whom thou love, says God, in whose life
his own was wrapped up: And this son, this only son, th^s Isaac, the son of his
love, must be taken now, even now, without delay, and be offered up by his own
father, for a burnt-offering, upon one of the mountains of the which God would
tell him.

Well might the apostle, speaking of this man of God, say, that against hope he
believed in hope, and, being strong in faith, gave glory to God: For, had he
not been blessed with faith which man never before bad, he must have refused to
comply with this severe command. For how many arguments might nature suggest,
to prove that such a command could never come from God, or to excuse himself
from obeying it? What! (might the good man have said) butcher my child! it is
contrary to the very law of nature: Much more to butcher my dear son Isaac, in
whose seed God himself has assured me, that all the families of the earth shall
be blessed. But supposing I could give up my own affections, and be willing to
part with him, though I love him so dearly, yet, if I murder him, what will
become of God's promise? Besides I am now like a city built upon a hill; I
shine as a light in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation: How then shall I cause God's name to be blasphemed, how shall I
become a byword among the heathen, if they hear that I have committed a crime
which they abhor! But, above all, what will Sarah my wife say? How can I ever
return to her again, after I have imbrued my hands in my dear child's blood? O
that God would parden me in this thing, or take my life in the place of my
son's! Thus, I say, Abraham might have argued, and that too seemingly with
great reason, against complying with the divine command. But, as before by
faith he considered not the deadness of Sarah's womb, when she was past age,
but believed on him, who said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; so
now being convinced that the same God spoke to and commanded him to offer up
that son, and knowing that God was able to raise him from the dead, without
delay he obeys the heavenly call.

O that unbelievers would learn of faithful Abraham, and believe whatever is
revealed from God, though they cannot fully comprehend it! Abraham knew God
commanded him to offer up his son, and therefore believed, notwithstanding
carnal reasoning might suggest many objections. We have sufficient testimony,
that God has spoken to us by his Son; why should we not also believe, though
many things in the New Testament are above our reason? For, where reason ends,
faith begins. And, however infidels may style themselves reasoners, of all men
they are the most unreasonable: For is it not contrary to all reason, to
measure an infinite by a finite understanding, or think to find out the
mysteries of godliness to perfection?

But to return to the patriarch Abraham: We observed before what plausible
objections he might have made; but he answered not a single word: No, without
replying against his Maker, we are told, ver. 3. that Abraham rose up early in
the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and
Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went
unto the place of which God had told him.

From this verse we may gather, that God spoke to Abraham in a dream, or vision
of the night: For it is said, he rose up early. Perhaps it was near the fourth
watch of the night, just before break of day, when God said, Take now thy son;
and Abraham rises up early to do so; as I doubt not but he used to rise up
early to offer up his morning-sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. It is often
remarked of people in the Old Testament, that they rose early in the morning;
and particularly of our Lord in the New, that he rose a great while before day
to pray. The morning befriends devotion; and if people cannot use so much
self-deniel as to rise early to pray, I know not how they will be able to die
as a stake (if called to it) for Jesus Christ.

The humility, as well as piety of the patriarch, is observable: He saddled his
own ass (great men should be humble;) and to show his sincerity, though he took
two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, ye^ he keeps his design as a
secret from them all: Nay, he does not so much as tell Sarah his wife: For he
knew not but she might be a snare unto him in this affair; and, as Rebeccah
afterward, on another occasion, advised Jacob to flee, so Sarah also might
persuade Isaac to hide himself; or the young men, had they known of it, might
have forced him away, as (...) after-ages the soldiers rescued Jonathan out of
the hands of Saul. But Abraham sought no such evasion, and therefore, like an
Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile, he himself resolutely clave the
wood for the burnt-offering, rose up and went unto the place of which God had
told him. In the second Verse, God commanded him to offer up his son upon one
of the mountains which he would tell him of. He commanded him to offer his son
up, but would not then directly tell him the place where: This was to keep him
dependent and watching unto prayer: For there is nothing like being kept waiting
upon God; and, if we do, assuredly God will reveal himself unto us yet further
in his own time. Let us practice what we know, follow providence so far as we
can see already; and what we know not, what we see not as yet, let us only be
found in the way of duty, and the Lord will reveal even that unto us. Abraham
knew not directly where he was to offer up his son; but he rises up and sets
forward, and behold now God shows him; and he went to the place of which God
had told him. Let us go and do likewise.

Ver. 4. Then on the third day, Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place
afar off.

So that the place, of which God had told him, was no less than three days
journey distant from the place where God first appeared to him, and commanded
him to take his son. Was not this to try his faith, and to let him see that
what he did, was not merely from a sudden pang of devotion, but a matter of
choice and deliberation? But who can tell what the aged patriarch felt during
these three days? Strong as he was in faith, I am persuaded his bowels often
yearned over his dear son Isaac. Methinks I see the good old man walking with
his dear child in his hand, and now and then looking upon him, loving him, and
then turning aside to weep. And perhaps, sometimes he stays a little behind to
pout out his heart before God; for he had no mortal to tell his case to. Then,
methinks, I see him join his son and servants again, and talking to him (...)
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, as they walked by the way. At
length, on the third day, he lift up his eyes, and saw the place afar off. And,
to show that he was yet sincerely resolved to do whatsoever the Lord required
of him, he even now will not discover his design to his servants, but said,
ver. 5. in his young men, (as we should say to our worldly thoughts when about
to tread the courts of the Lord's home) Abide ye here with the ass; and I and
the lad will go up yonder, and worship, and come again to you. This was a
sufficient reason for their staying behind; and, it being their master's custom
to go frequently to worship, they could have no suspicion of what he was going
about. And by Abraham's saying, that he and the lad would come again, I am apt
to think he believed God would raise him from the dead, if so be he permitted
him to offer his child up for a burnt-offering. However that be, he is yet
resolved to obey God to the uttermost; and therefore,

Ver. 6. Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac
his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife, and they went both of
them together. Little did Isaac think that he was to be offered on that very
wood which he was carrying upon his shoulders; and therefore, ver. 7. Isaac
innocently, and with a holy freedom (for good men should not keep their
children at too great a distance) spoke unto Abraham his father, and said, My
father; and he (with equal affection and holy condescension) said, Here am I,
my son. And to show how careful Abraham had been (as all christian parents
ought to be) to instruct his Isaac how to sacrifice to God, like a youth
trained up in the way wherein he should go; Isaac said, Behold the fire and the
wood; but where is the lamb for a burnt-offering? How beautiful is early piety!
How amiable, to hear young people ask questions about sacrificing to God in an
acceptable way! Isaac knew very well that a lamb was wanting, and that a lamb
was necessary for a proper sacrifice: Behold the fire and the wood; but where
is the lamb for a burnt-offering? Young men and maidens, learn or him.

Hitherto, it is plain, Isaac knew nothing of his father's design: But I
believe by what his father said in answer to his question, that now was the
time Abraham revealed it unto him.

Verse 8. And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a
burnt-offering. Some think that Abraham by faith saw the Lord Jesus afar off,
and here spoke prophetically of that Lamb of God already slain in decree, and
hereafter to be actually offered up for sinners. This was a lamb of God's
providing indeed) we dared not have thought of it) to satisfy his own justice,
and to render him just in justifying the ungodly. What is all our fire and
wood, the best preparation and performances we can make or present, unless God
had provided himself this Lamb for a burnt offering? He could not away with
them. The words will well bear this interpretation. But, whatever Abraham might
intend, I cannot but think he here made an application, and acquainted his son
of God's dealing with his soul; and at length, with tears in his eyes, and the
utmost affection in his heart, cried out, Thou art to be the lamb, my son; God
has commanded me to provide thee for a burnt-offering, and to offer thee upon
the mountain which we are now ascending. And, as it appears from a subsequent
verse, Isaac, convinced that it was the divine will, made no resistance at all:
for it is said, "they went both of them together;" and again, verse 9, when we
are told that Abraham bound Isaac, we do not hear of his complaining or
endeavoring to escape, which he might have done, being (as some think) near
thirty years of age, and it is plain, capable enough for carrying wood enough
for a burnt-offering. But he was partaker of the like precious faith with his
aged father, and therefore is as willing to be offered, as Abraham is to offer
him: and so they went both of them together.

Verse 6. At length they came to the place of which God had told Abraham. He
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and
laid him on the altar upon the wood.

And here let us pause awhile, and by faith take a view of the place where the
father has laid him. I doubt not but the blessed angels hovered round the altar
and sang, Glory be to God in the highest, for giving such faith to man. Come,
all ye tenderhearted parents, who know what it is to look over a dying child:
Fancy that you saw the altar erected before you, and the wood laid in order,
and the beloved Isaac bound upon it: Fancy that you saw the aged parent
standing by weeping. (For, why may we not suppose that Abraham wept, since
Jesus himself wept at the grave of Lazarus?) O what pious, endearing
expressions passed now alternately between the father and the son! Josephus
records a pathetic speech made by each, whether genuine I know not: but
methinks I see the tears trickle down the patriarch Abraham's cheeks; and, out
of the abundance of the heart, he cries, Adieu, adieu, my son; the Lord gave
thee to me, and the Lord calls thee away; blessed be the name of the Lord:
adieu, my Isaac, my only son, whom I love as my own soul; adieu, adieu. I see
Isaac at the same time meekly resigning himself into his heavenly Father's
hands, and praying to the most High to strengthen his earthly parent to strike
the stroke. But why do I attempt to describe what either son or father felt? It
is impossible: we may indeed form some saint idea of, but shall never fully
comprehend it, till we come and sit down with them in the kingdom of heaven,
and hear them tell the pleasing story over again. -- Hasten, O Lord, that
blessed time! O let thy kingdom come!

And now, ver. 10. The fatal blow is going to be given. And Abraham stretched
forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son. But do you not think he
intended to turn away his head, when he gave the blow? Nay, why may we not
suppose be sometimes drew his hand in, after it was stretched out, willing to
take another last farewell of his beloved Isaac, and desirous to defer it a
little, though resolved at last to strike home? Be that as it will, his arm is
now stretched out, the knife is in his hand, and he is about to put it to his
dear son's throat.

But sing, O heavens! and rejoice, O earth! Man's extremity is God's
opportunity: for behold, just as the knife, in all probability, was near his
throat, ver. 11. the angel of the Lord, (or rather, the Lord of angels, Jesus
Christ. the angel of the everlasting covenant) called unto him, (probably in a
very audible manner) from heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham. (The word is
doubled to engage his attention; and perhaps the suddenness of the call made
him draw back his hand, just as he was going to strike his son.) And Abraham
said, Here am I,

And he said, verse 12. Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any
thing unto him: for now know I that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

Here then it was that Abraham received his son Isaac from the dead in a
figure. He was in effect offered upon the altar, and God looked upon him as
offered and given unto him. Now it was that Abraham's faith; being tried, was
found more precious than gold purified seven times in the fire. Now as a reward
of grace, though not of debt, for this (...) act of obedience, by (...) God
gives and confirms the promise, that in his seed all the nations in the earth
should be blessed, verse 17. 18. With what comfort may we suppose the good old
man and his son went down from the (...), and returned unto the young men! With
what joy we imagine he went home, and related all that had passed to Sarah! And
above all, with what triumph is he existing now in the paradise of God, and
adoring (...), (...) distinguishing electing, everlasting love; which (...)
made him to differ from the (...) mankind, and rendered him worthy of that
(...) which he will have so long as the sun and the moon endure: The father of
the faithful!

But let us now drew our eyes from the creature, and do what Abraham, if he was
present, would direct to; I mean, (...) them on the Creator, God blessed for
evermore.

I see your hearts affected, I see your eyes weep, (and indeed, who can refrain
weeping at the relation of such a story?) But, behold, I show you a mystery hid
under the sacrifice of Abraham's only son, which, unless your hearts are
hardened, must cause you to weep tears of love, and that plentifully too. I
would willingly hope you even prevent me here, and are ready to say, (...) it
is the love of God, in giving Jesus Christ to die for our sins. Yes, that is
it. And yet perhaps you find your hearts at the mentioning of this, not so much
effected. Let this convince you, that we are fallen creatures, and that we do
not love God or Christ as we ought to do: for, if you admire Abraham offering
up his Isaac, how much more ought you to (...), and adore the love of God, who
so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son, Christ Jesus our Lord,
that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life;
May we not well cry out Now know we, O Lord, that thou have loved us, since
thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only son from us? Abraham was God's
creature (and God was Abraham's friend) and therefore under the highest
obligation to surrender up his Isaac. But, O stupendous love! Whilst we were
his enemies, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, that
he might become a curse for us. O the freeness, as well as the infinity, of the
love of God our Father! It is unsearchable: I am lost in contemplating it; it
is past finding out. Think, O believers, think of the love of God, in giving
Jesus Christ to be a propitiation for our sins. And when you hear how Abraham
built as altar, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his sea, and laid
him on the altar upon the wood; think how your heavenly Father bound Jesus
Christ his only Son, and offered him upon the altar of his justice, and laid
upon him the iniquities of us all. When you read of Abraham's stretching forth
his hand to slay his son, think, O think, how God actually suffered his Son to
be slain, that we might live for evermore. Do you read of Isaac carrying the
wood upon his shoulders, upon which he was to be offered. Let this lead you to
Mount Calvary, (this very mount of Moriah, where Isaac was offered, as some
think) and take a view of the antitype Jesus Christ, that Son of God, bearing
and ready to sink under the weight of that cross on which he was to hang for
us. Do you admire Isaac so freely consenting to die, though a creature, and
therefore obliged to go when God called? (...) do not forget to admire
infinitely more the dear Lord Jesus, that promised seed, who willingly said,
"Lo, I come," though under no obligation so to do, "to do thy will," to obey
and die for men, O God! Did you weep just now, when I bid you fancy that you
saw the altar, and the wood laid in order, and Isaac laid bound on the altar?
Look up by faith, behold the blessed Jesus, our all-glorious Immanuel, not
bound, but nailed on an accursed tree: see how he hangs crowned with thorns,
and had in derision of all that are round about him: see how the thorns pierce
him, and how the blood in purple streams trickles down his sacred temples! Hark
how the God of nature groans! See how he bows his head, and at length humanity
gives up the ghost! Isaac is saved, but Jesus, the God of Isaac, dies; a ram is
offered up in Isaac's room, but Jesus has no substitute; Jesus must bleed,
Jesus must die: God the Father provided this Lamb for himself from all
eternity. He must be offered in time, or man must be damned for evermore. And
now where are all your tears? Shall I say, refrain your voice from weeping? No,
rather let me exhort you to look to him whom you have pierced, and mourn, as a
women mourns for her firstborn: for we have been the betrayers, we have been
the murderers of this Lord of glory; and shall we not bewail those sins, which
brought she blessed Jesus to the accursed tree? Having so much done, so much
suffered for us, so much forgiven, shall we not love much? O! let us love him
with all our hearts, and minds, and strength, and glorify him in our souls and
bodies; for they are his. Which leads me to a second inference I shall draw
from the foregoing discourse.

From hence we may learn the nature of true justifying faith. Whoever
understands and preaches the truth as it is in Jesus, must acknowledge, that
salvation is God's free gift, and that we are saved, not by any or all the
works of righteousness which we have done or can do: no; we can neither wholly
nor in part justify ourselves in the sight of God. The Lord Jesus Christ is our
righteousness; and if we are accepted with God, it must be only in and through
the personal righteousness, the active and passive obedience of Jesus Christ
his beloved Son. This righteousness must be imputed, or counted over to us, and
applied by says to our hearts, or else we can in no wise be justified in God's
sight: and that very moment a sinner is enabled to say hold on Christ's
righteousness by faith, he is freely justified from all his sins, and shall
never enter into condemnation, notwithstanding he was a firebrand of hell
before. Thus it was that Abraham was justified before he did any good work: he
was enabled to believe on the Lord Christ; it was accounted to him for
righteousness; that is, Christ's righteousness was made over to him, and so
accounted his. This, this is gospel; this is the only way of finding acceptance
with God: good works have nothing to do with our justification in his sight. We
are justified by faith alone, as says the article of our church; agreeable to
which the apostle Paul says, By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not
of yourselves; it is the gift of God. Notwithstanding good works have their
proper place: they justify our faith, though not our persons: they follow it,
and evidence our justification in in the sight of men. Hence it is that the
apostle James asks, was not Abraham justified by works (alluding no doubt to
the story on which we have been discoursing) that is, did he not prove he was
in a justified state, because his faith was productive of good works? This
declarative justification in the sight of men, is what is directly to be
understood in the words of the text: "Now know I," says God, that thou fear
me, since thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. Not but that
God knew it before; but this is spoken in condescension to our weak capacities,
and plainly shows, that his offering up his son was accepted with God, as an
evidence of the sincerity of his faith, and for this, was left on record to
future ages. Hence then you may learn whether you are blessed with, and are
sons and daughters of faithful Abraham. You say you believe; you talk of free
grace, and free justification: you do well; the devils also believe and
tremble. But has the faith which you pretend to, influenced your hearts,
renewed your souls, and, like Abraham's worked by love? Are your affections,
like his, set on things above? Are you heavenly-minded, and like him, do you
confess yourselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth. In short, has your
(...) enabled you to overcome the world, and (...) you to give up your Isaacs,
your (...), your most beloved lusts, friends, pleasure, and (...) for God? If
so, take the comfort (...) may you say, We know assuredly, that we do fear and
love God, or rather are loved of him. But if you are only talking believers,
have only a faith of the head, and never felt the power of it in your hearts,
however you may bolster yourselves up, and say, we have Abraham for our father,
or Christ is our Savior; unless you get a faith of the heart, a faith working
by love, you shall never sit with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or Jesus Christ, in
the kingdom of heaven.

But I must draw one more inference, and with that I shall conclude.

Learn, O saints! from what has been said, to fit loose to all your worldly
comforts; and stand really prepared to part with every thing, when God shall
require it at your hand. Some of you, perhaps, may have friends, who are to you
as your own souls, and others may have children, in whose lives your own lives
are bound up: all I believe have their Isaacs, their particular delights of
some kind or other. Labor, for Christ's sake, labor, ye sons and daughters of
Abraham, to resign them, daily in affection to God, that, when he shall require
you really to sacrifice them, you may not confer with flesh and blood, any more
than the blessed patriarch now before us. And as for you that have been in any
measure tried like unto him, let his example encourage and comfort you.
Remember, Abraham your father was tried so before you: think, O think, of the
happiness he now enjoys, and how he is incessantly thanking God for tempting
and trying him when here below. Look up often by the eye of faith, and see him
sitting with his dearly beloved Isaac in the world of spirits. Remember, it
will be but a little while, and you shall sit with them also, and ^ell one
another what God has done for your souls. There I hope to sit with you, and
hear this story of his offering up his son from his own mouth, and to praise
the Lamb that sits upon the throne, for what he has done for all our souls,
for ever and ever.

SERMON V.
READINESS CONVERSION.
ACTS ix. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews
which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.
IT is an undoubted truth, however it may seem a paradox to natural men, that
whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And
therefore it is very remarkable, that our blessed Lord, in his glorious sermon
on the Mount, after he had been pronouncing those blessed, who were poor in
spirit, meek, pure in heart, and such like, immediately adds, (and spends no
less than three verses in this beatitude) Blessed are they who are persecuted
for righteousness sake. No one ever was or ever will be endowed with the
forementioned graces in any degree, but he will be persecuted for it in a
measure. There is an irreconcilable enmity between the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the serpent. And if we are not of the world, but show by our fruits
that we are of the number of those whom Jesus Christ has chosen out of the
world, for that very reason the world will hate us. As this is true of every
particular Christian, so it is true of every Christian church in general. For
some years past we have heard ^^t little of a public persecution: why? Because
but little of the power of godliness has prevailed amongst all determinations.
The strong man armed has had fall possession of most professors' hearts, and
therefore he has let them rest in a false peace. But we may assure ourselves,
when Jesus Christ begins to gather in his elect in any remarkable manner, and
opens an effectual door for preaching the everlasting gospel, persecution will
flame out, and Satan (...) his emissaries will do their utmost (though in vain)
to stop the work of God. Thus it was in the first ages, thus it is in our days,
and thus it will be till time shall be no more.

Christians, and Christian churches must then expect enemies. Our chief concern
should be, to learn how to behave toward them in a Christian manner: for
unless we take good heed to ourselves, we shall embitter our spirits, and act
unbecoming the followers of that Lord, who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, threatened not; and as a lamb before his shearers is
dumb, so opened he not his mouth. But what motive shall we make use of to bring
ourselves to this blessed Lamb-like temper? Next to the immediate operation of
the Holy Spirit upon our hearts, I know of no consideration (...) conducive to
teach us long-suffering toward (...) most bitter persecutors, than this, That,
for all that we know to the contrary, some of those very persons, who are now
persecuting, may be chosen from all eternity by God, and hereafter called in
time, to edify and build up the church of Christ.

The persecutor Saul, mentioned in the words of the text, (and whose
conversion, God willing. I propose to treat on in the following discourse) is a
noble instance of this kind.

I say, a persecutor, and that a bloody one: for see how he is introduced in
the beginning of this chapter: and Saul yet breathing out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of our Lord, went unto the high priest, and
desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of
THIS WAY, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem.

"And Saul yet breathing out." This implies that he had been a persecutor
before. To prove which, we need only look back to the seventh chapter, where we
shall find him so very remarkably active at Stephen's death, that the witnesses
laid down their clothes at a young man (...) feet, whose name was Saul. He
seems, though young, to be in some authority. Perhaps, for his zeal against the
Christians, he was preferred in the church, and was allowed to sit in the great
council or sanhedrim: for we are told, chap. viii. ver. 1. "That Saul was
consenting unto his death:" and again, at ver. 3. he is brought in as exceeding
all in his opposition; for thus speaks the evangelist as for Saul, he made
havoc of the church, entering into every house, and ^^aling men and women,
committed them to prison. One would have imagined, that this should have
satisfied, at least abated the fury of this young zealot. No: being exceedingly
mad against them, as he himself informs Agrippa, and having made havoc of all
in Jerusalem, he now is resolved to persecute the disciples of the Lord, even
to strange cities; and therefore yet breathing out threatening. "Breathing
out." The words are very emphatical, and expressive of his bitter enmity. It
was as natural to him now to threaten the Christians, as it was for him to
breathe: he could scarce speak, but it was some threatenings against them. Nay,
he not only breathed one threatenings, but slaughters also, (and those who
threaten, would also slaughter, if it were in their power) against the
disciples of the Lord. Insatiable therefore as hell, finding he could not
refuse or stop the Christians by force of argument, he is resolved to do it by
force of arms; and therefore went to the high priest (foe there never was a
persecution yet without a high priest at the head of it) and desired of him
letters, issued out of his spiritual court, to the synagogues or ecclesiastical
courts at Damascus, giving him authority, that if he found any of this way,
whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem, I
suppose to be arraigned and condemned in the high priest's court. Observe how
be speaks of the Christians. Luke, who wrote the Acts, calls them disciples of
the Lord. And Saul styles then men and women of this way. I doubt not but he
represented them as a company of upstart enthusiasts, that had lately gotten
into a new method or way of living; that would not be content with the
temple-service, but they most be righteous overmuch, and have their private
meetings of conventicler^; and break bread, as they called it, from house to
house, to the great disturbance of the established clergy, and to the utter
subversion of all order and decency. I do not hear that the high priest makes
any objection: no, he was as willing to grant letters, as Saul was to ask them;
and wonderfully pleased within himself, to find he had such an active zealot to
employ against the Christians.

Well then, a judicial process is immediately issued out, with the high
priest's seal affixed to it. And now methinks I see the young persecutor finely
equipped, and pleasing himself with thoughts how triumphantly he should ride
back with the men and women of this way, dragging after him to Jerusalem.

What a condition may we imagine the poor disciples at Damascus were in at this
time! No doubt they had heard of Readiness imprisoning and making havoc of the
saints at Jerusalem, and we may well suppose were apprised of his design
against them. I am persuaded this was a growing, because a trying time with
these dear people. O how did they wrestle with God in prayer, beseeching him
either to deliver them from, or give them grace sufficient to enable them to
bear up under the fury of their persecutors? The high priest doubtless with the
rest of his reverend brethren, flattered themselves, that they should now put
an effectual stop to this growing heresy, and waited with impatience for Readiness
return.

But, He that sits in heaven laughs them to scorn, the Lord has them in
derision. And therefore, ver. 3. As Saul journeyed and came even near unto
Damascus, perhaps to the very gates, (our Lord permitting (...) to try the
faith of his disciples, and more conspicuously to baffle the designs of his
enemies) suddenly (at midday; as he acquaints Agrippa) there shined round
about him a light from heaven, a light brighter than the sun; and he fell to
the earth, (why not into hell?) and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? The word is doubled, Saul, Saul: like that of our Lord
to Martha; Martha, Martha; or the prophet, O earth, earth, earth! Perhaps these
words came like thunder to his soul. That they were spoken audibly, we are
assured from verse 7^ His companions heard the voice. Our Lord now arrests the
persecuting zealot, calling him by name; for the word never does us good, till
we find it spoken to us in particular. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou ME? Put
the emphasis upon the word why, what evil have I done? Put it upon the word
persecutest, why persecutest! I suppose Saul thought he was not persecuting;
no, he was only putting the laws of the ecclesiastical court into execution;
but Jesus, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, saw through the hypocrisy of his
heart, that, notwithstanding his specious pretenses, all this proceeded from a
persecuting spirit, and secret enmity of heart against God; and therefore says,
Why persecutest thou ME? Put the emphasis upon the word ME, Why persecutest
thou me? Alas! Saul was not persecuting Christ, was he? He was only taking care
to prevent innovations in the church, and bringing a company of enthusiasts to
justice, who otherwise would overturn the established constitution. But Jesus
says, "Why persecutest thou me?" For what is done to Christ's disciples, he
takes as done to himself, whether it be good or whether it be evil. He that
touches Christ's disciples, touches the apple of his eye; and they that
persecute the followers of our Lord would persecute our Lord himself, was he
again to come and tabernacle amongst us.

I do not find that Saul gives any reason why he did persecute; no, he was
struck dumb; as every persecutor will be, when Christ Jesus puts this same
question to them at the terrible day of judgment. But being pricked at the
heart, no doubt with a sense not only of this, but of all (...) other offenses
against the great God, he said, ver. 5. "Who art thou, Lord?" See how soon God
can change the heart and voice of his most bitter enemies. Not many days ago,
Saul was not only (...) Christ himself, but, as much as in him lay, compelling
others to blaspheme also. But now he who before was an impostor, is called,
"Lord: who art thou, Lord? This admirably points out the way in which God's
Spirit works upon the heart: It first powerfully convinces of sin, and of our
damnable state: and then puts us upon inquiring after Jesus Christ. Saul being
struck to the ground or pricked to the heart, cries out after Jesus "Who art
thou, Lord?" As many of you that were never so far made sensible as your (...)
state, as to be made feelingly to seek after Jesus Christ were never yet truly
convicted by, much lest converted to, God. May the Lord, who (...), effectually
now strike all my Christ-less bearers, and for them upon inquiring after Jesus,
as their ALL in ALL! Saul said, "Who art thou, Lord? "And the Lord said, I am
Jesus, whom thou persecutest. Never did any one inquired truly after Jesus
Christ, but Christ made a saving discovery of himself (...) his soul. It should
(...) Lord appeared to him in person; for (...), afterward, says, the Lord who
appeared to thee in the way in which thou came; though this may only imply
Christ's meeting him in the way; it is not much matter: It is (...) here speak
to him, and says, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." It is remarkable, now
our Lord taken to himself the name of Jesus; for it is a name in which the
delights: I am Jesus, a Savior of my people, both from the (...) and power of
their sins: a "Jesus whom thou persecutest." This seems to be spoken to
convince Saul more and more of his sin: and I doubt not, but every word was
sharper than a two-edged sword, and came like so many daggars to his heart: O,
how did these words affect him! a Jesus! a Savior! and yet I am persecuting
him! This strikes him with horror; but then the word Jesus, though he was a
persecutor, might give him some hope. However, our dear Lord, to convince Saul
that he was to be saved by grace, and that he was not afraid of his power and
enmity, tells him, It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. As much as
to shy, though he was persecuting, yet he could not overthrow the church of
Christ: For he would sit as King upon his holy hill of Zion; tho (...) or
devils should never be able to prevail against him.

Ver. 6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Those, who think Saul had a discovery of Jesus made to his heart before,
think that this question is the result of his faith and that he now desires to
know what he shall do, out of gratitude, for what the Lord had done for his
soul; in this sense it may be understood, See my Sermon on, What think ye of
Christ?
and I have made use of it as an instance to prove, that faith will work by
love; but perhaps it may be more agreeable to the context, if we suppose that
Saul had only some distant discovery of Christ made to him, and not a full
(...) of faith: (...) we are told, he trembling and astonished, trembling at
the thoughts of his persecuting a Jesus, and astonished at his own vileness,
and the infinite condescension of this Jesus, cries out, "Lord, what will thou
have (...) to do?" Persons under soul, trouble, and sore conviction would be
glad to do any thing, or comply on any (...), to get peace with God. Arise,
(says our Lord) and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou shall
do.

And here we will leave Saul a while, and see what is become of his companions.
But what shall we say? God is a sovereign agent; his sacred Spirit blows when
and where it lists; He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Saul is
taken, but, as far as we know to the contrary, his fellow-travellers are left
to perish in their sins; For we are told, ver. 7. That the men (...) journeyed
with him stood, indeed speechless, and hearing a confused voice. I say, a
confused voice, for so the word signifies, and must be so interpreted, in order
to reconcile it with chap. xxii. ver. 9. where Saul giving an account of these
men, tells Agrippa, "They heard not the voice of him that spoke to me." They
heard a voice, a confused noise, out not the articulate voice of him that spoke
to Saul, and therefore remained unconverted. For what are all ordinances, all,
even the most extraordinary dispensations of providence, without Christ speaks
to the soul in them? Thus it is now under the word preached: many, like Readiness
companions are sometimes so struck with the outgoings of God appearing in the
sanctuary, that they even stand speechless; they hear the preacher's voice, but
not the voice of the Son of God, who, perhaps at the same time is speaking
effectually to many other hearts; this I have known often; and what shall we
say to these things? O the depth of the sovereignty of God! It is past finding
out. Lord, I desire to adore what I cannot comprehend. Even so, Father, for so
it seems good in thy sight!

But to return to Saul: the Lord bids him arise and go into the city; and we
are told, verse 8. that Saul ^rose from the earth; and when his eyes were
opened, (he was so overpowered with the greatness of the light that shone upon
them, that) he saw no man; but they led him by the hand, and brought him into
Damascus, that very city which was to be the place of his executing or
imprisoning the disciples of the Lord. And he was three days without fight, and
neither did eat nor drink But who can tell what horrors of conscience, what
convulsion of soul, what deep and (...) convictions of sin he underwent during
these three long days? It was this took away his appetite, (for who can eat or
drink when under a sense of the wrath of God for sin?) and, being to be greatly
employed hereafter, he must be greatly humbled now; therefore the Lord leaves
him three days groaning under the spirit of bondage, and buffetted, no doubt,
with the fiery darts of the devil, that, being tempted like unto his brethren,
he might be able hereafter, to succor those that were tempted. Had Saul
applied to any of the blind guides of the Jewish church under these
circumstances, they would have said, he was mad, or going beside himself; as
many carnal teachers and blind Pharisees now deal with, and so more and more
distress poor souls laboring under awakening convictions of their damnable
state. But God often at (...) first awakenings, visits us with sore trials,
especially those who are, like Saul, to shine in the church, and to be used as
instruments in bringing many sons to glory: those who are to be highly exalted,
must first be deeply humbled; and this I speak for the comfort of such, who may
be now groaning under the spirit of bondage, and perhaps, like Saul, can
neither eat nor drink; for I have generally observed, that those who have had
the deepest convictions, have afterward been favored with the most precious
communications, and enjoyed most of the divine presence in their (...). This
was afterward remarkably exemplified (...) Saul, who was three days without
sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

But will the Lord leave his poor servant in this distress? No: his Jesus
(though Saul persecuted him) promised and he will perform, that it should be
told him what he must do. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named
Ananias, and unto him said the Lord, in a vision, Ananias; and he said, Behold,
I am here, Lord. What a holy familiarity is there between Jesus Christ and
regenerate souls! Ananias had been used to such love-visits, and therefore knew
the voice of his beloved. The Lord says, Ananias; Ananias says, "Behold, I am
here, Lord." Thus it is that Christ now, as well as formerly, often talks with
his children at sundry times, and after diverse manners, as a man talks with
his friend. -- But what has the Lord to say to Ananias?

Ver. 11. And the Lord said unto him, arise, and go into the street, which is
called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas, for one called Saul of
Tarsus; (see here for your comfort, O children of the most high God, what
notice Jesus Christ takes of the street, and the house where his own dear
servants lodge) "for behold, he prays;" but why is this ushered in with the
word behold? What, was it such a wonder to hear that Saul was praying? Why,
Saul was a Pharisee, and therefore no doubt, fasted and made long prayers: and,
since we are told that he profited above many of his equals, I doubt not but he
was taken notice of for his gift in prayer; and yet it seems, that before these
three days, Saul never prayed in his life; and why; Because, before these three
days, he never felt himself a condemned creature: he was alive in his own
opinion, because without a knowledge of the spiritual meaning of the law; he
felt not a want of, and therefore, before now, cried not after a Jesus, and
consequently, though he might have said, or made a prayer, as many Pharisees do
nowadays, he never prayed a prayer; but now, behold! he prayed indeed; and
this was urged as one reason why he was converted. None of God's children, as
one observes, comes into the world still-born; prayer is the very breath of the
new creature: and therefore, if we are prayerless, we are CHRIST-less; if we
never had the spirit of supplication, it is a sad sign that we never had the
spirit of grace in our souls: and you may be assured you never did pray, unless
you have felt yourselves sinners, and seen the want of Jesus to be your
Savior. May the Lord, whom I serve in the gospel of his dear Son, prick you
all to the heart, and may it be said of you all as it was of Saul, Behold, they
pray!

The Lord goes on to encourage Ananias to go to Saul: says he, verse 12. For he
has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming in, and putting his hand on
him, that he might receive his sight. So that though Christ converted Saul
immediately by himself, yet he will carry on the work, thus begun, by a
minister. Happy they, who under soul-troubles have such experienced guides, and
as well acquainted with Jesus Christ as (...) was: you that have such make much
of and be thankful for them; and you who have them not, trust in God; he will
carry on his own work without them.

Doubtless, Ananias was a good man; but shall I commend him for his answer to
our Lord? I commend him not: for, says he, ver. 13. Lord, I have heard by many
of this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he
has authority from the chief priests to bind all that call upon thy name. I
fear this answer proceeded from some relics of self-righteousness, as well as
infidelity, that h^^ undiscovered in the heart of Ananias. Arise, (said our
Lord) and go into the street, which is called Straight, and enquire in the
house of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus; for behold he prays! One would
think this was sufficient to satisfy him: but says Ananias, "Lord, I have heard
by many of this man" (he seems to speak of him with much contempt; for even
good men are apt to think too contemptuously of those who are yet in their
sins) how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem; and here, he has
authority from the chief priests, to bind all that call upon thy name. And what
then, Ananias? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Who made thee to differ?
Could not (...) who converted thee, convert him also! Surely Ananias here
forgets himself, or perhaps fears, left this man, who had authority from the
chief priests to bind all that call upon Christ's name, should bind him also,
if he went unto him; but the Lord silences all objections with a Go thy way,
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must
suffer for my name's sake. Here God stops his mouth immediately, by asserting
his sovereignty, and preaching to him the doctrine of election. And the
frequent conversion of notorious sinners to God, to me is one great proof,
amongst a thousand others, of that precious, but too much exploced, and sadly
misrepresented doctrine of God's electing love; for whence is it that such are
taken, whilst thousands not near so vile, die senseless and stupid? All the
answer that can be given, is, They are chosen vessels; Go thy way, (says God)
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel: for I will show him how great things he must
suffer for my name's sake. Observe what a close connection there is between
doing and suffering for Christ. If any of my brethren in the ministry are
present, let them hear what preferment we must expect, if we are called out to
work remarkably for God: not great prebendaries or bishoprics, but great
sufferings for our Lord's name sake; these are the fruits of our labor; and he
that will not contentedly suffer great things for preaching Christ, is not
worthy of him. Suffering will be found to be the best preferment, when we are
called to give an account of our ministry at the great day.

I do not hear, that Ananias quarrelled with God concerning the doctrine of
election: no; O that all good men would, in this, learn of him! He went his
way, and entered into the house; and put his hands on him, and said, Brother
Saul; just now it was this man; now it is Brother Saul: It is no matter what a
man has been, if he be now a Christian; the same should be our brother, our
sister, and mother: God blots out every convert's transgressions as with a
thick cloud, and so should we; the more vile a man has been, the more should we
love him when believing in Christ, because Christ will be more glorified on
this behalf. I doubt not, but Ananias was wonderfully delighted to hear that so
remarkable a persecutor was brought home to God? I am persuaded he felt his
soul immediately united to him by love, and therefore addresses him not with,
Thou persecutor, Thou murderer, that came to butcher me and my friends; but,
brother Saul. It is remarkable that the primitive Christians much used the word
brother and brethren; I know it is a term now much in reproach; but those who
despise it, I believe would be glad to be of our brotherhood, when they see us
sitting as the right hand of the Majesty on high. Brother Saul, the Lord (even
Jesus that appeared (...) thee in the way as thou came) has sent me, that
thou might receive thy fight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. At this
time, we may suppose, he laid his hands upon him. See the consequences.

Verse 18. Immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he
received sight forthwith; not only bodily, but spiritual sight; he emerged as
it were into a new world; he saw, and felt too, things unutterable: he felt a
union of soul with God; he received the spirit of adoption; he could now, with
a full assurance of faith, cry, Abba, Father. Now was he filled with the Holy
Ghost; and had the love of God shed abroad in his heart; now were the days of
his mourning ended; now was Christ found in his soul; now he could give men and
devils the challenge, knowing that Christ had justified him; now he saw the
excellences of Christ, and esteemed him the fairest among ten thousand. -- You
only know how to sympathize with the apostle in his joy, who, after a long
night of bondage, have been set free by the Spirit, and have received joy in
the Holy Ghost. May all that are now mourning, as Saul was, be comforted in
like manner!

The scales then are now removed from the eyes of Readiness mind; Ananias has done
that for him, under God; he must now do another office -- baptize him, and so
receive him into the visible church of Christ; a good proof to me of the
necessity of baptism where it may be had: for I find here, as well as
elsewhere, that baptism is administered even to those who had received the Holy
Ghost; Saul was convinced of this, and therefore arose and was baptized; and
now it is time for him so recruit the outward man, which, by three days
abstinence and spiritual conflicts, had been much impaired: we are therefore
told (verse 1^) when he had received meat, he was strengthened.

But O with what comfort did the apostle now eat his food! I am sure it was
with singleness, I am persuaded also with gladness of heart; and why? He knew
that he was reconciled to God; and, for my own part, did I not know how blind
and flinty our hearts are by nature, I should wonder how any one could eat even
his common food with any satisfaction, who has not some well-grounded hope of
his being reconciled to God. Our Lord intimates thus much to us: for in his
glorious prayer, after he has taught us to pray for our daily bread,
immediately adds that petition "forgive us our trespasses;" as though our daily
bread would do us no service, unless we were sensible of having the forgiveness
of our sins.

To proceed: Saul has received meat, and is strengthened; and whither will he
go now? To see the brethren; then was Saul certain days with the disciples that
were at Damascus. If we know and love Christ, we shall also love, and desire to
be acquainted with the brethren of Christ: We may generally know a man by his
company. And though all are not saints that associate with saints, (for tares
will be always springing up amongst the wheat till the time of harvest) yet, if
we never keep company, but are shy and ashamed of the despised children of God,
it is a certain sign we have not yet experimentally learnt Jesus, or received
him into our hearts. My dear friends, ^e not deceived; if we are friends to the
Bridegroom, we shall be friends to the children of the Bridegroom. Saul, as
soon as he was filled with the holy Ghost, was certain days with the disciples
that were at Damascus.

But who can tell what joy these disciples felt when Saul came amongst them! I
suppose holy Ananias introduced him. Methinks I see the once persecuting
zealot, when they came to (...) him with a holy kiss, throwing himself upon
each of their necks, weeping over them with stoods of tears, and saying, O my
brother, O "my sister, Can you forgive me? Can you give such a wretch as I the
right hand of fellowship, who intended to drag you behind me bound unto
Jerusalem! Thus, I say, we may suppose Saul addressed himself to his
fellow-disciples; and I doubt not but they were as ready to forgive and forget
as Ananias was, and saluted him with the endearing title of brother Saul.
Lovely was this meeting; so lovely, that it seemed Saul continued certain days
with them, to communicate experiences, and to learn the way of God more
perfectly, to pray for a blessing on his future ministry, and to praise Christ
Jesus for what he had done for their souls. Saul, perhaps, had sat certain
years at the feet of Gamaliel, but undoubtedly learnt more these certain days,
than he had learnt before in all his life. It pleases me to think how this
great scholar is transformed by the renewing of his mind: what a mighty change
was here! That so great a man as Saul was, both as to his station in life, and
internal qualifications, and such a bitter enemy to the Christians; for him, I
say, to go and be certain days with the people of this mad way, and to sit
quietly, and be taught by illiterate men, as many of these disciples we may be
sure were, what a substantial proof was this of the reality of his conversion!

What a hurry and confusion may we suppose the chief priests now were in! I
warrant they were ready to cry out, what! is he also deceived? As for the
common people, who knew not the law and are accursed; for them to be carried
away, is no such wonder, but for a man bred at the feet of Gamaliel, for such a
scholar such an enemy to the cause as Saul; for him to be led away with a
company of fifty, deceived men and women, surely it is impossible: We cannot
believe it. But Saul soon convinces them of the reality of his becoming a fool
for Christ's sake: For straightway, instead of going to deliver the letters
from the high priests, as they expected, in order to bring the disciples that
were at Damascus bound to Jerusalem, he preached Christ in the synagogues, that
he is the Son of God. This was another proof of his being converted. He not
only conversed with Christians in private, but he preached Christ publicly in
the synagogues: Especially, he insisted on the divinity of our Lord, proving,
notwithstanding the state of humiliation, that he was really the Son of God.

But why did Saul preach Christ thus? Because he had felt the power of Christ
upon his own soul. And here is the reason why Christ is ^o (...) preached, and
his divinity so slights insisted on in our synagogues, because the generality
of those that pretend to preach him never felt a saving work of conversion upon
their own souls. How can they preach, unless they are first taught of, and then
sent by God? Saul did not preach Christ before he knew him; no more should any
one else. An unconverted minister, though he could speak with the tongues of
men and angels, will be but as a sounding brass and tinkling cymbal ^o those
whose senses are exercised to discern spiritual things. Ministers that are
unconverted, may talk and declaim of Christ, and prove from books that he is
the Son of God; but they cannot preach with the demonstration o^ the Spirit and
with power, unless they preach from experience, and have had a proof of his
divinity, by a work of grace wrought upon their own souls. God forgive those
who lay hands on an unconverted man, knowing that he is such: I would not do it
for a thousand worlds. Lord Jesus, keep thy own servants pure, and let them not
be then partakers of other men's sins!

Such an instance as was Readiness conversion, we may be assured, must make a
great deal of noise; and, therefore, no wonder we are told, ver. 21. But all
that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them who
called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he
might bring them bound to the chief priests?

Thus it will be with all that appear publicly for Jesus Christ; and it is as
impossible for a true Christian to be hid, as a city built upon a hill.
Brethren, if you are faithful to, you must be reproached and have remarks made
on you for Christ; especially if you have been remarkably wicked before your
conversion. Your friends say, is not this he, or she, who a little while ago
would run (...) as great excess of riot and vanity as the worst of us all? What
has turned your brain; Or if you have been (...), (...), ^^^mal hypocrites, as
Saul was they will wonder that you should be so deceived, as to think you were
not in a safe date before. No doubt, numbers were surprised to hear Saul, who
was touching the low (...) affirm that he was in a damnable (...) (as in all
probability he did) a few days before.

Brethren, you must expect to meet with many such difficulties, as there, The
courge of the tongue is generally the first cross we are called to bear for the
sake of Christ. Let no^, therefore, this move you. It did not intimidate, no,
it rather encouraged Saul.

Says the text, But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the
Jews who (...) at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ, Opposition never
yet did, nor ever will hurt a sincere convert: Nothing like opposition to make
the man of God perfect. None but a (...), who cares not for the sheep, will be
(...) at the approach or barking or wolves. Christ's ministers are as bold as
(...): It is not for such men as they to flee.

And therefore (that I may draw toward a conclusion) let the ministers and
disciples of Christ learn from Saul, not to fear men or their revilings; but,
(...) him increase in strength, the more wicked me; (...) to (...) We cannot be
Christians without (...) opposed; No; disciples in general must suffer;
ministers in particular must suffer great things. But let not this move any of
us from our stedfastness in the gospel: He that stood by and strengthened Saul,
will also stand by and strengthen us: He is a God mighty to save all that put
their trust in him. If we look up with an eye of faith, we, as well as the
first martyr St. Stephen, may see Jesus standing at the right hand of God,
ready to assist and protect us. Though the Lord's feat is in heaven, yet he has
respect to his saints in an especial manner, when suffering here on earth: Then
the Spirit of Christ and of glory rests upon their souls. And, if I may speak
my own experience. I never enjoy more rich communications from God, than when
despised and rejected of men for the fake of Jesus Christ. However little they
may design it, my enemies are my greatest friends. What I most fear, is a calm;
but the enmity which is in the hearts of natural men against Christ, will not
suffer them to be quiet long: No; as I hope the work of God will increase, so
the rage of men and devils will increase also. Let us put on, therefore, the
whole armor of God: Let us not fear the face of men: Let us ^ear him only who
can destroy both body and soul in hell: I say unto you, let us fear him alone.
You see how soon God can stop the fury of his enemies.

You have just now heard of a proud, powerful zealot stopped in his full
career, struck down to the earth with a light from heaven, converted by the
almighty power of efficacious grace, and thereupon zealously promoting, nay,
resolutely suffering for, the faith which (...) with threatenings and
slaughters he endeavored to destroy. Let this teach us to pity and pray for
our Lord's most inveterate enemies. Who knows, but in answer thereunto, our
Lord may give them repentance unto life? Most think, that Christ had respect to
Stephen's prayer, when he converted Saul. Perhaps for this reason God suffers
his adversaries to go on, that his goodness and power may shine more bright in
their conversion.

But let not the persecutors of Christ take encouragement from this to continue
in their opposition. Remember, though Saul was converted, yet the high priest
and Readiness companions, were left dead in trespasses and sins: And, if this
should be your case, you will of all men be most miserable: For persecutors
have the lowest place in hell. And, if Saul was struck to the earth by a light
from heaven, how will you be able to stand before Jesus Christ, when he comes
in terrible majesty to take vengeance on all those who have persecuted his
gospel? Then the question, "Why persecuted thou me?" will cut you through and
through. The secret enmity of your hearts shall be then detected before men and
angels, and you shall be doomed to dwell in the blackness of darkness for
evermore. Kiss the Son therefore, lest he be angry: For even you may yet find
mercy, if you believe on the Son of God: Though you persecute him, yet he will
be your Jesus. I cannot despair of any of you, when I find a Saul among the
disciples at Damascus. What though your sins are as scarlet, the blood of
Christ shall wash them as white as snow. Having much to be forgiven, despair
not; only believe, and like Saul, of whom I have now been speaking, love much.
He counted himself the chiefest sinner of all, and therefore labored more
abundantly than all Who is there among you fearing the Lord? Whose hearts has
the Lord now opened to hearken to the voice of his poor unworthy servant!
Surely the Lord will not let me preach in vain. Who is the happy soul that is
this day to be washed in the blood of the Lamb? Will no poor sinner take
encouragement from Saul to come to Jesus Christ. You are all thronging round,
but which of you will touch the Lord Jesus? What a comfort will it be to Soul,
and so your own souls, when you meet him in heaven, to tell him, that hearing
of his, was a^ means, under God, of your conversion! Doubtless it was written
for the encouragement of all poor returning sinners; he himself ^ell^ as (...)
For in (...) God showed all long-suffering that I might be an example to them
that should hereafter believe. Was Saul here himself, he would tell you so,
indeed he would; but being dead, by this account of his conversion, he yet
speaks O that God may speak by it to your hearts! O that the arrows of God
might this day stick fast in your souls, and you make to cry out, "Who art thou
Lord?" Are there any such amongst you? Methinks I feel something of what this
Saul felt, when he said, I travail in birth again for you, till Christ be
formed again in your hearts. O come, come away to Jesus on whom Saul believed;
and then I care not if the high priests issue out never so many writs, or
injuriously drag me to a prison. The thoughts of being instrumental in saving
you, will make me sing praises even at midnight: and I know you will be my joy
and crown or rejoicing, when I am delivered from this earthly prison, and meet
you in the kingdom of God hereafter. Now to God, etc.

SERMON VI.
Christ, the Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.
1 COR. i. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
wisdom righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
OF all the verses in the book of God, this which I have now read to you, is, I
believe, one of the most comprehensive: What glad tidings does it bring to
believers! What precious privileges are they herein invested with! How are they
here led to the fountain of them all, I mean, the love, the everlasting love of
God the Father! Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

Without referring you to the context, I shall from these words,

First, Point out to you the fountain, from which all those blessings flow,
which the elect of God partake of in Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us.
And,

Secondly, I shall consider what these blessings are, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

First, I would point out to you the fountain from which all those blessings
slow, that the elect of God partake of in Jesus, who of God is made unto us:
the Father, he it is who is spoken of here. Not as though Jesus Christ was not
God also; but God the Father is the fountain of the Deity; and, if we consider
Jesus Christ acting as Mediator, God the Father is greater than he; there was
an eternal contract between the Father and the Son: I have made a covenant with
my chosen, and I have sworn unto David my servant; now David was a type of
Christ, with whom the Father made a covenant, that if he would obey and suffer,
and make himself a sacrifice for sin, he should see his seed, he should prolong
his days, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hands. This
compact our Lord refers to, in that glorious prayer recorded in the 17th chap.
of John; and therefore he prays for, or rather demands with a full assurance,
all that were given to him by the Father: Father, I will that they also whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am. For this same reason the apostle
breaks out into praises of God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; for
he loved the elect with an everlasting love, or as our Lord expresses it,
before the foundation of the world; and therefore, to show them to whom they
were beholden for their salvation, our Lord, in the 25th of Matthew, represents
himself, saying, Come, ye blessed children of my Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And thus, in reply to the
mother of Zebedee's children, he says, It is not mine to give, but it shall be
given to them for whom it is prepared of the Father. The apostle therefore,
when here speaking of the Christian's privileges, lest they should sacrifice to
their own dra^, or think their salvation was owing to their own faithfulness,
or improvement of their own free will, reminds them to look back on the
everlasting love of God the Father; who of God is made unto us, etc.

Would to God, this point of doctrine was considered more, and people were more
studious of the covenant of redemption between the Father and the Son! we
should not then have so much disputing against the doctrine of election, or
hear it condemned (even by good men) as a doctrine of devils. For my own part,
I cannot see how true humbleness of mind can be attained without a knowledge of
it; and though I will not say, that every one who denies election is a bad man,
yet I will say, with that sweet singer, Mr. Trail, it is a very bad sign: such
a one, whoever he be, I think cannot truly know himself: for, if we deny
election, we must, partly at least glory in ourselves; but our redemption is so
ordered, that no flesh should glory in the divine presence; and hence it is,
that the pride of man opposes this doctrine, because according to this
doctrine, and no other, he that glories must glory only in the Lord. But what
shall I say? Election is a mystery that shines with such resplendent
brightness, that, to make use of the words of one who has drank deeply of
electing love, it dazzles the week eyes even of some of God's dear children;
however, though they know it not, all the blessings they receive, an the
privileges they door will enjoy through Jesus Christ, flow from the everlasting
love of God tho Father: But of him are you in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

Secondly, I come to show what these blessings are, which are here, through
Christ, made over to the elect And,

1. First, Christ is made to them wisdom; but wherein does true wisdom consist?
Was I to ask some of you, perhaps you would say, in indulging the lust of the
flesh, and saying to your soul^, eat, drink, and be merry; but this is only the
wisdom of brutes; they have as good a gust and (...) for sensual pleasures, as
the greatest epicure an earth. Others would tell me true wisdom consisted in
adding house to house, and field to field, and calling lands after their own
names; but this cannot be true wisdom; for riches often take to them wings and
fly away, like an eagle toward heaven. Even wisdom itself assures us, that a
man's life does not consist in the abundance of the things which he possesses;
vanity, vanity, all these things are vanity; for, if riches leave not the
owner, the owners must soon leave them; for rich men must also die, and leave
their riches for others; their riches cannot procure them redemption from the
grave, whither we are all hastening apace.

But perhaps you despise riches and pleasure, and therefore place wisdom in the
knowledge of books: but it is possible for you to tell the numbers of the
stars, and call them all by their names, and yet be mere fools; learned men are
not always wise; nay, our common learning so much cried up, makes men only so
many accomplished fools; to keep you therefore no longer in suspense, and
withal to humble you, I will send you to a heathen school, to learn what true
wisdom is: know thyself, was a saying of one of the wise men of Greece; this is
certainly true wisdom, and this is that wisdom spoken of in the text, and which
Jesus Christ has made to all elect sinners; they are made to know themselves,
so as not to think more highly of themselves, than they ought to think. Before
they were darkness; now they are light in the Lord; and in that light they see
their own darkness; they now bewail themselves as fallen creatures by nature,
dead in trespasses and sins, sons and heirs of hell, and children of wrath;
they now see that all their righteousnesses are as filthy rags; that there is
no health in their souls; that they are poor and miserable, blind, and naked;
and that there is no name given under heaven, whereby they can be saved, but
that of Jesus Christ. They see the necessity of closing with a Savior, and
behold the wisdom of God in appointing him to be a Savior; they are also made
willing to accept salvation upon our Lords own terms, and to receive him as
their all in all: thus Christ is made to them wisdom.

2. Secondly, Righteousness. Who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness;
Christ's whose personal righteousness is made over to, and accounted theirs.
Being enabled to lay hold on Christ by faith, God the Father blots out their
transgressions, as with a thick cloud; their sins, and their iniquities he
remembers no more; they are made the righteousness of God in Jesus, who is the
end of the saw for righteousness to every one that believes. In one sense, God
now sees no sin in them; the whole covenant of works is fulfilled in them; they
are actually justified, acquitted, and looked upon as righteous in the sight of
God; they are perfectly accepted in the Beloved; they are complete in him; the
flaming sword of God's wrath, which before moved every way, is now removed, and
free access given to the tree of life; they are enabled now to reach out the
arm of faith, and pluck and live for evermore. Hence it is that the apostle,
under a sense of this blessed privilege, breaks out into this triumphant
language; it is Christ that justifies, who is he that condemns? Does sin
condemn? Christ's righteousness delivers believers from the guilt of it: Christ
is their Savior, and is become a propitiation for their sins: who therefore
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? Does the law condemn? By
haring Christ's righteousness imputed to them, they are dead to the law, as a
covenant of works: Christ has fulfilled it for them, and in their stead. Does
death threaten them? They need not fear: The sting of death is sin, the
strength of sin is the law; but God has given them the victory, by imputing to
them the righteousness of the Lord Jesus.

And what a privilege in here! Well might the angels at the birth of Christ,
say to the humble shepherds Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joys unto
you that believe in Christ, a Savior is born. And well may they rejoice at the
conversion of poor sinners: for the Lord is their righteousness: they have
peace with God, through faith in Christ's blood, and shall never enter into
condemnation. O believers! (for this discourse is intended in a special manner
for you) lift up your heads; Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say, rejoice.
Christ is made to you of God, righteousness, what then should you fear? you are
made the righteousness of God in him; you may be called, "The Lord our
righteousness." Of what then should you be afraid? What shall separate you
henceforward from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No; I am persuaded,
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate you from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, who of God is made unto you righteousness.

This is a glorious privilege, but this is only the beginning of the happiness
of believers: for,

3. Thirdly, Christ is not only made to them righteousness, but sanctification.
By sanctification, I do not mean a bare hypocritical attendance on outward
ordinances (though rightly informed Christians will think it their duty and
privilege constantly to attend on all outward ordinances.) Nor do I mean by
sanctification, a bare outward reformation, and a few transient convictions, or
a little legal sorrow; for all this an unsanctified man may have; but, by
sanctification, I mean a total renovation of the whole man; by the
righteousness of Christ, believers become legally, by sanctification they are
made spiritually, alive; by one they are entitled to, by the other they are
made meet for glory. They are sanctified therefore throughout, in spirit, soul
and body.

Their understandings which were before dark, now become light in the Lord: and
their wills, before contrary to, now become one with the will of God: their
affections are now set on things above; their memory is now filled with divine
things; their natural consciences are now enlightened; their members, which
were before instruments of uncleanness, and of iniquity unto iniquity, are now
instruments of righteousness and true holiness; in short, they are new
creatures; old things are passed away, all things are become new, in their
hearts; sin has now no longer dominion over them; they are freed from the
power, though not the indwelling and being of it; they are holy both in heart
and life, in all manner of conversation; they are made partakers of a divine
nature; and from Jesus Christ, they receive grace for grace; and every grace
that is in Christ, is copied and transcribed into their souls; they are
transformed into his likeness; he is formed within them; they dwell in him, and
he in them; they are led by the Spirit, and bring forth the fruits thereof;
they know that Christ is their Immanuel, God with and in them; they are living
temples of the Holy Ghost. And therefore, being a holy habitation unto the
Lord, the whole Trinity dwells and walks in them; even here, they sit together
with Christ in heavenly places, and are vitally united to him, their head, by a
living faith; their Redeemer, their Maker, is their Husband; they are flesh of
his flesh, bone of his bone; they talk, they walk with him, as a man talks
and walks with his friend; in short, they are one with Christ, even as Jesus
Christ and the Father are one.

Thus is Christ made to believers sanctification. And O what a privilege is
this! To be changed from beasts into saints, and from a devilish to be made
partakers of a divine nature; to be translated from the kingdom of Satan, into
the kingdom of God's dear Son! To put off the old man, which is corrupt, and to
put on the new man, which is created after God, in righteousness and true
holiness, O what an unspeakable blessing is this! I almost stand amazed at the
contemplation thereof. Well might the apostle exhort believers to rejoice in
the Lord; indeed they have reason always to rejoice, yea, to rejoice on a dying
bed; for the kingdom of God is in them; they are changed from glory to glory,
even by the Spirit of the Lord: well may this be a mystery to the natural, for
it is a mystery even to the spiritual man himself, a mystery which he cannot
fathom. Does it not often dazzle your eyes, O ye children of God, to look at
your own brightness, when the candle of the Lord shines out, and your Redeemer
lifts up the light of his blessed countenance upon your souls? Are you not
astonished, when you feel the love of God shed abroad in your hearts, by the
Holy Ghost, and God holds out the golden scepter of his mercy, and bids you ask
what you will, and it shall be given you? Does not that peace of God, which
keeps and rules your hearts, surpass the utmost limits of your understandings?
And is not the joy you feel unspeakable? Is it not full of glory? I am
persuaded it is; and in your secret communion, when the Lord's love flows in
upon your souls, you are as it were swallowed up in, or, to use the apostle's
phrase, filled with all the fullness of God. Are you not ready to cry out with
Solomon, And will the Lord, indeed, dwell thus with men? How is it that we
should be thus thy sons and daughters, O Lord God Almighty!

If you are children of God, and know what it is to have fellowship with the
Father and the Son; if you walk by faith, and not by fight; I am assured this
is frequently the language of your hearts.

But look forward, and see an unbounded prospect of eternal happiness lying
before thee, O believer! What thou have already received, are only the first
fruits, like the cluster of grapes brought out of the land of Canaan; only an
earnest and pledge of yet infinitely better things to come: the harvest is to
follow; thy grace is hereafter to be swallowed up in glory. Thy great Joshua,
and merciful High Priest, shall administer an abundant entrance to thee into
the land of promise, that rest which awaits the children of God: for Christ is
not only made to believers, wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, but also
redemption.

But, before we enter upon the explanation and contemplation of this privilege.

First, Learn hence the great mistake of those writers, and clergy, who,
notwithstanding they talk of sanctification and inward holiness, (as indeed
sometimes they do, though in a very loose and superficial manner) yet they
generally make it the cause, whereas they should consider it as the effect, of
our justification. Of him "are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness," and then sanctification. For Christ's righteousness, or
that which Christ has done in our stead without us, is the sole cause of our
acceptance in the sight of God, and of all holiness wrought in us. To this, and
not to the light within, or any thing wrought within, should poor sinners seek
for justification in the sight of God: for the sake of Christ's righteousness
alone, and not any thing wrought in us, does God look favorably upon us; our
sanctification at best, in this life, is not complete: Though we are delivered
from the power, we are not freed from the in-being of sin; but not only the
dominion, but the in-being of sin, is forbidden by the perfect law of God: For
it is not said, thou shall not give way to lust, but, thou shall not lust. So
that whilst the principle of lust remains in the least degree in our hearts,
though we are otherwise never so holy, yet we cannot, on account of that, hope
for acceptance with God: We must first therefore, look for a righteousness
without us, even the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ: For this reason
the apostle mentions it, and puts it before sanctification in the words of the
text. And whosoever teaches any other doctrine, does not preach the truth as
it is in Jesus.

Secondly, From hence also, the Antinomians and formal hypocrites may be
confuted who talk of Christ without, but know nothing, experimentally, of a
work of sanctification wrought within them. Whatever they may pretend to, since
Christ is not in them, the Lord is not their righteousness, and they have no
well-grounded hope of glory: For though sanctification is not the cause, yet it
is the effect of our acceptance with God; who of God is made unto us
righteousness and sanctification. He therefore, that is really in Christ, is a
new creature; it is not going back to a covenant of works, to look into our
hearts, and, seeing that they are changed and renewed, from thence (...) a
comfortable and well-grounded assurance of the safety of our states: No, but
this is what we are directed to in scripture; by our bringing forth the fruits,
we are to judge whether or no we ever did truly partake of the Spirit of God.
We know, (says John) that we are passed from death unto life, because we love
the brethren. And however we may talk of Christ's righteousness, and exclaim
against legal preachers; yet, if we are not holy in heart and life, if we are
not sanctified and renewed by the Spirit in our minds, we are self-deceivers,
we are only formal hypocrites: For we must not put asunder what God has joined
together; we must keep the medium between the two extremes: not insist so much
on the one hand upon Christ without, as to exclude Christ within, as an
evidence of our being his, and as a preparation for future happiness; nor on
the other hand, so depend on inherent righteousness or holiness wrought in us,
as to exclude the righteousness of Jesus Christ without us. But;

4. Fourthly, Let us now go on, and take a view of the other link, or rather
the end, of the believer's golden chain of privileges, redempion. But we must
look very high; for the top of it, like Jacob^ ladder, reaches heaven, where
all believers will ascend, and be placed at the right hand of God. Who of God
is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

This is a golden chain indeed! And, what is (...), not one (...) can ever be
broken asunder from another. Wat there no other text in the book of God, this
single one sufficiently proves the final perseverance of true believers: for
never did God yet justify a man, whom he did not sanctify; no^ sanctify one
whom he did not completely redeem and glorify; no, as for God, his way, his
work, is perfect; he always carried on and finished the work he began; thus it
was in the (...) so it is in the new creation; when God says, "let there be
light," there is light, that shines more and more unto the perfect (...) when
believers enter into their eternal rest, as God entered into his. Those whom
God has justified, he has in effect glorified: for as a man's worthiness was
not the cause of God's giving him Christ's righteousness, so neither shall his
unworthiness be a cause of his taking it away; God's gifts and callings are
without repentance, and I cannot think they are clear in the notion of Christ's
righteousness, who deny the final perseverance of the saints; I fear, they
understand justification in that low sense, which I understood it in a few
years ago, as implying no more than remission of sin^ but it not only signifies
remission of sins past, but also a foederal right to all good things to come.
If God has given us his only Son, how will he not with him freely give us all
things? Therefore, the apostle, after he says, "who of God is made unto us
righteousness," does not say, perhaps he may be made to us sanctification and
redemption; but he is made: for there is an eternal, indissoluble connection
between these blessed privileges. As the obedience of Christ is imputed to
believers, so his perseverance in that obedience is to be imputed to them also:
and it argues great ignorance of the covenant of grace and redemption to object
against it.

By the word redemption, we are to understand, not only a complete deliverance
from all evil, but also a full enjoyment of all good both in body and soul: I
say both in body and soul; for the Lord is also for the body; the bodies of the
saints in this life are temples of the Holy Ghost; God makes a covenant with
the dust of believers; after death, though worms destroy them, yet, even in
their flesh shall they see God. I fear, indeed there are some Sadducees in our
days, or at least heretics who say, either, ^^at there is no resurrection of
the body, or that the (...) is past already, namely, in our (...). Hence it is,
that our Lord's coming in the ^esh, at the day of judgment is denied; and
conseqently, we must throw aside the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. For why
should we remember the Lord's death until he come to judgment, when he is
already come to judge our heart, and will not come a second time? But all this
is only the reasoning of unlearned, unstable men, who certainly know not what
they say, nor whereof they affirm. That we must follow our Lord in the
regeneration, be partakers of a new birth, and that Christ must come into our
hearts, we freely confess, and we hope, when speaking of these things, we speak
no more than what we know and feel: but then it is plain, that Jesus Christ
will come, hereafter, to judgment, and that he ascended into heaven with the
body which he had here on earth; for says he, after his resurrection, handle
me, and see; a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. And it is
plain, that Christ's resurrection was an earnest of ours: for says the apostle.
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept;
and as in A^^^ all die and are subject to mortality; so all that are in Christ,
the second Adam, who represented believers as their foederal head, shall
certainly be made alive, or rise again with their bodies at the last day.

Here then, O believers! is one, though the lowest, degree of that redemption
which you are to be partakers of hereafter; I mean, the redemption of your
bodies: For this corruptable must put on incorruption, this mortal must put on
immortality. Your bodies, as well as souls, were given to Jesus Christ by the
Father: they have been companions i^ watching, and fasting and praying: Your
bodies therefore, as well as souls, shall Jesus Christ raise up at the last
day. Fear not therefore, O believers, to look into the grave; for to you it
(...) no other than a consecrated dormitory, where your bodies shall sleep
quietly until the morning of the resurrection; when the voice of the archangel
shall sound, and the trump of God give the general alarm, "Arise ye dead, and
come to judgment;" earth, air, fire, water, shall give up your scattered atoms,
and both in body and soul shall you be ever with the Lord. I doubt not but many
of you are groaning under crazy bodies, and complain often that the mortal body
weighs down the immortal soul; at least this is my case; but let us have a
little patience, and we shall be delivered from our earthly prisons; ere long,
there tabernacles of clay shall be dissolved, and we shall be clothed with our
house which is from heaven: hereafter, our bodies shall be spiritualized, and
shall be so far from hindering our souls through weakness, that they shall
became strong; so strong, as to bear up under an exceeding and eternal weight
of glory; others again may have deformed bodies, emaciated also with sickness,
and worn out with labor and age; but wait a little, until your blessed change
by death comes; then your bodies shall be renewed and made glorious, like u^ ^o
Christ's glorious body: of which we may form some faint idea, from the account
given us of our Lord's transfiguration on the Mount, when it is said, His
raiment became bright and glistering, and his face brighter than the sun. Well
then may a believer break out into the apostle's triumphant language, O death
where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory!

But what is the redemption of the body, in comparison of the redemption of the
better part, our souls? I must, therefore say to you believers, as the angel
said to John, "Come up higher," and let us take as clear a view as we can, at
such a distance, of the redemption Christ has purchased for, and will shortly
put you in actual possession of. Already you are justified, already you are
sanctified, and thereby freed from the guilt and dominion of sin: but, as I
have observed, the being and indwelling of sin yet remains in you; God sees it
proper to leave some Amalekites in the land, to keep his Israel in action.

The most perfect Christian, I am persuaded, must agree, according to one of
our articles, that the corruption of nature remains even in the regenerate;
that the flesh lusts always against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh. So that believers cannot do things for God with that perfection they
desire; this grieves their righteous souls day by day, and, with the holy
apostle, makes them to cry out, Who shall deliver us from the body of this
death! I thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ will, but not completely before the
day of our dissolution; then will the very being of sin be destroyed, and an
eternal stop put to inbred, indwelling corruption. And is not this a great
redemption? I am sure believers esteem it so: for there is nothing grieves the
heart of a child of God so much, as the remains of indwelling sin. Again,
believers are often in heaviness through manifold temptations; God sees that it
is needful and (...) for them so to be; and though they may be highly favored,
and wrapped up in communion with God, even to the third heavens, yet a messenger
of Satan is often sent to buffet them, left they should be puffed up with the
abundance of revelation. But be not weary; be not faint in your minds: the time
of your complete redemption draws nigh. In heaven the wicked one shall cease
from troubling you, and your weary souls shall enjoy an everlasting rest; his
fiery darts cannot reach those blissful regions: Satan will never come any more
to appear with, disturb, or accuse the sons of God, when once the Lord Jesus
Christ shuts the door. Your righteous souls are now grieved, day by day, at the
ungodly conversation of the wicked; tares now grow up among the wheat; wolves
come in sheep's clothing: but the redemption spoken of in the text will free
our souls from all anxiety on these accounts; hereafter you shall enjoy a
perfect communion of faints; nothing that is unholy or unsanctified shall enter
into the holy of holies, which is prepared for you above: This, and (...)
manner of evil whatsoever, you shall be delivered from, when your redemption is
hereafter made complete in heaven; not only so, but you shall enter into the
full enjoyment of all good. It is true all saints will not have the same degree
of happiness, but all will be as happy as their hearts can desire. Believers,
you shall judge evil, and familiarly converse with good, angels: You shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the spirits of just men made perfect;
and, to sum up all your happiness in one word, you shall see God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost and, by seeing God, be more and more (...) him, and pass
from glory to glory, even to all eternity.

But I must stop: the glories of the upper world crowd in so fast upon my soul,
that I am lost in the contemplation of them. Brethren, the redemption spoken of
is unutterable; we cannot here find it out; eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor has it entered into the hearts of most holy men living, to conceive how
great it is. Was I to entertain you whole ages with an account of it, when you
come to heaven you must say, with the queen of Sheba, Not half, no, not one
thousandth part was told us. All we can do here, is to go upon Mount Pisgah,
and by the eye of faith, take a distant view of the promised land: we may see
it, as Abraham did Christ, afar off, and rejoice in it; but here we only know
in part. Blessed be God, there is a time coming, when we shall know God, even
as we are known, and God be all in all. Lord Jesus, accomplish the number of
thine elect! Lord Jesus, hasten thy kingdom!

And now, where are the scoffers of these last days, who count the lives of
Christians to be madness, and their end to be without honor? Unhappy men! you
know not what you do. Were your eyes open, and had you senses to discern
spiritual things, you would not speak all manner of evil against the children
of God, but you would esteem them as the excellent ones of the earth, and envy
their happiness; your souls would hunger and thirst after it: you also would
become fools for Christ's sake. You boast of wisdom; so did the Philosophers of
Corinth: but your wisdom is the foolishness of folly in the sight of God. What
will your wisdom avail you, if it does not make you wise unto salvation? Can
you, with all your wisdom, propose a more consistent scheme to build your hopes
of salvation on, than what has now been laid down before you? Can you with all
the strength of natural reason, find out a better way of acceptance with God,
than by the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ? Is it right to think your
own works can in any measure deserve or procure it? If not, why will you not
believe (...), him? Why will you not submit to his righteousness? Can you deny
that you are fallen creatures? Do not you find that you are full of disorders
and that these disorders make you unhappy? Do not you find that you cannot
change your own hearts? Have you not resolved many and many a time, and have
not your corruptions yet dominion over you? Are you not bondslaves to your
lusts, and led captive by the devil at his will? Why then will you not come to
Christ for sanctification? Do you not desire to die the death of the righteous,
and that your future state may be like theirs? I am persuaded you cannot bear
the thoughts of being annihilated, much less of being miserable for over.
Whatever you may pretend, if you speak truth, you must confess, that conscience
breaks in upon you in your more sober intervals, whether you will or not, and
even constrains you to believe, that hell is no painted sire. And why then will
(...) not come to Christ? He alone can procure you everlasting redemption.
Have, haste away to him, poor beguiled sinners. (...) wisdom; (...) it of
Christ. Who knows but he may give it you? He is able; for he is the wisdom of
the Father; he is that wisdom which was from everlasting. You have no
righteousness; away, therefore, to Christ: He is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. You are unholy; flee to the Lord
Jesus: he is full of grace and truth? and of his fullness, all may receive that
believe in him. You are as if afraid to die; let this drive you to Christ: he
has the keys of death and hell; in him is plenteous redemption; he alone can
open the door which leads to everlasting life. Let not therefore, the deceived
reasoner boast any longer of his pretended reason. Whatever you may think, it
is the most unreasonable thing in the world not to believe on Jesus Christ,
whom God has sent. Why, why will you die? Why will you not come unto him, that
you may have life? Ho? every one that thirsts, come unto the waters of life
and drink freely: Come, buy without money and without price. Were these blessed
privileges in the text to be purchased with money you might say, we are poor,
and cannot buy: or, were they to be conferred only on sinners of such a rank or
degree, then you might say, how can such sinners as we expect to be so highly
favored? But they are to be freely given of God to the worst of sinners. To
us, says the apostle; to me a persecutor, to you Corinthians, who were (...)
drunkards, covetous persons, idolaters. Therefore, each poor sinner may say
then, why not unto me? Has Christ but one blessing? What if he has blessed
millions already, by turning them away from their iniquities; yet, he still
continues the same: he lives for ever to make intercession, and therefore will
bless you, even you also. Though, Esau-like, you have been profane, and
hitherto depised your heavenly Father's birthright; even now, if you believe,
Christ will be made to you of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.

But I must turn again to believers, for whose instruction, as I observed
before, this discourse was particularly intended. You see, brethren, partakers
of the heavenly calling, what great blessings are treasured up for you in Jesus
Christ your head, and what you are entitled to by believing on his name. Take
heed, therefore, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.
Think often how highly you are favored; and remember, you have not chosen
Christ, but Christ has chosen you. Put on (as the elect of God) humbleness of
mind, and glory, but let it be only in the Lord: for you have nothing but what
you have received of God. By nature, ye were as foolish, as legal, as unholy,
and in as damnable a condition as others. Be pitiful, therefore, be courteous;
and, as sanctification in a progressive work, beware of thinking you have
already attained. Let him that is holy, be holy still; knowing that he who is
most pure in heart, shall hereafter enjoy the clearest vision of God. Let
indwelling fin be your daily burden; and not only bewail and lament, but see
that you subdue it daily by the power of divine grace; and look up to Jesus
continally to be the finisher, as well as the author of your faith. Build not
on your own faithfulness, but on God's unchangeableness. Take heed of thinking
you stand by the power of your own free will. The everlasting love of God the
Father must be your only hope and consolation: let this support you under all
trials. Remember that God's gifts and callings are without repentance; that
Christ having once loved you, will love you to the end. Let this constrain you
to obedience, and make you long and look for that blessed time. when he shall
not only be your wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, but also
complete and everlasting redemption. "Glory be to God in the highest!"

SERMON VII.
THE PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN.
LUKE xviii. 14. I tell you this man went down to his house justified rather
than the other: For every one that exalts himself, shall be abased: and he
that humbles himself, shall be exalted.
THOUGH there be some who dare to deny the Lord Jesus, and disbelieve the
revelation he has been pleased to give us, and thereby bring upon themselves
swift destruction; yet I would charitably hope there are but few, if any such
among you to whom I am now to preach the kingdom of God. Was I to ask you, how
you expect to be justified in the sight of an offended God? I suppose you would
answer, only for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ. But, was I to come more
home to your consciences, I fear most would make the Lord Jesus but in part
their Savior, and go about, as it were, to establish a righteousness of their
own. And this is not thinking contrary to the rules of Christian charity: For
we are all self-righteous by nature; it is as natural for us to turn back to a
covenant of works, as for the sparks to fly upwards. We have had so many legal
and so few free grace preachers, for these many years, that most professors now
seem to be settled upon their lees, and rather deserve the title of Pharisees
than Christians.

Thus it was with the generality of the people during the time of our Lord's
public ministrations: And therefore, in almost all his discourses, he preached
the gospel to poor sinners, and denounced terrible woes against proud
self-justiciaries. The parable to which the words of the text belong, looks
both these ways: For the evangelist informs as, (ver. 9) that our Lord spoke it
unto certain who trusted in themselves, than they were righteous, and depised
others And a notable parable it is; a parable worthy your most serious
attention. "He that has ears to hear let him hear" what Jesus Christ speaks to
all visible professors in it.

Ver. 16. "Two men went up to the temple to pray," (and never two men of more
opposite characters) the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican. The
Pharisees were the strictest sect among the Jews. I was of the strictest sect
of the Pharisees says Paul. They prayed often; not only so, but they made long
prayers; and, that they might appear extraordinary devout, they would pray at
the corners of the street, where two ways met, that people going or coming,
both ways, might see them. They made broad (as our Lord informs us) the borders
of their philacteries, they had pieces of parchment sown to their long robes,
on which some parts of the scripture were written, that people might from
thence infer, that they were lovers of the law of God. They were so very
punctual and exact in outward purifications, that they washed at their going
out and coming in. They held the washing of pots, brazen vessels and tables,
and many other such like things they did. They were very zealous for the
traditions of the fathers, and for the observation of the rites and ceremonies
of the church, notwithstanding they frequently made void the law of God by
their traditions. And they were so exceedingly exact in the outward observation
of the Sabbath, that they condemned our Lord for making a little clay with his
spittle; and called him a sinner, and said, he was not of God, because he had
given sight to a man born blind, on the Sabbath Day. For these reasons they
were had in high veneration among the people, who were sadly misled by these
blind guides. They had the uppermost places in the synagogues, and greetings in
the market places (which they loved dearly) and were called of men, Rabbi; in
short, they had such a reputation for piety, that it became a proverb among the
Jews, that if there were but two men saved, the one of them must be a Pharisee.

As for the Publicans it was not so with them. It seems they were sometimes
Jews, or at least proselytes of the gate; for we find the one here coming up to
the temple; but for the generality, I am apt to think they were Gentiles; for
they were gatherers of the Roman taxes, and used to amass much wealth (as
appears by the confession of Zaccheus one of the chief of them) by wronging men
by false accusations. They were so universally infamous, that our Lord himself
tells his disciples, the excommunicated man should be to them as a Heathen man,
or a Publican. And the Pharisees thought it a sufficient impeachment of our
Lord's character, that he was a friend to Publicans and sinners, and went to
sit down with them at meat.

But, however they disagreed in other things, they agreed in this, that public
worship is a duty incumbent upon all: For they both came up to the temple. The
very Heathens were observers of temple-worship. We have very early notice of
men's sacrificing to, and calling upon the name of the Lord, in the Old
Testament! and I find it no where contradicted in the New. Our Lord, and his
apostles, went up to the temple, and we are commanded by the apostle, not to
forsake the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of too many is in
our days; and such too, as would have us think well of them, though they seldom
or never tread the courts of the Lord's house. But, though our devotions begin
in our closets, they must not end there. And, if people never show their
devotions abroad, I must suspect they have little or none at home. "Two men
went up to the temple." And what went they thither for? Not (as multitudes
amongst us do) to make the house of God a house of merchandise, or to turn it
into a den of thieves; much less to ridicule the preacher, or disturb the
congregation. No, they came to the temple, says our Lord, to pray. Thither
should the tribes of God's spiritual Israel go up, to walk with and pour out
their hearts before the mighty God of Jacob.

"Two men went up to the temple to pray." I fear one of them forgot his errand.
I have often been at a loss what to call the Pharisee's address. It certainly
does not deserve the name of a prayer: He may rather be said to come to the
temple to boast, than to pray; for I do not find one word of confession of his
original guilt; not one single petition for pardon of his past actual sins, or
for grace to help and assist him for the time to come: he only brings in God,
as it were, a reckoning of his performances, and does that, which no flesh can
justly do, I mean, glory in his presence.

Verse 11. The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers or even as
this Publican.

Our Lord first takes notice of his posture; the Pharisee stood, he is not to
be condemned for that (...) for standing, as well as kneeling, is a proper
(...) for prayer. When you stand praying, says our Lord; though sometimes our
Lord kneeled, nay, lay flat on his face upon the ground; his apostles also
kneeled, as we read in the Acts, which has made me wonder at some, who are so
bigoted to standing in family as well as public prayer that they will not
kneel, notwithstanding all kneel that are around them. I fear there is
something of the Pharisee is this conduct. Kneeling and standing are
indifferent, if the knee of the soul be bent, and the hear upright toward God.
We should study not to be particular in indifferent things, lest we offend weak
minds. What the Pharisee is remarked for, is his standing by himself: For the
words may be rendered, he stood by himself, upon some eminent place, at the
upper part of the temple, near the holy of (...), that the congregation might
see what a devout man he was: Or it may be understood as we read it, he prayed
by himself or of himself out of his own heart; he did not pray by form, it was
an extempore prayer: For there are many Pharisees that pray and preach too
extempore. I do not seen why these may not be acquired, as well as other arts
and sciences. A man, with a good elocution, ready turn of thought, and good
memory, may repeat his own or other men's sermons, and by the help of (...)
Wilkins or Henry, may pray seemingly excellently well and yet not have the
least grain of true grace in his heart; and I speak this, not to cry down
extempore prayer, or to discourage those dear souls who really pray by the
Spirit: I only would hereby give a word of reproof to those who are to bigoted
to extempore prayer, that they condemn, at least judge, all that use forms, as
though not so holy and heavenly, as others who pray without them. Alas! this is
wrong. Not every one that prays extempore is a spiritual, nor every one that
prays with a form, a formal man. Let us not judge one another; let not him that
uses a form, judge him that prays extempore, on that account; and let not him
that prays extempore, despise him who uses a form. "The Pharisee stood, and
prayed thus by himself." Which may signify also praying inwardly in his heart;
for there is a way (and that an excellent one too) of praying when we cannot
speak; thus Anna prayed when she spoke not aloud, only her lips moved. Thus God
says to Moses, Why criest thou? when it is plain, he did not speak a word. This
is what the apostle means by the Spirit making intercession (for believers)
with groanings which cannot be uttered. For there are times when the soul is
too big to speak; when God fills as it were, and overshadows it with his
presence, so that it can only fall down, worship, adore, and lie in the dust
before the Lord. Again, there is a time when the soul is benumbed, barren, and
dry, and the believer has not a word to say to his heavenly Father; and then
the heart only can speak. And I mention this for the encouragement of weak
Christians, who think they never are accepted but when they have a flow of
words, and fancy they do not please God at the bottom, for no other reason but
because they do not please themselves. Such would do well to consider, that God
knows the language of the heart, and the mind of the spirit; and that we make
use of words, not to inform God, but to affect ourselves. When ever therefore
any of you find yourselves in such a frame be not discouraged: offer yourselves
up in silence before God, as clay in the hands of the potter, (...) him to
write and stamp his own divine image upon your souls. But I believe the
Pharisee knew nothing of this way of prayer: he was self-righteous, (...)
stranger to the divine life and therefore either (...) the former explanations
may be best put upon (...) words. He stood, and prayed thus with himself God, I
thank thee that I am not as other (...) are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even (...) this Publican. Here is some appearance of devotion, but it is
only in appearance. To (...) God, that we are not extortioners, unjust, (...),
and as wicked in our practices, at other men (...), is certainly meet, right,
and our bounde^ duty: for whatever degrees of goodness there may be in us, more
than in others, it is owing to God^ restraining, preventing, and assisting
grace. We are all equally conceived and born in sin; all are fallen short of
the glory of God, and liable to all the curses and maledictions of the law; so
that (...) that glories, must glory only in the Lord. For none of us have any
thing which he did not receive, and whatever we have received, we did not in
the least merit it, nor could we lay the least claim to it on any account
whatever: we are wholly indebted to free grace for all. Had the Pharisee
thought thus, when he said, God, I thank thee that I am not as other (...) are.
it would have been an excellent introduct^^. (...) his prayer: but he was a
free-willer, as well as self-righteous, (for he that is the one must be the
other) and thought by his own power and strength he had kept himself from these
vices. And yet I do not see what reason he had to trust in himself that he was
righteous, merely because he was not an extortioner, unjust, adulterer; for all
this while he might be, as he certainly was, (as is also every self-righteous
person) as proud as the devil. But he not only boasts, but lies before God (as
all self-justiciaries will be found liars here or hereafter.) He thanks God
that he was not unjust: but is it not an act of the highest injustice to rob
God of his prerogative! Is it not an act of injustice to judge our neighbor?
And yet of both these crimes this self-righteous vaunter is guilty. "Even as
this Publican!" He seems to speak with the utmost disdain; this Publican!
Perhaps he pointed at the poor man, the others might treat him with the like
contempt. Thou proud, confident boaster, what had thou to do with that poor
Publican? Supposing other Publicans were unjust, and extortioners, did it
therefore follow that he must be so? Or if he had been such a sinner, how
know thou but he has repented of those sins? His coming up to the temple to
pray, is one good sign of a reformation at least. Thou art therefore
inexcusable, O Pharisee, who thus judge the Publican: for thou that judge
him to be unjust, art, in the very act of judging, unjust thyself: thy
sacrifice is only the sacrifice of a fool.

We have seen what the Pharisee's negative goodness comes to; I think, nothing
at all. (...) us now see how far his positive goodness extends; for, if we are
truly religious, we shall not eschew evil, but also do good: "I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of "all that I possess."

The Pharisee is not here condemned for his fasting, for fasting is a Christian
duty; "when you fast," says our Lord, thereby taking it for granted, that his
disciples would fast. And when the bridegroom shall be taken away, then shall
they fast in those days. In fasting often, says the apostle. And all that would
not be cast-aways, will take care, as their privilege, without legal
constraint, to "keep their bodies under, and bring them into subjection." The
Pharisee is only condemned for making a righteousuess of his fasting, and
thinking that God would accept him, or that he was any better then his
neighbors, merely on account of his fasting: this is what he was blamed for.
The Pharisee was not to be discommended for fasting twice in a week; I wish
some Christians would imitate him more in this: but to depend on fasting in the
least, for his justification in the fight of God was really abominable. "I give
tithes of all that I possess:" He might as well have said, I pay tithes. But
self righteous people (whatever they may say to the contrary) think they
give-something to God. I give tithes, of all that I possess: I make conscience
of giving tithes, not only of all that the law requires, but of my mint,
annise, and cummin, of all things whatsoever I possess; this was well; but to
boast of such things, or of fasting, is Pharisaical and devilish. Now then let
us sum up all the righteousness of this boasting Pharisee, and see what little
reason he had to trust in himself, that he was righteous, or to despise others.
He is not unjust (but we have only his word for that, I think I have proved the
contrary;) he is no adulterer, no extortioner; he fasts twice in the week, and
gives tithes of all that he possesses; and all this he might do, and a great
deal more, and yet be a child of the devil: for here is no mention made of his
loving the Lord his God with all his heart, which was the "first and great
commandment of the law;" here is not a single syllable of inward religion; and
he was not a true Jew, who was only one outwardly. It is only an outside piety
at the best; inwardly he is full of pride, self-justification, free will, and
great uncharitableness.

Were not the Pharisees, do you think, highly offended at this character? For
they might easily know that it was spoken against them. And though perhaps some
of you may be offended at me, yet, out of love, I must tell you, I fear this
parable is spoken against many of you: For are there not many of you, who go up
to the temple to pray, with no better spirit than this Pharisee did? And
because you fast it may be in the Lent, or every Friday; and because you do
nobody any harm, receive the sacrament, pay tithes, and give an alms now and
then; you think that you are safe, and trust in yourselves that you are
righteous, and inwardly despise those, who do not come up to you in these
outward duties? This, I am persuaded, is the case of many of you, though, alas!
it is a desperate one, as I shall endeavor to show at the close of this
discourse.

Let us now take a view of the Publican, verse 13. And the Publican standing
afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven. but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

The "Publican standing afar off." Perhaps in the outward court of the temple,
conscious to himself that he was not worthy to approach the holy of holies; so
conscious, and so weighed down with a sense of his own unworthiness, that he
would not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven, which he knew was God's
throne. Poor heart! what did he feel at this time! None but returning
Publicans, like himself, can tell. Methinks I see him standing afar off,
pensive, oppressed, and even overwhelmed with sorrow; sometimes he attempts to
look up; but then; thinks he, the heavens are unclean (...) God's sight, and
the very angels are charged with folly; how then shall such a wretch as I, dare
to lift up my guilty head! And to show that his heart was full of holy
self-resentment, and that he sorrowed after a godly sort, he smote upon his
breast; the word in the original implies, that he struck hard upon his breast:
he will lay the blame upon none but his own wicked heart. He will not, like
unhumbled Adam, tacitly lay the fault of his (...) upon God, and say, the
passions which thou (...) me, they deceived me, and I sinned: he is (...)
penitent thus to reproach his Maker; he smites upon his breast; his
treacherous, ungrateful, despera^^ly wicked breast; a breast now ready to
burst; and at length, out of the abundance of his heart, I (...) not with many
tears, he at last cries out, "God be merciful to me a sinner." Not, God be
merciful to yonder proud Pharisee: he found enough in himself to vent his
resentment against, without looking abroad upon others. Not, God be merciful to
me a saint; for he knew all his righteousnesses were but filthy rags. Not, God
be merciful (...) such or such a one; but, God be merciful to me, even to me a
sinner, a sinner by birth, a sinner in thought, word, and deed; a sinner as to
my person, a sinner as to all my performances; a sinner in whom is no health,
in whom dwells no good thing; a sinner, poor miserable, blind, and naked,
from the crown of the head to the sole of the feet, full of wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores; a self-accused, self-condemned sinner. What
think you? would this Publican have been offended if any minister had told him
that he deserved to be damned? would he have been angry, if any one had told
him, that by nature he was half a devil and half a beast? No: he would have
confessed a thousand hells to have been his due, and that he was an earthly,
devilish sinner. He felt now what a dreadful thing it was to depart from the
living God: he felt that he was inexcusable every way: that he could in nowise,
upon account of any thing in himself, be justified in the sight of God; and
therefore lays himself at the feet of sovereign mercy, "God be merciful to me a
sinner." Here is no confidence in the flesh, no plea fetched from fasting,
paying tithes, or the performance of any other duty; here is no boasting that
he was not an extortioner, unjust, or an adulterer. Perhaps he had been guilty
of all these crimes, at least he knew he would have been guilty of all these,
had he been left to follow the devices and desires of his own heart; and
therefore, with a broken and contrite spirit, he cries out, God be merciful to
me a sinner.

This man came up to the temple to pray, and he prayed indeed. And a broken and
a contrite heart God will not despise. I tell you, says our Lord, I who lay in
the bosom of the Father from all eternity; I who am God, and therefore know all
things; I who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, whose judgment is according
to right; I tell you, whatever you may think of it, or of me for telling you
so, this man, this Publican, this despised; sinful, but broken hearted man,
went down to his house justified (acquitted, and looked upon as righteous in
the sight of God) rather than the other.

Let Pharisees take heed that they do not pervert this text: for when it is
said, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other, our Lord
does not mean that both were justified, and that the Publican had rather more
justification than the Pharisee: but it implies, either that the Publican was
actually justified, but the Pharisee was not; or, that the Publican was in a
better way to receive justification, than the Pharisee; according to our Lord's
saying, the Publicans and (...) enter into the kingdom of heaven before you.
That the Pharisee was not justified is certain, (...) God resists the proud;
and that the Publican was at this time actually justified (and perhaps went
home with a sense of it in his heart) we have great reason to infer from the
latter part of the text, For every one that exalts himself shall be abased,
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The parable therefore now speaks to all who hear me this day: for that our
Lord intended it for our learning, is evident, from his making such a general
application; for every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The parable of the Publican and Pharisee, is but as it were a glass, wherein
we may see the different disposition of all mankind; for all mankind may be
divided into two general classes. Either they trust wholly in themselves, or in
part, that they are righteous, and then they are Pharisees; or they have no
confidence in the flesh, are self-condemned sinners, and then they come under
the character of the Publican just now described. And we may add also, that the
different reception these men met with, points out to us in lively colors, the
different treatment the self-justiciary and self-condemned criminal will meet
with at the terrible day of judgment^ Every one that exalts himself shall be
abased, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Every one, without exception, young or old, high or low, rich or poor (for God
is no respecter of persons) every one, whosoever he be, that exalts himself,
and not free grace; every one that trusts in himself that he is righteous,
that rests in his duties; or thinks to join them with the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, for justification in the sight of God, though he be no adulterer,
no extortioner, though he be not outwardly unjust, nay, though he fast twice in
the week, and gives tithes of all that he possesses; yet shall he be abased in
the sight of all good men who know him here, and before men and angels, and God
himself, when Jesus Christ comes to appear in judgment hereafter. How low, none
but the Almighty God can tell. He shall be abased to live with devils, and make
his abode in the lowest hell for evermore.

Hear this, all ye self-justiciaries, tremble, and behold your doom! a dreadful
doom, more dreadful than words can express, or thought conceive! If you refuse
to humble yourselves, after hearing this parable, I call heaven and earth to
witness against you this day, that God shall visit you with all his storms, and
pour all the vials of his wrath upon your rebellious heads; you exalted
yourselves here, and God shall abase you hereafter; you are as proud as the
devil, and with devils shall you dwell to all eternity. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked; he sees your hearts, he knows all things. And notwithstanding you
may come up to the temple to pray, your prayers are turned into sin, and you go
down to your houses unjustified, if you are self-justiciaries; and do you know
what it is to be unjustified? Why, if you are unjustified, the wrath of God
abides upon you; you are in your blood; all the curses of the law belong to
you: Cursed are you when you go out, cursed are you when you come in; cursed
are your thoughts, cursed are your words, cursed are your deeds; every thing
you do, say, or think from morning to night, is only one continued series of
sin. However highly you may be esteemed in the sight of men, however you may be
honored with the uppermost seats in the synagogues in the church militant, you
will have no place in the church triumphant. Humble yourselves therefore under
the mighty hand of God: Pull down every self-righteous thought, and every proud
imagination, that now exalts itself against the perfect, personal, imputed
righteousness of the dear Lord Jesus: For he (and he alone) that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

He that humbles himself, whatever he be; if, instead of fasting twice in the
week, he has been drunk twice in the week; if, instead of giving tithes of all
that he possesses, he has cheated the minister of his tithes, and king of his
taxes; notwithstanding he be unjust, an extortioner, an adulterer, nay,
notwithstanding the sins of all mankind center and unite in him; yet, if
through grace, like the Publican, he is enabled to humble himself, he shall be
exalted; not in a temporal manner; for Christians must rather expect to be
abased, and to have their names cast out as evil and to lay down their lives
for Christ Jesus in this world: But he shall be exalted in a spiritual sense;
he shall be freely justified from all his sins by the blood of Jesus; he shall
have peace with God, a peace which passes all understanding; not only peace,
but joy in believing; he shall be translated from the kingdom of Satan, to the
kingdom of God's dear Son: He shall dwell in Christ, and Christ in him: He
shall be one with Christ, and Christ one with him: He shall drink of divine
pleasures as out of a river: He shall be sanctified throughout in spirit, soul,
and body; in one word, he shall be filled with all the fullness of God. Thus
shall the man who humbles himself be exalted here; but O how high shall he be
exalted hereafter! as high as the highest heavens, even to the right hand of
God: There he shall sit, happy both in soul and body, and judge angels; high,
out of the reach of all sin and trouble, eternally secure from all danger of
falling. O sinners, did you but know how highly God intends to exalt those who
humble themselves and believe in Jesus, surely you would humble yourselves, at
least beg of God to humble you; for it is he that must strike the rock of your
hearts; and cause floods of contrite tears to flow therefrom. O that God would
give this sermon such a commission, as he once gave to the rod of Moses! I
would strike you through and through with the rod of his word, until each of
you was brought to cry out with the poor Publican, "God be merciful to me a
sinner." What pleasant language would this be in the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath!

Are there no poor sinners among you? What, are you all Pharisees? Surely, you
cannot bear the thoughts of returning home unjustified; can you? what if a fit
of the apoplexy should seize you, and your souls be hurried away before the
awful judge of quick and dead? What will you do without Christ's righteousuess?
If you go out of the world unjustified, you must remain so for ever. O that you
would humble yourselves! then would the Lord exalt you; it may be, that, whilst
I am speaking, the Lord might justify you freely by his grace. I observed, that
perhaps the Publican had a sense of his justification before he went from the
temple, and knew that his pardon was sealed in heaven: And who knows but you
may be thus exalted before you go home, if you humble yourselves? O what peace,
love, and joy, would you then feel in yo^^ hearts! You would have a heaven upon
earth. O that I could hear any of you say (as I once heard a poor sinner, under
my preaching, cry out) He is come, he is come! How would you then, like him,
extol a precious, a free-hearted Christ? How would you magnify him for being
such a friend to Publicans and sinners? Greater love can no man show, than to
lay down his life for a friend; but Christ laid down his life for his enemies,
ever for you, if you are enabled to humble yourselves, as the Publican did.
Sinners, I know not how to leave off talking with you; I would fill my mouth
with arguments, I could plead with you. Come, let us reason together; though
your sins be as scarlet, yet if you humble yourselves, they shall be as white
as snow. One act of true faith in Christ justifies you for ever and ever; he
has not promised you what he cannot perform; he is able to exalt you: For God
has exalted, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow; nay, God has exalted him to be not only a Prince, but a
Savior. May he be a Savior to you! and then I shall have reason to rejoice in
the day of judgment, that I have not preached in vain, nor labored in vain.

SERMON VIII.
THE HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING THE WORLD OF SIN, RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND JUDGMENT.
JOHN xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.
THESE words contain part of a gracious promise, which the blessed Jesus was
pleased to make to his weeping and sorrowful disciples. The time was now
drawing near, in which the Son of man was first to be lifted upon the cross,
and afterward to heaven. Kind, wondrous kind! had this merciful High Priest
been to his disciples, during the time of his tabernacling amongst them. He had
compassion on their infirmities, answered for them when assaulted by their
enemies, and set them right when out of the way, either in principle or
practice. He neither called nor used them as servants, but as friends: and he
revealed his secrets to them from time to time. He opened their understandings,
that they might understand the scriptures; explained to them the hidden
mysteries of the kingdom of God, when he spoke to others in parables: Nay, he
became the servant of them all, and even condescended to wash their feet. The
thoughts of parting with so dear and loving a master as this. especially for a
long season, must needs affect them much. When on a certain occasion he
intended to be absent from them only for a night; we are told, he was obliged
to constrain them to leave him; no wonder then, that when he now informed them
he must entirely go away, and that the Pharisees in his absence would put them
out of their synagogues, and excommunicate them; yea, that the time should
come, that whosoever killed them, would think they did God service (a prophecy,
one would imagine, in an especial manner designed for the suffering ministers
of this generation;) no wonder, I say, considering all this that we are told,
ver. 6, Sorrow had filled their hearts: Because I have said the things unto
you, sorrow has filled your hearts. The expression is very emphatical; their
hearts were so full of concern, that they were ready to burst. In order,
therefore, to reconcile them to this mournful dispensation our dear and
compassionate Redeemer shows them the necessity he lay under to leave them;
Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away: As
though he had said, Think not, my dear disciples, that I leave you out of
anger: No^ it is for your sakes, for your profit that I go away: For if I go
not away, if I die not upon the cross for your fins, and rise again for your
justification, and ascend into heaven to make intercession, and plead my merits
before my Father's throne, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, will not, cannot come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you: And, that they might know
what he was to do, When he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.

The person referred to in the words of the text, is plainly the Comforter, the
Holy Ghost; and the promise was first made to our Lord's apostles. But though
it was primarily made to them, and was literally and remarkably fulfilled at
the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost came down as a rushing mighty wind,
and also when three thousand were pricked to the heart by Peter's preaching;
yet, as the apostles were the representatives of the whole body of believers,
we must infer, that this promise must be looked upon as spoken to us, and to
our children, and to as many as the Lord our God shall call.

My design from these words, is to show the manner in which the Holy Ghost
generally works upon the hearts of those, who, through grace, are made vessels
of mercy, and translated from the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of
God's dear Son.

I say, generally: for as God is a sovereign agent, his sacred spirit blows
not only on whom, but when and how it lists. Therefore, far be it from me to
confine the Almighty to one way of acting; or say, that all undergo an equal
degree of conviction; no, there is a holy variety in God's methods of calling
home his elect. But this we may affirm assuredly, that, wherever there is a
work of true conviction and conversion wrought upon a sinner's heart, the Holy
Ghost, whether by a greater or less degree of inward soul-trouble, does that
which our Lord Jesus told the disciples, in the words of the text, that he
should do when he came.

If any of you ridicule inward religion, or think there is no such thing as our
feeling or receiving the Holy Ghost, I fear my preaching will be quite
foolishness to you, and that you will understand me no more than if I spoke to
you in an unknown tongue. But as the promise in the text is made to the world,
and as I know it will be fulfilling till time shall be no more, I shall proceed
to explain the general way whereby the Holy Ghost works upon every converted
sinner's heart; and I hope that the Lord, even whilst I am speaking, will be
pleased to fulfill it in many of your hearts. And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of fin of righteousness, and of judgment.

The word which we translate reprove, ought (...) be rendered convince; and in
the original at implies a conviction by way of argumentation, and coming with a
power upon the mind equal to a demonstration. A great many scoffers of these
lost days, will ask such as they term pretenders to the Spirit, how they feel
the Spirit, and how they (...) the Spirit? They might as well ask, how they
know, and how they feel the sun when it shines upon the body? For with equal
power and demonstration does the Spirit of God work upon and convince the soul.
And.

First. It convinces of sin; and generally of some enormous sin, the worst
perhaps the convicted person ever was guilty of. Thus, when our Lord was
conversing with the woman of Samaria, he convinced her first of her adultery:
Woman, go call thy husband. The woman answered, and said, I have no husband.
Jesus said unto her, Thou have well said, I have no husband: for thou have had
five husbands, and he whom thou now have, is not thy husband; in this said
thou truly. With this, there went such powerful conviction of all her other
actual sins, that soon after, she left her water-pot, and went her way into the
city, and says to the men, Come, and see a man that told me all things that
ever I did: Is not this the Christ? Thus our Lord also dealt with the
persecutor Saul: he convinced him first of the horrid sin of persecution; Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Such a sense of all his other sins, probably at
the same time revived in his mind, that immediately he died; that is, died to
all his false confidences, and was thrown into such an agony of soul, that he
continued three days, and neither did eat nor drink. This is the method the
Spirit of God generally takes in dealing with sinners; he first convinces them
of some heinous actual fin, and at the same time brings all their other sins
into remembrance; and as it were sets them in battle-array before them: When he
is come, he will reprove the world of fin.

And was it ever thus with you, my dear hearers? (For I must question you as I
go along, because I intend, by the divine help, to preach not only to your
heads, but your hearts.) Did the Spirit of God ever bring all your sins thus to
remembrance, and make you cry out to God, thou writest bitter things against
me? Did your actual sins ever appear before you, as though drawn in a map? If
not, you have great reason (unless you were sanctified from the womb) to
suspect that you are not convicted, much more not converted, and that the
promise of the text was never yet fulfilled in your hearts.

Farther: When the Comforter comes into a sinner's heart, though it generally
convinces the sinner of his actual sin first, yet it leads him to see and
bewail his original sin, the fountain from which all these polluted streams do
flow.

Though every thing in the earth, air and water; every thing both without and
within, concur to prove the truth of that assertion in the scripture, "in Adam
we have all died;" yet most are so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
that notwithstanding they may give an assent to the truth of the proposition in
their heads, yet they never felt it really in their hearts. Nay, some in words
professedly deny it, though their works too, too plainly prove them to be
degenerate sons of a degenerate father. But when the Comforter, the Spirit of
God, arrests a sinner, and convinces him of sin, all carnal reasoning against
original corruption, every proud and high imagination, which exalts itself
against that doctrine, is immediately thrown down; and he is made to cry out,
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death; he now finds that
concupiscence is sin; and does not so much bewail his actual sins, as the
inward perverseness of his heart, which he now finds not only to be an enemy
to, but also direct enmity against God.

And did the Comforter, my dear friends, ever come with such a convincing power
as this into your hearts? Were you ever made to see and feel, that in your
flesh dwells no good thing; that you are conceived and born in sin; that you
are by nature children of wrath; that God would be just if he damned you,
though you never committed an actual sin in your lives? So often as you have
been at church and sacrament, did you ever feelingly confess, that there was no
health in you; that the remembrance of your original and actual sins was
grievous unto you, and the burden of them intolerable? If not, you have been
only offering to God vain oblations; you never yet prayed in your lives, the
Comforter never yet came effectually into your souls: consequently you are not
in the faith properly so called; no, you are at present in a state of death and
damnation.

Again, the Comforter, when he comes effectually to work upon a sinner, not
only convinces him of the sin of his nature, and the sin of his life, but also
of the sin of his duties.

We all naturally are legallists, thinking to be justified by the works of the
law. When somewhat awakened by the terrors of the Lord, we immediately, like
the Pharisees of old, go about to establish our own righteousness, and think we
shall find acceptance with God, if we seek it with tears: finding ourselves
damned by nature and our actual sins, we then think to recommend ourselves to
God by our duties, and hope, by our doings of one kind or another, to inherit
eternal life. But, whenever the Comforter comes into the heart, it convinces
the soul of these false rests, and makes the sinner to see that all his
righteousnesses are but as filthy rags; that his best works are but so many
splendid sins; and that, for the most pompous services he deserves no better a
doom than that of the unprofitable servant, to be thrown into outer darkness,
where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

And was this degree of conviction ever wrought in any of your souls? Did the
Comforter ever come into your hearts, so as to make you sick of your duties, as
well as your sins? Were you ever, with the great apostle of the Gentiles, made
to abhor your own righteousness which is by the law, and acknowledge that you
deserve to be damned, though you should give all your goods to feed the poor?
Were you made to feel, that your very repentance needed to be repented of, and
that every thing in yourselves is but dung and dross? And that all the
arguments you can fetch for mercy, must be out of the heart and pure unmerited
love of God? Were you ever made to lie at the feet of sovereign grace, and to
say, Lord, if thou will, thou may save me; if not, thou may justly damn
me; I have nothing to plead; I can in no wise justify myself in thy sight; my
best performances, I see will condemn me; and all I have to depend upon is thy
free grace? What say you? Was this, ever, or is this now; the habitual language
of your hearts? You have been frequently at the temple; but did you ever
approach it in the temper of the poor Publican; and, after you have done all,
acknowledge that you have done nothing; and upon a feeling experimental sense
of your own unworthiness and sinfulness every way, smite upon your breasts, and
say, God be merciful to us sinners? If you never were thus minded, the
Comforter never yet effectually came into your souls, you are out of Christ;
and if God should require your souls in that condition, he would be no better
to you than a consuming fire.

But there is a fourth sin, of which the comforter, when he comes, convinces
the soul, and which alone (it is very remarkable) our Lord mentions as though
it was the only sin worth mentioning; for indeed it is the root of all other
sins whatsoever: It is the reigning as well as the damning sin of the world.
And what now do you imagine that sin may be; It is that cursed sin, that root
of all other evils, I mean the sin of unbelief. Of sin, because they believe
not on me.

But does the Christian world or any of you that hear me this day, want the
Holy Ghost to convince you of unbelief? Are there any infidels here? Yes, (O
that I had not too great reason to think so) I fear most are such: Not indeed
such infidels as professedly deny the Lord that bought us (though I fear too
many even of such monsters are in every country;) but I mean such unbelievers,
that have no more faith in Christ than the devils themselves. Perhaps you may
think, you believe, because you repeat the creed, or subscribe to a confession
of says, because you go to church or meeting, receive the sacrament, and are
taken into full communion. These are blessed privileges; but all this may be
done, without our being true believers. And I know not how to detect your false
hypocritical faith better, than by putting to you this question. How long have
you believed? Would not most of you say, as long as we can remember, we never
did disbelieve. Then this is a certain sign that you have no true faith at all;
No, not so much as a grain of mustard seed: For if you believe now, (unless you
were sanctified from your infancy, which is the ease of some) you must know
that there was a time in which you did not believe on the Lord Jesus, Christ;
and the Holy Ghost, if ever you received it, convinced you of this. Eternal
Truth has declared, when he is come he will convince the world of sin, because
they believe not on me.

None of us believe by nature: But after the Holy Ghost has convinced us of the
sin of our natures, and the sin of our lives and duties, in order to convince
us of our utter inability to save ourselves, and that we must be beholden to
God, as for every thing else, so for faith (without which it is impossible to
please, or be saved by Christ) he convinces us also that we have no faith. Do
thou believe on the Son of God? is the grand question which the Holy Ghost now
puts to the soul: At the same time he works with such power and demonstrations,
that the soul sees, and is obliged to confess, that it has no faith.

This is a thing little thought of by most who call themselves believers. They
dream they are Christians because they live in a Christian country: If they
were born Turks, they would believe on Mahomet; for what is that which men
commonly call faith, but an outward consent to the (...) religion? But do not
you thus deceive your ourselves; true faith is quite another thing. Ask
yourselves, therefore, whether or not the Holy Ghost ever powerfully convinced
you of the sin of unbelief? You are perhaps so devout (you may imagine) as to
get a catalogue of sins, which you look over, and confess in a formal manner,
as often as you go to the holy sacrament: But among all your sins, did you ever
once confess and bewail that damning sin of unbelief? Were you ever made to cry
out, Lord, give me faith; Lord, give me to believe on thee; O that I had faith!
O that I could believe! If you never were thus distressed, at least, if you
never saw and felt, that you had no faith, it is a certain sign that the Holy
Ghost the Comforter, never came into and worked savingly upon your souls.

But is it not odd, that the Holy Ghost should be called a Comforter, when it
is plain, by the experience of all God's children, that this work of conviction
is usually attended with sore inward conflicts, and a great deal of
soul-trouble? I answer, the Holy Ghost may well be termed a Comforter, even in
this work; because it is the only way to, and ends in true solid comfort.
Blessed are they that are thus convicted by him; for they shall be comforted.
Nay, not only so, but there is present comfort, even in the midst of these
convictions; The soul secretly rejoices in the sight of its own misery, blesses
God for bringing it out of darkness into light, and looks forward with a
comfortable prospect of future deliverances, knowing, that, though sorrow may
endure for a night, joy will come in the morning.

Thus it is that the Holy Ghost convinces the soul of sin. And, if so, how
wretchedly are they mistaken, that blend the light of the Spirit with the light
of conscience, as all such do, who say, that Christ lights every man that
comes into the world, and that light, if improved, will bring us to Jesus
Christ? If such doctrine be true; the promise in the text was needless: Our
Lord's apostles had already that light; the world hereafter to be convinced,
had that light; and, if that was sufficient to bring them to Christ, why was it
expedient that Christ should go away to heaven, to send down the Holy Ghost to
do this for them? Alas! all have not this Spirit: It is the special gift of
God, and, without this special gift, we can never come to Christ.

The light of conscience will accuse or convince us of any common sin: but the
light of natural conscience never did, never will, and never can convince us of
unbelief: If it could, how comes it to pass, that not one of the heathens, who
improved the light of nature in such an eminent degree, was ever convinced of
unbelief? No ^atural conscience cannot effect this; it is the peculiar property
of the Holy Ghost the Comforter: When he is come, he will reprove (or convince)
the world of sin, of righteousness, and judgment.

We have heard how he convinces of sin: We come now to show,

Secondly, What is the righteousness, of which the Comforter convinces the
world.

By the word righteousness, in some places of scripture, we are to understand
that common justice which we ought to practice between man and man; as when
Paul is said to reason of temperance and righteousness before a trembling
Felix. But here (as in a multitude of other places in holy writ) we are to
understand by the word righteousness, the active and passive obedience of the
dear Lord Jesus; even that perfect, personal, all-sufficient righteousness,
which he has wrought out for that world which the Spirit is to convince. Of
righteousness, (says our Lord) because I go to the Father, and ye see me no
more. This is one argument that the Holy Spirit makes use of to prove Christ's
righteousness, because he is gone to the Father, and we see him no more. For
had he not wrought out a sufficient righteousness, the Father would have sent
him back, as not having done what he undertook: and we should have seen him
again.

O the righteousness of Christ! It so comforts my soul, that I must be excused
if I mention it in almost all my discourses. I would not, if I could help it,
have one sermon without it. Whatever infidels may object, or Arminians
sophistically argue against an imputed righteousness; yet whoever know
themselves and God, must acknowledge, that Jesus Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness, (and perfect justification in the sight of God,) to every
one that believes, and that we are to be made the righteousness of God in him.
This, and this only a poor sinner can lay hold of, as a sure anchor of his
hope. Whatever other scheme of salvation men may lay, I acknowledge I can see
no other foundation whereon to build my hopes of salvation, but on the rock of
Christ's personal righteousness, imputed to my soul.

Many, I believe, have a rational conviction of, and agree with me in this: But
rational convictions, if rested in, avail but little; it must be a spiritual,
experimental conviction of the truth which is saving. And therefore our Lord
says, when the Holy Ghost comes in the day of his power, it convinces of this
righteousness, of the reality, completeness and sufficiency of it, to save a
poor sinner.

We have seen how the Holy Ghost convinces the sinner of the sin of his nature,
life, duties, and of the sin of unbelief; and what then must the poor creature
do? He must, he must inevitably despair, if there be no hope but in himself.
When therefore the Spirit has hunted the sinner out of all his false rests and
hiding-places, taken off the pitiful fig leaves of his own works, and driven
him out of the trees of the garden (his outward reformations) and placed him
naked before the bar of a sovereign, holy, just, and sin-avenging God; then,
then it is, when the soul, having the sentence of death within itself because
of unbelief; has a sweet display of Christ's righteousness made to it by the
holy Spirit of God. Here it is, that he begins more immediately to act in the
quality of a Comforter, and convinces the soul so powerfully of the reality and
all sufficiency of Christ's righteousness, that the soul is immediately set a
hungering and thirsting after it. Now the sinner begins to see, that though he
has destroyed himself, yet in Christ is his help; that, though he has no
righteousness of his own to recommend him, there is a fullness of grace, a
fullness of truth, a fullness of righteousness in the dear Lord Jesus, which, if
once imputed to him, would make him happy for ever and ever.

None can tell, but those happy souls who have experienced it, with what
demonstration of the Spirit this conviction comes. O how amiable, as well as
all-sufficient, does the blessed Jesus now appear! With what new eyes does the
soul now see the Lord its righteousness! Brethren, it is unutterable. If you
were never thus convinced of Christ's righteousness in your own souls, though
you may believe it doctrinally, it will avail you nothing; if the Comforter
never came savingly into your souls, then you are comfortless indeed. But

What will this righteousness avail, if the soul has it not in possession?

Thirdly, The next thing therefore the Comforter, when he comes, convinces the
soul of, is judgment.

By the word judgment, I understand that well-grounded peace, that settled
judgment, which the soul forms of itself, when it is enabled by the Spirit of
God, to lay hold on Christ's righteousness, which I believe it always does,
when convinced in the manner beforementioned. "Of judgment, (says our Lord)
because the Prince of this world is judged; the soul, being enabled to lay hold
on Christ's perfect righteousness by a lively faith, has a conviction wrought
in it by the Holy Spirit, that the "Prince of this world is judged." The soul
being now justified by faith, has peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and can triumphantly say, it is Christ that justifies me, who is he
that condemns me? The strong man armed is now cast out? my soul is in a true
peace; the Prince of this world will come and accuse, but he has now no share
in me: The blessed Spirit which I have received, and whereby I am enabled to
apply Christ's righteousness to my poor soul powerfully convinces me of this:
Why should I fear? Or of what shall I be afraid, since God's Spirit witnesses
with my spirit, that I am a child of God? The Lord is ascended up on high; he
has led captivity captive; he has received the Holy Ghost the Comforter, that
best of gifts for men: and that Comforter is come into my heart: he is faithful
that has promised: I, even I, am powerfully, rationally, spiritually convicted
of sin, righteousness, and judgment. By this I know the prince of this world is
judged.

Thus, I say, may we suppose that soul to triumph, in which the promise of the
text is happily fulfilled. And though, at the beginning of this discourse, I
said, most had never experienced any thing of this, and that therefore this
preaching must be foolishness to such; yet I doubt not but there are some few
happy souls, who, through grace, have been enabled to follow me step by step;
and notwithstanding the Holy Ghost might not directly work in the same order as
I have described, and perhaps they cannot exactly say the time when, yet they
have a well grounded confidence that the work is done, and that they have
really been convinced of sin, righteousness, and judgment, in some way, or at
some time or another.

And now what shall I say to you? O thank God, thank the Lord Jesus, thank the
ever blessed Trinity, for this unspeakable gift: For you would never have been
thus highly favored, had not he who first spoke darkness into light, loved you
with an everlasting love, and enlightened you by his Holy Spirit, and that too,
not on account of any good thing foreseen in you, but for his own name's sake.

Be humble therefore, O believers be humble: Look to the rock from whence you
have been hewn: Extol free grace; admire electing love, which alone has made
you to differ from the rest of your brethren. Has God brought you into light?
Walk as becomes the children of light Provoke not the Holy Spirit to depart
from you: For though he has sealed you to the day of redemption and you know
that the Prince of this world is judged; yet if you backslide, grow lukewarm,
or forget your first love, the Lord will visit your offenses with the rod of
affliction, and your sin with spiritual scourges. Be not therefore high-minded,
but fear. Rejoice, but let it be with trembling. As the elect of God, put on,
not only humbleness of mind, but bowels of compassion; and pray, O pray for
your unconverted brethren! Help me, help me now, O children of God, and hold up
my hands, as Aaron and Hur once held up the hands of Moses. Pray whilst I am
preaching, that the Lord may enable me to say, This day is the promise in the
text fulfilled in some poor sinners' hearts. Cry mightily to God, and, with the
cords of a holy violence, pull down blessings on your neighbors heads. Christ
yet lives and reigns in heaven: The residue of the Spirit is yet in his hand,
and a plentiful effusion of it is promised in the latter days of the church.
And O that the Holy Ghost, the blessed Comforter, would now come down, and
convince those that are Christ-less among you, of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment! O that you were once made willing to be convinced!

But perhaps you had rather be filled with wine than with the Spirit, and are
daily chasing that Holy Ghost from your souls. What shall I say for you to God?
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. What shall I say from God
to you? Why? that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself:
Therefore I beseech you, as in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Do not
go away contradicting and blaspheming. I know Satan would have you begone. Many
of you may be uneasy, and are ready to cry out, "What a weariness is this!" But
I will not let you go: I have wrestled with God for my hearers in private, and
I must wrestle with you here in public. Though of myself I can do nothing, and
you can no more by your own power come to and believe on Christ, than Lazarus
could come forth from the grave; yet who knows but God may beget some of you
again to a lively hope by this foolishness of preaching, and that you may be
some of that world, which the Comforter is to convince "of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment?" Poor Christ less souls! do you know what a
condition you are in? Why, you are lying in the wicked one, the devil; he rules
in you, he walks and dwells in you, unless you dwell in Christ, and the
Comforter is come into your hearts. And will you contentedly lie in that wicked
one the devil? What wages will he give you? Eternal death. O that you would
come to Christ! The free gift of God through him is eternal life. He will
accept of you even now, if you will believe in him. The Comforter may yet come
into your hearts, even yours. All that are now his living temples, were once
lying in the wicked one as well as you. This blessed gift, this Holy Ghost, the
blessed Jesus received even for the rebellious.

I see many of you affected: But are your passions only a little wrought upon,
or are your souls really touched with a lively sense of the heinousness of your
sins, your want of faith, and the preciousness of the righteousness of Jesus
Christ? If so, I hope the Lord has been gracious, and that the Comforter is
coming into your hearts. O do not stifle these convictions! Do not go away, and
straightway forget what manner of doctrine you have heard, and thereby show
that these are only common workings of a few transient convictions, floating
upon the surface of your hearts. Beg of God that you may be sincere (for he
alone can make you so) and that you may indeed desire the promise of the text
to be fulfilled in your souls. Who knows but the Lord may be gracious! Remember
you have no plea but sovereign mercy; but for your encouragement also, remember
it is the world, such as you are, to whom the Comforter is to come, and whom he
is to convince: Wait therefore at Wisdom's gates. The bare probability of
having a door of mercy opened, is enough to keep you striving. Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, the chief of them: You know not but he
came to save you. Do not go and quarrel with God's decrees, and, if I am a
reprobate, I shall be damned; if I am elected, I shall be saved; and therefore
I will do nothing. What have you to do with God's decrees? Secret things belong
to him; it is your business to give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure. If there are but few who find the way that leads to life, do you
strive to be some of them: You know not but you may be in the number of those
few, and that your striving may be the means which God intends to bless, to
give you an entrance in. If you do not act thus you are not sincere; and, if
you do, who knows but you may find mercy? For though after you have done all
that you can, God may justly cut you off, yet never was a single person damned
who did all that he could. Though therefore your hands are withered, stretch
them out; though you are impotent, sick, and lame, come lie at the pool. Who
knows but by and by the Lord Jesus may have compassion on you, and send the
Comforter to convince you of sin, righteousness, and of judgment? He is a God
full of compassion and long-suffering, otherwise you and I had been long since
lifting up our eyes in torments. But still he is patient with us!

O Christ-less sinners, you are alive, and who knows but God intends to bring
you to repentance? Could my prayers or tears effect it, you should have volleys
of the one, and floods of the other. My heart is touched with a sense of your
condition: May our merciful High Priest now send down the Comforter and make
you sensible of it also! O the love of Christ! It constrains me to beseech you
to come to him; what do you reject, if you reject, Christ, the Lord of glory!
Sinners, give the dear Redeemer a lodging in your souls. Do not be
Bethshemites; give Christ your hearts, your whole hearts, Indeed he is worthy.
He made you and not you yourselves. You are not your own; give Christ then your
bodies and souls, which are his: Is (...) not enough to melt you down, to think
that the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity, ^^uld condescend to invite
you by his ministers? How soon can he frown you to hell? And how know you but
he may this very instant, if you do not hear his voice? Did any yet harden
their hearts against Christ, and prosper? Come then do not send me sorrowful
away: Do not let me have reason to cry out, O my leanness, my leanness! Do not
let me go weeping into my closet, and say, Lord they will not believe my
report; Lord, I have called them, and they will not answer; I am unto them as a
very pleasant song, and as one that plays upon a pleasant instrument; but their
hearts are running after the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the
pride of life. Would you be willing that I should give such an account of you,
or make such a prayer before God? And yet I must not only do so here, but
appear in judgment against you hereafter, unless you will come to Christ. Once
more therefore I entreat you to come. What objections have you to make? Behold,
I stand here in the name of God, to answer all that you can offer. But I know
no one can come, unless the Father draw him: I will therefore address me to my
God, and intercede with him to send the Comforter into your hearts.

O blessed Jesus, who art a God whose compassions fail not, and in whom all the
promises are yea and amen; thou that sit between the cherubims, show
thyself amongst us. Let us now see thy outgoings! O let us now taste that thou
art gracious, and reveal thy almighty arm! Get thyself the victory in these
poor sinners' hearts. Let not the word spoken prove like water spilt upon the
ground. Send down, send down, O great High Priest, the Holy Spirit, to convince
the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. So will we give thanks and
praise to thee, O Father, thee O Son, and thee O blessed Spirit; to whom as
three Persons, but one God, be ascribed, by angels and archangels, by cherubims
and seraphims, and all the heavenly hosts, all possible power; might, majesty,
and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen, Amen, Amen.

SERMON IX.
THE CONVERSION OF ZACCHEUS.
LUKE xix. 9, 10. And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this
house, forasmuch as he also is the son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost.
SALVATION, every where through the whole scripture, is said to be the free
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Not only free, because God is a
sovereign agent, and therefore may withhold it from, or confer it on, whom he
pleases; but free, because there is nothing to be found is man, that can any
way induce God to be merciful unto him. The righteousness of Jesus Christ is
the sole cause of our finding favor in God's light: This righteousness
apprehended by faith (which is also the gift of God) makes it our own; and this
faith, if true, will work by love.

These are parts of those glad tidings which are published in the gospel; and
of the certainty of them, next to the express word of God, the experience of
all such as have been saved, is the best, and as I take it, the most unbounded
proof. That God might teach us every way, he has been pleased to live upon
record many instances of the power of his grace exerted in the salvation, of
several persons, that we hearing how he dealt with them, might from thence
inter the manner we must expect to be dealt with ourselves, and learn in what
way we must look for salvation, if we truly desire to be made partakers of the
inheritance with the saints in light.

The conversion of the person referred to in the text, I think will be of no
small service to us in this matter, if rightly improved. I would hope, most of
you know who the person is, to whom the Lord Jesus speaks; it is the Publican
Zaccheus, to whose house the blessed Jesus said, salvation came, and whom he
pronounces a son of Abraham.

It is my design (God helping) to make some remarks upon his conversion
recorded at large in the preceding verses, and then to enforce the latter part
of the text, as an encouragement to po^^ ^^done sinners to come to Jesus
Christ. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

The evangelist Luke introduces the account of this man's conversion thus, ver.
1. And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho. The holy Jesus made it his
business to go about doing good. As the sun in the firmament is continually
spreading his benign, quickening, and cheering influences over the natural; so
the Son of Righteousness arose with healing under his wings, and was daily and
hourly diffusing his gracious influences over the moral world. The preceding
chapter acquaints us of a notable miracle wrought by the holy Jesus on a poor
blind Bartime^^; and in this, a greater presents itself to our consideration.
The evangelist would have us take particular notice of it; for he introduces it
with the word behold: And behold, there was a man named Zaccheus, who was the
chief among the Publicans, and he was rich.

Well might the evangelist usher in the relation of this man's conversion with
the word behold! For, according to human judgment, how many insurmountable
obstacles lay in the way of it! Surely no, one will say there was any fitness
in Zaccheus for ^^^vation; for we are told that he was a Publican, and
therefore in all probability a notorious sinner. The Publicans were gatherers
of the Roman taxes; they were infamous for their abominable extortion; their
very name therefore became so odious, that we find the Pharisees often
reproached our Lord, as very wicked, because he was a friend unto and far down
to meat with them. Zaccheus then, being a Publican, was no doubt a sinner; and,
being chief among the Publicans, consequently was chief among sinners. Nay, he
was rich. And one inspired apostle has told us, that not many mighty, not many
noble, are called. Another says, God has chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith. And he who was the Maker and the Redeemer of the apostles, assures
us, that it is easier for a camel (or cable rope) to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Let not therefore
the rich glory in the multitude of their riches.

But rich as he was, we are told, verse 3. that "he sought to see Jesus." And
that was a wonder indeed! The common people heard our Lord gladly, and the poor
received the Gospel. The multitude, the very mob, the people that knew not the
law, as the proud highpriests called them, used to follow him on foot into the
country, and sometimes stayed with him three days together to hear him preach:
But did the rich believe or attend on him! No. Our Lord preached up the
doctrine of the cross; he preached too searching for them, and therefore they
counted him their enemy, persecuted and spoke all manner of evil against him,
falsely. Let not the ministers of Christ marvel, if they meet with the like
treatment from the rich men of this wicked and adulterous generation. I should
think it no scandal (supposing it true) to hear it affirmed, that none but the
poor attended my ministry. Their souls are as precious to our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the souls of the greatest men. They were the poor that attended him
in the days of his flesh: These are they whom he has chosen to be rich in
faith, and to be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Were the rich in this
world's goods generally to speak well of me, woe be unto me; I should think it
a dreadful sign that I was only a wolf in sheep's clothing, that I spoke peace,
peace, when there was no peace, and prophesied smoother things than the gospel
would allow of. Hear ye this, O ye rich. Let who will dare to do it, God forbid
that I should despise the poor; in doing so, I should reproach my Maker. The
poor are dear to my soul; I rejoice to see them fly to the doctrine of Christ,
like the doves to their windows. I only pray that the poor who attend, may be
evangelized, and turned into the spirit of the gospel: If so, blessed are ye;
for yours is the kingdom of heaven.

But we must return to Zaccheus. He sought to see Jesus. That is good news. I
heartily wish I could say, it was out of a good principle: But, without
speaking contrary to that charity which hopes and believes all things for the
best, we may say, that the same principle drew him after Christ, which now
draws multitudes (to speak plainly, it may be multitudes of you) to hear a
particular preacher, even curiosity: For we are told, that he came not to ^ear
his doctrine, but to view his person, or to use the words of the evangelist, to
see who he was. Our Lord's fame was now spread abroad through all Jerusalem,
and all the country round about: Some said he was a good man; others, nay, but
he deceives the people. And therefore curiosity drew out this rich Publican
Zaccheus to see who this person was, of whom he had heard such various
accounts. But it seems he could not conveniently get a sight of him for the
press, and because he was little of stature. Alas! how many are kept from
seeing Christ in glory, by reason of the press. I mean, how many are ashamed of
being singularly good, and therefore follow a multitude to do evil, because
they have a press or throng of polite acquaintance! And, for fear of being set
at naught by those with whom they used to set at meat, they deny the Lord of
glory, and are ashamed to confess him before men. This base, this servile fear
of man, is the bane of true Christianity; it brings a dreadful snare upon the
soul, and is the ruin of ten thousands: For I am fully persuaded, numbers are
rationally convicted of gospel truths; but, not being able to brook contempt,
they will not prosecute their convictions, nor reduce them to practice. Happy
those, who in this respect, at least, like Zaccheus, resolved to overcome all
impediments that lie in their way to a sight of Christ: For finding he could
not see Christ because of the press, and the littleness of his natural stature,
he did not smite upon his breast, and depart, saying, It is in vain to seek
after a sight of him any longer, I can never attain unto it. No, finding he
could not see Christ, if he continued in the midst of the press, he run before
the multitude, and climbed up into a sycamore-tree, to see him; for he was to
pass that way.

There is no seeing Christ in glory, unless we run before the multitude, and
are willing to be in the number of those despised few, who take the kingdom of
God by violence. The broad way, in which so many go, can never be that straight
and narrow way which leads to life. Our Lord's flock was, and always will be,
comparatively a little one: And unless we dare to run before the multitude in a
holy singularity, and can rejoice in being accounted fools for Christ's sake,
we shall never see Jesus with comfort, when he appears in glory. From
mentioning the sycamore-tree, and considering the difficulty with which
Zaccheus must climb it, we may farther learn, that those who would see Christ,
must undergo other difficulties and hardships, besides contempt. Zaccheus,
without doubt, went through both. Did not many, think you, laugh at him (...)
he ran along, and in the language of Michal, Readiness daughter, cry out, how
glorious did the rich Zaccheus look to day, when, forgetting the greatness of
his station, he ran before a pitiful, giddy mob, and climbed up a
sycamore-tree, to see an enthusiastic preacher! But Zaccheus cares not for all
that; his curiosity was strong: If he could but see who Jesus was, he did not
value what scoffers said of him. Thus, and much more will it be with all those
who have an effectual desire to see Jesus in heaven: They will go on from
strength to strength, break through every difficulty lying in their way, and
care not what men or devils say of or do unto them. May the Lord make us all
thus minded, for his dear Son's sake!

At length, after taking much pains, and going (as we may well suppose) through
much contempt, Zaccheus has climbed the tree; and there he ^its, as he thinks,
hid in the leaves of it, and watching when he should see Jesus pass by: For he
was to pass by that way.

But sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth! Praise, magnify, and adore
sovereign, electing, free, preventing love; Jesus the everlasting God, the
Prince of peace, who saw Nathaniel under the fig tree, and Zaccheus from
eternity, now sees him in the sycamore-tree, and calls him in time.

Ver. 5. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said
unto him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy
house. Amazing love! Well might Luke usher in the account with behold! It is
worthy of our highest admiration. When Zaccheus thought of no such thing, nay
thought that Christ Jesus did not know him; behold, Christ does what we never
hear he did before or after, I mean, invite himself to the house of Zaccheus,
saying, Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy
house. Not pray let me abide, but I must abide this day at thy house. He also
calls him by name, as though he was well acquainted with him: and indeed well
he might; for his name was written in the book of life, he was one of those
whom the Father had given him from all eternity: therefore he must abide at his
house, that day. For whom he did predestinate, them he also called.

Here then, as through a glass, we may see the doctrine of free grace evidently
exemplified before us. Here was no fitness in Zaccheus. He was a Publican,
chief among the Publicans; not only so, but rich, and came to see Christ only
out of curiosity: but sovereign grace triumphs over all. And if we do God
justice, and are effectually wrought upon, we must acknowledge there was no
more fitness in us than in Zaccheus; and, had not Christ prevented us by his
call, we had remained dead in trespasses and sins, and alienated from the
divine life, even as others. Jesus looked up, and saw him, and said unto him,
Zaccheus; make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy house.

With what different emotions of heart may we suppose Zaccheus received this
invitation? Think you not that he was surprised to hear Jesus Christ call him
by name, and not only so, but invite himself to his house? Surely, thinks
Zaccheus, I dream: it cannot be; how should he know me? I never saw him before:
besides, I shall undergo much contempt, if I receive him under my (...). Thus,
I say, we may suppose Zaccheus th^^ (...) within himself. But what says the
scripture? I will make a willing people in the day of my power. With this
outward call, there went an efficacious power from God, which sweetly
overruled his natural will: and therefore, verse 6. He made haste, and came
down, and received him joyfully, not only into his house, but also into his
heart.

Thus it is the great God brings home his children. He calls them by name by
his word or providence; ^he speaks to them also by his Spirit. Hereby they are
enabled to open their hearts, and are made willing to receive the King of
glory. For Zaccheus' sake, let us not entirely condemn people that come unto
the word, out of no better principle than curiosity, Who knows, but God may
call them? It is good to be where the Lord is passing by. May all who are now
present out of this principle, hear the voice of the Son of God speaking to
their souls, and so hear that they may live! Not that men ought therefore to
take encouragement to come out of curiosity. For perhaps a thousand more, at
other times, came to see Christ out of curiosity, as well as Zaccheus, who were
not effectually called by his grace. I only mention this for the encouragement
of my own soul, and the consolation of God's children, who are too apt to be
angry with those who do not attend on the word out of love to God: but let them
alone. Brethren, pray for them. How do you know but Jesus Christ may speak to
their hearts? A few words from Christ applied by his Spirit, will save their
souls. Zaccheus, says Christ, make (...) and come down. And he made haste, and
came down, and received him joyfully.

I have observed in holy scripture, how particularly it is remarked, that
persons rejoiced upon believing in Christ. Thus the converted Eunuch went on
his way rejoicing; thus the jailor rejoiced with his whole house; thus Zaccheus
received Christ joyfully. And well may those rejoice who receive Jesus Christ;
for with him they receive righteousness, sanctification, and eternal
redemption. Many have brought up an ill report upon our good land, and would
fain persuade people that religion will make them melancholy mad. So far from
it, that joy is one ingredient of the kingdom of God in the heart of a
believer; the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. To rejoice in the Lord, is a gospel duty. Rejoice in the Lord always,
and again I say, rejoice. And who can be so joyful, as those who know that
their pardon is sealed before they go hence and are no more seen? The godly
may, but cannot (...) how many ungodly men can rejoice: (...) cannot be truly
cheerful. What if wicked (...) have laughter amongst them? (...) the laughter
of fools; in the midst of it (...); at the best, it is but like the (...) of
thorns under a pot; It makes a blaze, (...) goes out. But, as for the godly, it
is not (...) them; their joy is solid and lasting. As (...) joy that a stranger
intermedieth not with, so (...) a joy that no man takes from them, it is a joy
in God, a joy unspeakable and full of glory.

It should seem that Zaccheus was under (...) but a little while; "perhaps,"
says Guthric, in his book entitled, the trial concerning a saving interest in
Christ, not above a quarter of an hour; I add, perhaps not so long: For as one
observes, sometimes the Lord Jesus delights in deliver speedily. God is a
sovereign agent, and works upon his children in their effectual calling,
according to the counsel of his eternal will. It is with the spiritual, as
natural birth: All (...) have not the like pangs; all Christians have not the
like degree of conviction. But all agree in this, that all have Jesus Christ
formed in their hearts! And those who have not so many trials at (...); may be
visited with the greater conflicts hereafter; though they never come into
bondage again, after they have once received the spirit of adoption. We have
not (says Paul) received the spirit of bondage again unto fear. We know not
what Zaccheus underwent before he died: However this one thing I know, he now
believed in Christ, and was justified, or acquitted, and looked upon as
righteous in God's sight, though a Publican chief among the Publicans, not many
moments before. And thus it is with all, that, like Zaccheus, receive Jesus
Christ, by faith into their hearts. The very moment they find rest in him, they
are freely justified from all things from which they could not be justified by
the law of Moses; for by grace are we saved, through faith, and that not of
ourselves, it is the gift of God.

Say not within yourselves this is a licentious, Antinomian doctrine; for this
faith, if true, will work by love, and be productive of the fruits of holiness.
See an instance in this convert Zaccheus: No sooner had he received Jesus
Christ by faith into his heart, but he evidences it by his works; For ver. 8.
we are told Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the
half of my goods (...) give unto the poor; and if I have taken any thing from
any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.

Having believed on Jesus in his heart, he now makes confession of him with his
mouth to salvation. Zaccheus stood forth: He was not ashamed, but stood forth
before his brother Publicans; for true faith casts out all servile, sinful fear
of men; And said, Behold, Lord. It is remarkable, how readily people in
scripture have owned the divinity of Christ immediately, upon their conversion.
Thus the woman at Jacob's well; Is not this the Christ? Thus the man born
blind; Lord, I believe; and worshipped him. Thus Zaccheus, "Behold, Lord." An
incontestitle proof this to me, that those who deny our Lord's divinity, never
effectually felt his power: If they had, they would not speak so lightly of
him; they would scorn to deny his eternal power and Godhead. Zaccheus stood
forth, and said, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if
I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold. Noble fruits of a true living faith in the Lord Jesus! Every word
calls for our notice. Not some small, not the tenth part, but the half. Of
what? My goods; things that were valuable. My goods, his own, not another's: I
give: Not, I will give when I die, when I can keep them no longer; (...), I
give now, even now. Zaccheus would be his own executor. For whilst we have time
we should do good. But to whom would he give half of his goods? Not to the
rich, not to those who were already clothed in purple and fine linen, of whom
he might be recompensed again; but to the poor, the maimed, the halt, the
blind, from which he could expect no recompense till the resurrection of the
dead. "I give to the poor." But knowing that he must be just, before be could
be charitable, and conscious to himself that in his public administrations he
had wronged many persons, he adds, And, If I have taken any thing from any man
by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. Hear ye this, all ye that make no
conscience of cheating the king of his taxes, or of buying or selling run
goods. If ever God gives you true faith you will never rest, till, like
Zaccheus, you have made restitution to the utmost of your power. I suppose,
before his conversion he thought it no harm to cheat thus, no more than you may
do now, and pleased himself frequently, to be sure, that he got rich by doing
so: But now he is grieved for it at his heart; he confesses his injustice
before men, and promises to make ample restitution. Go, ye cheating Publicans,
learn of Zaccheus, go away and do likewise; if you do not make restitution
here, the Lord Jesus shall make you confess your sins before men and angels,
and condemn you for it, when he comes in the glory of his Father to judgment
hereafter.

After all this, with good reason might our Lord say unto him, This day is
salvation come to this house; forasmuch as he is the son of Abraham; not so
much by a natural as by a spiritual birth. He was made partaker of like
precious faith with Abraham: Like Abraham, he believed on the Lord, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness: His faith, like Abraham's, worked by love;
and I doubt not, but he has been long since sitting In Abraham's harbor.

And now are you not ashamed of yourselves, who speak against the doctrines of
grace especially that doctrine of being justified by faith alone, as though it
leaded to licentiousness? What can (...) more unjust than such a charge? Is not
the instance of Zaccheus a sufficient proof to the contrary? Have I strained it
to serve my own turn? God forbid. To the best of my knowledge I have spoken the
truth in sincerity, and the truth as it is in Jesus. I do affirm that we are
saved by grace, and that we are justified by faith alone: But I do also affirm,
that faith must be evidenced by good works where there is an opportunity of
performing them.

What therefore has been said of Zaccheus, may serve as a rule, whereby all may
judge whether they have faith or not, You say you have faith; but how do you
prove it? Did you ever hear the Lord Jesus call you by name? Were you ever made
to obey that call? Did you ever, like Zaccheus, receive Jesus Christ joyfully
into your hearts? Are you influenced, by the faith you say you have, to stand
up and confess the Lord Jesus before men? Were you ever made willing to own,
and humble yourselves for, your past offenses? Does your faith work by love, so
that you conscientiously lay up, according as God has prospered you, for the
support of the poor? Do you give alms of all things that you possess? And have
you made due restitution to those you have wronged? If so, happy are ye;
salvation is come to your souls; you are sons, you are daughters of, you shall
shortly be everlastingly blessed with faithful Abraham. But, if you are not
thus minded, do not deceive your own souls; though you may talk of
justification by faith, like angels, it will do you no good; it will only
increase your damnation. You hold the truth, but it is in unrighteousness: Your
faith being without works, is dead; you have the devil, not Abraham, for your
father. Unless you get a faith of the heart, a faith working by love, with
devils and damned spirits shall you dwell for evermore.

But it is now time to enforce the latter part of the text; For the Son of man
is come to seek and to save that which was lost. These words are spoken by our
Savior, in answer to some self-righteous Pharisees, who instead of rejoicing
with the angels in heaven, at the conversion of such a sinner, murmured, that
he was gone to be guest with a man that was a sinner. To vindicate his conduct,
he tells them, that this was an act agreeable to the design of his coming; For
the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. He might have
said, the "Son of God." But O the wonderful condescension of our Redeemer! He
delights to style himself the Son of man. He came not only to save, but to seek
and to save that which was lost. He came to Jericho to seek and save Zaccheus;
for otherwise Zaccheus would never have been saved by him. But from whence came
he? Even from heaven, his dewlling place, to this lower earth, this vale of
tears, to seek and save that which was lost; or all that feel themselves lost,
and are willing, like Zaccheus, to receive him into their hearts to save them;
with how great a salvation? even from the guilt, and also from the power of
their sins; to make them heirs of God, and joint heirs with himself, and
partakers of that glory which he enjoyed with the Father before the world
began. Thus will the Son of man save that which is lost. He was made the Son of
man, on purpose that he might save them. He had no other end but this in
leaving his Father's throne, in obeying the moral law, and hanging upon the
cross: All that was done and suffered, merely to satisfy, and procure a
righteousness for poor, lost undone sinners, and that too without respect of
persons. "That which was lost:" all of every nation and language, that feel,
bewail, and are truly desirous of being delivered from their lost state, did
the Son of man come down to seek and to save: For he is mighty, not only so,
but willing, to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him; he will
in no wise cast them out. For he is the same today, as he was yesterday. He
comes now to sinners, as well as formerly; and, I hope, has seat me out this
day to seek, and, under him, to bring home some of you, the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

What say you? Shall I go home rejoicing, saying, that many like sheep, have
gone astray, but they have now believed on Jesus Christ, and so returned home
to the great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls? If the Lord would be pleased
thus to prosper my handiwork, I care not how many legalists and self-righteous
Pharisees murmur against me, for offering salvation to the worst of sinners;
For I know the Son of man came to seek and to save them; and the Lord Jesus
will now be a guest to the worst Publican, the vilest sinner that is amongst
you, if he does but believe on him. Make haste then, O sinners, make haste, and
come by faith to Christ. Then, this day, even this hour, nay this moment, if
you believe, Jesus Christ shall come and make his eternal abode in your hearts.
Which of you is made willing to receive the King of glory? Which of you obeys
the call, as Zaccheus did? Alas! why do you stand still? How know you, whether
Jesus Christ may ever call you again? Come then, poor, guilty sinners; come
away, poor, lost, undone Publicans: Make haste, I say, and come away to Jesus
Christ. The Lord condescends to invite himself to come under the filthy roofs
of the houses of your souls. Do not be afraid of entertaining him; he will fill
you with all peace and joy in believing. Do not be ashamed to run before the
multitude, and to have all manner of evil spoken against you falsely for his
sake: One sight of Christ will make amends for all. Zaccheus was laughed at;
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. But
what of that? Zaccheus is now crowned in glory; as you also shall shortly be,
if you believe on, and are reproached for Christ's sake. Do not, therefore, put
me off with frivolous excuses; there is no excuse can be given for your not
coming to Christ. You are lost, undone, without him; and if he is not glorified
in your salvation, he will be glorified in your destruction: if he does not
come and make his abode in your hearts, you must take up an eternal abode with
the devil and his angels. O that the Lord would be pleased to pass by some of
you at this time! O that he may call you by his Spirit, and make you a willing
people in this day of his power! For I know my calling will not do, unless he,
by his efficacious grace, compel you to come in. O that you once felt what it
is to receive Jesus Christ into your hearts! You would soon, like Zaccheus,
give him every thing. You do not love Christ, because you do not know him; you
do not come to him, because you do not feel your want of him: you are whole and
not brokenhearted; you are not sick, at least not sensible of your sickness;
and, therefore, no wonder you do not apply to Jesus Christ, that great, that
almighty physician. You do not feel yourselves lost, and therefore do not seek
to be found in Christ. O that God would wound you with the sword of his Spirit,
and cause his arrows of conviction to stick deep in your hearts! O that he
would dart a ray of divine light into your souls! For if you do not feel
yourselves lost without Christ, you are of all men most miserable: your souls
are dead; you are not only an image of hell, but in some degree hell itself:
you carry hell about with you, and you know it not. O that I could see some of
you sensible of this, and hear you cry out, Lord, break this hard heart; Lord,
deliver me from the body of this death; draw me, Lord make me willing to come
after thee; I am lost; Lord, save me, or I perish! Was this your case, how soon
would the Lord stretch forth his almighty hand, and say, be of good cheer, it
is I; be not afraid? What a wonderful calm would then possess your troubled
souls! Your fellowship would then be with the Father and the Son: Your life
would be hid with Christ in God.

Some of you, I hope, have experienced this, and can say, I was lost, but I am
found; I was dead, but am alive again. The Son of man came and sought me in the
day of his power, and saved my sinful soul. And do you repent that you came to
Christ? Has he not been a good Master? Is not his presence sweet to your souls?
Has he not been faithful to his promise? And have you not found, that even in
doing and suffering for him, there is an exceeding present great reward? I am
persuaded you will answer, Yes. O then, ye saints, recommend and talk of the
love of Christ to others, and tell them, what great things the Lord has done
for you! This may encourage others to come unto him. And who knows but the Lord
may make you fisher of men? The story of Zaccheus was left on record for this
purpose. No truly convicted soul, after such an instance of divine grace has
been laid before him, need despair of mercy, What if you are Publicans? Was not
Zaccheus a Publican? What if you are chief among the Publicans? Was not
Zaccheus likewise? What if you are rich? Was not Zaccheus rich also? And yet
almighty grace made him more than conqueror over all these hindrances. All
things are possible to Jesus Christ* nothing is too hard for him: he is the
Lord almighty. Our mountains of sins must all fall before this great
Zerubbabel. On him God the Father has laid the iniquities of all that shall
truly believe; and in his own body he bare them on the tree. There, there by
faith, O mourners in Sion, may you see your ^aviour hanging with arms stretched
out, and (...) him, as it were, thus speaking to your souls; Behold how I have
loved you! Behold my hands and my feet! Look, look into my wounded side, and
see a heart flaming with love: Love stronger than death* Come into my arms, O
sinners, come wash your spotted souls in my heart's blood. See here is a
fountain opened for all sin and uncleanness! See, O guilty souls, how the wrath
of God is now abiding upon you: Come, haste away, and hide yourselves in the
clefts of my wounds; for I am wounded for your transgressions; I am dying that
you may live for evermore. Behold, as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so I am here lifted up upon a tree. See how I am become a curse for
you: The chastisement of your peace is upon me. I am thus scourged, thus
wounded, thus crucified, that you by my stripes may be healed. O look unto me
all ye trembling sinners, even to the ends of the earth! Look unto me by faith,
and you shall be saved: For (...) came thus to be obedient even unto death,
that I might save that which was lost.

And what say you to this, O sinners? Suppose you saw the King of glory dying,
and thus speaking to you; would you believe on him? No, you would not, unless
you believe on him now: For though he is dead, he yet speaks all this in the
scripture; nay, in effect, says all this in the words of the text, The Son of
man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. Do not therefore any
longer crucify the Lord of glory: Bring those rebels, your sins, which will not
have him to reign over them, bring them out to him: Though you cannot slay them
yourselves, yet he will slay them for you. The power of his death and
resurrection is as great now as formerly. Make haste therefore, make haste, O
ye Publicans and sinners, and give the dear Lord Jesus your heart^, your whole
hearts. If you refuse to hearken to this call of the Lord, remember your
damnation will be just: I am free from the blood of you all: You must acquit my
Master and me at the terrible day of judgment. O that you may know the things
that belong to your everlasting peace, before they are eternally hid from your
eyes! Let all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, say, Amen.

SERMON X.
THE POWER OE CHRIST'S RESURRECTION.
PHILIP. iii. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection.
THE apostle, in the verses before the text, had been cautioning the
Philippians to beware of the concision, Judaizing teachers, who endeavored to
subvert them from the simplicity of the gospel, by telling them, they still
ought to be subject to circumcision and all the other ordinances of Moses. And
that they might not think he spoke out of prejudice, and condemned their tenets
because he himself was a stranger to the Jewish dispensation, he acquaints
them, that if any other man thought he had whereof he might trust in the flesh,
or seek to be justified by the outward privileges of the jews, he had more: for
he was circumcised the eighth day; of the stock of Israel, (not a proselyte,
but a native Israelite;) of the tribe of Benjamin, (the tribe which adhered to
Judah when the others revolted;) an Hebrew of the Hebrews, (a Jew both of the
father and mother's side;) and as touching the law, a Pharisee, the strictest
sect amongst all Israel. To show that he was no Gallio in religion, through his
great, though misguided zeal, he had persecuted the church of Christ; and as
touching the righteousness of the law (as far as the Pharisee's exposition of
it went) he was blameless, and had kept it from his youth. But, when it pleased
God, who separated him from his mother's womb, to reveal his Son in him, What
things were gain to me, (he says) those privileges (...) boasted myself in, and
sought to be justified by. I counted loss for Christ. And that they might not
think he repented that he had done so, he tells them, he was now more confirmed
than ever in his judgment. For, says he, "yea, doubtless," (the expression in
the original rises with a holy triumph) and do count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And that they might
not object that he said, and did not, he acquaints them, he had given proofs of
the sincerity of these professions, because for the sake of them, he had
suffered the loss of all his worldly things, and still was willing to do more;
for, I count them but dung (no more than offals th^^ (...) out to dogs) so that
I may win, (or have a saving interest in) Christ, and be found in him, (as the
manslayer in the city of refuge) not having my own righteousness, which is of
the law, not depending on having Abraham for my father, or on any works of
righteousness which I have done, either to atone or serve as a balance for my
evil deeds, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith, a righteousness of God's appointing, and which will
be imputed to me, if I believe in Christ, that I may know him, and the power of
his resurrection; that I may have an experimental knowledge of the efficacy of
his resurrection, by feeling the influences of his blessed Spirit on my soul.
In which words two things are implied.

First, Th^^ Jesus Christ did rise from the dead.

Secondly, That it highly concerns us to know the power of his rising again.

Accordingly in the following discourse I shall endeavor to show,

First, That Christ is risen indeed from the dead; and that it was necessary
for him so to do; and,

Secondly, That it highly concerns us to know and experience the power of his
resurrection:

First, Christ is indeed risen.

That Jesus should rise from the dead was absolutely necessary.

1. First, On his own account. He had often appealed to this as the last and
most convincing proof he would give them that he was the true Messiah, There
shall no other sign be given you, than the prophet Jonas. And again, Destroy
this temple of my body, and in three days I will build it up. Which words his
enemies remembered, and urged it as an argument, to induce Pilate to grant them
a watch, to prevent his being stolen out of the grave. We know that deceiver
said, whilst he was yet alive after three days I will rise again. So that had
he not risen again, they might have justly said, we know that this man was an
impostor.

2. Secondly, It was necessary on our account. He rose again, says the apostle,
for our justification; or that the debt we owed to God for our sins, might be
fully satisfied and discharged.

It had pleased the Father (for ever adored be his infinite love and free
grace) to wound his only Son for our transgressions, and to arrest and confine
him in the prison of the grave, as our surety for the guilt we had contracted
by setting at naught his commandments. Now had Christ continued always in the
grave, we could have had no more assurance that our sins were satisfied for,
than any common debtor can have of his creditor's being satisfied, whilst his
surety is kept confined. But he being released from the power of death, we are
thereby assured, that with his sacrifice God was well pleased, that our
atonement was finished on the cross, and that he had made a full, perfect, and
sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the world.

3. Thirdly, It was necessary that our Lord Jesus should rise again from the
dead, to assure us of the certainty of the resurrection of our own bodies.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the body was entirely exploded and set at
naught among the Gentiles, as appears from the Athenians mocking at, and
calling St. Paul a babbler and a setter forth of strange doctrines, when he
preached to them Jesus, and the resurrection. And though it was believed by
most of the Jews, as is evident from many passages of scripture, yet not by
all; the whole sect of the Sadducees denied it. But the resurrection of Jesus
Christ put it out of dispute. For as he acted ^s our representative, if he our
Head be risen, then must we also, who are his members, rise with him. And as in
the first Adam we all died, even so in him our second Adam we must all, in this
sense, be made alive.

As it was necessary, upon these accounts, that our blessed Lord should rise
from the dead; so it is plain beyond contradiction, that he did. Never was any
matter of fact better attested; never were more precautions made use of to
prevent a cheat. He was buried in a sepulcher, hewn out of a rock, so that it
could not be said that any dug under, and conveyed him away. It was a
sepulcher also wherein never man before was laid; so that if any body did rise
from thence, it must be the body of Jesus of Nazareth. Besides, the sepulcher
was sealed; a great stone rolled over the mouth of it; and a band of soldiers
(consisting not of friends, but of his professed enemies) was set to guard it.
And as for his disciples coming by night and stealing him away, it was
altogether improbable: for it was not long since, that they had all forsaken
him, and they were the most backward in believing his resurrection. And
supposing it was true that they came whilst the soldiers slept; yet the
soldiers m^st be cast into a deep sleep indeed, that the rolling away so great
a stone did not awake some of them.

And our blessed Lord's afterward appearing at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, to his disciples, as when they were assembled together, when they were
walking to Emmaus, when they were fishing; nay, and condescending to show them
his hands and feet, and his appearing to above five hundred brethren at once,
put the truth of his resurrection out of all dispute.

Indeed there is one objection that may be made against what has been said,
that the books wherein these facts are recorded were written by his disciples.

And who more proper persons than those who were eyewitnesses of what they
related, and eat and drank with him after his resurrection? But they were
illiterate and ignorant men. Yet as good witnesses of a plain matter of fact,
as the most learned masters in Israel. Nay, this rendered them more proper
witnesses. For being plain men, they were therefore less to be suspected of
telling or making a lie, particularly, since they laid down their lives for a
testimony of the truth of it. We read indeed of Jacob's telling a lie, though
he was a plain man, in order to get his father's blessing. But it was never
heard since the world began, that any man, much less a whole set of men, died
martyrs for the sake of an untruth, when they themselves were to reap no
advantage from it.

No, this single circumstance proves them to be Israelites indeed, in whom was
no guile. And the wonderful success God gave to their ministry afterward, when
three thousand were converted by one sermon; and twelve poor fishermen, in a
very short time enabled to be more than conquerors over all the opposition men
or devils could make, was as plain a demonstration, that Christ was risen,
according to their gospel, as that a divine power, at the sound of a few ram
horns, c^used the wall of Jericho to fall down.

But what need we any farther witnesses? Believe you the resurrection of our
blessed Lord? I know that you believe it, as your gathering together on this
first day of the week in the courts of the Lord's house abundantly testifies.

What concerns us most to be assured of, and which is the

Second thing I was to speak to, is, Whether we have experimentally known the
power of his resurrection; that is, Whether or not we have received the Holy
Ghost, and by his powerful operations on our hearts, have been raised from the
death of sin, to a life of righteousness, and true holiness.

It was this, the great apostle was chiefly desirous to know: the resurrection
of Christ's body he was satisfied would avail him nothing, unless he
experienced the power of it in raising his dead soul.

For another, and that a chief end of our blessed Lord's rising from the dead,
was to enter heaven as our representative, and to send down the Holy Ghost to
apply that redemption he had finished on the cross, to our hearts, by working
an entire change in them.

Without this, Christ would have died in vain. For it would have done us no
service to have had his outward righteousness imputed to us, unless we had an
inward inherent righteousness wrought in us. Because, being altogether
conceived and born in sin, and consequently unfit to hold communion with an
infinitely pure and holy God, we cannot possibly be made meet to see or enjoy
him, till a thorough renovation has passed upon our hearts.

Without this we leave out the Holy Ghost in the great work of our redemption.
But as we were made by the joint concurrence and consultation of the blessed
Trinity; and as we were baptized in their name, so must all of them concur in
our salvation: as the Father made, and the Son redeemed, so must the Holy Ghost
sanctify and seal us, or otherwise we have believed in vain.

This (...) is what the apostle means by the power of Christ's resurrection,
and this is what we are as much concerned experimentally to know, as that he
(...) all.

Without this, though we may be moralists, though we may be civilized,
good-natured people, yet we are no Christians. For he is not a true Christian,
who is only one outwardly; nor have we therefore a right, because we daily
profess, to believe that Christ rose again the third day from the dead. But he
is a true Christian who is one inwardly, and then only can we be styled true
believers, when we not only profess to believe, but have felt the power of our
blessed Lord's rising from the dead, by being quickened and raised by his
Spirit, when dead in trespasses and sins, to a thorough newness both of heart
and life.

The devils themselves cannot but believe the doctrine of the resurrection, and
tremble; but yet they continue devils, because the benefits of this
resurrection have not been applied to them, nor have they received a renovating
power from it, to change and put off their diabolical nature. And so, unless we
not only profess to know, but also feel that Christ is risen indeed, by being
born again from above, we shall be as far from the kingdom of God as they: our
faith will be as ineffectual as the faith of devils.

Nothing has done more harm to the Christian world, nothing has rendered the
cross of Christ of less effect, than a vain supposition, that religion is
something without us. Whereas we should consider, that every thing that Christ
did outwardly, must be done over again in our souls; or otherwise, the
believing there was such a divine Person once on earth who triumphed over hell
and the grave, will profit us no more than believing there was once such a
person as Alexander who conquered the world.

As Christ was born of the Virgin's womb, so must he be spiritually formed in
our hearts. As he died for sin, so must we die to sin. And as he rose again,
from the dead, so must we also rise to a divine life.

None but those who have followed him in this regeneration, or new birth, shall
sit on thrones as approvers of his sentence, when he shall come in terrible
majesty to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

It is true, as for the outward work of our redemption, it was a transient act,
and was certainly finished on the cross; but the application of that redemption
to our hearts, is a work that will continue always even unto the end of the
world.

So long as there is an elect man breathing on the earth, who is naturally
engendered of the offspring of the first Adam, so long must the quickening
Spirit, which was purchased by the resurrection of the second Adam, that Lord
from heaven, be breathing upon his soul.

For though we may exist by Christ, yet we cannot be said to exist in him, till
we are united to him by one spirit, and enter into a new state of things, as
certainly as he entered into a new state of things, after that he rose from the
dead.

We may throng and crowd round about Christ, and call him Lord, Lord, when we
come to worship before his footstool; but we have not effectually touched him,
till by a lively faith in his resurrection, we perceive a divine virtue coming
out of him, to renew and purify our souls.

How greatly then do they err who rest in a bare historical faith of our
Savior's resurrection, and look only for external proofs to evidence it?
Whereas were we the most learned disputers of this world, and could speak of
the certainty of this fact with the tongue of men and angels, yet without this
inward testimony of it in our hearts, though we might convince others, yet we
should never be saved by it ourselves.

For we are but dead men, we are like so many carcases wrapped up in grave
clothes, till that same Jesus who called Lazarus from his tomb, and at whose
own resurrection many that slept arose, does raise us also by his quickening
Spirit from our natural death, in which we have so long lain, to a holy and
heavenly life.

We might think ourselves happy, if we had seen the holy Jesus after he was
risen from the dead, and our hands had handled that Lord of life. But more
happy are they who have not seen him, and yet having felt the power of his
resurrection, therefore believe in him. For many saw our divine Master, who
were not saved by him; but whosoever has thus felt the power of his
resurrection, has the earnest of his inheritance in his heart, he has passed
from death to life, and shall never fall into final condemnation.

I am very sensible that this is foolishness to the natural man, as were many
such like truths to our Lord's own disciples, when only weak in faith, before
he rose again. But when th^se natural men, like them, have fully felt the power
of his resurrection, they will then own that this doctrine is from God, and say
with the Samaritans, Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we ourselves
have experienced it in our hearts.

And O that all unbelievers, all letter-learned masters of Israel, who now look
upon the doctrine of the power of Christ's resurrection, or our new birth as an
idle tale, and condemn the preachers of it as enthusiasts and madmen, did but
thus feel the power of it in their souls, they would no longer ask, how this
thing could be? But they would be convinced of it as much as Thomas was, when
he saw the Lord's Christ; and like him, when Jesus bid him reach out his hands
and thrust them into his side, in a holy confusion they would cry out, "My
Lord, and my God!"

But how shall an unbeliever, how shall the formal Christian come thus to know
Christ, and the power of his resurrection? God, who cannot lie, has told us, I
am the resurrection and the life, whosoever lives and believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live. Again says the apostle, By faith we are saved,
and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God.

This, this is the way, walk in it. Believe and you shall live in Christ, and
Christ in you; you shall be one with Christ, and Christ one with you. But
without this, your outward goodness and professions will avail you nothing.

But then, by this faith we are not to understand a dead speculative faith, a
faith in the head; but a living principle wrought in the heart by the powerful
operations of the Holy Ghost, a faith that will enable us to overcome the world
and forsake all in affection for Jesus Christ. For thus speaks our blessed
Master. Unless a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.

And so the apostle, in the words immediately following the text, says, being
made conformable to his death; thereby implying, that we cannot know the power
of Christ's resurrection unless we are made conformable to him in his death.

This we have shadowed out by the custom of baptizing by immersion in the
primitive church, and (which is also recommended by our own) their putting the
infants under the water, signified their obligation to die unto sin; as their
taking them out of the water, signified their rising again to newness of life.
To which the apostle plainly alludes, when he says, we are buried with him in
baptism."

If we can reconcile light and darkness, heaven and hell, then we may hope to
know the power of Christ's resurrection without dying to ourselves and the
world. But till we can do this, we might as well expect that Christ will have
concord with Belial.

For there is such a contrariety between the spirit of this world, and the
spirit of Jesus Christ, that he who will be at friendship with the one, must be
at enmity with the other: We cannot serve God and mammon."

This may, indeed, seem a hard saying; and many, with the young man in the
gospel, may be tempted to go away sorrowful: but wherefore should this offend
them? For what is all that is in the world, the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh, and the pride of life, but vanity and vexation of spirit?

God is love; and therefore, could our own wills, or the world, have made us
happy, he never would have sent his own dear Son Jesus Christ to die and rise
again, to deliver us from the power of them. But because they only torment and
cannot satisfy, therefore God bids us to renounce them.

Had any one persuaded profane Esau not to lose so glorious a privilege, merely
for the sake of gratifying a present corrupt inclination, when he saw him about
to sell his birthright for a little red pottage, would not one think that man
to have been Esau's friend? And just thus stands the case between God and us.
By the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, we are newborn to an heavenly
inheritance amongst all them which are sanctified; but our own corrupt wills
would tempt us to sell this glorious birthright for the vanities of the world,
which, like Esau's red pottage, may please us for a while, but will soon be
taken away from us. God knows this, and therefore rather bids us renounce them
for a season, than for the short enjoyment of them lose the privilege of that
glorious birthright, to which, by knowing the power of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, we are entitled.

O the depth of the riches and excellency of Christianity! Well might the great
St. Paul count all things but dung and dross for the excellency of the
knowledge of it. Well might he desire so ardently to know Jesus, and the power
of his resurrection. For even on this side eternity it raises us above the
world, and makes us to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Well might that glorious company of worthies, recorded in the holy scriptures,
supported with a deep sense of their heavenly calling, despise the pleasures
and profits of this life, and wander about in sheepskins and goat skins, in
dens and caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. And O that
we were all like-minded! that we felt the power of Christ's resurrection as
they did! How should we then count all things as dung and dross for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord! How should we then
recover our primitive dignity, trample the earth under our feet, and with our
souls be continually gasping after God.

And what hinders but we may be thus minded? Is Jesus Christ, our great High
Priest, altered from what he was? No; he is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. And though he is exalted to the right hand of God, yet he is not ashamed
to call us brethren. The power of his resurrection is as great now as formerly,
and the Holy Spirit, which was assured to us by his resurrection, as ready and
able to quicken us who are dead in trespasses and sins, as any saint that ever
lived. Let us but cry, and that instantly, to him that is mighty and able to
save; let us, in sincerity and truth, without secretly keeping back the least
part, renounce ourselves and the world; then we shall be Christians indeed. And
though the world may cast us out and separate from our company, yet Jesus
Christ will walk with, and abide in us. And at the general resurrection of the
last day, when the voice of the archangel and trump of God shall bid the sea
and the graves to give up their dead, and all nations shall appear before him,
then will he confess us before his Father and the holy angels, and we shall
receive that invitation which he shall then pronounce to all who love and fear
him, Come, ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world.

Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom,
with thee and the Holy Ghost, etc.

SERMON XI.
THE INDWELLING OF THE SPIRIT, THE COMMON PRIVILEGE OF ALL BELIEVERS.
JOHN vii. 37, 38, 39. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus
stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He
that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive.
NOTHING has rendered the cross of Christ of less effect; nothing has been a
greater stumbling block and rock of offense to weak minds, than a supposition,
now current among us, that most of what is contained in the gospel of Jesus
Christ, was designed only for our Lord's first and immediate followers, and
consequently calculated but for one or two hundred years. Accordingly, many now
read the life, sufferings, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, in the same
manner as Caesar's Commentaries, or the conquests of Alexander are read: as
things rather intended to afford matter for speculation, than to be acted over
again in and by us.

As this is true of the doctrines of the gospel in general, so it is of the
operation of God's Spirit upon the hearts of believers in particular; for we no
sooner mention the necessity of our receiving the Holy Ghost in these last
days, as well as formerly, but we are looked upon by some, as enthusiasts and
madmen; and by others, represented as wilfully deceiving the people, and
undermining the established constitution of the church.

Judge ye then, whether it is not high time for the true ministers of Jesus
Christ, who have been made partakers of this heavenly gift, to lift up their
voices like a trumpet; and if they would not have those souls perish, for which
the Lord Jesus has shed his precious blood, to declare with all boldness, that
the Holy Spirit is the common privilege and portion of all believers in all
ages; and that we, as well as the first Christians, must receive the Holy
Ghost, before we can be truly called the children of God.

For this reason, (and also that I might answer the design of our church in
appointing the present festival Whitsuntide.
) I have chosen the words of the text.

They were spoken of by Jesus Christ, when he was at the feast of Tabernacles.
Our Lord attended on the temple service in general, and the festivals of the
Jewish Church in particular. The festival at which he was now present, was that
of the feast of Tabernacles, which the Jews observed according to God's
appointment in commemoration of their living in tents. At the last day of this
feast, it was customary for many pious people to fetch water from a certain
place, and bring it on their heads, singing this anthem out of Isaiah, And with
joy shall they draw water out of the wells of salvation. Our Lord Jesus
observing this, and it being his constant practice to spiritualize every thing
he met with, cries out, If any man thirst let him come unto me (rather than
unto the well) and drink. He that believes on me as the scripture has spoken,
(where it is said, God will make water to spring out of a dry rock, and such
like) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. And that we might
know what our Savior meant by this living water, the evangelist immediately
adds, But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive.

These last words I shall chiefly insist on in the ensuing discourse: And,

First, I shall briefly show what is meant by the word Spirit.

Secondly, That this Spirit is the common privilege of all believers.

Thirdly, I shall show the reason on which this doctrine is founded. And,

Lastly, Conclude with a general exhortation to believe on Jesus Christ,
whereby alone we can receive this Spirit.

First, I am to show what is meant by the word Spirit.

By the Spirit, is evidently to be understood the Holy Ghost, the third person
in the ever-blessed Trinity, consubstantial and coeternal with the Father and
the Son, proceeding from, yet equal to them both. For, to use the words of our
church in this day's office, that which we believe of the glory of the Father,
the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any difference
or inequality.

Thus says St. John, in his first epistle, chap. v. verse 7. There are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one. And our Lord, when he gave his apostles commission to go and
teach all nations, commanded them to baptize in the name of the Holy Ghost, as
well as of the Father and the Son. And St. Peter, Acts v. 3. said to Ananias,
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost? and verse 4. he
says, Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. From all which passages, it is
plain, that the Holy Ghost is truly and properly God, as well as the Father and
the Son. This is an unspeakable mystery, but a mystery of God's revealing, and,
therefore to be assented to with our whole hearts; seeing God is not a man that
he should lie, nor the son of man that he should deceive. I proceed,

Secondly, To prove, that the Holy Ghost is the common privilege of all
believers.

But, here I would not be understood of so receiving the Holy Ghost, as no
enable us to work miracles, or show outward signs and wonders. I allow our
adversaries, that to pretend to be inspired in this sense, is being wise above
what is written. Perhaps it cannot be proved, that God ever interposed in this
extraordinary manner, but when some new revelation was to be established, as at
the first settling of the Mosaic and gospel dispensation: and as for my own
part, I cannot but suspect the spirit of those who insist upon a repetition of
such miracles at this time. For the world being now become nominally Christian,
(though God knows, little of its power is left among us) there need not outward
miracles, but only an inward cooperation of the Holy Spirit with the word, to
prove that Jesus is the Messiah which was to come into the world.

Besides, if it were possible for thee, O man, to have faith, so as to be able
to remove mountains, or cast out devils; nay, could thou speak with the
tongues of men and angels, yea, and bid the sun stand still in the midst of
heaven; what would all these gifts of the Spirit avail thee, without being made
partaker of his sanctifying graces? Saul had the spirit of government for a
while, so as to become another man, and yet probably was a castaway. And many,
who cast out devils in Christ's name, at the last will be disowned by him. If,
therefore, thou had only the gifts, and was destitute of the graces of the
Holy Ghost, they would only serve to lead thee with so much the more solemnity
to hell.

Here then we join issue with our adversaries, and will readily grant, that we
are not in this sense to be inspired, as were our Lord's first apostles. But
unless men have eyes which see not, and ears that hear not, how can they read
the latter part of the text, and not confess that the Holy Spirit in another
sense, is the common privilege of all believers, even to the end of the world?
This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.
Observe he does not say, they that believe on him for one or two ages, but they
that believe on him in general, or, at all times, and in all places. So that,
unless we can prove, that St. John was under a delusion when he wrote these
words, we must believe that even we also, shall receive the Holy Ghost, if we
believe on the Lord Jesus with our whole hearts.

Again, our Lord, just before his bitter passion, when he was about to offer up
his soul an offering for the sins of the elect world; when his heart was most
enlarged, and he would undoubtedly demand the most excellent gifts for his
disciples, prays, That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I
in thee; that they also may be one in us, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one; that is, that all his true followers might be
united to him by his Holy Spirit, by as real, vital, and mystical an union, as
there was between Jesus Christ and the Father. I say all his true followers;
for it is evident, from our Lord's own words, that he had us, and all believers
in view, when he put up this prayer; Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word; so that, unless we
treat our Lord as the high priests did, and count him a blasphemer, we must
confess, that all who believe in Jesus Christ, through the word, or
ministration of his servants, are to be joined to Jesus Christ, by being made
partakers of the Holy Spirit.

A great noise has been made of late, about the word enthusiast, and it has
been cast upon the preachers of the gospel, as a term of reproach; but every
Christian, in the proper sense of the word, must be an enthusiast; that is,
must be inspired of God, or have God, by his Spirit, in him. St Peter tells us,
we have many great and precious promises, that we may be made partakers of the
divine nature; our Lord prays, that we may be one, as the Father and he are
one; and our own church, in conformity to these texts of scripture, in her
excellent communion-office, tell us that those who receive the sacrament
worthily, Dwell in Christ, and Christ in them; that they are one with Christ,
and Christ with them. And yet, Christians must have their names cast out as
evil, and ministers in particular, must be looked upon a^ deceivers of the
people, for affirming, that we must be really united to God, by receiving the
Holy Ghost. "Be astonished, O heavens, at this!"

Indeed, I will not say, all our letter-learned preachers deny this doctrine in
express words; but however, they do in effect; for they talk professedly
against inward feelings, and say, we may have God's Spirit without feeling it,
which is, in reality, to deny the thing itself. And had I a mind to hinder the
progress of the gospel, and to establish the kingdom of darkness, I would go
about telling people, they might have the Spirit of God, and yet not feel it.

But to return: When our Lord was about to ascend to his Father and our Father,
to his God and our God, he gave his apostles this commission, Go and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. And accordingly, by authority of this commission, we do teach and
baptize in this, and every age of the church. And though we translate the
words, "baptizing them in the name;" yet, as the name of God, in the Lord's
prayer, and several other places, signifies his nature, they might as well be
translated thus, baptizing them into the nature of the Father, into the nature
of the Son, and into the nature of the Holy Ghost. Consequently, if we are all
to be baptized into the nature of the Holy Ghost, before our baptism be
effectual to salvation, it is evident, that we all must actually receive the
Holy Ghost, and ere we can say, we truly believe in Jesus Christ. For no one
can say, that Jesus is my Lord, but he that has thus received the Holy Ghost.

Numbers of other texts might be quoted to make this doctrine, if possible,
still more plain; but I am astonished, that any who call themselves members;
much more, that many, who are preachers in the church of England, should dare
so much as to open their lips against it. And yet, with grief I speak it, God
is my judge, persons of the established church seem more generally to be
ignorant of it than any dissenters whatsoever.

But, my dear brethren, what have you been doing? How often have your hearts
given your lips the lie? How often have you offered to God the sacrifice of
fools, and had your prayers turned into sin, if you approve of, and use our
church-liturgy, and yet deny the Holy Spirit to be the portion of all
believers? In the daily absolution, the minister exhorts the people to pray,
that God would grant them repentance, and his Holy Spirit; In the Collect for
Christmas Day, we beseech God, that he would daily renew us by his Holy Spirit.
In the last week's Collect, we prayed that we may evermore rejoice in the
comforts of the Holy Ghost; and in the concluding prayer, which we put up every
day, we pray, not only that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, but that "the fellowship of the Holy Ghost" may be with us all evermore.

But farther, a solemn season, to some, is now approaching: I mean the
Ember-days, at the end of which, all that are to be ordained to the office of a
deacon, are in the sight of God, and in the presence of the congregation, to
declare, that they trust they are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take
upon them that administration; and to those who are to be ordained priests, the
bishop is to repeat these solemn words, Receive thou the Holy Ghost, now
committed unto thee by the imposition of our hands. And yet, O that I had no
reason to speak it, many that use our good forms, and many who have witnessed
this good confession, yet dare to both talk and preach against the necessity of
receiving the Holy Ghost now; and not only so, but cry out against those, who
do insist upon it, as madmen, enthusiasts, schismatics, and underminers of the
established constitution.

But you are the schismatics, you are the bane of the church of England, who
are always crying out, "the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord:" and
yet starve the people out of our communion, by feeding them only with the dry
husks of dead morality, and not bringing out to them the fatted calf; I mean,
the doctrines of the operations of the blessed Spirit of God. But here is the
misfortune; many of us are not led by, and therefore no wonder that we cannot
talk feelingly of, the Holy Ghost; we subscribe to our articles, and make them
serve for a key to get into church-preferment, and then preach contrary to
those very articles to which we have subscribed. Far be it from me, to charge
all the clergy with this hateful hypocrisy: no, blessed be God, there are some
left among us who dare maintain the doctrines of the reformation, and preach
the truth as it is in Jesus: But I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not; the
generality of the clergy are fallen from our articles, and do not speak
agreeable to them, or to the form of sound words delivered in the scriptures;
woe be unto such blind leaders of the blind! How can you escape the damnation
of hell? It is not all your learning, (falsely so called) it is not all your
preferments can keep you from the just judgment of God. Yet a little while, and
we shall all appear before the tribunal of Christ; there, there will I meet
you; there Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, shall
determine who are the false prophets, who are the wolves in sheep's clothing.
Those who say, that we must now receive and feel the Holy Ghost, or those who
exclaim against it, as the doctrine of devils.

But I can say no more? it is an unpleasing task to censure any order of men,
especially those who are in the ministry; nor would any thing excuse it but
necessity: That necessity which extorted from our Lord himself so many woes
against the Scribes and Pharisees, the letter-learned rulers and teachers of
the Jewish church; and surely if I could bear to see people perish for lack of
knowledge, and yet be silent toward those who keep from them the key of true
knowledge, the very stones would cry out.

Would we restore the church to its primitive dignity, the only way is to live
and preach the doctrine of Christ, and the articles to which we have
subscribed; then we shall see the number of dissenters will daily decrease, and
the church of England become the joy of the whole earth.

I am, in the Third place, to show the reasonableness of this doctrine.

I say the reasonableness of the doctrine; for however it may seem foolishness
to the natural man, yet to those, who have tasted of the good word of life, and
have felt the power of the world to come, it will appear to be founded on the
highest reason; and is capable to those who have eyes to see, even of a
demonstration; I say of demonstration, for it stands on this self-evident
truth, that we are fallen creatures, or, to use the scripture-expression, Have
all died in Adam.

I know indeed, it is now no uncommon thing amongst us, to deny the doctrine of
original sin, as well as the divinity of Jesus Christ; but it is incumbent on
those who deny it, first to disprove the authority of the holy scriptures; if
thou can prove, thou unbeliever, that the book, which we call the Bible, does
not contain the lively oracles of God; if thou can show, that holy men of old
did not write this book, as they were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, then
will we give up the doctrine of original sin; but unless thou can do this, we
must insist upon it, that we are all conceived and born in sin; if for no
other, yet for this one reason, because that God, who cannot lie, has told us
so.

But what has light to do with darkness, or polite infidels with the Bible!
Alas! as they are strangers to the power, so they are generally as great
strangers to the word of God. And therefore, if we will preach to them, we must
preach to and from the heart: for talking in the language of scripture to them,
is but like talking in an unknown tongue. Tell me then, O man, whosoever thou
art, that deniest the doctrine of original sin, if thy conscience be not seared
as with a hot iron: tell me, if thou do not find thyself, by nature, to be a
motley mixture of brute and devil? I know these terms will stir up the whole
Pharisee in thy heart! But let not Satan hurry thee hence: stop a little, and
let us reason together; do thou not find, that by nature thou art prone to
pride? otherwise wherefore art thou now offended? Again, do not thou find in
thyself the seeds of malice, revenge, and all uncharitableness? And what are
these but the very tempers of the devil? Again, do we not all by nature follow,
and suffer ourselves to be led by our natural appetites, always looking
downwards, never looking upwards to that God, in whom we live, move, and have
our being? And what is this but the very nature of the beasts that perish? Out
of thy own heart, therefore, will I oblige thee to confess, what an inspired
apostle has long since told us, that the whole world (by nature) lies in the
wicked one; we are no better than those whom St. Jude calls brute beasts; for
we have tempers in us all, by nature, that prove to a demonstration, that we
are earthly, sensual, devilish.

And this will serve as another argument, to prove the reality of the
operations of the blessed Spirit on the hearts of believers, against those
false professors, who deny there is any such thing as influences of the Holy
Spirit, that may be felt. For if they will grant that the devil works, and so
as to be felt in the hearts of the children of disobedience, (which they must
grant, unless they will give an apostle the lie) where is the wonder that the
good Spirit should have the same power over those who are truly obedient to the
faith of Jesus Christ?

If it be true then, that we are all by nature, since the fall, a mixture of
brute and devil, it is evident, that we all must receive the Holy Ghost, ere we
can dwell with and enjoy God.

When you read, how the prodigal, in the gospel, was reduced to so low a
condition, as to eat husks with swine, and how Nebuchadnezzar was turned out to
graze with oxen; I am confident, you pity their unhappy state. And when you
^ear how Jesus Christ will say, at the last day, to all that are not born again
of God. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels, do not your hearts shrink within you, with a secret
horror? And if creatures, with only our degree of goodness, cannot bear even
the thoughts of dwelling with beasts or devils, to whose nature we are so
nearly allied, how do we imagine God, who is infinite goodness, and purity
itself, can dwell with us, while we are partakers of both their natures? We
might as well think to reconcile heaven and hell.

When Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit, he fled and hid himself from God;
why? because he was naked; he was alienated from the life of God, the due
punishment of his disobedience. Now we are all by nature naked and void of God,
as he was at that time and consequently, until we are changed, renewed, and
clothed with a divine nature again, we must fly from God also.

Hence then appears the reasonableness of our being obliged to receive the
Spirit of God. It is founded on the doctrine of original sin; and therefore,
you will always find, that those who talk against feeling the operations of the
Holy Ghost, very rarely, or slightly at least, mention our fall in Adam; no,
they refer St. Paul's account of the depravity of unbelievers, only to those of
old time. Whereas it it obvious, on the contrary, that we are all equally
included under the guilt and consequences of our first parents sin, even as
others; and to use the language of our own church-article, bring into the world
with us, a corruption, which renders us liable to God's wrath, and eternal
damnation.

Should I preach to you any other doctrine, I should wrong my own soul; I
should be found a false witness toward God and you; and he that preaches any
other doctrine, howsoever dignified and distinguished, shall bear his
punishment, whosoever he be.

From this plain reason then appears the necessity, why we, as well as the
first apostles, in this sense, must receive the Spirit of God.

For the great work of sanctification, or making us holy, is particularly
referred to the Holy Ghost; therefore, our Lord says, Unless a man be born of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Jesus Christ came down to save us, not only from the guilt, but also from the
power of sin. And however often we have repeated our (...) and told God we
believe in the Holy Ghost, ye^ if we have not believed in him, so as to be
really united to Jesus Christ by him, we have no more concord with Jesus Christ
than (...) himself.

And now, my brethren, what shall I say more? Tell me, are not many of your
offended at what has been said already? Do not some of you think, though I mean
well, yet I have carried the point a little too far? Are not others ready to
cry out, if this be true, "who then can be saved?" Is not this driving people
into despair?

Yes, I ingenuously confess it is? but into what despair? a despair of mercy
through Christ? No, God forbid; but a despair of living with God without
receiving the Holy Ghost. And I would to God, that not only all you that hear
me this day, but that the whole world was filled with this despair. Believe me,
I have been doing no more that you allow your bodily physicians to do every
day: if you have a wound, and are in earnest about a cure, you bid the surgeon
probe it to the very bottom; and shall not the physician of your souls be
allowed the same freedom? What have I been doing but searching your natural
wounds, that I might convince you of your danger, and put you upon applying to
Jesus Christ for a remedy? Indeed I have dealt with you as gently as I could;
and now I have wounded, I will attempt to heal you: For I was in the

Last place, to exhort you all to come to Jesus Christ by faith, whereby you,
even you also, shall receive the Holy Ghost. For this spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive.

This, this is what I long to come to. Hitherto I have been preaching only the
law; but-behold I bring you (...) ridings (...) great joy. If I have wounded
you, (...); behold I now bring a remedy for all your wounds. Notwithstanding
you are sunk into the nature of the beast and devil, yet, if you truly believe
on Jesus Christ, you shall receive the quickening Spirit promised in the text,
and be restored to the glorious liberties of the sons of God; I say, if you
believe on Jesus Christ. For by faith we are saved; it is not of works, least
any one should boa^^. And, however some men may say, there is a fitness
required in the creature, and that we must have a righteousness of our own,
before we can lay hold on the righteousness of Christ, yet, if we believe the
scripture, salvation is the free gift of God in Christ Jesus our Lord; and
whosoever believes on him with his whole heart, though his soul be as black as
hell itself, shall receive the (...) of the Holy Ghost. Behold then, I stand
up, and cry out in this great day of the feast, Let (...) every one that
thirsts come unto Jesus Christ and drink. He that believes on him, out of
his belly shall ^low (not only streams or rivulets, but whole) "rivers of
living waters." This I speak of the Spirit, which they that believe on Jesus
shall certainly receive. For Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today and for
ever. -- He is the way, the truth, the resurrection, and the life; whosoever
believes on him, though he were dead, yet shall he live. There is no respect
of persons with Jesus Christ; high and low, rich and poor, one with another,
may come to him with an humble confidence, if they draw near by faith; from him
we all receive grace upon grace; for Jesus Christ is full of grace and truth,
and ready to save to the uttermost, all that by a true faith turn unto him.
Indeed, the poor generally receive the gospel, and God has chosen the poor in
this world, rich in faith. But though not many mighty, not many noble are
called; and though it be easier for a camel to go, through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, yet even to you that are
rich, do I now freely offer salvation, by Jesus Christ, if you will renounce
yourselves, and come to Jesus Christ as poor sinners; I say as poor sinners;
for the poor in spirit are only so blessed as (...) have a right to the kingdom
of God. And Jesus Christ calls none to him, but those who thirst after his
righteousness, and feel themselves weary, and heavy ^^den with the burden of
their sins. Jesus Christ justifies the ungodly; he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Do not then say you are unworthy: for this is a faithful and true saying and
worthy of all men to be received, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners; and if you are the chief of sinners, if you feel yourselves such,
verily Jesus Christ came into the world chiefly to save you. When Joseph was
called out of the prisonhouse to Pharoah's court, we are told, that he staid
some time to prepare himself; but do you come with all your prison-clothes
about you; come poor, and miserable and blind, and naked, as you are, and God
the Father shall receive you with open arms, as was the returning prodigal. He
shall cover your nakedness with the best robe of his dear son's righteousness,
shall seal you with the signet of his Spirit, and seed you with the fatted
calf, even with the comforts of the Holy Ghost. O, let there then be joy in
heaven over some of you, as believing; let me not go back to my Master, and
say, Lord, they will not believe my report. Harden no longer your hearts, but
open them wide, and let the king of glory enter in; believe me, I am willing to
go to prison or death for you; but I am not willing to go to heaven without
you. The love of Jesus Christ constrains me to lift up my voice like a trumpet.
My, heart is now full; out of the abundance of the love which I have (...)?
precious and immortal souls, my mouth now speaks; and I could now not only
continue my discourse until midnight, but I could speak until I could speak no
more. And why should I despair of any? No, I can despair of no one, when I
consider Jesus Christ has had mercy on such a wretch as I am however you may
think of yourselves, I know that by nature I am but half a devil and half a
beast. The free grace of Christ prevented me (...) he saw me in my blood, he
passed by me, and said unto me, live; and the same grace which was sufficient
for me, is sufficient for you also; behold, the same blessed Spirit is ready to
breathe on all your dry bones, if you will believe on Jesus Christ, whom God
has sent; indeed, you can never believe on, or serve a better master, one that
is more mighty, or more willing to save; I can say, the Lord Christ is
gracious, his yoke is easy, his burden exceeding light; after you have served
him many years, like the servants under the law, was he willing to discharge
you, you would say, we love our Master, and will not go from him. Come then, my
guilty brethen, come and believe on the Lord that bought you with his precious
blood; look up by faith, and see him whom you have pierced; behold him
bleeding, panting, dying? Behold him with arms stretched out to receive you
all; cry unto him as the penitent thief did, Lord, remember us now thou art in
thy kingdom, and he shall say to your souls, Shortly shall you be with me in
paradise. For those whom Christ justifies, them he also glorifies, even with
that glory which he enjoyed with the Father before the world began. Do not say,
I have bought a piece of ground, and must needs go see it; or I have bought a
yoke of oxen, and must needs go prove them; or I have married a wife, I am
engaged in an eager pursuit after the lust of the eye, and the pride of life,
and therefore cannot come. Do not fear having your name cast out as evil, or
being accounted a (...) for Christ's sake; yet a little while, and you shall
shine like the stars in the firmament for ^ver. Only believe, and Jesus Christ
shall be to you wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and eternal redemption;
your bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and your souls be
partakers of all the fullness of God.

Which God, of his infinite mercy, grant through Jesus Christ; to whom, with
thee, O Father, thee, O Holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, be ascribed, as
is most due, all power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.
Amen, Amen.

SERMON XII.
THE ETERNITY OF HELL TORMENTS.
MATTHEW xxv. 46. These shall go away into everlasting Punishment.
THE excellency of the gospel dispensation is greatly evidenced by those
sanctions of rewards and punishments which it offers to the choice of all its
hearers, in order to engage them to be obedient to its precepts. For it
promises no less than eternal happiness to the good, and denounces no slighter
a punishment that everlasting misery against the wicked: on the one hand, It is
a favor of life unto life; on the other, a favor of death unto death. And
though one would imagine the bare mentioning of the former would be sufficient
to draw men to their duty, yet ministers in all ages, have found it necessary,
frequently to remind their people of the latter, and to set before them the
terrors of the Lord, as so many powerful dissuasives from sin.

But whence is it that men are so disingenuous? The reason seems to be this:
the promise of eternal happiness is so agreeable to the inclinations and wishes
of mankind, that all who call themselves? Christians, universally and willingly
subscribe to the belief of it: but then there is something so shocking in the
consideration of eternal torments, and seemingly such an infinite disproportion
between an endless duration of pain, and a short life spent in pleasure, that
men (some at least of them) can scarcely be brought to confess it as an article
of their faith, that an eternity of misery awaits the wicked in a future state.

I shall therefore, at this time, beg leave to insist on the proof of this part
of one of the articles of our creed; and endeavor to make good what our
blessed Lord has here threatened in the words of the text, These (that is the
wicked) shall go away into everlasting punishment.

Accordingly, without considering the words as they stand in relation to the
context, I shall resolve all I have to say, into this one general proposition,
That the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter, are eternal.

But before I proceed to make good this, I must inform you that I take it for
granted,

All present do steadfastly believe, They have something within them, which we
call a soul, and which is capable of surviving the dissolution of the body, and
of being miserable or happy to all eternity.

I take it for granted farther, That you believe a divine revelation; that
those books emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the inspiration
of God, and that the things therein contained, are founded upon eternal truth.

I take it for granted, That you believe, that the Son of God came down to die
for sinners; and that there is but one Mediator between God and man, even the
Man Christ Jesus.

These things being granted, and they were necessary to be premised, proceed we
now to make good the one general proposition asserted in the text, That the
torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal. These shall go away
into everlasting punishment. The (...)

First argument I shall advance to prove that the torments reserved for the
wicked hereafter are eternal, (for I have taken it for granted, that you
believe those books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the
inspiration of God, and that the things contained therein are founded upon
eternal truth) is, that the word of God himself assures us, in line upon line,
that it will be (...).

To quote all the texts that might be produced in proof of this, would be
endless. Let it suffice to instance only a few. In the old Testament, in the
book of Daniel, chap. xii. verse 2. we are told, that some shall awake to
everlasting life, and others to everlasting contempt. In the book of Isaiah, it
is said, that the worm of those who have transgressed God's law, and die
impenitently, shall not die, nor their fire be quenched. And, in another place,
the holy prophet, struck, no doubt, with astonishment and horror at the
prospect of the continuance of the torments of the damned, breaks out into this
moving expostulation, Who can dwell with everlasting burning?

The New Testament is still fuller as to this point, it being a revelation
which brought this and such like particulars (...) a clear light. The apostle
Jude tells us of the profane despisers of dignities in his days, that, for them
was reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And in the Revelations it is
written, that the smoke of the torments of the wicked ascends for ever and
ever. And if we believe the witness of men inspired, the witness of the Son of
God, who had the Spirit given him, as Mediator, without measure, is still far
greater: and in St. Mark's gospel he repeats the solemn declaration th^^^
several times, It is better for thee to enter into life maimed; that is, it is
better to forego the gratification of thy lust, or incur the displeasure of a
friend, which may be as dear to thee as a hand, or as useful as a foot, than
having two hands (...) feet, (that is, for indulging the one, or disobeying God
to oblige the other) to be (...) into (...) where the worm die^^ not, and the
fire is not quenched.

And here again, in the words of the text, Th^se (the wicked) shall go away
into everlasting punishment.

I know it ha^ been objected by some who have denied the eternity of
hell-torment^, That the words, everlasting, and ever and ever, are often used
in the Holy Scriptures, (especially in the Old Testament) when they signify not
an endless duration; but a limited term of time.

And this we readily grant: But then we reply, That when the words are used
with this limitation, they either manifestly appear to be used so from the
context; or are put in opposition to occasional types, which God gave his
people on some special occasions, as when it is said, It shall be a perpetual
or everlasting statute, or, a statute for ever; that is, a standing type, and
not merely transient or occasional, as was the pillar of cloud, the manna, and
such like. Or, lastly, they have a relation to that covenant God made with his
spiritual Israel; which if understood in a spiritual sense, will be
everlasting, though the ceremonial dispensation be abolished.

Besides, it ought to be observed, that some of the passages just now referred
to, have neither of these words so much as mentioned in them and cannot
possibly be interpreted, so as to denote only a limited term of years.

But let that be as it will, it is evident even to a demonstration, that the
words of the text will not admit of such a restrained signification, as appears
from their being directly opposed to the words immediately following, That the
righteous shall go into life eternal. From which words, all are ready to grant,
that the life promised to the righteous will be eternal. And why the punishment
threatened to the wicked should not be understood to be eternal likewise, when
the very same words in the original, is used to express the duration of each,
no shadow of reason can be given.

But, secondly, There ^anno^ be (...), why God should reward his ^^ints with
everlasting happiness which will not equally prove that he ought to punish
sinners with eternal misery.

For, since we know nothing (at least for a certainty) how he will deal with
either, but by a divine revelation; and since, as was proved by the foregoing
argument, he has as positively threatened eternally to punish the wicked, as
to reward the good; it follows, that his truth will be as much impeached and
called in question, did he not inflict his punishments, as it would be, if he
did not con^^^ his rewards.

To this also it has been objected, That though God is obliged by promise to
give his rewards, yet his veracity could not be called in question, supposing,
he should not execute his threatenings, as he actually did not in the case of
Nineveh; which God expressly declared by his prophet Jonah, "should be
destroyed in forty days:" Notwithstanding the sequel of the story informs us,
that Nineveh was spared.

But in answer to this objection, we affirm, That God's threatenings, as well
as promises, are without repentance; and for this reason, because they are both
founded on the eternal laws of right reason. Accordingly we always find, that
where the conditions were not performed, on the nonperformance of which the
threatenings were denounced; God always executed the punishment threaten^^. The
driving Adam out of Eden, the destruction of the old world by a deluge of
water, and the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, are, and will be always so many
standing monuments of God's executing his threatenings when denounced, though
a^ our weak apprehensions, the punishment may see^ far to exceed the crime.

It is true, God did spare Nineveh, and that because the inhabitants did
actually repent, and therefore performed the conditions upon which it was
supposed, by the prophet's being sent to warn them, the threatened punishment
should be withheld.

And so in respect to gospel-threatenings. If men will so far consult their own
welfare as to comply with the gospel, God certainly will not punish them, but
on the contrary, confer upon them his rewards. But to affirm that he will not
punish, and that eternally too, impenitent, obstinate sinners, according as he
has threatened; what is it, in effect, but to make God like a man, that he
should lie, or the son of man, that he should repent?

But the absurdity of such an opinion will appear still more evident from

The third argument I shall offer to prove, that the torments reserved for the
wicked hereafter are eternal, from the nature of the Christian covenant.

And here I must again observe, that it was taken for granted at the beginning
of this discourse, that you believe the Son of God came down to save sinners;
and that there is but one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ
Jesus.

And here I take it for granted farther. (unless you believe the absurd and
unwarrantable doctrine of purgatory) that you are fully persuaded, this life is
the only time allotted by Almighty God for working out our salvation, and that
after a few years are passed over, there will remain no more sacrifice for sin.

And if this be granted (and who dares deny it?) it follows, that if a wicked
man dies in his wickedness, and under the wrath of God, he must continue in
that state to all eternity. For, since there is no possibility of his being
delivered out of such a condition, but by and through Christ; and since, at the
hour of death, the time of Christ's mediation and intercession for him is
irrecoverably gone; the same reason that may be given, why God should punish a
sinner that dies under the guilt of his sins for a single day, will equally
hold good, why he should continue to punish him for a year, an age, nay to all
eternity.

But I hasten to the fourth and last argument, to prove, That the torments
reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal, because the devil's punishment
is to be so.

That there is such a being whom we call the devil; that he was once an angel
of light, but for his pride and rebellion against God, was cast down from
heaven, and is now permitted, with the rest of the spiritual wickednesses, to
walk to and fro, seeking whom they may devour; that there is a place of torment
reserved for them, or to use the apostle's words, That they are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day; are
truths all here present were supposed to be convinced of, at the beginning of
this discourse, you believing the Holy Scriptures to be written by the
inspiration of God, wherein these truths are delivered.

But then, if we allow all this, and thin^ it no injustice in God to punish
those once glorious spirits for their rebellion; how can we think it unjust in
him to punish wicked men for their impertinency to all eternity.

You will say, perhaps, that they have sinned against greater light, and
therefore deserve a greater punishment. And so we grant that the punishment of
the fallen angels may be greater as to degree, than that of wicked men? but
then we affirm, it will be equal as to the eternal duration of it: for in that
day, as the lively oracles of God informs us, shall the Son of man say to them
on his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for
the devil and his angels. Where we find that impenitent sinners are to be cast
into the same everlasting fire with the devil and his angels; and that too very
justly. For though they may have sinned against greater light, yet Christians sin
against greater mercy; since Christ took not hold of, did not die for, the
fallen angels, but for men and for our salvation. So that if God spared not
those excellent beings, assure thyself, O obstinate sinner, whoever thou art,
he will by no means spare thee.

From what then has been said it plainly appears, that verily the torments
reserved for the wicked hereafter, are eternal. And if so, brethren, how ought
we to fly to Jesus Christ for refuge; how holy ought we to be in all manner of
conversation and godliness. That we may be accounted worthy to escape this
wrath to come!

But before I proceed to a practical exhortation, permit me to draw an
inference o^ two from what has been said.

And first, if the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal, what
shall we say to those, who make an open profession in their creed to believe a
life everlasting, a life of misery (...) happiness, and yet dare to live in the
actual commission of those sins which will unavoidably, without repentance,
bring them into that place of torment? Thou believe that the punishments of
the impenitently wicked in another life, are eternal: thou do well, the
devils also believe and tremble. But know, O vain man, unless this belief does
influence thy practice, and makes thee bid adieu to thy sins, every time thou
repeatest thy creed, thou do in effect say, I believe I shall be undone for
ever.

But, secondly, If the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are eternal,
then let this serve as a caution to such persons, (and it is to be feared there
are some such) who go about to dissuade others from the belief of such an
important truth; there being no surer way, in all probability, to encourage and
promote infidelity and profaneness, than the broaching or maintaining so
unwarrantable a doctrine. For if the positive threats of God concerning the
eternity of hell torments, are already found insufficient to deter men from
sin, a higher pitch of wickedness may we imagine they will quickly arrive at,
when they are taught to entertain any hopes of a future recovery out of them;
or, what is still worse, that their souls are hereafter to be annihilated, and
become like the beasts that perish? But woe unto such blind leaders of the
blind. No wonder if they both fall into the ditch. And let such corrupters of
God's word know, that I testify unto every man that hears me this day, That
if any one shall add unto, or take away from the words that are written in the
book of God, God shall take his part out of the book of life, and shall add
unto him all the plagues that are in that book.

Thirdly and lastly, If the torments reserved for the wicked hereafter are
eternal, then this may serve as a reproof for those who quarrel with God, and
say it is inconsistent with his justice, to punish a person to all eternity,
only for enjoying the pleasures of sin for a season. But such persons must be
told, that it is not their thinking or calling God unjust, will make him so, no
more than a condemned prisoner's saying the law or judge is unjust, will render
either duly chargeable with such an imputation. But know thou, O worm, what
blasphemy thou art guilty of, in charging God with injustice? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Will thou presume
to arraign the Almighty at the bar of thy shallow reasoning? And call him
unjust for punishing thee eternally, only because thou wishest it may not be
so? But has God said it, and shall he not do it? He has said it: and let God
be true though every man be a liar. Shall not the judge of all the earth do
right? Assuredly he will. And if sinners will not own his justice in his
threatenings here, they will be compelled ere long to own and feel them, when
tormented by him hereafter.

But to come to a more practical application of what has been delivered.

You have heard, brethren, the eternity of hell torments plainly proved, from
the express declarations of Holy Scriptures, and consequences naturally drawn
from them. And now there seems to need no great art of rhetoric to persuade any
understanding person to avoid and abhor those sins, which, without repentance
will certainly plunge him into this eternal gulf. The disproportion between
the pleasure and the pain (if there be any pleasure in sin) is so infinitely
great that supposing it was only possible, though not certain, that the wicked
would be everlastingly punished, no one that has the reason of a man, for the
enjoying a little momentary pleasure, would, one might imagine, run the (...)
of enduring eternal pain. But since the torments of the damned are not only
possible, but certain, (since God himself, who cannot lie, has told us so) for
men, notwithstanding, to persist in their disobedience, and then flatter
themselves, that God will not make good his threatenings, is a (...) egregious
instance of folly and presumption.

Dives himself supposed, that if one rose from the dead, his brethren would
amend their lives; but Christians, it seems, will not repent, though the Son of
God died and rose again, and told them what they must expect, if they continue
obstinate in evil-doing.

Would we now and then draw off our thoughts from sensible objects, and by
faith meditate a while on the miseries of the damned, I doubt not but we
should, as it were, hear many an unhappy soul venting his fruitless sorrows, in
some such piteous moans as these.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! O
foolish mortal that I was, thus to bring myself into these never-ceasing
tortures, for the transitory enjoyments of a few short-lived pleasures, which
scarcely afforded me any satisfaction, even when I most indulged myself in
them. Alas! are these the wages, these the effects of sin? Are all the grand
deceiver's inviting promises come to this? O damned apostate! first to delude
me with pretended promises of happiness, and after several years drudgery in
his service, thus to involve me in eternal woe* O that I had never hearkened to
his beguiling insinuations! O that I had rejected his very first suggestions
with the utmost detestation and abhorrence! O that I had taken up my cross and
followed Christ! O that I had never ridiculed serious godliness; and out of a
false politeness, condemned the truly pious as too severe, enthusiastic, or
superstitious! For I then had been happy indeed, happy beyond expression, happy
to all eternity, yonder in those blessed regions where they sit, clothed with
unspeakable glory, and chanting forth their seraphic hallelujahs to the Lamb
that sits upon the throne for-ever. But, alas! these reflections come too
late: these wishes now are vain and fruitless; I have not suffered, and
therefore must not reign with them. I have in effect denied the Lord that
bought me, and therefore justly am I now denied by him. But must I live for
ever tormented in these flames? Must this body of mine, which not long since
lay in state, was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every
day, must it be here eternally confined, and made the mockery of insulting
devils! O eternity! that thought fills me with despair: I must be miserable for
ever.

Come then, all ye self-deluding, self-deluded sinners, and imagine yourselves
for once in the place of that truly wretched man I have been here describing.
Think, I beseech you by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, think with
yourseves, how racking, how insupportable the never-dying worm of a
self-condemning conscience will hereafter be to you. Think how impossible it
will be for you to dwell with everlasting burnings.

Come, all ye Christians of a lukewarm, Laodicean spirit, ye Gallios in
religion, who care a little, but not enough for the things of God; O think,
think with yourselves, how deplorable it will be to lose the enjoyment of
heaven, and run into endless torments, merely because you will be content to be
almost, and will not strive to be altogether Christians. Consider, I beseech
you consider, how you will rave and curse that fatal stupidity which made you
believe any thing less than true faith in Jesus, productive of a life o^ strict
piety, self-denial, and mortification, can keep you from those torments* the
eternity of which I have been endeavoring to prove.

But I can no more. These thoughts are too melancholy for me to dwell on, as
well as for you to hear; and God knows, as punishing is his strange work, so
denouncing his threatenings is mine; but if the bare mentioning the torments of
the damned is so shocking, how terrible must the enduring of them be!

And now, are not some of you ready to cry out, "These are hard sayings, who
can bear them?"

But let not sincere Christians be in the least terrified at what has been
delivered: no, for you is reserved a crown, a kingdom, an eternal and exceeding
weight of glory. Christ never said that the righteous, the believing, the
upright, the sincere, but the wicked, merciless, negatively good professors
before described, shall go into everlasting punishment. For you, who love him
in sincerity, a new and living way is laid open into the holy of holies by the
blood of Jesus Christ: and an abundant entrance will be administered unto you,
at the great day of account into eternal life. Take heed, therefore, and beware
that there be not in any of you a root of bitterness springing up of unbelief:
but on the contrary, steadfastly and heartily rely on the many precious
promises reached out to you in the gospel, knowing that he who has promised is
faithful, and therefore will perform.

But let no obstinately wicked professors dare to apply any of the divine
promises to themselves: for it is not meet to take the children's bread, and
give it unto dogs! No, to such the terrors of the Lord only belong. And as
certainly as Christ will say to his true followers, Come, ye blessed Children
of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world; so he will unalterably pronounce this dreadful sentence against all that
die in their sins, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels.

From which unhappy state, may God of his infinite mercy deliver us all through
Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee O Father, and thee O Holy Ghost, three persons
and one eternal God, be ascribed, as is most due, all honor, power, might,
majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.

SERMON XIII.
THE GREAT DUTY OF FAMILY-RELIGION.
JOSHUA xxiv. 15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.
THESE words contain the holy resolution of pious Joshua, who having, in a most
moving, affectionate discourse recounted to the Israelites what great things
God had done for them, in the verse immediately preceding the text, comes to
draw a proper inference from what he had been delivering; and acquaints them,
in the most pressing terms, that since God had been so exceeding gracious unto
them, they could do no less, than out of gratitude for such uncommon favors
and mercies, dedicate both themselves and families to his service. Now,
therefore, fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity and truth, and put away the
Gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood. And by the same
engaging motive does the prophet Samuel afterward enforce their obedience to
the commandments of God, 1 Samuel xii. 24, Only fear the Lord and serve him in
truth with all your heart; for consider how great things he has done for you.
But then, that they might not excuse themselves (as too many might be apt to
do) by his giving them a bad example, or think he was laying heavy burdens upon
them, whilst he himself touched them not with one of his fingers, he tells them
in the text, that whatever regard they might pay to the doctrine he had been
preaching, yet he (as all ministers ought to do) was resolved to live up and
practice it himself: Choose you therefore whom you will serve, whether the gods
which your fathers served, or the gods of the Amorities, in whose land ye
dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

A resolution this, worthy of Joshua, and no less becoming, no less necessary
for every true son of Joshua, that is entrusted with the care and government of
a family in our day: and, if it was ever seasonable for ministers to preach up,
or people to put in practice Family Religion, it was never more so than in the
present age; since it is greatly to be feared, that out of those many
households that call themselves Christians, there are but few that serve God in
their respective families as they ought.

It is true indeed, visit our churches and you may perhaps see something of the
form of godliness still subsisting among us; but even that is scarcely to be
met with in private houses. So that were the blessed angels to come, as in the
patriarchal age, and observe our spiritual economy at home, would they not be
tempted to say, as Abraham to Abimelech, "Surely the fear of God is not in this
place?" Genesis xx. 1^.

How such a general neglect of Family Religion first began to overspread the
Christian world, is difficult to determine. As for the primitive Christians, I
am positive it was not so with them: No, they had not so learned Christ, as
falsely to imagine religion was to be confined solely to their assemblies for
public worship; but, on the contrary, behaved with such piety and exemplary
holiness in their private families, that St. Paul often styles their house a
church: Salute such a one, says he, and the church which is in his house. And,
I believe we must for ever despair of seeing a primitive spirit of piety
revived in the world, till we are so happy as to see a revival of primitive
Family Religion; and persons unanimously resolving with good old Joshua, in the
words of the text, As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

From which words, I shall beg leave to insist on these three things.

I. First, That it is the duty of every governor of a family to take care, that
not only he himself, but also that those committed to his charge, serve the
Lord. II. Secondly, I shall endeavor to show after what manner a governor and
his household ought to serve the Lord. And, III. Thirdly, I shall offer some
motives, in order to excite all governors, with their respective households, to
serve the Lord in the manner that shall be recommended.
And First, I am to show that it is the duty of every governor of a family to
take care, that not only he himself, but also that those committed to his
charge, should serve the Lord.

And this will appear, if we consider that every governor of a family ought to
look upon himself as obliged to act in three capacities: as a prophet, to
instruct; as a priest, to pray for and with; as a king, to govern, direct, and
provide for them. It is true indeed, the latter of these, their kingly office,
they are not so frequently deficient in, (nay in this they are generally too
solicitous;) but as for the two former, their priestly and prophetic offices,
like Gallio, they care for no such things. But however indifferent some
governors may be about it, they may be assured, that God will require a due
discharge of these offices at their hands. For if, as the apostle argues, he
that does not provide for his own house, in temporal things, has denied the
faith and is worse than an infidel; to what greater degree of apostasy must he
have arrived, who takes no thought to provide for the spiritual welfare of his
family.

But farther, persons are generally very liberal of their invectives against
the clergy, and think they justly blame the conduct of that minister who does
not take heed to and watch over the flock, of which the Holy Ghost has made him
overseer: but may not every governor of a family, be in a lower degree liable
to the same censure, who takes no thought for those souls who are committed to
his charge? For every house is as it were a little parish, every governor (as
was before observed) a priest, every family a flock: And if any of them perish
through the governor's neglect, their blood will God require at his hands.

Were a minister to disregard teaching his people publicly, and from house to
house, and to excuse himself by saying that he had enough to do to work out his
own salvation with fear and trembling, without concerning himself with that of
others; would you (...) be apt to think such a minister, to be like the unjust
judge, One that neither feared God nor regarded man? And yet, odious as such a
character would be, it is no worse than that governor of a family deserves, who
thinks himself obliged only to save his own soul, without paying any regard to
the souls of his household. For (as was above hinted) every house is as it were
a parish, and every master is concerned to secure, as much as in him lies, the
spiritual prosperity of every one under his roof, as any minister whatever is
obliged to look to the spiritual welfare of every individual person under his
charge.

What precedents men who neglect their duty in this particular, can plead for
such omission, I cannot tell. Doubtless not the example of holy Job, who was so
far from imagining that he had no concern, as governor of a family, with any
one's soul but his own, that the scripture acquaints us, When the days of his
children's feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and
offered burnt offerings, according to the number of them all; for Job said, it
may be that my sons have sinned and cursed God, in their hearts: Thus did Job
continually." Nor can they plead the practice of good old Joshua, whom, in the
text, we find as much concerned for his household's welfare, as his own. Nor
lastly, that of Cornelius, who feared God, not only himself, but with all his
house: And were Christians but of the same spirit of Job, Joshua, and the
Gentile centurion, they would act as Job, Joshua, and Cornelius did.

But alas! if this be the case, and all governors of families ought not only ^o
serve the Lord themselves, but likewise to see that their respective households
do so too; what will then become of those who not only neglect serving God
themselves, but also make it their business to ridicule and scoff at any of
their house that do? Who are not content with not entering into the kingdom of
heaven themselves; but those also that are willing to enter in, they hinder.
Surely such men are factors for the devil indeed. Surely their damnation
slumbereth not: For although God, in his good providence may suffer such
stumbling blocks to be put in his children's way, and suffer their greatest
enemies to be those of their own households, for a trial of their sincerity,
and improvemement of their faith; yet we cannot but pronounce a woe against
those masters "by whom such offenses came." For if those that only take care of
their own souls, can scarcely be saved, where will such monstrous profane and
wicked governors appear?

But hoping there are but few of this unhappy stamp, proceed we now to the

Second thing proposed; To show after what manner a governor and his household
ought to serve the Lord.

1. And the first thing I shall mention, is, reading the word of God. This is a
duty incumbent on every private person. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, is a precept given by our blessed Lord
indifferently to all: but much more so, ought every governor of a family to
think it in a peculiar manner spoken to myself, because (as has been already
proved) he ought to look upon himself as a prophet, and therefore, agreeably to
such (...) character, bound to instruct those under his charge in the knowledge
of the word of God.

This we find was the order God gave to his peculiar people Israel: for thus
speaks his representative Moses, Deuteronomy. vi. 6, 7. "These words," that is, the
scripture words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, that is, as it is generally
explained, servants as well as children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy house. From whence we may infer, that the only reason, why so
many neglect to read the words of Scripture diligently to their children is,
because the words of Scripture are not in their hearts: for if they were, out
of the abundance of the heart their mouth would speak.

Besides, servants as well as children, are, for the generality, very ignorant,
and m^re novices in the laws of God: And how shall they know, unless some one
teach them? and what more proper to teach them by, than the lively oracles of
God, which are able to make them wise unto salvation? And who more proper to
instruct them by these lively oracles, than parents and masters, who (as has
been more than once observed) are as much concerned to feed them with
spiritual, as with bodily bread, day by day.

But if these things be so, what a miserable condition are those unhappy
governors in, who are so far from feeding those committed to their care with
the sincere milk of the word, to the intent they may grow thereby, that they
neither search the scriptures themselves, nor ^re careful to explain them to
others? Such families must be in a happy way indeed to do their master's will,
who take such prodigious pains to know it! Would not one imagine that they had
turned converts to the church of Rome; that they thought ignorance to be the
mother of devotion; and that those were to be condemned as heretics who read
their bibles? And yet how few families are there amongst us, who do not act
after this unseemly manner! But shall I praise them in this? I praise them not:
Brethren, this thing ought not so to be.

2. Pass we on now to the second means whereby every governor and his household
ought to serve the Lord, Family Prayer.

This is a duty, though as much neglected, yet as absolutely necessary as the
former. Reading is a good preparative for prayer, as prayer is an excellent
means to render reading effectual. And the reason why every governor of a
family should join both these exercises together, is plain, because a governor
of a family cannot perform his priestly office (which we before observed he is
in some degree invested with) without performing this duty of family prayer.

We find it therefore remarked, when mention is made of Cain and Abel's
offering sacrifices, that they brought them. But to whom did they bring them?
Why, in all probability to their father Adam, who, as priest of the family was
to offer sacrifice in their names. And so likewise ought every spiritual son of
the second Adam, who is entrusted with the care of an household to offer up the
spiritual sacrifices of supplications and thanksgivings, acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ, in the presence and name of all who wait upon, or eat me
(...) at his table.

Thus we read our blessed Lord behaved when he tabernacled amongst us: For it
is said often, that he prayed with his twelve disciples, which was then his
little family. And (...) himself has promised a particular blessing to joint
supplications: Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of them. And again, If two or three are agreed touching any
thing they shall ask, it shall be given them. Add to this, that we are
commanded by the apostle to pray always, with all manner of supplication, which
doubtless includes family prayer. And holy Joshua, when he set up the good
resolution in the text, that he and his household would serve the Lord,
certainly resolved to pray with his family, which is one of the best
testimonies they could give of their serving him.

Besides, there are no families but what have some common blessings, of which
they have been all partakers, to give thanks for; some common crosses and
afflictions, which they are to pray against; some common sins, which they are
all to lament and bewail: But how this can be done, without joining together in
one common act of humiliation, supplication, and thanksgiving, is difficult to
devise.

From all which considerations put together, it is evident, that family prayer
is a great and necessary duty; and consequently, those governors that neglect
it, are certainly without excuse. And it is much to be feared, if they live
without family prayer, they live without God in the world.

And yet, such an hateful character as this is, it is to be feared, that was
God to send out an angel to destroy us, as he did once to destroy the Egyptian
firstborn, and withal give him a commission, as then, to spare no houses but
where they saw the blood on the lintel, sprinkled on the door-post, so now, to
let no families escape, but those that called upon him in morning and evening
prayer: few would remain unhurt by his avenging sword. Shall I term such
families Christians or heathens: doubtless they deserve not the name of
Christians; and heathens will surely rise up in judgment against such profane
families of this generation: for they had always their household gods, whom
they worshipped, and whose assistance they frequently invoked. And a pretty
pass those families surely are arrived at, who must be sent to school to
Pagans. But will not the Lord be avenged on such profane households as these?
Will he not pour out his fury upon those that call not upon his name?

3. But it is time for me to hasten to the third and last means I shall
recommend, whereby every governor ought with his household to serve the Lord,
catechizing and instructing their children and servants, and bringing them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

That this, as well as the two former, is a duty incumbent on every governor of
an house, appears from that famous encomium or commendation God gives of
Abraham: I know that he will command his children and his household after him,
to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. And indeed scarce any
thing is more frequently pressed upon us in holy writ, than this duty of
catechizing. Thus, says God in a passage before cited, Thou shall teach these
words diligently to thy children. And parents are commanded in the New
Testament, to breed up their children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. The holy Psalmist acquaints us, that one geat end why God did such great
wonders for his people, was, to the intent that when they grew up, they should
show their children, or servants, the same. And in Deuteronomy vi. at the 20th
and following verses, God strictly commands his people to instruct their
children in the true nature of the ceremonial worship, when they should inquire
about it, as he supposed they would do, in time to come. And if servants and
children were to be instructed in the nature of Jewish rites, much more ought
they now to be initiated and grounded in the doctrines and first principles of
the gospel of Christ: not only, because it is a revelation, which has brought
life and immortality to a fuller and clearer light, but also, because many
seducers are gone abroad into the world, who do their utmost endeavor to
destroy not only the superstructure, but likewise to sap the very foundation of
our most holy religion.

Would then the present generation have their posterity be true lovers and
honourers of God; masters and parents must take Solomon's good advice, and
train up and catechize their respective households in the way wherein they
should go.

I am aware but of one objection, that can, with any show of reason, be urged
against what has been advanced; which is, that such a procedure as this will
take up too much time, and hinder families too long from their worldly
business. But it is much to be questioned, whether persons that s^art such an
objection, are not of the same hypocritical spirit as the traitor Judas, who
had indignation against devout Mary, for being so profuse of her ointment, in
anointing our blessed Lord, and asked why it might not be sold for two hundred
pence, and given to the poor. For has God given us so much time to work for
ourselves, and shall we not allow some small pittance of it, morning and
evening, to be devoted to his more immediate worship and service? Have not
people read, that it is God who gives men power to get wealth, and therefore
that the best way to prosper in the world, is to secure his favor? And has not
our blessed Lord himself promised, that if we seek first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, all outward necessaries shall be added unto us?

Abraham, no doubt, was a man of as great business as such objectors may be;
but yet he would find time to command his household to serve the Lord. Nay,
David was a king, and consequently had a great deal of business upon his hands:
yet notwithstanding, he professes that he would walk in his house with a
perfect heart. And, to instance but one more, holy Joshua was a person
certainly engaged very much in temporal affairs; and yet he solemnly declares
before all Israel, that as for him and his household, they would serve the
Lord. And did persons but redeem their time as Abraham, David, or Joshua did,
they would no longer complain, that family duties kept them too long from the
business of the world.

III. But my third and last general head, under which I was to offer some
motives in order to excite all governors, with their respective households, to
serve the Lord in the manner before recommended, I hope, will serve instead of
a thousand arguments, to prove the weakness and folly of any such objection.

1. And the first motive I shall mention is the duty of gratitude, which you
that are governors of families owe to God. -- Your lot, every one must confess,
is cast in a fair ground: providence has given you a goodly heritage, above
many of your fellow creatures; and therefore, out of a principle of gratitude,
you ought to endeavor, as much as in you lies, to make every person of your
respective households to call upon him as long as they live: not to mention,
that the authority, with which God has invested you as parents and governors of
families, is a talent committed to your trust, and which you are bound to
improve to your Master's honor. In other things we find governors and parents
can exercise lordship over their children and servants readily, and frequently
enough can say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes;
to a third, Do this, and he does it. And shall this power be so often employed
in your own affairs, and never exerted in the things of God? Be astonished, O
heavens, at this!

Thus did not faithful Abraham; no, God says, that he knew Abraham would
command his servants and children after him. Thus did not Joshua; no, he was
resolved not only to walk with God himself, but to improve his authority in
making all about him do so too: As for me and my household, we will serve the
Lord. Let us go and do likewise.

2. But Secondly, If gratitude to God will not, methinks love and pity to your
children should move you, with your respective families to serve the Lord.

Most people express a great fondness for their children: nay so great, that
very often their own lives are wrapped up in those of their offspring. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? says God by his prophet Isaiah. He speaks of it as a monstrous
thing, and scarce credible; but the words immediately following, affirm it to
be possible, yea, they may forget: and experience also assures us they may.
Father and mother may both forsake their children: for what greater degree of
forgetfulness can they express toward them, than to neglect the improvement of
their better part, and not bring them up in the knowledge and fear of God?

It is true indeed, parents seldom forget to provide for their children's
bodies, (though, it is to be feared, some men are so far sunk beneath the
beasts that perish, as to neglect even that) but then how often do they forget,
or rather, when do they remember, to secure the salvation of their immortal
souls? But is this their way of expressing their fondness for the fruit of
their bodies? Is this the best testimony they can give of their affection to
the darling of their hearts? Then was Dalilah fond of Samson, when she
delivered him up into the hands of the Philistines: then were those ruffians
well affected to Daniel, when they threw him into a den of lions.

3. But Thirdly, If neither gratitude to God, nor love and pity to your
children, will prevail on you; yet let a principle of common honesty and
justice move you to set up the holy resolution in the text.

This is a pri^ciple which all men would be thought to act upon. But certainly,
if any may be truly censured for their injustice, none can be more liable to
such censure, than those who think themselves injured, if their servants
withdraw themselves from their bodily work, and yet they in return take no care
of their inestimable souls. For is it just that servants should spend their
time and strength in their master's service, and masters not at the same time
give them what is just and equal for their service!"

It is true; some men may think they have done enough when they give unto their
servants food and raiment, and say, did not I bargain with thee for so much
a year? But if they give them no other reward than this, what do they less for
their very beasts? But are not servants better than they? Doubtless they are:
and however masters may put off their conviction for the present, they will
find a time will come, when they shall know they ought to have given them some
spiritual as well as temporal wages; and the cry of those that have mowed down
their fields, will enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

4. But Fourthly. If neither gratitude to God, pity to children, nor a
principle of common justice to servants, are sufficient to balance all
objections; yet let that darling that prevaling motive of self-interest turn
the scale, and engage you with your respective households to serve the Lord.

This weighs greatly with you in other matters: be then persuaded to let it
have a due and full influence on you in this: and if it has, if you have but
faith as a grain of musterd-seed; how can you avoid believing, that promoting
family-religion would be the best means to promote your own temporal, as well
as eternal welfare? For godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as
well as that which is to come.

Besides, you all, doubtless, wi^h for honest servants, and pious children: and
to have them prove otherwise, would be as great a grief to you, as it was to
Elisha to have a treacherous Gehazi, or David to be troubled with a rebellious
Absalom. But how can it be expected they should learn their duty, except those
set over them, take care to teach it to them? Is it not as reasonable to expect
you should reap where you had not sown, or gather where you had not strawed?

Did Christanity, indeed, give any countanance to children and servants to
disregard their parents and masters according to the flesh, or represent their
duty to them, as inconsistent with their entire obedience to their Father and
Master who is in heaven, there might then be some pretense to neglect
instructing them in the principles of such a religion. But since the precepts
of this pure and undefiled religion, are all of them holy, just, and good; and
the more they are taught their duty to God, the better they will perform their
duties to you; methinks to neglect the improvement of their souls, out of a
dread of spending too much time in religious duties, is acting quite contrary
to your own interest as well as duty.

5. Fifthly and lastly, If neither gratitude to God, love to your children,
common justice to your servants, nor even that most prevailing motive,
self-interest, will excite; yet let a consideration of the terrors of the Lord
persuade you to put in practice the pious resolution in the text. Remember, the
time will come, and that perhaps very shortly, when we must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ; where we must give a solemn and strict account how
we have had our conversation, in our respective families, in this world. How
will you endure to see your children and servants (who ought to be your joy and
crown of rejoicing in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ) coming out as so many
swift witnesses against you; cursing the father that begot them, the womb that
bare them, the paps which they have sucked, and the day they ever entered into
your houses? Think you not, the damnation which men must endure for their own
sins will be sufficient, that they need load themselves with the additional
guilt of being accessory to the damnation of others also? O consider this, all
ye that forget to serve the Lord with your respective households, lest he pluck
you away, and there be none to deliver you!

But God forbid, brethren, that any such evil should befall you: No, rather will
I hope, that you have been in some measure convinced, by what has been said, of
the great importance of Family-religion; and therefore are ready to cry out, in
the words immediately following the text, God forbid that we should forsake the
Lord; and again verse 21. "Nay, but we will" (with our several households)
"serve the Lord."

And that there may be always such a heart in you, let me exhort all governors
of families, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, often to reflect on the
inestimable worth of their own souls, and the infinite ransom, even the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, which has been paid down for them. Remember,
that you are fallen creatures; that you are by nature lost and estranged from
God; and that you can never be restored to your primitive happiness, till by
being born again of the Holy Ghost, you arrive at your primitive state of
purity, have the image of God restamped upon your souls, and are thereby made
meet to be partakers of the saints in light. Do, I say, but seriously and
frequently reflect on, and act as persons that believe such important truths,
and you will no more neglect your family's spiritual warfare than your own. No,
the love of God, which will be then shed abroad in your hearts, will constrain
you to do your utmost to preserve them: And the deep sense of God's free grace
in Christ Jesus, (which you will then have) in calling you, will excite you to
do your utmost to save others, especially those of your own household. And
though, after all your pious endeavors, some may continue unreformed; yet you
will have this comfortable reflection to make, that you did what you could to
make your families religious: And therefore may rest assured of sitting down in
the kingdom of heaven, with Abraham, Joshua, and Cornelius, and all the godly
householders, who in their several generations shone forth as so many lights in
their respective households upon earth. Amen.

SERMON XIV.
THE METHOD OF GRACE.
JEREMIAH vi. 14. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
AS God can send a nation or people no greater blessing, than to give them
faithful, sincere, and upright ministers; so the greatest curse that God can
possibly send upon a people in this world, is to give them over to blind,
unregenerate, carnal, lukewarm, and unskilful guides. And yet, in all ages, we
find that there have been many wolves in sheep's clothing, many that daubed
with untempered mortar, that prophesied smoother things than God did allow. As
it was formerly, so it is now, there are many that corrupt the word of God, and
deal deceitfully with it. It was so in a special manner in the prophet
Jeremiah's time; and he, faithful to his Lord, faithful to that God that
employed him, did not fail, from time to time, to open his mouth against them,
and to bear a noble testimony to the honor of that God, in whose name he from
time to time spoke. If ye will read his prophecy, ye will find, that none spoke
more against such ministers than Jeremiah: and here especially, in the chapter
out of which the text is taken, he speaks very severely against them; he
charges them with several crimes, particularly, he charges them with
covetousness: For, says he in the 13th verse, from the least of them even to
the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness: and from the prophet
even unto the priest, every one deals falsely. And then in the words of the
text, in a more special manaer, he exemplifies how they had dealt falsely, how
they had behaved treacherously to poor souls, says he, They have healed also
the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace. The prophet, in the name of God, had been denouncing war
against the people, he had been telling them, that their house should be left
desolate, and the Lord would certainly visit the land with war, "Therefore,"
says he, in the 11th verse, I am full of the fury of the Lord: I am weary with
holding in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly
of young men together: For even the husband with the wise shall be taken, the
aged with him that is full of days. And their houses shall be turned unto
others, with their fields and wives together: for I will stretch out my hand
upon the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord. The prophet gives a
thundering message, that they might be terrified, and have some convictions and
inclinations to repent: but it seems that the false prophets, the false
priests, went about stifling people's convictions, and when they were hurt or a
little terrified, they were for daubing over the wound, telling them, that
Jeremiah was but an enthusiastic preacher; that there could be no such thing as
a war among them; and bidding people peace, peace, be still, when the prophet
told them there was no peace. The words then refer primarily unto outward
things; but I verily believe have also a further reference to the soul; and are
to be referred to those false teachers, when people were under conviction of
sin, when people were beginning to look toward heaven, they were for stifling
their convictions, and telling them they were good enough before. And indeed
people generally love to have it so: our hearts are exceedingly deceitful and
desperately wicked; none but the eternal God knows how treacherous they are.
How many of us cry, peace, peace to our souls, when there is no peace. How many
are there that are now settled upon their lees, that now think they are
Christians, that now flatter themselves that they have an interest in Jesus
Christ; whereas, if we come to examine their experiences, we will find that
their peace is but a peace of the devil's making; it is not a peace of God's
giving; it is not a peace that passes human understanding. It is matter
therefore of great importance, my dear hearers, to know whether we may speak
peace to our hearts: We are all desirous of peace, peace is an unspeakable
blessing: How can we live without peace? And therefore people, from time to
time, must be taught how far they must go, and what must be wrought in them
before they can speak peace to their hearts. This is what I design at present,
that I may deliver my soul, that I may be free from the blood of all those to
whom I preach, that I may not fail to declare the whole counsel of God. I
shall, from the words of the text, endeavor to show you what ye must undergo,
and what must be wrought in you, before ye can speak peace to your hearts.

But before I come directly to this, give me leave to premise a caution or two.
And the first is, that I take it for granted ye believe religion to be an
inward thing; ye believe it to be a work in the heart, a work wrought in the
soul by the power of the spirit of God. If you do not believe this, ye do not
believe your bible: If ye do not believe this, though ye have got your bible in
your hands, ye hate the Lord Jesus Christ in your heart: for religion is every
where represented in scripture, as the work of God in the heart; the kingdom of
God is within us, says our Lord; and, he is not a Christian that is one
outwardly, but he is a Christian who is one inwardly. If any of you place
religion in outward things, I shall not perhaps please you this morning; ye
will understand me no more when I speak of the work of God upon a poor sinner's
heart, than if I were talking in an unknown tongue. I would further premise a
caution, that I would by no means confine God to one way of acting; I would by
no means say, that all persons before they come to have a settled peace in
their hearts, are obliged to undergo the same degrees of conviction. No; God
has various ways of bringing his children home; his sacred spirit blows when,
and where and how, it lists. But however, I will venture to affirm this, that
before ever ye can speak peace to your hearts, whether by shorter or longer
continuance of your convictions, whether in a more pungent or in a more gentle
way, ye must undergo what I shall hereafter lay down in the following discourse.

First, Then, before ye can speak peace to your hearts, ye must be made to see,
made to feel, made to weep over, made to bewail your actual transgressions
against the law of God. According to the covenant of works, the soul that
sins it shall die; cursed is that man, be what he will, be who he will, that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do
them. We are not only to do some things, but we are to do all things, and we
are to continue so to do; so that the least deviation from the moral law,
according to the covenant of works, whether in thought, word, or deed, deserves
eternal death at the hand of God. And if one evil thought, if one evil word, if
one evil action, deserves eternal damnation; how many hells, my friends, do
every one of us deserve, whose whole lives have been one continual rebellion
against God. Before ever therefore ye can speak peace to your hearts, ye must
be brought to see, brought to believe, what a dreadful thing it is to depart
from the living God. And now, my dear friends, examine your hearts, for I hope
you come hither with a design to have your souls made better; give me leave to
ask you, in the presence of God, whether you know the time, and if ye do not
know exactly the time, do you know there was a time when God wrote bitter
things against you, when the arrows of the Almighty were within you? Was ever
the remembrance of your sins grievous to you? Was the burden of your sins
intolerable to your thoughts? Did you ever see that God's wrath might justly
fall upon you, upon account of your actual transgressions against God? Were ye
ever in all your life sorry for your sins? Could ye ever say, my sins are gone
over my head as a burden too heavy for me to bear? Did ye ever experience any
such thing as this? Did ever any such thing as this pass between God and your
soul; if not, for Jesus Christ's sake do not call yourselves Christians; ye may
speak peace to your hearts, but there is no peace. May the Lord awaken you, may
the Lord convert you, may the Lord give you peace, if it be his will, before ye
go home.

But further, ye may be convinced of your actual sins, so as to be made to
tremble, and yet ye may be strangers to Jesus Christ, ye may have no true work
of grace upon your hearts. Before ever, therefore, ye can speak peace to your
hearts, conviction must go deeper; ye must not only be convinced of your actual
transgressions against the law of God, but likewise of the foundation of all
your transgressions; and what is that? I mean original sin; that original
corruption each of us brings into the world with us, which renders us liable to
God's wrath and damnation. There are many poor souls that think themselves fine
reasoners, yet they pretend to say there is no such thing as original sin? They
will charge God with injustice in imputing Adam's sin to us; although we have
got the mark of the beast, and of the devil upon us, yet they tell us, we are
not born in sin. Let them look abroad into the world, and see the disorders in
it, and think if they can, if this is the paradise in which God did put man?
No, every thing in the world is out of order. I have often thought, when I was
abroad, that if there were no other argument to prove original sin, but the
rising of wolves and tigers against man, nay, the barking of a dog against us,
is a proof of original sin. Tigers and lions durst not rise against us, if it
were not for Adam's first sin: for when the creatures rise up against us, it is
as much as to say, ye have sinned against God, and we take up our Master's
quarrel. If we look inward, we will see enough of lusts, and man's temper
contrary to the temper of God; there is pride, malice, and revenge in all our
hearts, and this temper cannot come from God; it comes from our first parent,
Adam, who, after he fell from God, fell out of God into the devil. However,
therefore, some people may deny this, yet when conviction comes, all carnal
reasonings are battered down immediately, and the poor soul begins to feel and
see the fountain from which all the polluted streams do flow. When the sinner
is first awakened, he begins to wonder how he came to be so wicked: the Spirit
of God then strikes in, and shows that he has no good thing in him by nature;
then he sees that he is altogether gone out of the way, that he is altogether
become abominable; and the poor creature is made to lie down at the foot of the
throne of God, and to acknowledge that God would be just to damn him, just to
cut him off, though he never had committed one actual sin in his life. Did ye
ever feel and experience this any of you, to justify God in your damnation; to
own that ye are by nature children of wrath, and that God may justly cut you
off, though ye never actually had offended him in all your life. If ye were
ever truly convicted, if your hearts were ever truly cut, if self were truly
taken out of you, ye will be made to see and feel this. And if ye have never
felt the weight of original sin, do not call yourselves Christians. I am verily
persuaded original sin is the greatest burden of a true convert; this even
grieves the regenerate soul, the sanctified soul. The indwelling of sin in the
heart is the burden of a converted person; it is the burden of a true
Christian; he continually cries out, O Who will deliver me from this body of
death, this indwelling corruption in my heart; this is that which disturbs a
poor soul most. And, therefore, if ye never felt this inward corruption, if ye
never saw that God might justly curse you for it; indeed, my dear friends, ye
may speak peace to your heart, but I fear, nay, I know, there is no true peace.

Further, before we can speak peace to your hearts, ye must not only be
troubled for the sins of your life, the sin of your nature, but likewise for
the sins of your best duties and performances. When a poor soul is somewhat
awakened by the terrors of the Lord, then the poor creature, being born under
the covenant of works flies directly to a covenant of works again. And as Adam
and Eve hid themselves among the trees of the garden, and sewed fig leaves
together to cover their nakedness; so the poor sinner when awakened, flies to
his duties, and to his performances, to hide himself from God; and goes to
patch up a righteousness of his own; says he, I will be mighty good now; I will
reform, I will do all I can, and then certainly Jesus Christ will have mercy on
me. But before ye can speak peace to your heart, ye must be brought to see that
God may damn you for the best prayer ye ever put up in all your life: ye must
be brought to see all your duties, all your righteousness, as the prophet
elegantly expresses it, put them altogether, are so far from recommending you
to God, are so far from being any motive and inducement to God to have mercy on
your poor souls, that ye will see them to be filthy rags, a menstruous cloth;
that God hates them, and cannot away with them, if ye bring them to him in
order to recommend you to his favor. My dear friends, what is there in our
performances to recommend us unto God; our persons are in an unsanctified state
by nature, we deserve to be damned ten thousand times over; and what must our
performances ^e? We can do no good thing by nature; they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. Ye may do things materially good, but ye cannot do a thing
formally and rightly good; because nature cannot act above itself. It is
impossible that a man that is unconverted can act for the glory of God; he
cannot do any thing in faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. After we
are renewed, yet we are renewed but in part; indwelling sin continues in us;
there is a mixture of corruption in every one of our duties: so that after we
are converted, were Jesus Christ only to accept us according to our works, our
works would damn us; for we cannot put up a prayer but it is far from that
perfection which the moral law requires. I do not know what ye may think; but
I can say that I cannot pray but I sin; I cannot preach to you or any others
but I sin; I can do nothing without sin: and, as one expresses it, my
repentance wants to be repented of, and my tears to be washed in the precious
blood of my dear Redeemer; our best duties are as so many splendid sins. Before
ye can speak peace to your hearts, ye must not only be sick of your original
and actual sins; but ye must be made sick of your righteousness, of all your
duties and performances, There must be a deep conviction before ye can be
brought out of your self-righteousness; it is the last idol that is taken out
of our heart, the pride of our heart will not let us submit to the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. But if ye never felt that ye had no
righteousness of your own; if ye never felt the deficiency of your own
righteousness, ye can never come to Jesus Christ. There are a great many now
that may say, Well, we believe all this: but there is a great difference
betwixt talking and feeling. Did ye ever feel the want of a dear Redeemer? Did
ye ever feel the want of Jesus Christ upon the account of the deficiency of
your own righteousness? And can ye now say from your heart, Lord, thou may
justly damn me for the best duties that ever I did perform: If ye are not thus
brought out of self, ye may speak peace to yourselves, but yet there is no
peace.

But then before ye can speak peace to your souls there is one particular sin
ye must be greatly troubled for; and yet I fear there are few of you think what
it is: it is the reigning, the damning sin of the Christian world; and yet the
Christian world seldom or never think of it; and pray what is that? It is what
most of you think ye are not guilty of, and that is the sin of unbelief; before
we can speak peace to your heart, ye must be troubled for the unbelief of your
heart; but can it be supposed that any of you are unbelievers here in this
churchyard, that are born in Scotland, in a reformed country, that go to
church every Sabbath (...) Can any of you that receive the sacrament once a
year? (O that it were administered oftener.) Can it be supposed that you that
had tokens for the sacrament; that you that keep up family prayer, that any of
you do not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ? I appeal to your own hearts, if ye
would not think me uncharitable, if I doubted whether any of you believed in
Christ; and yet I fear, upon examination, we should find that most of you have
not so much faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as the devil himself. I am persuaded
the devil believes more of the bible than most of us do; he believes the
divinity of Jesus Christ, that is more than many that call themselves
Christians do; nay, he believes and trembles, and that is more than thousands
amongst us do. My friends, we mistake an historical faith for a true faith
wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God. Ye fancy ye believe, because ye
believe there is such a book we call the bible, because ye go to church; all
this ye may do, and have no true faith in Christ. Merely to believe there was
once such a person as Christ, merely to believe there is such a book called the
bible, will do you no good, more than to believe there was such a man as Caesar
or Alexander the Great. The bible is a sacred depository; what thanks have we
to give to God for these lively oracles! But yet we may have these, and not
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. My dear friends, there must be a principle
wrought in the heart by the Spirit of the living God. Did I ask you how long it
is since ye believed in Jesus Christ, I suppose most of you would tell me, ye
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ as long as ever ye remember; ye never did
disbelieve: then ye could not give me a better proof that ye never yet believed
in Jesus Christ, unless ye were sanctified early from the womb; for they that
believe in Christ, know there was a time when they did not believe in Jesus
Christ. You say you love God with all your heart, soul, and strength; if I were
to ask you, how long it is since ye loved God, ye would say, as long as ye can
remember ye never hated God; ye know no time when there was enmity in your
heart against God: then unless ye were sanctified very early, ye never loved
God in your life. My dear friends, I am more particular in this, because it is
a most deceitful delusion, whereby so many people are carried away, that they
believe already. Therefore it is remarkable of Mr. Marshall giving account of
his experiences, he had been working for life, he had ranged all his sins under
the ten commandments, and then coming to a minister, asked him the reason why
he could not get peace: the minister looked to the catalogue, Away, says he, I
do not find one word of the sin of unbelief in all your catalogue. It is the
peculiar work of the Spirit of God to convince us of our unbelief, that we have
got no faith. Says Jesus Christ, I will send the Comforter; and when he is
come, he will reprove the world of the sin of unbelief: Of sin, says Christ,
because they believe not on me. Now, my dear friends, did God does show you
that ye had no faith? Was you ever made to be wail a hard heart of ^unbelief?
Was it ever the^ language of your heart, Lord, give me (...)? Lord, enable me
to lay hold on thee? Lord, enable me to call thee my Lord and my God? Did Jesus
Christ ever convince you in this manner? Did he ever convince you of your
inability to chose with Christ, and make you cry out to God to give you faith?
If not, do not speak peace to your heart: may the Lord awaken you and give you
true solid peace before ye go hence and be no more!

Once more then, before ye can speak^ peace to your heart, ye must not only be
(...) of your actual and original sin, the sin of (...) own righteousness, the
sin of unbelief but ye must be enabled to lay hold upon the perfect
righteousness the all-sufficient righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ; you
must lay hold by faith on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and then ye shall
have peace (...) Come says? Jesus, unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I (...) give you rest. This speaks encourage^^ (...) all that are
weary and heavy laden; but the promise (...) only upon their coming, and (...),
and taking him to be their God, and their (...) Before ever woman have peace
with God, we must be justified by faith; thro^^^ our Lord Jesus Christ's, we
must be enabled to apply Christ to our heart; we must have Christ brought home
to our soul, so as his righteousness, may be made our righteousness, so as his
merits may be imputed to our souls. My dear friends, were ye ever married to
Jesus Christ? Did Jesus Christ ever give himself to you? Did ye ever close with
Christ by a lively faith, so as to feel Christ in your heart, so as to hear him
speaking peace to your souls? Did peace ever flow in upon your heart like a
river? Did ye ever feel that peace that Christ spoke to his disciples? I pray
God he may come, and speak peace to you. These things ye must experience. I am
now talking of the invisible realities of another world, of inward religion, of
the work of God upon a poor sinner's heart: I am now talking of a matter of
great importance; my dear bearers, ye are all concerned in it; your souls are
concerned in it; your eternal salvation is concerned in it. You may all be at
peace, but perhaps the devil has lulled you asleep into a carnal lethargy and
security, and will endeavor to keep you there, till he get you to hell, and
there ye will be awakened; but it will be dreadful to be awakened, and find
yourselves so fearfully mistaken, when the great gulf is fixed when ye will be
calling to all eternity for a drop of water to cool your tongue, and shall not
obtain it.

Give me leave then to address myself to several ^orts of persons; and O may
God, of his infinite mercy, bless the application. There are some of you
perhaps can say, through grace we can go along with you; blessed be God we have
been convinced of our actual sins; we have been convinced of original sin; we
have been convinced of self-righteousness; we have felt the bitterness of
unbelief, and, through grace, we have closed with Jesus Christ; we can speak
peace to our hearts, because God has spoken peace to us. Can ye say so? Then I
will salute you as the angels did the women the first day of the week, All
hail, fear not ye, my dear brethren; ye are happy souls; ye may lie down and be
at peace indeed, for God has given you peace; ye may be content under all the
dispensations of providence; for nothing can happen to you now, but what shall
be the effect of God's love to your soul; ye need not fear what fightings may
be without, seeing there is peace within. Have ye closed with Christ? Is God
your friend? Is Christ your friend? Then look up with comfort; all is yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's; every thing shall work together for
your good; the very hairs of your head are numbered; he that touches you,
touches the apple of God's eye. But then, my dear friends, take care of
resting on your first conversion: ye that are young believers in Christ, ye
should be looking out for fresh discoveries of the Lord Jesus Christ every
moment: ye must not build upon your past experiences; ye must not build upon a
work within you, but always come out of yourselves to the righteousness of
Jesus Christ without you: ye must be always coming as poor sinners to draw
water out of the wells of salvation; ye must be forgetting the things that are
behind, and be continually pressing forward to the things that are before. My
dear friends, ye must keep up a tender close walk with the Lord Jesus Christ.
Many of us lose our peace by our untender walk. Something or other gets in
betwixt Christ and us, and we fall into darkness; something or other steals our
heart from God, and this grieves the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost leaves us
to ourselves. Let me, therefore, exhort you that have got peace with God, to
take care that ye do not lose this peace. It is true, if ye are once in Christ,
ye cannot finally fall from God; there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus; but if ye cannot fall finally, ye may full (...), and may go with
broken bones all your days. Take care of backsliding for Jesus Christ's sake:
Do not grieve the Holy Ghost; ye may never recover your comfort while ye live.
O take care of going a gadding and wandering from God; after ye have closed
with Jesus Christ. My dear friends, I have paid dear for backsliding. Our
hearts are so cursedly wicked, that ^word ye take not care, if ye do not keep
up a constant watch, your wicked hearts will deceive you, and draw you aside.
It will be sad to be under the scourge of a correcting father; witness the
visitation of Job, David, and other saints in scripture. Let me, therefore,
exhort you that have got peace to keep a close walk with Christ. I am grieved
with the loose walk of those that are Christians, that have had discoveries of
Jesus Christ: there is so little differ not betwixt them and other people, that
I can scarce know which is the true Christian. Christians are afraid to speak
for God; they run down with the stream; if they come into worldly company, they
will talk of the world, as if they were in their element: This ye would not do
when ye had the first discoveries of Christ's love; ye could (...) then of
Christ's love for ever, when the candle of the Lord shined upon your soul. The
time has been when ye had something to say for your dear Lord; but now ye can
go into company, and hear others speaking about the world bold enough, and ye
are afraid of being laughed at, if ye speak for Jesus Christ. A great many
people have grown conformists now in the worst sense of the word; they will cry
out against the ceremonies of the church, as they may justly do; But then yet
are mighty fond of ceremonies in your behavior; ye will conform to the world,
which is a great deal worse; many will stay till the devil bring up new
fashions. Take care then not to be conformed to the world: What have Christians
to do with the world? Christians should be singularly good, bold for their
Lord, that all that are with you may take notice that ye have been with Jesus.
I would exhort you to come to a settlement in Jesus Christ, so as to have a
continual abiding of God in your heart. We go a building on our faith of
adherence, and lose our comfort; but we should be growing up to a faith of
assurance, to know that we are God's, and so walk in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost and be edified. Jesus Christ is now much wounded in the house of his
friends. Excuse me in being particular; for, my friends, it grieves me more
that Jesus Christ should be wounded by his friends as by his enemies. We cannot
expect any thing else from Deists; but for such as have felt his power to fall
away, for them not to walk agreeably to the vocation wherewith they are called,
by these means we bring our Lord's religion into contempt; to be a byword among
the Heathens. For Christ's sake, if ye know Christ keep close by him; if God
has spoken peace, O keep that peace, by looking up to Jesus Christ every
moment. Such as have got peace with God if ye are under trials, fear not, all
things shall work for your good; if ye are under temptations, fear not; if he
has spoken peace to your heart, all these things shall be for your good.

But what shall I say to you that have got no peace with God; and these are
perhaps the most of this congregation; it makes me weep to hear of it. Most of
you, if you examine your heart, must confess that God never yet spoke peace to
you; ye are children of the devil if Christ is not in you; if God has not
spoken peace to your heart, poor soul, what a cursed condition are you in! I
would not be in your case for ten thousand thousand worlds! Why? Ye are just
hanging over hell. What peace can ye have when God is your enemy, when the
wrath of God is abiding upon your poor soul? Awake then, ye that are sleeping
in a false peace; awake, ye careless professors; ye hypocrites that go to
church, receive the sacrament, read your bibles, and never felt the power of
God upon your heart: ye that are formal professors, ye that are baptized
heathens, awake, awake, and do not rest on a false bottom. Blame me not for
addressing myself to you; indeed it is out of love to your soul. I see ye are
lingering in your Sodom, and wanting to stay there: but I come to you as the
angel did to Lot, to take you by the hand. Come away, my dear brethren, fly,
fly, fly for your lives to Jesus Christ: fly to a bleeding God, fly to a throne
of grace; and beg of God to break your heart; beg of God to convince you of
your actual ^ine; beg of God to convince you of your original sin; beg of God
to convince you of your self-righteousness: beg of God to give you faith, and
to enable you to close with Jesus Christ. O ye that are secure, I must be a son
of thunder to you; and O that God may awaken you, though it be with thunder. It
is out of love indeed that I speak to you. I know, by sad experience, what it
is to be lulled asleep with a false peace. Long was I lulled asleep; long did I
think myself a Christian, when I knew nothing of the Lord Jesus Christ. I went
perhaps further than many of you do; I used to fast twice a week; I used to
pray sometimes nine times a day; I used to receive the sacrament constantly
every Lord's day; and yet I knew nothing of Jesus Christ in my heart. I knew
not I must be a new creature: I knew nothing of inward religion in my soul. And
perhaps many of you may be deceived, as I a poor creature was; and therefore it
is out of love to you indeed that I speak to you. O, if ye do not take care, a
form of religion will destroy your soul: ye will rest in it, and will not come
to Jesus Christ at all: whereas these things are only the means, and not the
end of religion; Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to all that
believe. O then awake, ye that are settled on your le^s; awake, ye church
professors; awake, ye that have got a name to live, that are rich and think ye
want nothing, not considering that ye are poor and blind, and naked; I counsel
you to come and buy of Jesus Christ gold, white raiment and eye salve. But I
hope there are some that are a little wounded. I hope God does not intend to
let me preach in vain. I hope God will reach some of your precious souls, and
awaked some of you out of your carnal security. I hope there are some that are
willing to come to Christ, and beginning to think that they have been building
upon a false foundation. Perhaps the devil may strike in, and may bid you
despair of mercy; but fear not: what I have been speaking to you, is only out
of love to you, is only to awaken you, and let you see your danger. If any of
you are willing to be reconciled to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is
willing to be reconciled to you. O then, though ye have no peace as yet, come
away to Jesus Christ; he is our peace; he is our peacemaker; he has made peace
between God and offending man. Would you have peace with God? Away then to God,
through Jesus Christ, who has purchased peace. The Lord Jesus has shed his
heart's blood for this; he died for this; he rose again for this; he ascended
into the highest heavens, and is now interceding at the right hand of God.
Perhaps ye think there will be no peace for you: Why so? Because ye are
sinners; because ye have crucified Christ, ye have put him to open shame, ye
have trampled under foot the blood of the Son of God. What of all this? yet
there is peace for you. Pray, what did Jesus Christ say to his disciples, when
he came to them the first day of the week? The first word he said was Peace be
unto you. He showed them his hands and his feet, and said, Peace be unto you:
It is as much as if he had said, fear not, my disciples; (...) my hands and my
feet, how they have been pierced for your sake; therefore fear not. How did
Christ speak to his disciples? Go tell my brethren, and tell broken hearted
Peter in particular, that Christ is risen: that he has ascended unto his father
and your father, to his God and your God. And after Christ rose from the dead,
he came preaching peace with an olive branch of peace in his mouth as Noah's
dove, My peace I leave with you. Who were obey? They were the enemies of Christ
as well as we they were deniers of Christ once as well as we. Perhaps some of
you have backslidden and lost your peace, and ye think ye deserve no peace; and
no more ye do: but then God will heal your backslidings, he will love you
freely. As for you that are wounded, if you are made willing to come to Christ,
come away. Perhaps some of you want to dress yourselves in your duties, that
are but rotten rags. No, ye had better come naked, as ye are; for ye must throw
aside your rags, and come in your blood. Some of you may say, we would come,
but we have got a hard heart: but ye will never get it soft till you come to
Christ; he will take away the heart of stone, and give you a heart of flesh he
will speak peace to your soul: though ye have betrayed him, yet he will be your
peace. Shall I (...) upon any of you this morning to come to Jesus Christ.
^^ere is a great multitude of souls here; how shortly m^st ye all die, and go
to judgment; even before night, or tomorrow's night, some of you may be buried
in this churchyard. And how will ye do if ye be not at peace with God! if the
Lord Jesus Christ has not spoken peace to your heart. If God speak not peace to
you here, ye will be damned for ever. I must not flatter you; my dear friends,
I will deal sincerely with your souls. Some of you may think I carry things too
far: but indeed when ye come to judgment, ye will find this true, either to
your eternal damnation or comfort. May God influence your hearts to come to
him! I am not willing to go away without persuading you. I cannot be persuaded
but God may make use of me as a mean of persuading some of you to come to the
Lord Jesus Christ. O did you but feel the peace which they have that love the
Lord Jesus Christ;" Great peace have they, says the Psalmist, that love thy
law, nothing shall offend them. But there is no peace to the wicked. I know
what it is to live a life of sin. I was obliged to sin to stifle conviction.
And I am sure this is the way many of you take; if ye get into company, ye
drive off conviction. But ye had better go to the bottom at once; it must be
done, your, wound must be searched, or ye must be damned. If it were a matter
of indifferency, I would not speak one word about it: but ye will be damned
without Christ; he is the way, he is the truth, and the life. I cannot think
you should go to hell without Christ. How can ye dwell with everlasting
burnings? How can ye abide the thought of living with the devil for ever; Is it
not better to have some soul trouble here, than to be sent to hell by Jesus
Christ hereafter? What is hell but to be absent from Christ; If there were no
other hell, that would be hell enough. It will be hell to be tormented with the
devil for ^ver. Get acquaintance with God then, and be at peace. I beseech you
as a poor worthless ambassador of Jesus Christ, that ye would be reconciled to
him. My business this morning, the first day of the week, is to tell you that
Christ is willing to be reconciled to you. Will any of you be reconciled to
Jesus Christ? Then, he will forgive you all your sins; he will blot out all
your transgressions. But if ye will go on and rebel against Christ, and stab
him daily; if ye will go on and abuse Jesus Christ, the wrath of God, ye must
expect, will fall upon you. God will not be mocked; that which a man sows,
that shall (...) also reap. And if ye will not be at peace with God, God will
not be at peace with you. Who can stand before God when he is angry. It is a
dreadful thing to fall into the hands of an angry God. When the people came to
apprehend Christ, they fell to the ground when Jesus said, I am he: and if they
could not bear the fight of Christ when clothed with the rags of mortality, how
will they bear the fight of him when he is on his Father's throne? Methinks I
see the poor wretches dragged out of their graves by the devil, methinks I see
them trembling, crying out to the hills and rocks to cover them. But the devil
will say, Come, I will take you away; and then they will stand trembling before
the judgment seat of Christ. They shall appear before him to see him once, and
hear him pronounce that irrevocable sentence, "Depart from me, ye cursed."
Methinks I hear the poor creatures saying, Lord, if we must be damned, let some
angel pronounce the sentence. No, the God of love, Jesus Christ, will pronounce
it. Will ye not believe this? Do not think I am talking at random, but
agreeable to the scriptures of truth. If ye do then show yourselves men, and
this morning go away with full resolution, in the strength of God, to cleave to
Christ. And may ye have no rest in your soul till ye rest in Jesus Christ. I
could still go on, for it is sweet to talk of Christ. Do ye not long for the
time when ye shall have new bodies, when they shall be immortal, and made like
Christ's glorious body, and then they will talk of Jesus Christ for evermore.
But it is time perhaps for you to go and prepare for your respective worship,
and I would not hinder any of you. My design is to bring poor sinners to Jesus
Christ. O that God may bring some of you to himself. May the Lord Jesus now
dismiss you with his blessing; and may the dear Redeemer convince you that are
unawakened, and turn the wicked from the evil of their way. And may the love of
God that passes all understanding fill your heart. Grant this, O Father, for
Christ's sake, to whom with thee and the blessed Spirit, be all honor and
glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON XV.
THE WISE AND FOOLISH VIRGINS.
MATTHEW xxv. 13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour in
which the Son of man comes.
THE apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Hebrews, informs us, that it is
appointed for all men once to die; after that in the judgment. And I think, if
any consideration be sufficient to awaken a sleeping drowsy world, it must be
this, that there will be a day wherein these heavens shall be wrapped up like a
scroll, this element melt with fervent heat, the earth and all things therein
be burnt up, and every soul, of every nation and language, summoned to appear
before the dreadful tribunal of the righteous Judge of quick and dead, to
receive rewards and punishments, according to the deeds done in their bodies.
The great apostle just mentioned, when brought before Felix, could think of no
better means to convert that sinful man, than to reason of temperance,
righteousness, and more especially of a judgment to come. The first might in
some measure affect, but I am persuaded, it was the last consideration, a
judgment to come, that made him to tremble: and so bad as the world is now
grown, yet there are few have their consciences so far ^eared, as to deny that
there will be a reckoning he easter. The promiscuous dispensations of
providence in this life, wherein we see good men afflicted, destitute,
tormented, and the wicked permitted triumphantly to ride over their heads, has
been always looked upon as an indisputable argument, by the generality of men,
that there will be a day in which God will judge the world in righteousness,
and administer equity unto his people. Some indeed are so bold as to deny it,
while they are engaged in the pursuit of the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life; but follow them to their deathbeds, ask them, when their souls are ready
to launch into eternity, what they then think of judgment to come? and they
will tell you, they dare not give their consciences the lie any longer. They
feel a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation in their hearts.
Since then these things are so, does it not highly concern each of us, my
brethren, before we come on a bed of sickness, seriously to examine how the
account stands between God and our souls, and how it will fare with us in that
day? As for the openly profane, the drunkard, the whoremonger, the adulterer,
and such like, there is no doubt of what will become of them; without
repentence, they shall never enter into the kingdom of God and his Christ: No;
their damnation slumbereth not: a burning fiery Tophet, kindled by the fury of
God's eternal wrath, is prepared for their reception, wherein they must suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire. Nor is there the least doubt of the state of
true believers. For though they are despised and rejected of natural men, yet
being born again of God, they are heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ.
They have the earnest of the promised inheritance in their hearts, and are
assured, that a new and living way is made open for them, into the holy of
holies, by the blood of Jesus Christ, into which an abundant entrance shall be
administered to them at the great day of account. The only question is, what
will become of the almost Christian, one that is content to go, as he thinks,
in a middle way to heaven, without being profane on the one hand, or, as he
falsely imagines, righteous overmuch on the other? Many there are in every
congregation, and consequently some here present, of this stamp. And what is
worst of all, it is more easy to convince the most notorious publicans and
sinners of their being out of a state of salvation, than any of these.
Notwithstanding, if Jesus Christ may be your judge, they shall as certainly be
rejected and disowned by him at the last day, as though they lived in open
defiance to all his laws.

For, what says our Lord in the parable of which the words of the text are a
conclusion, and which I intend to make the subject of my present discourse:
"Then," at the day of judgment, which he had been discoursing of in the
foregoing, and prosecutes in this chapter, "shall the kingdom of heaven," the
state of professors in the gospel church, be likened unto ten virgins, who took
up their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. In which words, is a
manifest allusion to a custom prevailing in our Lord's time among the Jews, at
marriage-solemnities which were generally at night and at which it was
customary for the persons of the bride-chamber to go out in procession, with
many lights, to meet the bridegroom.

By the bridegroom, you are here to understand Jesus Christ. The church, that
is, true believers, are his spouse; he is united to them by one spirit, even in
this life; but the solemnizing of these sacred nuptials is reserved till the
day of judgment, when he shall come to take them home to himself, and present
them before men and angels, as his purchase to his Father, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing. By the ten virgins we are to understand the
professors of Christianity in general. Are all called virgins, because all are
called to be saints? Whosoever names the name of Christ is obliged by that very
profession to depart from all iniquity. But the pure and chaste in heart, are
the only persons that will be so blessed as to see God. As Christ was born of a
virgin, so he can dwell in none but virgin souls, made pure and holy by the
cohabitation of his Holy Spirit. What says the apostle? "All are not Israelites
that are of "Israel," all are not Christians that are called after the name of
Christ: No, says our Lord in the 2d verse, "Five of those virgins were wise,"
true believers, "and five were foolish," formal hypocrites. But why are five
said to be wise, and the other five foolish? Hear what our Lord says in the
following verses; They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with
them; but the wi^e took oil in their vessels with their lamps. They that were
foolish took their lamps of an outward profession." They would go to church,
say over many manuals of prayers, come perhaps even in a field to hear sermon,
give at a collection, and receive the sacrament constantly, nay, oftener than
once a month. But then here lay the mistake; they had no oil in their lamps, no
principle of grace, no living faith in their hearts, without which, though we
should give all our goods to feed the poor, and our bodies to be burned, it
would profit us nothing. In short, they were exact, nay, perhaps superstitious
bigots as to the form, but all the while they were strangers to, and, in
effect, denied the power of godliness in their hearts. They would go to church,
but at the same time, think it no harm to go to a hall or an assembly,
notwithstanding they promised at their baptism to renounce the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world. They were so exceedingly fearful of being
righteous overmuch, that they would even persecute those that were truly
devout, if they attemted to go a step farther than themselves. In one word,
they never effectually felt the power of the world to come. They thought they
might be Christians without so much inward feeling, and therefore,
notwithstanding their high pretensions, had only a name to live.

And now, sirs, let me pause a while, and, in the name of God, whom I endeavor
to serve in the gospel of his dear Son, give me leave to ask one question.
Whilst I have been drawing, though in miniature, the character of these foolish
virgins, have not many of your consciences made the application and with a
small, still, though articulate voice, said, thou man, thou woman, art one of
those foolish virgins, for thy sentiments and practice agree thereto? Stifle
not, but rather encourrage these convictions; and, who knows but that Lord who
is rich in mercy to all that call upon him faithfully, may so work on you even
now by this foolishness of preaching, as to make you wise virgins?

What they were you shall know immediately: But the wise took oil in their
vessels with their lamps. Observe, the wise, the true believers, had their
lamps as well as the foolish virgins; for Christianity does not require us to
cast of all outward, forms; we may use forms and yet not be formal: For
instance, it is possible to worship God in a set form of prayer, and yet
worship him in spirit and in truth. And therefore, brethren, let us not judge
one another: The wise virgins had their lamps; herein then did not lie the
difference between them and the foolish, that one worshipped God with a form,
and the other did not: No: as the Pharisee and Publican went up to the temple
to pray, so these wise and foolish virgins might go to the same place of
worship, and sit under the same ministry; but then the wise took oil in their
vessels with their lamps: they kept up the form, but did not rest in it: their
words in prayer were the language of their hearts, and they were no strangers
to inward feelings; they had savingly tasted the good word of life, and felt or
had an experimental knowledge of the power of the world to come; they were not
afraid of searching doctrines, nor affronted when ministers told them they by
nature deserved to be damned: they were not self-righteous, but were willing
that Jesus Christ should have all the glory of their salvation; they were
convinced that the merits of Jesus Christ were to be apprehended only by faith;
but yet were they as careful to maintain (...) works, as though they were to be
justified by them: In short, their obedience flowed from love and gratitude,
and was cheerful, constant, uniform, universal, like that obedience which the
holy angels pay our Father in heaven.

Here then let me exhort you to pause again; and if any of you can faithfully
apply these characters to your hearts, give God the glory, and take the comfort
to your own souls; you are not false but true believers. Jesus Christ has been
made of God to you wisdom, even that wisdom, whereby you shall be made wise
unto salvation. God sees a difference between you and foolish virgins, if
natural men will not. You need not be uneasy, though one chance and fate in
this life may happen to you both. I say, one chance and fate: for verse 5,
"while the bridegroom tarried." in the space of time which passes between our
Lord's ascension and his coming again to judgment, "they all slumbered and
slept." The wise as well as the foolish died, for dust we are, and to dust we
must return. It is no reflection at all upon the divine goodness that
believers, as well as hypocrites, must pass through the valley of the shadow of
death; for Christ has taken away the sting of death, so that we need fear no
evil. It is to them a passage to everlasting life: Death is only terrible to
those who have no hope, because they live without faith, and therefore without
God in the world. Whosoever there are amongst you, that have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, I am persuaded are ready to cry out, we would not live
here always; we long to be dissolved, that we may be with Jesus Christ; and
though worms must destroy our bodies as well as others, yet we are content,
being assured that our Redeemer lives, that he will stand at the latter days
upon the earth, and that in our flesh we shall see God.

But it is not so with hypocrites and unbelievers beyond the grave; for what
says our Lord? And at midnight, Observe at midnight, when all was hushed and
quiet, and no one dreaming of any such thing, "a cry was made;" the voice of
the archangel and the trump of God was heard sounding this general alarm; to
things in heaven, to things in earth, and to things in the waters under the
earth, Behold! mark how this awful summons is ushered in the word, Behold, to
engage our attention "Behold the bridegroom comes?" even Jesus Christ, the
desire of nations, the bridegroom of his spouse, the church: Because he tarried
for a while to exercise the faith of saints, and give sinners space to repent,
scoffers were apt to cry out, Where is the promise of his coming? But the Lord
is not slack concerning his promise, as these men account slackness. For
behold, he that was to come, now comes, and will not tarry any longer: He
comes to be glorified in his saints, and to take vengeance on them that know
not God, and have not obeyed his gospel: He comes not as a poor despised
Galilean; not to be (...) a stinking manger; not to be despised and rejected of
men; not to be blind-folded, spit upon, and buffetted; not to be nailed to an
accursed tree; he comes not as the Son of man, but as he really was, the
eternal Son of the eternal God: He comes riding on the wings of the wind, in
the glory of the Father and his holy angels, and to be had in everlasting
reverence of all that shall be round about him. Go ye forth to meet him; arise
ye dead, ye foolish, as well as wise virgins, arise, and come to judgment.
Multitudes, no doubt, that hear this awakening cry, would rejoice, if the rocks
might fall on, and the hills cover them from the presence of the Lamb: What
would they give, if, as the lived as beasts, they might now die like the beasts
that perish? How would they rejoice, if those same excuses, which they made on
this side eternity, for not attending on holy ordinances, would serve to keep
them from appearing before the heavenly bridegroom! But as Adam,
notwithstanding his fig leaves, and the trees of the garden, could not hide
himself from God, when arrested with an, Adam where art thou? So now the decree
is gone forth, and the trump of God has given its last sound; all tongues,
people, nations, and languages, both wise and foolish virgins, must come into
his presence, and bow beneath his (...) stool; even Pontius Pilate, Annas, and
Ca^aphas; even the proud persecuting high priests and Pharisees of this
generation, must appear before him: For says our Lord, Then (when the cry was
made, behold the bridegroom comes!) in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
the graves were opened, the sea gave up its dead and all those virgins, both
wise and foolish, arose and trimmed their lamps, or endeavored to put
themselves in a proper posture to meet the bridegroom.

But how may we imagine the foolish virgins were surprised, when,
notwithstanding their high thoughts and proud imaginations of their security,
they now find themselves wholly naked, and void of that inward holiness and
purity of heart, without which no man living at that day shall comfortably meet
the Lord. I doubt not but many of these foolish virgins, whilst in this world,
were clothed in purple and (...) linen, fared sumptuously every day, and
disdained to set the wise virgins, some of whom might he as poor as Lazarus,
even with the dogs of their flock. These were looked upon by them as
enthusiasts and madmen, as persons that were righteous overmuch, and who
intended to turn the world upside down: but now death has opened their eyes,
and convinced them to their eternal sorrow, that he is not a true Christian,
who is only one outwardly. Now they find (though alas! too late) they, and not
the wise virgins had been beside themselves. Now their proud hearts are made to
stoop, their lofty looks are brought low; and as Dives entreated that Lazarus
might dip the tip of his finger in water, and be sent to cool his tongue, so
these foolish virgins, these formal hypocrites, are obliged to turn beggars to
these whom they once despised: "Give us of your oil;" O! impart to us a little
of that grace and holy spirit, for the insisting on which we fools accounted
your lives madness; for, alas! Our lamps are gone out; we had only the form of
godliness; we were whited sepulchers; we were heart-hypocrites; we consented
ourselves with desiring to be good; and though confident of salvation while we
lived, yet our hope is entirely gone, now God has entirely taken away our
souls; give us therefore, O! give us, though we once despised you, give us of
your oil for our lamps of an outward profession, and transient convictions, are
quite gone out. Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, says the Lord. My brethren
to Christ, hear what the foolish say to the wise virgins, and learn in patience
to possess your (...), If you are true followers of the lowly Jesus, I am
persuaded you have your names cast out, and all manner of evil spoken falsely
against you for his name's sake. For no one ever did, or will live godly in
Christ Jesus, without suffering persecution; nay, I doubt not but your chief
foes are those of your own household: Tell me, do not your carnal relations and
friends vex your tender souls day by day, in bidding you spare yourselves, and
take heed lest you go too far: and as you passed along to come and hear the
word of God, have you not heard many a Pharisee cry out, here comes another
troop of his followers! Brethren, be not surprised, Christ's servants were
always the world's fools: you know it hated him before it hated you. Rejoice
and be exceeding glad. Yet a little while, and behold the bridegroom comes;
then shall you hear these formal scoffing Pharisees saying unto you, Give us of
your oil for our lamps are gone out. When you are reviled, revile not again:
when you suffer, threaten not; commit your souls into the hands of him that
judges righteously: for behold the day comes, when the children of God shall
speak for themselves.

The wise virgins, in the parable, no doubt endured the same cruel mockings as
you may do; but as the lamb before the shearers is dumb, so in this life opened
they not their mouths; but now we find they can give their enemies an answer:
Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that
sell, and buy for yourselves. These words are not to be understood as though they
were spoken in an insulting manner; for true charity teaches us to use the
worst of sinners, and our most bitter enemies, with the meekness and gentleness
of Christ: Though Dives was in hell, yet Abraham does not say, Thou villain; but
only, Son, remember; and I am persuaded, had it (...) in the power of these
wise virgins, they would have dealt with the foolish virgins, as, God knows, I
would willingly deal with my most inveterate enemies, not only give them of
their oil, but also exalt them to the right hand of God. It was not then for
want of love, but the fear of wanting a sufficiency for themselves, that made
them return this answer, Not so, left there be not enough for us and you; for
they (...) have most grace, have none to spare; none but self-righteous,
foolish virgins think they are good enough, or have already attained. Those who
are truly wise are always most distrustful of themselves, pressing forwards to
the things that are before, and think it well if after they have done all, they
can make their calling and election sure. Not so, lest there be not enough for
us and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. These
words indeed seem to be spoken in a triumphant, but certainly they were uttered
in the most compassionate manner; Go ye to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves: Unhappy virgins! you accounted our lives folly. Whilst with you in
the body, how often have you condemned us for our zeal in running to hear the
word of God, and looked on us as enthusiasts, for affirming, that we must be
led and walk by the Spirit, and feel the Spirit of God witnessing with our
spirits, that we are his children? Now you would be glad to be partakers of
this privilege, but it is not ours to give. You contented yourselves with
seeking, when you should have been striving to enter in at the strait gate; and
now go to them that sell, "and buy for yourselves."

And what say you to this, ye foolish formal professors? for I doubt not but
curiosity and novelty have brought many such, even to this despised place, to
hear a sermon. Can you hear this reply, and yet not tremble? Why yet a little
while, and thus it shall be done to you. Rejoice and bolster yourselves up in
your duties and form^; endeavor to cover your nakedness with the fig leaves of
an outward profession, and legal righteousness, and despise the true servants
or Christ as much as you please, yet know, that all your hopes will fall you
when God brings you into judgment. For not he who commends himself is
justified, but he whom the Lord commends.

But to return; we do not hear of any reply the foolish virgins make: no, their
consciences condemned them; like the person without a wedding garment, they are
struck dumb, and are now filled with anxious thoughts how they shall buy oil,
that they may lift up their heads before the bridegroom. "But whilst they went
to buy," the bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, the king, the husband of his spouse
the church, comes, attended with thousands and twenty times ten thousands of
saints and angels, publicly to count up his jewels; and they that were ready,
the wise virgins who had oil in their lamps, and were sealed by his Spirit to
the day of redemption, having on the wedding garment of an imputed
righteousness, and a new nature, went in to the marriage.

Who can express the transports these wise virgins felt, when they were thus
admitted, in holy triumph, into the presence and full enjoyment of him, whom
their souls hungered and thirsted after. No doubt they had tasted of his love,
and by faith had often fed on him in their hearts, when sitting down to
commemorate his last supper here on earth; but how full may we think their
hearts and tongues were of his praises, when they see themselves seated
together to eat bread in his heavenly kingdom. And what was best of all the
door was shut, and shut them in, to enjoy the ever blessed God, the company of
angels, and the spirits of just man-made perfect, for ever. I say, without
interruption for in this life, their eyes often gushed out with water, because
men kept not God's law; and they could never come to appear before the Lord, or
to hear his word, but Satan and his emissaries would come also to disturb them:
but now the door is shut, now there is a perfect communion of saints, which
they in vain longed for in this lower world, now tares no longer grow up with
the wheat; no hypocrite or unbeliever, can screen himself among them. Now "the
wicked cease from troubling" and now their weary souls enjoy rest.

Once more, O believers, let me exhort you in patience to possess your souls.
God, has sealed you to be his, and has secured you, as surely as he did Noah,
when he locked him in the ark. But though heirs of God, and joint-heirs of
Christ, and neither men nor devils can pluck you out of your heavenly Father's
hands, yet you must be tossed about with manifold temptations; however, lift up
your heads, the day of your perfect complete redemption draws nigh. Behold the
bridegroom comes to take you to himself; then you shall be ever with the Lord.

But I even tremble to tell you, O nominal Christians! that the door shall be
shut, I mean the door of mercy, never to be opened to give you admission, though
you should continue knocking to all eternity. For thus speaks our Lord,
"Afterward," after those that were ready went in, and the door was shut; after
they had, to their sorrow, sound that no oil was to be bought, nor grace
procured, came also the other virgins; and as Esau, after Jacob had got the
blessing, cried with an exceeding bitter cry, "Bless me, even me also, O my
father;" so they came, saying, "Lord, Lord, open to us." Observe the
importunity of these foolish virgins, implied in these words, Lord, Lord.
Whilst in the body, I suppose they only read, did not pray over their prayers.
If you now tell them, they should pray without ceasing, they should pray from
their hearts, and feel the want of what they prayed for; they would answer,
they could not tell what you mean by inward feelings; that God did not require
us to be always on our knees; but if a man did justly, and loved mercy, and did
as the church-forms required him, it was as much as the Lord required at his
hands.

I fear, sirs, too many among us are of this mind: nay, I fear there are many
so polite, so void of the love of God, as to think it too great a piece of
self-denial, to rise early to offer up a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. If any such, by the good providence of
God, are brought hither this morning, I beseech you to consider your ways, and
remember, if you are not awakened out of your spiritual lethargy, and live a
life of prayer here, you shall but in vain cry but with the foolish virgins,
Lord, Lord, open to us, hereafter. Observe farther, the impudence, as well as
importunity of these other virgins; Lord, Lord, say they, as though they were
intimately acquainted with the holy Jesus. Like numbers among us, who because
they go to church, repeat their creeds, and receive the blessed sacrament,
think they have a right to call Jesus their Savior, and dare call, God their
Father, when they put up the Lord's prayer. But Jesus is not your Savior. The
devil, not God, is your father, unless your hearts are purified by faith, and
you are born again from above. It is not merely being baptized by water, but
being born again of the Holy Ghost, that must qualify you for salvation; and it
will do you no service at the great day, to say unto Christ, Lord, my name is
in the register of such and such a parish. I am persuaded, the foolish virgins
could say this and more. But what answer did the blessed Jesus make? He
answered and said, "Verily, I say unto you:" He puts the word verily (...)
assure them he was in earnest. I say unto you, I who am truth itself, I whom
you have owned in words, but in works denied, "verily, I say unto you, I know
you not." These words must not be understood literally; for whatever Arians and
Socinians may say to the contrary, yet we affirm, that Jesus Christ is God, God
blessed for ever, and therefore knows all things. He saw Nathaniel, when
under the fig tree. He sees and is now looking down from heaven, his
dewlling place, upon us, to see how we behave in these fields. Brethren, I know
nothing of the thoughts and intents of your hearts, in coming hither; but Jesus
knows who come like newborn babes, desirous to be fed with the sincere milk of
the word; and he knows who come to hear what the babbler says, and to run away
with part of a broken sentence, that they may have whereof they may ridicule or
accuse him. This expression then, "I know you not," must not be understood
literally; no, it implies a knowledge of approbation, as though Christ had
said, You call me Lord, Lord, but you have not done the things that I have
said; you desire me to open the door, but how can you come in hither not having
on a wedding garment? Alas, you are naked! Where is my outward righteousness
imputed to you? Where is my inherent righteousness wrought in you? Where is my
divine image stamped upon your souls? How dare you call me Lord, Lord, when you
have not received the Holy Ghost, whereby I real all that are truly mine?
Verily, I know you not; depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels.

And now, he that has ears to hear, let him hear what manner of persons these
were, whom Jesus Christ dismissed with this answer. Remember, I entreat you,
they are not sent away for being fornicators, swearers, sabbath breakers, or
prodigals. No, in all probability, they were, touching the outward observances
of the moral law, blameless; they were constant as to the form of religion; and
if they did no good yet no one could say they did any harm. The only thing for
(...) they were condemned, and eternally banished from the presence of the Lord
(for so much is implied in I know you not) was this, they had no oil in their
lamps, no principle of a true living faith and holiness in their hearts. And if
persons may go to church, receive the sacrament, lead honest moral lives, and
yet be sent to hell at the last day, as they certainly will be if they advance
no farther, where will thou, O drunkard? Where will thou, O swearer? Where will thou, O sabbath-breaker? Where will thou that deniest divine revelation, and
even the form of godliness? Where will you and such like sinners appear? I know
very well. You must appear before the dreadful tribunal of Jesus Christ:
However you may, like Felix, put off the prosecution of your convictions, yet
you, as well as others, must arise after death, and appear in judgment; you
will then find, to your eternal sorrow, that your damnation slumbers not: sin
has blinded your hearts and hardened your foreheads now, but yet a little
while, and our Lord will ease him of his adversaries. Methinks, by faith, I see
the heavens opened, and the holy Jesus coming with his face brighter than ten
thousand suns, darting fury upon you from his eyes! Methinks I see you rising
from your graves, trembling, astonished, and crying out, who can abide this day
of his coming!

And now what inference shall I draw from what has been said? Our Lord, in the
text, has drawn one for me: Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor
the hour wherein the Son of man comes.

Watch, that is, be on your guard, and keep your graces in continual exercise;
For, as when we are commanded to watch unto prayer, it signifies that we should
continue instant in that duty; so when we are required to watch in general, it
means that we should put on the whole armor of God, and live every day as
though it were our last.

And O that the Lord may now enable me to lift up my voice like a trumpet! for
had I a thousand tongues, or could I speak so loud that the whole world might
hear me, I could not sound a more useful alarm than that which is contained in
the text. Watch, therefore, my brethren, I beseech you by the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus, Watch; be on your guard; Awake, ye that sleep in the dust; for ye
know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man comes. Perhaps to
day, perhaps this midnight, this cry may be made: for in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, the trump is to sound. However, supposing the final day of
judgment may yet be a great way off, the day of death is certainly near at
hand. For what is our life? It is but a vapor, soon passes it away, and we
are gone. Blessed be God, we are all here well; but who, out of this great
multitude, dare say, I shall go home to my house in safety! Who knows, (...)
whilst I am speaking God may commission his ministering spirits to call some of
you away by a sudden stroke, to give an account with what attention you have
heard this sermon.

You know, my brethren, some such instances we have lately had. And what angel
or spirit has assured us, that some of you shall not be the next? Watch
therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man will
come: And it is chiefly for this reason, that God has hid the day of our deaths
from us. For since I know not but I may die tomorrow, O my soul, will thou not
watch today? Since I know not but I may die next moment, why will thou not
prepare for dying this?

Many such reflections as these, my brethren, crowd in on my mind. At present,
blessed be the Lord, who delights to magnify his strength in a poor worm's
weakness, I am at a stand, not so much about what I shall say, as what I shall
leave unsaid. My belly, like Elihu's, is, as it were, full of new wines; out of
the abundance of my heart, my mouth speaks. A sense of the infinite majesty
of that God in whose name I preach, and before whom I as well as you must
appear, to give an account; and the uncertainty there is whether I shall live
another day, to speak to you any more, are considerations, which furnish me
with so much matter, that I scarce know where to begin, or end my application.
However, for method's sake, by the divine assistance, I will branch it into
three particulars.

And First, I would remind you, that are notoriously ungodly, of what our Lord
says in the text: for, though I have said your damnation slumbers not, whilst you
continue (...) an impenitent state; yet that was only to set you on your watch,
to convince you of your danger, and excite you to cry out: What shall we do to
be saved? I appeal to all that hear me, whether I have said the door of mercy
should be shut against you, if you believe on Jesus Christ: No, if you are the
chief of sinners; if you are murderers of fathers, or of mothers; if you are
emphatically the dung and offscouring of all things; yet if you believe on
Jesus Christ, and cry unto him with the same faith as the expiring thief, Lord,
remember me, now thou art in thy kingdom; I will pawn my eternal salvation on
it, that he will shortly translate you to his heavenly paradise. Wonder not at
my speaking with so much assurance, for I know It is a faithful and true
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save (all truly affected and believing) sinners: Nay, so great is his love,
that I am persuaded, was it necessary, he would come again into the world, and
die a second time for them on the cross. But, blessed be God, when our Lord
bowed down his head, and gave up the ghost, our redemption was finished. It is
not our sins, but our want of a lively faith in his blood, that will prove our
condemnation: If you draw near to him by faith, though you are the worst of
sinners, yet he will not say unto you, Verily I know you not. No, a door of
mercy shall be opened to you. Look then, by an eye of faith, to that God man,
whom ye have pierced. Behold him bleeding, panting, dying on the cross, with
arms stretched out ready to embrace you all. Hark! how he groans! See how all
nature is in agony! The rocks rend, the graves open; the sun withdraws its
light, ashamed as it were to see the God of nature suffer; and all this to
usher in man's great redemption. Nay, the holy Jesus, in the bitter agonies and
pangs of death, prays for his very murderers: Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. If then you have crucified the Son of God afresh, and
put him to an open shame, yet do not despair, only believe, and even this shall
be forgiven. You have read, at least you have heard, no doubt, how three
thousand were converted at Peter's preaching one sermon, after our Lord's
ascension, and many of the crucifiers of the Lord of glory undoubtedly were
among them; and why should you despair? For Jesus Christ is the same yesterday,
today, and for ever. The Holy Ghost shall be sent down on you, as well as on
them, if you do but believe; for Christ ascended up on high to receive this
gift even for the vilest of men. Come then, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden with a sense of your sins, lay hold on Christ by faith and he will give
you rest; for salvation is the free gift of God to all them that believe. And
though you may think this too good news to be true, yet I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not, this is the gospel, this is the glad tidings which we are
commissioned to preach to every one. Be not faithless then, but believing. Let
not the devil lead you captive at his will any longer; for all the wages he
gives his servants in death, death often in this life, death everlasting in the
next: but the free gift of God is everlasting life to all that believe in Jesus
Christ. Pharisees are and will be offended at my coming here, and offering your
salvation on such cheap terms: but the more they bid me hold my peace, the more
will I cry out and proclaim to convicted sinners, that Jesus, David's son
according to the flesh, but David's Lord as he was God, will have mercy on all
that by a living faith truly turn to him. If this is to be vile, I pray God I
may be more vile. If they will not let me preach Christ crucified; and offer
salvation to sinners in a church, I will preach him in the lanes, streets,
highways and hedges; and nothing pleases me better, than to think I am now in
one of the devil's strongest holds. Surely the Lord has not sent me and all you
hither for nothing; no, blessed be God, the fields are white, ready unto
harvest, and many souls I hope will be gathered into his heavenly garner. It is
true, It is the midnight of the church, especially the poor church of England;
but God has lately sent forth his servants to cry, Behold the bridegroom
comes: I beseech you, O sinners, hearken unto the voice! Let me espouse you by
faith to my dear master: and henceforward watch and pray, that you mad be ready
to go forth to meet him.

Secondly, I would apply to those that are not openly profane, but by depending
on a formal round of duties, deceive your souls, and are foolish virgins.

But I must speak to your conviction, rather than comfort. My dear brethren,
you have heard how far the foolish virgins went, and yet were answered with,
"Verily I know you no^:" The reason is, because none but such as have a living
faith in Jesus Christ, and are truly born again, can possibly enter into the
kingdom of heaven. You may, perhaps, live honest and outwardly moral lives, but
if you depend on that morality, or join your works with your faith, in order to
justify you before God, you have no lot or share in Christ's redemption: For
what is this but to deny the Lord that has bought you? What is this but making
yourselves your own Savior? taking the crown from Christ, and putting it on
your own heads? The crime of the devil, some have supposed, consisted in this,
that he would not bow to Jesus Christ, when the Father commanded all the angels
to worship him: and what do you less? You will not own and submit to his
righteousness; and though you pretend to worship him with your lips, yet your
hearts are far from him; besides you, in effect, deny the operations of his
blessed Spirit, you mistake common for effectual grace; you hope to be saved
because you have good desires, and a few short convictions; and what is this,
but to give God, his word, and all his saints, the lie? A Jew, a Turk, has
equally as good grounds whereon to build the hopes of his salvation. Need I not
then to cry out to you, ye foolish virgins, watch. Beg of God to convince you
of your self-righteousness, and the unbelief of your hearts; or otherwise when
the cry shall be made, "Behold the bridegroom comes," you will find yourselves
utterly unprepared to go forth to meet him: You may cry, Lord, Lord, but the
answer will be, Verily I know you not.

Thirdly, I would speak a word to you by way of exhortation to those who are
wise virgins and are assured they have on a wedding garment. That there are
many such amongst you, who by grace have renounced your own righteousness, and
know that the righteousness of the Lord Jesus is imputed to you, I make no
doubt. God has his secret ones in the worst of times; and I am persuaded he has
not let so loud a gospel-cry be made among his people, as of late has been
heard, for nothing. No, I am confident, the Holy Ghost has been given to many
at the preaching of faith, and has powerfully fallen on many, whilst they have
been hearing the word. You are now then no longer foolish, but wise virgins;
notwithstanding, I beseech you also to suffer the word of exhortation; for wise
virgins are too apt, whilst the bridegroom tarries, to slumber and sleep. Watch
therefore, watch and pray, at this time especially; for perhaps a time of
suffering is at hand. The ark of the Lord begins already to be driven into the
wilderness. Be ye therefore on your watch, and still persevere in following
your Lord, even without the camp, bearing his reproach: the cry that has been
lately made; has awakened the devil and his servants; they begin to rage
horribly: and well they may; for I hope their kingdom is in danger. Watch
therefore, for if we are not always on our guard, a time of trial may overtake
us unawares; and, instead of owning, like Peter we may be tempted to deny our
master. Set death and eternity often before you. Look to Jesus, the author and
finisher of your faith, and consider how little a while it will be, ere he
comes to judgment; and then our reproach shall be wiped away; the accusers of
us and our brethren shall be cast down, and we all shall be lodged in heaven
for ever, with our dear Lord.

Lastly, What I say to you, I say to all, Watch: High and low, rich and poor,
young and old, one with another, of whatever sect or denomination, for I regard
not that, I beseech you, by the mercies of Jesus, to be on your guard: Fly to
Jesus Christ that heavenly bridegroom; Behold he desires to take you to
himself, miserable, poor, blind and naked as you are; he is willing to clothe
you with his everlasting righteousness, and make you partakers of that glory,
which he enjoyed with the Father before the world began. Do not turn a deaf ear
to me; do not reject the message on account of the meanness of the messenger. I
am a child; but the Lord has chosen me, that the glory might be all his own.
Had he sent to invite you by a learned rabbi, you might have supposed that the
man had done something; but now God has sent a child, that the excellency of
the power may be seen not to be of man, but of God. Let the learned Pharisees
then despise my youth: I care not how vile I appear in the sight of such men; I
glory in it. And I am persuaded, if any of you should be married to Christ by
this preaching, you will have no reason to repent, when you come to heaven,
that God sent a child to cry, Behold the Bridegroom comes! O my brethren, the
thought of being instrumental in bringing one of you to glory, fills me with
fresh zeal. Once more, I entreat you, Watch, and pray; for the Lord Jesus will
receive all that call on him faithfully. Let that cry, "Behold the Bridegroom
comes," be continually sounding in your ears; and begin now to live, as though
you were assured, this night you were to go forth to meet him. May the Lord
give you all an hearing ear, an obedient heart, and so closely unite you to
himself by one spirit, that when he shall come in terrible majesty, to judge
mankind, you may be found having on a wedding garment, and ready to go in with
him to the marriage.

Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake, Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen!
and Amen!

FINIS.

