MR. WEST's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

The Christian Soldier. A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE
ARTILLERY COMPANY, ON MONDAY, JUNE 2d, 1794; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR
ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY SAMUEL WEST, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SOUTH CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING AND LORING, IN QUAKER LANE -- MDCCXCIV.

A SERMON.
To describe the character of the good SOLDIER, as formed upon the principles
and influenced by the spirit of Christianity, will perfectly suit the present
occasion; this, therefore, shall be attempted in the following Discourse,
founded on those words of St. Paul, 2 Timothy, chapter ii. and the latter part
of the second verse -- "A GOOD SOLDIER OF JESUS CHRIST."

CHRISTIANITY has an excellent effect on the characters of men, in all the
relations which they sustain in life. It renders them useful to society, as
well as happy in themselves. It leads the soldier in particular to true glory
in the path of virtue, and by giving him a just sense of his relation and
obligations to his Maker, qualifies him for the service of his country.

IT is highly pleasing to contemplate the benevolent design of the gospel
institution. By subduing the passions of men, those sources of contention, and
reforming the heart, this divine religion shall ultimately exclude war from the
face of the earth; and by diffusing universal charity, produce universal peace.
But this great event can only be considered as the subject of prophecy, the
accomplishment of which, though certain, is probably far distant in futurity.

IT adds a grandeur to scripture prophecy, when we consider it as directing its
eye through such long extended periods of time as astonish the minds of
mortals; though they sink to nothing in the sight of Him whose existence is
eternal, and with whom a thousand years are as one day, and one day as a
thousand years.

CHRISTIANITY is emphatically the work of God. Introduced and established by
the exercise of miraculous powers, it made surprising progress, so long as it
was supported and confirmed by that incontestible evidence of its divine
original; since which its prevalence has been very unequal, slow at the best,
and on the whole extremely short of what its early success seemed to indicate.
The re-appearance of its divine Author, attended with the same miraculous
powers, an event plainly predicted, will go far toward effecting his gracious
purpose. But nothing short of repeated appearances of this nature, or
successive dispensations of Christianity, each more illustrious than the
preceding, can complete the great design. When death shall be swallowed up in
victory, tears shall be wiped from all faces, a new heaven and new earth shall
arise from the ashes of the old, and the world become a kingdom of
righteousness and peace.

As the progress of the seasons cannot, so neither can the advancement of
Christianity, be accelerated beyond the design of its Author. One part must
conform to another; and it is as absurd to expect general peace in the present
state of human nature, as the fruits of summer amid the frosts and snows of
winter. It is only by restoring man to his primitive character, the moral image
of his Maker, an event which we as confidently expect as the return of seasons,
that wars shall cease to the ends of the earth.

IN the present state of mankind, with respect to moral and religious
improvement, war is necessary upon the same principle, and for the same reason,
that the exercise of the sword of justice is necessary in the hand of the
magistrate. As the one vindicates the rights, and protects the lives of
individuals, the other with equal reason protects and vindicates the rights of
nations.

NATIONAL pride, the eager thirst for property, and the equally eager lust of
dominion, may produce such injuries and insults, as to excite rational
resentment in the breasts of the most dispassionate, and render it a duty
indispensable for a people to arm in defense of that inheritance which Heaven
has bestowed upon them, and of which, it would be ignominious tamely to suffer
men to deprive them. Whilst Christianity forbids every other species of war, it
evidently enjoins that self-defence which is the first law of nature, and must
be in force so long as we have an enemy to threaten, or an interest to defend.
Our text implies, the consistency of war with the religion of Christ; as we can
hardly suppose the inspired author would have alluded to a calling which
Christianity forbids, to illustrate the character of the Christian.

THE soldier, therefore, in the present state of society, is a profession as
honorable as it is useful. He is, in the hand of Providence, and under the
direction of the magistrate, the safety of his country, the protector of her
honor and her interests. This useful character is highly adorned and rendered
still more useful to society by the influence of Christianity, which, by
enlisting men into the service, and forming them as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ, qualifies them in the highest degree for the service of their country.

SELF-COMMAND -- a true sense of honor -- the love of glory -- patriotism and
courage, distinguish the good soldier; and these are produced in the greatest
perfection by an acquaintance with Christianity. The first lesson taught under
the discipline of Christ is self-command, a dispassionate attention to the
voice of reason and truth; choosing peace as the greatest good, and engaging in
war only to ensure the blessings of peace. The soldier of the Prince of Peace
formed by his religion, must be the son of peace; he will never be the
aggressor on the rights of others; he wears on his breast, what ought to be the
motto of every Christian, Bear and forbear; he is not easily provoked, nor
suffers resentment, that enemy of peace, lightly to enter his bosom; he is not
overcome of evil, but endeavors to overcome evil with good.

THERE is, however, a certain point, beyond which forbearance is folly, and
yielding is madness; this is the point of honor to which the Christian soldier
carefully attends, and by which he governs his conduct.

WHATEVER the crooked policy of this world may have suggested to the contrary,
the honor and rights of nations, as well as of individuals, are best
vindicated on the generous maxims of the gospel: and resentment will be most
successfully expressed, when justified by reason dignified with religion, and
attended with the clearest evidence not only of justice, but even of
forbearance toward the offending party. The Christian soldier draws his sword
at the call of justice, in the cause of human happiness; it is pursuing this
cause with propriety, that constitutes the dignity and honor of his character.

HONOR, as taught by Christianity, is indeed widely different from that which
is founded on the capricious maxims of the world. The Christian soldier is the
votary of true honor; he feels its worth; it warms his heart, and nerves his
arm; he understands and obeys its dictates, while he feels the utmost contempt
for its tawdry counterfeits.

HONOR, alas! thou strangely prostituted name! how art thou degraded by being
connected with characters and with actions, as detestable to humanity as they
are inconsistent with reason and religion! How often is thy sacred name applied
to a phantom engendered by the worst passions of the human heart, and cherished
at the expense of human happiness! How art thou degraded when made to attend
the bloody progress of him, who destroys thousands to gratify his own pride or
lust of dominion; that his vile head may be adorned with a crown, and his name
be transmitted to posterity as the conqueror of nations. How art thou degraded
when called in to justify a barbarous custom of avenging personal injuries at
the expense of life, in defiance of civil order, in the face of law, reason,
conscience, and religion. The Christian soldier will vindicate thy rights, and
teach mankind that honor and virtue are inseparable; that not he who
enslaveth, much less who destroys, but the savior and friend of man, who
after the example of the Savior of the world, exposes or even lays down his
own life for the good of others, is the man of true honor; that the dignity of
private character is better asserted, by treating personal injuries with an
indignant silence, or punishing the offender by making him feel your superior
goodness, than by indulging a petulant resentment, the evidence of a little
mind, or pursuing that revenge which is the effect of a vicious heart. "He that
is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that rules, his spirit than
he that takes a city."

THE hope of glory animates the Christian soldier; but it is a glory founded on
solid and rational principles, and not that empty, visionary thing which
fascinates the hearts of the proud and the vain, but which vanishes when
examined in the light of reason and religion.

THE great Author of the universe seeks his own glory in all that he does; this
is his undivided object in the creation and government of the world, in the
mission of his Son, and the dispensation of his grace. But this glory results
from the happiness produced, and shines with a luster exactly proportioned to
it. Here than we find a standard by which to estimate the dignity of all
rational creatures. He who best improves the powers entrusted to him for
promoting general good, obtains the prize; and the greatest glory results from
the greatest usefulness.

MAN is at best extremely limited in his capacity for doing good, and in his
opportunities for the exercise of that capacity. Providence does, however, in
some instances, after long intervals, and by an admirable concurrence of
circumstances, exhibit the human character to great advantage, and with such
improvement as to excite the admiration of the world.

How illustrious does the savior of his country appear, and with what real
glory adorned, who, having successfully drawn his sword to vindicate the
insulted rights of a great nation; the object obtained, presides over her
counsels in peace, and directs them with such exquisite skill as to promote her
domestic prosperity and happiness, and her foreign influence and honor. The
glory of his country seems centred in him, and in connection with his name will
be immortal.

BY far the greater part of mankind are, from the order of society or the
allotments of providence, confined to a narrow sphere; they are not, however,
excluded from the prospect and pursuit of glory, the certain result of filling
with propriety the place assigned us, and acting our part well in the world's
great drama. The most obscure character has its connexions, and consequently
its influence on society, which being directed in favor of virtue and human
happiness, shall not lose its reward; for however unnoticed such persons may
pass down the stream of time, they are distinguished by Him whose eye sees all
things, and shall finally meet with the public applauses of their Redeemer and
Judge.

No season is so quiet in this turbulent world, as to exclude the propriety of
military preparation; the best security for peace, is to be prepared for war.
Too great a distinction between the civil and military characters is productive
of evil. The wisdom of government should aim to unite both in the same persons;
that every citizen may consider himself as a soldier, and every soldier may
remember that he is a citizen.

CHRISTIANITY will effect this genuine patriotism. To the Christian, the love
of his country is domestic love enlarged. It destroys trifling distinctions,
and while it embraces with warmth the interests of a particular nation, it is
corrected by the love of human kind.

HOW despicable was the patriotism which taught the Grecian and Roman soldier
to seek the aggrandisement of his own, at the expense and with the ruin of
every other country. The Christian soldier views things on a more extended
plan. The world is his country; man his brother; and nothing is considered as
foreign to him, which relates to the good of the species; when pursuing the
interest of a part, he does not overlook the good of the whole; when he
unsheathes his sword, it is not to inflict misery on others, but to defend the
inheritance which God has given him; the justice of his cause gives steadiness
to his temper, and firmness to his arm, in the greatest dangers.

NATURE has invested death with terrors; to pretend not to feel them, is a vain
boast; some stronger passion may stifle, nothing but religion can raise the
soul above, the fears of death, or inspire a rational courage in the views of
it.

IT is madness, and not courage, to dare death without a hope beyond it. If
this momentary life is to be our all, and existence to cease with our ceasing
pulse, reason urges to protract it by every possible expedient; for what can
compensate for the loss of being? How are the senseless ashes of the hero
affected by the preservation or the ruin of his country? both are to him
perfectly indifferent.

HOWEVER the understanding may be dazzled by the false reasonings of those, who
with an absurd zeal have abused the powers of eloquence, to weaken the evidence
of a future state, candor on reflection will acknowledge, that it is
weakening, if not destroying the great principle of morality, and the only
solid support in the hour of danger.

As the prospect of immortality, so every thing relative to man rises or falls.
Existence is hardly worth acknowledging, if confined to a transient, anxious
being of threescore years and ten. Connected with a future state, the great
doctrine of the gospel, man holds a nobler rank in the scale of rational
creatures, his interests become more important, and he feels a debt of
gratitude to the Author of his being.

PERSUADED of, and looking forward to an happy immortality, man considers
himself as a pupil educated here, for a more valuable inheritance hereafter.
God is his instructor; nature and revelation, reason and conscience point out
the lessons which he is to learn and practice; providence exercises the
discipline by which they are enforced.

IN general, we are taught to place our hope in God, as our reconciled Father
in Jesus Christ; to love him with our whole heart, and our neighbor as
ourselves; to pursue true glory, by becoming workers together with God, in
promoting, according to our abilities, the good of society, the order, virtue
and happiness of mankind.

THE glory acquired in this way will be solid and lasting. It depends not on
the page of history, nor on marble monuments. It may be said of such, their
witness is in heaven, and their record is on high. It has no connection with the
opinion which the world may entertain of us; it is sufficient, that the Lord
knows who are his. The good man is satisfied from himself, and rejoiceth in
the prospects of that period, when the Captain of his salvation shall crown
with unfading glory his good soldier, who in this state of trial has acted his
part well, and been faithful unto death.

FORMAL, complimentary addresses we despise: You, Gentlemen, of this Ancient
and Honorable Company, will excuse me from every thing of the kind; and permit
me to address you with that plainness and sincerity which peculiarly suit my
profession and my age.

YOU see at once what must be the drift of our address, if connected with the
preceding discourse. It is not to remind you that your Company is ancient and
honorable; that it has been an ornament to your country; has furnished those
who have done honor to the character of the soldier; and that veterans, who
have bled in the cause of their country, have inserted their names in your
rolls. These things may be mentioned as excitements to emulation. Degeneracy is
disgraceful. But our grand object is to convince you, Gentlemen, that to be
good soldiers, you must be good men and good Christians; that to be qualified
to serve your country effectually, you must serve the Lord Christ; and that
unless this is the case, whatever names you may assume, whatever pomp you may
exhibit, whatever patriotism or courage you may profess, it is all idle parade;
a kind of scenery, which may amuse and please for a time, but when the curtain
drops, darkness and despair succeed.

THE character of the good soldier and the good citizen are essentially the
same; religion is the basis of both. Piety is the parent of social and personal
virtue; these render men mutual blessings

VICE dissolves the bonds of society; weakens the force of law; enflames and
sets at liberty the unruly passions of men; produces contention, confusion and
misery. Religion the reverse; strengthens the social bond; gives energy to law;
restrains the passions; produces order, peace, and public happiness. No
government can be happy, no free government can long exist, unless its
character is prevailingly virtuous.

THE good soldier must be a patriot; he loves his country, and consults her
interests; but, how contemptible is that patriotism, which will not dispose a
man to do the most essential, and perhaps the only thing he is capable of doing
for the good of his country, that is, to be virtuous. We cannot all fill
public, we may fill our private station, so as to render it a post of honor.
If we are not called to show the good soldier in the field, we may do it to as
good purpose at home, by opposing vice, our own and our country's greatest
enemy.

YOU, Gentlemen, are considered as our first military corpse; your example will
do much toward promoting a military spirit, giving it proper direction, and
fixing the hitherto undescribable point of military honor. If you connect it
with the dignity of religion, and the amiable forms of social and private
virtue, the effect will be happy; and within the sphere of your influence, the
good soldier, the man of honor, the good man, and the good Christian will be
the same. May the God of armies bless you! and may your institution flourish,
till wars shall cease by the prevalence of the kingdom of the Redeemer. May you
keep in view and steadily follow him; obey his orders; do his well; and he will
certainly lead you to victory and to glory.

THIS respectable auditory will indulge me with observing, that although we
exclude politics from the desk any farther than as essentially connected with
religion, we may be permitted on this occasion to express the gratitude we feel
to Providence for that excellent form of government with which our country is
favored; and for the happy effects we have derived from it for successive
years; nor do we consider some difference of opinion upon political subjects as
an evil; it leads to investigation, consequently to the discovery of truth.
That free government is in real danger which meets with no opposition; and a
dead uniformity of opinion discovers such an apathy in the public mind as
threatens the death of liberty.

THE only evil we discover here is a want of candor, where different opinions
are abetted. Suppose our neighbor to be in an error, why should we impeach the
heart for the errors of the head? But alas! where or whose is the error? Is it
yours? or is it mine? Let each take his share of that weakness and liability to
err, which is common to us all, and despise himself if he finds the pride of
his heart betraying him into an imaginary infallibility, or to think the worse
of another, merely on account of his holding a different opinion.

LET us cultivate that charity which thinks no evil, and which by cementing
our hearts will prevent the ill effects arising from different political views.
Our political hemisphere has been clouded, and we have been threatened with the
calamity of foreign war; but we flatter ourselves, that the blessing of Heaven
upon the prudent measures of our national government, will disperse the cloud,
and that the blessings of peace will still be indulged to our favored country;
that her rising glory will answer the sanguine expectations and fervent prayers
of her friends. But a nobler object should terminate our views; another and a
better country beyond the grave. It has been purchased for, revealed to, and
urged upon us by the most powerful motives. Let us embrace the animating hope,
and under the influence of it steadily endeavor to act our parts well, as good
soldiers of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

