THE ART OF PREVENTING DISEASES, AND RESTORING HEALTH, FOUNDED ON RATIONAL
PRINCIPLES, AND ADAPTED TO PERSONS OF EVERY CAPACITY.

BY GEORGE WALLIS, M. D. S. M. S. EDITOR OF THE LAST EDITION OF MOTHERBY's
MEDICAL DICTIONARY, AND SYDENHAM's WORKS, WITH NOTES, etc. etc.

From Fact and Reason we our Practice draw,
The firmest Basis, and the soundest Law,
Whence Nature's powers in fullest Vigor rise,
And dread Disease with all his Phalanx flies.
NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 37, HANOVER-SQUARE, M,DCC,XCIV.

EXPLANATORY PREFACE.
IN the perusal of several works on the prevention and cure of disease, I have
seldom met with any that, according to my conceptions, have been formed with
sufficient perspicuity; for though simplicity of style may be essentially
necessary, considering the class of people to whom such labors are addressed;
still I see no cause, why the very principles and reasoning by which they ought
to be directed in their pursuit should either be totally omitted, or treated in
so slight a manner, as not to afford any material advantages -- the principles
I mean are, the NATURE OF CONSTITUTIONS, and THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF DISEASE;
for whether we wish to prevent or cure, these two points must ever be kept in
view. To prove this, let us inquire, by what are we directed in our attempts to
avoid disease?

From the knowledge of the remote causes, being well acquainted with the effect
which they are calculated to produce in the machine, and preventing their
accession; but in all cases this cannot be done; in many, prevention of that
circumstance is impossible -- how then must we act? By so regulating the powers
of the constitution, that it may be placed in such a state as to be rendered
incapable of feeling the effect of the remote cause.

And how can this be accomplished without being thoroughly acquainted with the
nature of the constitution itself; Indeed, it seems not only necessary in this
respect, but also to render the disease, when the cause has produced its
consequence, as mild as possible. Various proofs of the validity of this
doctrine will arise upon slight consideration. In inoculating for the
smallpox, we find very often great variability in the disease; and this
cannot, it is clear, be owing to the matter by which the complaint is
occasioned, having any variability of action; for the same matter taken from
the very same pock will produce in different habits a disease of very different
natures, with respect to mildness or malignancy -- it is therefore obvious the
variation must arise from some deviations in the separate habits, which require
different modes of preparation; -- and, probably, it is owing to want of
accuracy in this point that some children after being inoculated die, and
several fall into other maladies.

With respect to the other principle to which we must advert with regard to the
cure; we should confine ourselves to the IMMEDIATE CAUSE OR CAUSES, which,
acting in the habit, produce those symptoms, an enumeration of which is called
disease; for all other causes in this point of view are of no avail. Matters it
by what means the disease has been occasioned, since the action of that cause
is past? the effect at this time acting as a cause, claims only attention, for
that conquered, the disease vanishes. To explain, let us take the Dropsy, --
its causes have been said to be, an hereditary disposition -- drinking strong
liquors, want of exercise, excessive evacuations -- sudden stoppage of those
which are customary and necessary -- large quantities of cold, weak, watery
liquors drank when the body has been overheated by violent exercise -- a low
damp marshy situation -- long use of poor watery diet, or viscous aliment that
is hard of digestion. It is often the effect of other diseases, as jaundice,
scirrhus of the liver, violent ague of long continuance, looseness, dysentery,
an empyema, or consumption of the lungs -- in short, whatever obstructs
perspiration, or prevents the blood from being duly prepared, may occasion a
dropsy. These may produce this malady, I do not deny, but that not one of them
is the immediate cause against which our remedies are solely to be levelled to
perfom a cure, nor any number of them, except such of which dropsy is only a
symptom. It is to the effect brought on by these causes that we are to attend,
which I take to be general relaxation of the solids -- a thin watery blood --
and a weakened action of the absorbents, (23. Where the figures are put without
the No, these refer to the Page^ where with (...) No, or succeeding it, to the
(...) throughout the wo^^.
) by which more water is thrown into the cellular system and different cavities
by the exhalent, than can be taken up by the absorbent vessels.

From the enumeration of the former, not any thing can be collected respecting
the cure -- but from the immediate causes every thing, as they plainly point
out the indications, viz. to invigorate the solids, and increase the action of
the absorbent system, that the water may be taken from the places wherein it is
deposited, and thrown out of the machine.

It was the defect in these particulars that furnished one principal reason for
presenting this work to the public, in order to supply other information
absolutely necessary, and more essentially beneficial. I have therefore been
obliged to divide the work into distinct heads -- the first of which
comprehends the ANATOMY of those parts in which reside the active powers of the
constitution chiefly, with intent to make my reader acquainted with the nature
of them, their uses, connections, and dependencies; that he might have some
idea of the materials upon which he was to act; as well as be taught what he
might expect from them: for to attempt to teach a man the mode of proceeding in
any art, without informing him of the nature of the subject to which he is to
direct his attention, would be like throwing a rough diamond to a
glass-grinder, he might destroy, but never polish. Suppose a man seized with a
pain in his bowels, attended with trifling evacuations, he sees cordials are
good in some of these cases, and slight opiates -- he takes them, they give him
relief for some time -- they return more violently, he has recourse to the same
remedies, 'till an inflammation comes on -- considering the intervals of ease
he has obtained, he has no conception how this can arise -- let him be informed
of the structure and nature of the bowels, he will soon understand that they
are subject to irritating causes, liable to inflammatory affections; and
readily conceive why those irritating causes must be removed before cordials
and opiates should be taken; which he could never do without such knowledge of
the parts. Indeed, I believe for want of this many have fallen sacrifices.

The parts being shown in their simple state, I have next spoken of them
collectively, showing the nature of different CONSTITUTIONS, which are formed
by the combinations of these. I conceive this knowledge essential necessary
toward the preventing of disease, palliating such as are incurable, and
conquering those which lie within the reach of our powers; for there are a
variety which require particular att^ntion, in order that full effects may be
given to our regimen, and medical treatment; for, without the one is properly
adapted to the other, we shall not only be foiled in our attempts to cure; but
the very means used for preservation from, will be instrumental in bringing on
disease, which too frequently proves mortal. This we need not here farther
elucidate, as what we have said in the former part of the preface, and in the
introduction, render it unnecessary.

Thus for the parts of the machine to be acted upon have been considered. It
remains now to speak of those which are the agents, the NON-NATURALS, so
termed, and MEDICINAL SUBSTANCES -- the first of which have called forth my
attention, in order to show the great influence they have on, and how by being
properly managed, they contribute to keep the body in a state of health; for it
is almost solely on them that we must depend for this purpose -- for good air
-- proper aliment, moderate in quantity -- suitable exercise and rest -- with
due subordination of mental affections, form the best plan for our bodily
security -- we have therefore endeavored to show how they act under different
circumstances, and how necessary it is to lay down rules with respect to them;
which, by observing, supply the most pleasing consequences -- freedom from
pain, vigor of mind, and a placid old age; and, by neglecting, the contrary
extremes -- besides, we have considered some of them with respect to their
powers as medical substances, and shown how they act, as by these means we
might afford an opportunity of properly combining the two, that they might
assist in strengthening, and not, by producing contrary effects, counteract
each other.

As for medicines, there, perhaps, my reader may consider me too systematical,
as I have preserved the terms of the schools, and reasoned too abstractly,
perhaps, according to his comprehension. However, when it is known that I have
given the derivation of every term, and explained the powers of each class, as
commonly conceived, in a manner to render them in this place easily
intelligible; for the terms themselves, once understood, are infinitely more
expressive, and involve more ideas than any other which might be thought more
familiar, I shall, I hope, stand excused, as well as for dwelling upon the
powers which medicines exert; for it appeared not only necessary to speak of
the good that was likely to accrue from this action, but also of the mischief
which they might create, injudiciously applied; therefore I was to exhibit them
in different views, that it might be known where their exhibition was safe,
where uncertain, or perhaps detrimental -- because a medicine may be proper
respecting a complaint to be relieved, but its mode of action injurious to the
constitution -- for instance, costiveness is to be removed, if it should be
attended with heat and pain in the bowels, showing that in them there is a
great irritation, and that the blood must circulate too freely, the stimulant
purgatives, are improper, (173.) -- if there should be coldness in them, and
the blood circulates uncommonly slow and languid the cooling, (171.) should not
be used -- and if habitual costiveness be an error of the habit, the astringent
kind, (172.) should be avoided.

I should be taxed by some of my female readers with inhumanity, if the rising
(...) of infants were forgotten, with whom many have said little is to be done.
Take them from the indulgence of fond parents; the vanity, ignorance, neglect,
and selfishness of conceited nurses, I believe very little would be necessar^;
save where they, like adults, were liable to be affected with accidental
complaints, and then properly nursed, they would be more readily cured. To the
form^r I can only reply; my animadversion must yield to "who can help it" I
lament the misfortune of the infant, and pity the feelings of the parent, whose
partiality lays the foundation for ten thousand heart-aches -- and to the
customs of the latter, with all their train of poisons, I oppose the plain
directions given under the article Nursing -- to the perusal of which I
recommend all mothers, and rational superintendants, and leave it to speak for
itself; it is uncomplicated, founded upon facts deduced from observation and
experience, and supported by the voice of reason.

The parts of which we have here spoken form what is necessary to be understood
before any one should enter on the practice of physic, as without these the
adventurers sail upon the bosom of a dangerous sea, divested of rudder and
compass. It must be so clear to common observation, that I shall consider it
admitted; and proceed to close with the account of the practical part -- and
here I have labored to be as simple, and usually concise, as the nature of
such a work would admit.

After showing the tendency of the disease in general, I have particularised
the description of each, that is, collected the symptoms which have happened,
forming its history; but as the whole of these do not always occur, yet ^^ill
would burden, from their number, the memory of those who have slight
knowledge, or are totally uninformed -- out of those I have selected the
characteristic signs, by pointing out such symptoms as are agreed always to
attend, laying down before the remote or immediate causes: because if it
appears that the patient has been in the way of the former, it increases the
probability of his being attacked by the latter, which give origin to the
disease. In this there seems to be a peculiar advantage, because the immediate
cause or causes being remembered, leads us fairly to account for a number of
the symptoms by which the patient may be oppressed. This needs no
exemplification, on comparing one with the other, it will appear obvious.

With respect to the medicinal substances, a catalogue is given of them classed
under different heads, with the common doses annexed, and also a variety of
formulae -- in the first place, for the purpose of supplying a number of
materials possessed of similar powers, though in different degrees, under one
head; that the prescriber might have an opportunity of making his own election,
and varying them as particular circumstances might require; besides empowering
him to prescribe in the most simple manner -- in the second, to show the nature
of medical composition, how and in what forms particular ingredients might be
united; and here I must observe, that the compound medicines I have used are
chiefly those of the last London dispensatory; where they are not, they are
particularly specified from whence taken.

There are also, other advantages in this work, which will be to young students
of no little consequence; for here they will be relieved in their investigation
of the real meaning of technical terms, as they are either explained in the
body of the work where they occur, and references made in the Index, or in the
Index itself; and the various articles referred to different places will show
them the different powers they possess, as well as the best modes of
composition -- for instance -- myrrh is referred to (...). 164. 18^. 1^^. -- by
these it will be shown, that it is a stimulant -- expectorant -- emenagogue --
and antiseptic, and the (...) of the numbers following the letter F. will refer
the reader to the different form, in which it is prescribed.

Such, then, my plan, such my reasons on which I risque its support. It is not
for me to determine whether it is happily conceived, or well executed. Some
things have I borrowed, much altered, and many additions made, wherever I
thought it might answer any good purposes; for my intent was --

To give rational information to those, who not being properly educated, are
obliged to practice from necessity; declaring, at the same time, my wish to
stop the daring hand of inconsiderate rashness, bold from ignorance, and
careless from contempt of social duty.

To convince those who are led by humanity, or whom instinctive whim, too often
mistaken for that virtue, prompts to visit the miserable roofs of sickly
indigence, that something more is necessary to constitute the medical pilot --
to convince them, that in family recipes, and borrowed nostrums, there is
little success, and less security -- that if stimulated by the desire of doing
good, the materials to which they should be limited, lie within a narrow
compass -- warmth -- decent clothing, moderate living, industry, and
cleanliness. These form the regimen of conscientious elegance; and are, nine
times out of ten, the poor man's best prescriptions -- these are the powerful
cordials -- these the restoratives of a good Samaritan -- and with these every
hospitable house-wife would be a physician superior to an Hippocrates without
them.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.
SECTION I.
INTRODUCTION, 17 CHAP. I. On Bones, Cartilages, and other component Parts of
the Machine, 21 CHAP. II. Brain, and other more complex parts of the Machine,
26
SECTION. II.
On Constitutions, 57
SECTION III.
On the Non-naturals, 65; with an Account of the Liquids which we in common
use, 80
SECTION IV.
Constitutions more particularly specified. 89
SECTION V.
Necessary Cautions respecting Food, Exercise, etc. 104
SECTION VI.
On Nursing, 114
SECTION VII.
On Medicine, 128 CHAP. I. Medicines which act on the inert Solids by means of
the vital Principle, 132 CHAP. II. Medicines which act upon the living Solids
by means of the same Principle. 143 CHAP. III. Medicines which act upon the
Fluids through the System, 183 CHAP. IV. Medicines which manifest Action
chiefly, if not solely, in the first Passages respecting the fluids, 189 CHAP.
V. Medicines which produce their consequences by external Application, or on
substances formed within the Machine, though lodged without the Verge of
Circulation, 195
SECTION VIII.
On Disease in general, 202 CHAP. I. Febrile Affections in general, 203 On
continued Fevers, -- 1. Simple continued -- 2. Inflammatory. -- 3. Nervous. --
4. and Putrid, from 203 to 229 Forms of Medicine, 229 5. Mixed fever, 240
instanced in the Puerperal, or Childbed Fever, 243
SECTION IX.
Remittent Fevers, 250 Bilious, marsh remittent Fever, 255
SECTION X.
Intermittent Fever, 255
SECTION XI.
Hectic, or chronic remittent, without Crisis, 261
SECTION XII.
Eruptive Fevers, from 264 to 298 1. Smallpox, 265. -- 2. Inoculated
Smallpox, 275 -- 3. Meazles, 280. -- 4. Water-pox, 285. -- Chicken, or
Swine-pox, ibid. -- 5. Scarlet Fever, 287 -- 6. Miliary Fever, 288. -- 7.
Erysipelas, or serous inflammatory Fever, 294. -- 8. Pemphigus, bullous, or
vesiculary Fever, 297.
SECTION XIII.
CHAP I. On Inflammation, 298 CHAP. II. Inflammation of the Head and Neck, 310
1. Inflammation of the Brain, 310. -- 2. Of the Ear, 313. -- 3. Of the Eye,
31^. -- 4. Of the Throat, 317 -- 5. Malignant ulcerous Sore Throat, 322. CHAP.
III. Inflammation of the Breast, 324 1. Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Pleura,
324 -- 2. Of the Lungs, or Peripneumony, 327. -- Of the Mediastinum -- of the
Heart -- the Membrane surrounding the Heart -- of the Diaphragm, 328. --
Malignant Peripneumony, 329. -- 1. Vomica, 330. -- 2. Empyema, 330. -- 3.
Pulmonary Consumption, 331. -- Tabes, 334. -- Tabes dorsalis, or dorsel
Consumption, 335. -- 4. Inflammation of the Stomach, or Gastritis, 335. -- 5.
Of the Intestines, or Enteritis, 337. 6. Of the Liver, or Hepatitis, 339 -- 7.
Of the Spleen, or Splenitis, 341. -- 8. Of the Kidneys, or Nephritis, 341. -- 9
Of the Bladder, or Cystitis 343 -- Of the Peritoneum, or Peritonitis -- Of the
Omentum or Cawl, or Omentitis, 344. -- Of the Mesentery, or Mesenteritis -- Of
the Muscles of the lower Belly, 345.
SECTION XIV.
Of Diseases where Pain is the characteristic Symptoms. 345 1. Headache, or
Cephalalgia, Cephalaea, and Hemicrania, 346. -- 2. Ear-ach, or Otalgia, 348. --
3. Toothache, or Odontalgia, 349. -- 4 Pains in the Side, or Pleurodyne, 350.
-- 5 Pains of the Stomach, or Gystrodynia, 352. -- 6. Colic -- Colica, 356. --
sect. 7. Nervous Colic, 359. -- 8 Pains of the Liver, or Hepatalgia, 361. -- 9.
Pains of the Spleen, or Splenalgia, 363. -- 10. Pains in the Kidneys and
Ureters, or Nephralgia -- Gravel 364. -- 11. Stone in the Bladder, 366. -- 1.
Suppression of Urine. -- 2. Stranguary, or Stranguria, 367. -- 3. Dysury, or
Dysuria, 36^. 12. Rheumatism, Hip Gout, or S^iatica -- Lumbago, 369. -- 13.
Gout, or Arthritis, 373.
SECTION XV.
Morbid Evacuations, 380 CHAP. I. Alvine Evacuations, 381 1. Cholera Morbus, or
bilious vomiting and intestinal Flux, 382. -- 2. Dysentery, or tenesmodal
dysenteric intestinal Flux, 385. -- Hepatirrh^ea, 382. 389. ^^entery, white and
black Flux, 382. -- Diarrhoea, 381.389. CHAP. II. Haemorrhages, or sanguinary
Evacuations, 389 1. Spitting of Blood, or Haemoptysis, 391. -- Coughing up of
Blood. 390, 391 -- 3. Bleeding at the Nose, 390. 39^ -- 4. Vomiting of Blood,
Haematamesis, 390, 39^ -- 5. Bloody Urine, or Haematuria, 390. 395 -- (...)
Piles, or Haemorrhoids 390 397. CHAP. III. When the Serum, or lymphatic Part of
the Fluids are evacuated in too copious Quantities, 399 1. Morbid Discharge of
Urine, or Diabetes, 399 -- 2. Morbid Discharge of Sweat or Epidrosis, 401. --
Forms of Medicine, 403.
SECTION XVI.
CHAP. I. A^^ive Nervous Affections, 413 1. Tetanus, 414. -- 2. Convulsions,
417. -- 3. Epilepsy, or falling Sickness, 418 CHAP. II. Passive nervous
Affections, 422 1. Apoplexy, or Apoplexia, 423 -- Carus and Lethargy, 426. --
Cata^^psy, 426. -- 2. Palsy, or Paralysis, 428.
SECTION. XVII.
Madness -- Insa^ia, 432 Melancholy, or gloomy Madness -- Mania, or furious
Madness, 432
SECTION XVIII.
Affections of the Lungs, 439 1. Common Cough, or Tussis, 439. -- 2 Hooping or
convulsive Cough, 440. -- 3. Asthma, 444. -- 4. Suffocating Catarrh, 448. -- 5.
Spurious Peripneumony, 449.
SECTION XIX.
Diseases whereon the Humors of the Machine are particularly concerned, 451 1.
Jaundice, or Icterus, 451 -- 2. Dropsy, or Hydrops, 454 -- Anasarca, or general
Dropsy, 454, 455. -- Dropsy of the Belly, or Ascites, 454, 455. -- Of the
Chest, or Hydrothorax, 455, 456. -- Of the Pericardium, 457 -- Of the Womb, or
Hydrometron, 454, 457. -- Of the Head, or Hydrocephalus, 454. 461. -- 3
Tympany, or Tympanitis, 464. -- 4. Nervous Consumption, or Atrophy, 465 -- 5.
Scurvy, or Scorbutus, 466. -- 6. Scrophula, 470. -- 7. Cancer, 475. -- 8. Clap,
or Gonorrhoea virulenta -- Pox, or Lues venerea, 479.
SECTION XX.
Diseases of the Skin, 488 1. Itch, 488. -- Tetter, or Herpes, 488. -- 2,
Scald-head, or Tinea, 490. -- 3. Leprosy, 491.
SECTION XXI.
1. Inflammation of the Womb, 496. -- 2. Menses, Menorrhagia, too copious, 498.
-- 3. Whites, or Leucorrhoea, 500. -- 4. Menses suppressed, painful, or
retained -- Amenorrhoea, 502. -- 5. Hysteric Disease, or Hysteria, 505. -- 6.
Hypochondriac Disease, or Hypochondriasis, 510. -- 7. Hysteria-hypochondriac
Disease, 515. -- 8. Indigestion, called Dyspepsia, 517. -- 9. Rickets, or
Rachitis, 519. -- 10. Dread of Water, or Hydrophobia, 524. -- Forms of
Medicine, 527.
INTRODUCTION. SECTION I.
WHEN we reflect on the precariousness of man's existence in this life, the
multiplicity of dangers with which he is surrounded, even from the first moment
of his being to his ultimate stage; and also that the fabric of his machine is
so formed, that the means necessary for its preservation are so many
instruments wearing out its powers and conducing to dissolution; and, at the
same time, consider, that he is subject to an immense variety of diseases,
which often occasion him to drag out a life of pain and misery; nay, frequently
cut him off even in the bloom and vigor of his age: it will not appear
extraordinary that many men of the first, and most distinguished abilities,
have devoted themselves, not only to the study of Medicine, in order to cure
those maladies, by which man is constantly attacked; but also prevent their
origin, or the mischiefs which are apt to succeed.

From the time of GALEN, who has, upon this last subject, written most
elaborately, to the present day, we have had various publications, calculated
to instruct mankind in the Art of preserving Health, preventing Diseases, or
shortening their Duration by the use of judicious applications: indeed, of late
years, their particular documents have been studiously conveyed in such a
style, as to be readily intelligible to common understandings; so that each man
might become, in some degree, his own Physician. Such laudable undertakings
merit the highest praise, and, if well conducted, promise the most salutary
consequences; for there can be no doubt but the modes of preventing Diseases,
shortening their Duration, and warding off their evil tendencies by early
assistance, are not only the easiest, but safest, and most pleasant.

What has been written on this subject may to many, perhaps, appear sufficient:
and so it probably might be, were all men's constitutions similar; for the
methods advised by many of those authors, are selected with great judgment, and
extremely well calculated to answer the ends proposed, under the circumstance
above specified; but there seems to be a very great defect in all the
publications which have treated on these subjects -- they give no information
to their readers how the variations of constitutions are to be distinguished,
or in what cases the methods are properly to be altered; and without this the
prescribing of remedies can be considered little less than a species of
quackery, by whatever authority it may be sanctioned.

The universality or generality of any medicine furnishes the idea of the most
flagrant absurdity, suitable only to the arrogance of every ignorant impostor;
and certainly appropriating remedies of the same specific nature to one
complaint in all constitutions, however dissimilar, is, at least, a branch of
the same tree; for it is a fact uncontrovertible, supported by the soundest
experience -- that what may be of great service to one constitution, may to
another be highly detrimental, though laboring under the same affection.

To elucidate this, I shall adduce a very familiar example -- to many of my
readers, perhaps, experimentally comprehensible; I mean the mode of obviating
the effects of INEBRIATION.

Under this circumstance we will suppose a man of strong stamina -- full habit
of body -- with good digestive powers, and a nervous system acting with
firmness and regularity; and one, of a relaxed constitution -- not abounding
with blood -- a weak, delicate stomach -- and the nerves easily irritated --

The advice to alleviate the constitutional disturbances occasioned by this
indiscretion -- is lying in bed, and promoting perspiration by plentiful
dilution, that is, drinking copiously of weak tea -- small broth -- thin gruel
-- weak white wine or vinegar whey -- or some such liquors warm, that the
superabundance may be evacuated with which the patient has been loaded, and the
body soaked, us it is termed, into its sober standard. For the robust man the
advice might be proper -- for by the surcharge of the vascular system, and the
stimulus of the intoxicating liquids, his habit becomes nearly to assume an
inflammatory disposition, discovered by pain and a sense of fullness of the
head; redness of his eyes; quick strong pulse; much heat, and great thirst --
which are the general concomitants of such a debauch; and thus he requires
abstinence, evacuation, rest, and dilution for his alleviation. But the same
mode, applied to the other, renders all his constitutional defects worse, he
experiences the uneasy sensations of languor, sickness, oppressed spirits, and
undescribable sinkings -- all increased by such a regimen; whose good
consequences are derived in the former cure from relaxation and debilitating
the system. The delicate constitutioned man requires fresh air, riding on
horseback, a glass or two of generous wine, or some cordial, such as will
invigorate the powers of his habit, promote vascular action, strengthen his
stomach, increase insensible perspiration, and thus conquer those unhappy
feelings he labors under from increased weakness and debility. Simple as is
this fact, and of little consequence as it may be thought, the same
peculiarities occur in diseases of the most alarming nature; and I am persuaded
that it is from ignorance or inattention in this point, that people are apt to
increase their maladies, nay often make that, which would, left to itself, have
been mild, become dangerous by applications not adapted to the particular
nature of the constitution. For as curing diseases depends on the knowledge of
this particular, by which we can more certainly appropriate our remedies to the
benefit of the afflicted, so doubtless must it be a more essential point in
preserving from, preventing, and shortening their duration, as in all our
endeavors we must attempt to keep the constitution in, or bring it to a state
of health, consistent with the principle of its formation, and the nature of
the particular parts of which it is formed -- and how can this be accomplished
without the peculiarities of the constitution are known to the person applying
remedies, or fixing on any regimen?

In order, therefore, to attain this point, as these sheets are addressed to
the un-informed, it appears unavoidable to give some account of the human
machine, with regard to the structure, dependencies and action of its parts,
before we enter on the means to be used in particular cases, that every man may
be informed of the materials upon which his remedies and regimen are to
operate; be able to discover their particular state, and hence proceed with
some degree of regularity and certainty.

Now the human machine consists of SOLIDS and FLUIDS, differently disposed, for
the purpose of supporting each other; so that as the parts are worn away or
destroyed by the necessary actions of life, they may be again supplied; and
this diminution and accession preserves a constant routine, until the animal
agreeable to the laws of nature, is destroyed by its own exertions, the machine
being rendered incapable of continuing its vital actions: thus, without any
preternatural cause, gradually descends to the grave.

But in order to promote the different purposes allotted to the solids and
fluids for the well-being of the human body, they are variously divided.

The SOLIDS into bones, cartilages or gristles, ligaments, muscles with their
tendons, nerves, vessels, glands, and membranes.

The FLUIDS, into blood, nervous fluid; perspirable matter flowing through the
skin insensibly, or in form of sweat; saliva separated by the glands of the
mouth and throat; ear-wax; mucus; gastric and intestinal juices, liquids
secreted into the stomach and bowels; cystic and hepatic biles, separated by
the liver, lodged in part in the gall bladder, in part emptied into the first
bowel called duodenum; pancreatic juice, or that of the sweet bread: urine,
semen, liquor of the prostrate gland, and that fluid which moistens the
internal surface of all cavities; the glary mucilaginous liquid of the joints
called synovia; tears; mucus of the nostrils; a white nutritious fluid
separated from the food in the intestines, called chyle, lymph, fat, and marrow.

It will not be necessary to give prolix accounts of the different component
parts of the human machine; but only such as may enable our readers so far to
understand the anatomy, as to furnish ideas sufficient to assist them in
pursuing the future subject with some requisite degree of accuracy.

CHAP. I. Of the BONES, CARTILAGES, and other component Parts of the Body.
THE BONES are the hardest, and most solid parts of the human machine,
calculated to support those which are soft and less firm, in all their motions
and pressures; they are covered with a membrane, or thin bladdery substance,
called periosteum, on account of its covering the bone, which is exquisitely
sensible, being plentifully supplied with nerves and blood vessels. The
outsides of bones are commonly more compact than the inner parts; and are
formed of plates, joined together by transverse fibers; their insides are
spongy and cellular, in which is contained marrow, within membranous bags,
filling up the cells; this marrow, being more or less distributed over all the
bones, and transuding through their plates and fibers, makes them tougher, and
less brittle; the bones are supplied both within and without, with blood
vessels and nerves.

CARTILAGES or GRISTLES, are solid, smooth, white, elastic substances, between
the hardness of a bone and that of a ligament, ( see ligament below) covered
with a membrane called perichondrium, because it covers a cartilage, which is
akin to the periosteum of the bones; they serve to make the bones, whose
extremities or ends they cover, move freely in the joints: they limit the
growth of bones, as to their length, by hindering the bony fibers from
sprouting out; and, therefore, when the cartilages in the joints are eroded, an
immobility is there formed, called anchylosis, or stiff joint, by the
elongation and coalition of the fibers of the bones that are articulated
together; sometimes they serve as ligaments to join the bones together, and
sometimes they do the office of bones to greater advantage than these would do;
as the cartilages of the ribs, which, by their elasticity chiefly contribute
toward expiration; the cartilages that make out brims of cavities, etc.

LIGAMENTS are white, tough, flexible bodies, thicker and firmer than
membranes, and not so hard or solid as cartilages, without cavity; difficulty
stretched and with little elasticity; they serve to connect parts together, and
keep the part to which they are fixed in a proper situation, as appears
remarkably in the joints or articulations; they are made up of fibrous layers
or strata; the largest and strongest of which run lengthwise.

MUSCLE. -- This is the name of the immediate organical instrument of motion in
the animal body, whether voluntary or involuntary; it is called organical,
because mere elasticity is the immediate cause of some motions, as in
expiration The arteries have been supposed by some to contract themselves after
distension by this elastic power; though they may in some degree, yet not
totally, for they certainly, and I believe it is generally allowed, act by the
contractile power of their muscular coat, as may be instanced in blushing --
and their sudden increase of action from other local irritat.
.

The general characteristic of a muscle is, to consist of fleshy fibers which,
when acting, contract themselves, and become shorter; this contraction,
according to different circumstances of the muscle, and the parts to which it
is fastened, produces different effects, and different motions.

If one end of a muscle is tied to a fixed part, and the other to a moveable
one, when it acts, its fibers contracting will pull the moveable part to that
which is fixed.

If both the parts, to which the extremities of a muscle are attached, be
moveable, by its action, they will be both drawn toward each other.

If the muscle be hollow, and contain a fluid, when it contracts, it will press
upon, and endeavor to expel its contents; such a muscle as the heart, and in
some measure the stomach, and urinary bladder.

If the fibers of a muscle return upon themselves, in the form of a ring, when
they contract, they will diminish the area within that circumference, making
the circle narrower. Such muscles are employed to shut cavities, and are called
sphincters, because they have the power of closing cavities and restraining the
exit of any thing they contain.

TENDONS. -- These are continuations of fleshy, muscular fibers; each tendon
being divisible into as many fibers, or rather bundles of fibers, as the muscle
itself is to which it belongs; but the tendinous fibers are more compacted and
smaller, drier and harder, than the fleshy fibers; they are not capable of
contraction, but serve like ropes to pull, when the fleshy fibers act, for the
commodiousness and firmness of insertion, and for the direction of motion.

NERVES. -- These are soft white cords, proceeding either from the brain or
spinal marrow, and running to every minute part of the body, and are the
immediate instruments of sensation, and indispensably necessary for the
continuance of muscular motion. They are supposed by many to contain a very
subtle fluid, but appear without any cavity discernible even by the finest
microscope.

VESSELS in the machine mean the animal tubes or canals through which fluids or
juices move; the least imaginable vessel is made of the least membrane, rolled
up in the form of a hollow cylinder, or part of a cone. The vessels, as their
coats must be thicker, are composed of thicker membranes, upon which smaller
vessels run.

These are divided into ARTERIES, VEINS, ABSORBENTS, SECRETORY vessels, and
EXCRETORY ducts.

ARTERY. -- This is the name of that kind of vessel which, arising originally
from the heart, contains a fluid whose motion is directed from thence toward
the extremities and surface of the body. The larger and easily visible arteries
contain red blood, are of a conical figure -- flew, tapering from the heart
forwards, and ramifying variously; in living animals they be^^ or have what is
called a pulse, answering to the motion of the heart; their coats look whitish,
and are pretty thick and strong.

VEINS. -- These contain a fluid whose motion is from the extremities or
surface of the body toward the heart; their coats are thinner and more
transparent than those of the arteries, and, therefore, they appear of a
bluish, livid color, the blood shining through them. In many places they have
valves within them, which open toward the heart, and shut the contrary way.

ABSORBENT VESSELS. -- So called, because they absorb or take up fluids, and
are divided into LYMPHATICS and LACTEALS, from the particular liquids they
convey to other parts -- they are similar, only have different origins, and
calculated for different purposes, from whence they take their names, the
former convey the lymph or aqueous fluids, the latter the milky juice, formed
from the aliment in the intestines called chyle; the lymphatics are the general
absorbents, and carry the juices to what is called the receptaculum chyli,
thoracic duct, and left subclavian vein; the lacteals to the receptaculum
chyli, or receptacle of the chyle.

The lymphatics and lacteals are very fine vessels; the former of which arise
from the surface of the body, and all cavities or cells of the cellular
membrane; the surface of the intestines, of the urine and gall bladders, of the
ventricles of the brain, and of all other parts, and carry a pelucid liquor
toward the receptaculum chyli, and the thoracic duct, in which, like the
lacteals, do they all terminate.

SECRETORY VESSELS. -- These are all those tubuli or minute tubes, in the
different organs, which are adapted for the purposes of secretion, presumed to
separate and strain off the different humors from the general mass of fluids.

EXCRETORY VESSELS are those tubes or ducts which also belong to the different
organs of sensation; whose office is to carry off the humors that are
separated, and either convey them to their appropriated receptacles, where some
of them are deposited, or discharge them out of the body.

GLAND denotes in general an organical texture, of a circumscribed figure,
framed so as to separate from the blood, a liquid, different from, and unlike
the blood; of these are various kinds, some more simple, others more complex or
compounded and are called by the common people, kernel.

MEMBRANE. -- This is a web or rather a lamina, or slough formed of a very thin
substance, appearing like a bladder, whose thickness bears a very small
proportion to its breadth and length. Most, if not all the membranes, we see in
the animal body, are composed of; and resolvable into thinner ones.

FIBER is a small thread or filament, without a cavity, at least without one
visible; whose breadth and thickness bears a very small proportion to its
length; the least fiber of all is too minute to be perceived by our senses,
however assisted. The fibers we can perceive, are no other than so many bundles
of smaller ones tied together.

Now these are the different solids of the human machine simply considered, and
being differently disposed and united, by means of the cellular membrane, of
which we shall soon speak, form the human body. This is divided into the LIVING
SOLIDS, called solida viva, and into the INERT SOLIDS, called solida inertia,
which constitute the hard parts, and help to complete the cellular system.

These are again divided by physiologists, or those who treat of the human body
and teach the uses of its various parts, into three systems. The VASCULAR
SYSTEM -- the NERVOUS SYSTEM -- and the CELLULAR SYSTEM.

The FIRST of these has the heart for its center; that is to say, all the tubes
or canals which are comprehended in this division, either carry fluids out from
the heart, or return and convey them to it, and comprehend every species of
artery, vein, sinus, duct, and absorbent vessel, and may be distinguished into
circulatory vessels, excretory vessels and absorbents; vessels, through which
the blood circulates, by which particular fluids are separated from it, by
which these last are carried from the place where separated, and by which
fluids are taken up, and carried into the machine.

The CIRCULATORY VESSELS include all the arteries, which springing from the
aorta or large artery of the heart, and that called pulmonary, supplying the
lungs, carry out the general mass of blood, and all the veins, which being
reflected back, and uniting at the two great sinuses of the heart, return it,
and thus maintain perpetual circulation.

The secretory, excretory vessels, and absorbents, we have before explained.

The SECOND or NERVOUS SYSTEM, has the brain as its basis, from whence issue
different portions called medulla oblongata, ^pinalis, and nerves. Some affirm
that there are two sets of nerves -- the one adapted principally for the
purpose of perception and sensation, bestowed on the several organs of sense,
internal and external; while the other is blended with the muscular fibers,
because it is observable in certain diseases, that the muscular strength shall
be totally exhausted, and yet the powers of perception and sensation remain
entire; and on the other hand that the muscles shall sometimes exert prodigious
strength, while the senses are all locked up, hence the authority on which is
founded the distinction.

But we must observe, that though all animal motion seems to be derived from
the nervous system, and although the heart, like every other muscle, can act no
longer than the communication through the nerves which are bestowed on it,
remains free; yet there is a necessity for distinguishing between the vascular
and nervous systems; because it will appear, when we come to inquire into the
nature of diseases, that there may be evident disorder in the one, while little
or none shall appear in the other; and this consideration will greatly
influence us in the directions necessary to be given for procuring relief.
THESE form the living solids.

The INERT SOLIDS, not only constitute such parts of the body as have neither
nerves nor vessels; viz. the cuticle and its continuations; the nails; the
hair; great share of the substance of bones; cartilages; ligaments; tendons and
their membranes: but these inert solids form the connecting medium every where
between the living solids, binding together every minute vessel and nervous
filament; and there are innumerable nerves and vessels in all parts of the
body, except those above mentioned, which no eye can trace; yet, if we reason
from analogy, and say, that the smallest branches and filaments are like the
visible trunks and cords, then the transverse section of these must be
circular; and consequently when they come to be interwoven or laid together,
they must universally leave intermediate pores, and minute cavities; hence we
may understand, that though there may be some parts of the body, which have
neither nerves nor vessels, i. e. no living solids, yet there is no place in
the whole fabric to which the cellular system does not extend, and where there
is not some picture of inert solids; besides uniting and binding together the
different species of vessels, which either rise from or terminate at the heart;
and all the nervous cords or filaments, which spring from the brain or spinal
marrow, however variously they may be combined, disposed, or interwoven; and
this fibrous and laminated connecting substance is not endowed, like the living
solids, with either sense of feeling or power of motion.

That the CELLULAR SYSTEM extends itself universally throughout the whole
frame, and has a general and free communication, seems fully proved by some
particular diseases, such as universal dropsy, called anasarca; where water
diffuses itself through the whole body; or emphysema, where air occupies the
same space, passing from pore to pore, and cell to cell; for this membrane
consists of a number of little cells, hence its name, which in many parts
communicate with each other.

In the natural and healthy state, the cavities of the cellular system, are
either filled with a thin fine fluid called lymph, or with oil -- hence it is
distinguished into two parts, the lymphatic and adipose, according to the
substances it contains.

The pores, or minute cavities of the lymphatic part, are always to be
understood as interposed between every nervous fibril; whereas the adipose
cells are not so universally extended, the fat or animal oil being always
lodged in distinct bags or vesicles, else, was it suffered to diffuse itself as
freely through the cellular system at large, it would be equally distressing
and fatal with the spreading of water in an universal dropsy, or of elastic air
in an emphysema.

CHAP. II. Of the BRAIN, and the other more complex Parts of the Machine.
HAVING now shown the solid principles, and the systems of which the human
body, aggregately considered, consists, we shall take a view of some parts
which are formed out of these, with their fluids and uses, and give such
accounts as may be requisite for the proper information of our readers, to
enable them to discover what parts are affected in particular diseases, and
distinguish their nature. We therefore begin with the BRAIN, which is a soft
pulpy substance, surrounded by two membranes, one called dura, the other the
pia matter -- and has also a third called arachnoid, from its fineness, similar
to a spider's web -- the chief peculiarities to be taken notice of for our
purposes are the SINUSES, which are nothing more than large veins or
receptacles for blood, and the VENTRICLES. Like other parts of the body it has
a variety of arterial branches coming from the heart, which are diffused
through its substance, and on the membranes -- from this is derived the whole
nerves of the human machine, as the spinal marrow is no more than a
continuation of the brain through the vertebrae of the back -- and this is
considered the source of all perception, sensation, and support of muscular
motion. -- It is not considered in itself very sensible, but can transmit most
acute sensations to every part of the body by means of the nerves, when in a
state of health -- and most violent ones when diseased; there is not the
smallest portion of the living solids but is materially connected with it -- so
that it not only gives strong impressions to, but feels strong impression from
the smallest portions when affected; and it may be considered the fountain of
all nervous incitability, by which all the parts dependent upon the nerves are
put into motion, or continued capable of persevering in their action.

And here, as we shall often have occasion to speak of NERVOUS INCITABILITY,
and MUSCULAR IRRITABILITY, two powers to which we allow the existence of the
machine, in a living state, and the action of all its moving solids with
respect to their continuance, are entirely owing, it will be proper to describe
what we mean by these two terms; because they certainly do in some degree exist
independent of each other, notwithstanding their intimate union, and in general
conjunct action -- and also, as by this knowledge, we shall in some cases be
able to discover, how from particular defect in these two powers, separately
attended to, diseases put on different appearances -- and are to be prevented,
alleviated, or cured by our applications made to them distinctively as well as
unitedly.

By INCITABILITY we mean that power in the brain and nervous system, which may
be put into action by mental affection, as well as local irritation, and which
produces those appearances we call sympathetic.

By IRRITABILITY we mean that power which may be put into action by material
stimulus locally exerted -- yet is obedient to the influence of the nerves in
general -- and cannot, in the living machine, exist for any considerable time
without this union.

To elucidate this, we shall observe that many will be thrown into convulsions
by uneasiness of mind -- we also know that the same complaint will be
occasioned by severe irritation on some part or parts of the machine; or that
parts themselves only will, from this source, experience such effects -- as in
cramps. Now as we are totally ignorant how the mind acts upon the brain, and
nervous system -- how these act upon the muscular fibers -- nor can we conceive
how immateriality, which we take the thinking faculty to be, can act upon
materiality, we can by no means make use of a term which points out
specifically the action of these causes productive of morbid effects.

In order then either to prevent, alleviate, or cure the complaint from thence
arising, we prescribe such things as may amuse the mind, and keep it free from
those painful reflections -- and put the body into such a state as to render it
less susceptible of impressions from this source.

On the other hand, we advert to the part or parts affected, and by our
applications locally directed endeavor to remove the irritative cause in order
to promote a cure -- and with intent to prevent a return, do such things as to
render the part or parts incapable of being affected by the cause, or put under
such circumstances as to render the accession of that cause impracticable --
hence we think the discrimination between the two terms absolutely necessary --
as we shall in advising remedies always pay the strictest attention to
constitutional peculiarities.

The LUNGS are situated in the chest, and there divided into two large portions
called LOBES, the one on the right, and the other on the left side, which are
separated from one another by a transverse membrane called mediastinum --
dividing the chest into two equal separate cavities, that have no communication
with one another: but the left lobe of the lungs is considerably less than the
right, because the heart with its membrane, called pericardium, from its
surrounding the heart, with the great vessels that open into it, are contained
in the left division. -- The lungs, besides their external membrane, and
cellular texture of which they are composed, are a congeries of air vessels
from the windpipe, which is a firm tube, made up of cartilaginous or gristly
rings, joined together by muscular fibers -- these rings backwards are
incomplete; this descends into the breast almost to the basis of the heart, and
there divides into two great branches, the one right, and the other left; which
again are divided and subdivided into lesser and lesser ramifications -- and so
distributed through all the substance of the lungs, terminating at length in
small membranous, dilatable cells, or vesicles -- as well as these, there are
vessels which carry blood, and juices derived from the blood; and these two
kind of canals are so uniformly dispersed through the lungs, that in every
physical point there are branches all over, besides these they are supplied
with nerves and absorbents. Various are the uses of this organ.

The most important is that of respiration, by which a trajection of blood is
effected through their substance, and circulation completed, in which life
consists; by comminuting, condensing, and rounding its particles, and thereby
adapting them to flow through the canals of different sizes in the body;
creating redness in its globules -- besides it has several uses which are of
the greatest consequence to the animal, for by this means the abdominal viscera
are with a continuance alternately pressed upon, and freed from that
compression; by which means concoction in the stomach and intestines is
promoted; and the circulation through the system of the vena portarum, or large
vein of the liver, which otherwise would be too sluggish, is urged on. The
faeces and urine are expelled by its efforts; smelling is performed by
inspiring, or snuffing up air; the foetus is excluded by its assistance; and
suction, so necessary for the preservation of the newborn animal, is
performed, and without it there could be no such thing as voice or speech
brought about. Besides, the lungs are considered as the recipient of animal
heat, that is, the quantity of atmospheric air which rushes into the lungs at
every inspiration being loaded with those particles creating heat, they are
separated from the air and pass into the blood, and by their evolution through
the course of circulation form an universal stimulus to the vascular system --
and at the same time they perform the office of excretion, throwing out such
matters which have become useless, and would be hurtful if continued in the
habit.

In the middle of the chest between the two lobes of the lungs, rather
inclining in its position to the left side, lies the HEART. It is a strong
hollow muscle, having two cavities, separated by a septum or division, which
are called ventricles, out of which issue the two large arteries of the human
machine -- one called pulmonary artery, because it serves the lungs; the other
aorta, or large artery of the body; near the mouths of these two ventricles are
two other hollow muscular substances, from their similitude to dogs ears,
called auriculae, into which the vessels called vena cava descendens, and
ascendens, and pulmonary veins open -- the two former into the right, the
latter into the left. It is also enveloped with a membrane from its situation,
surrounding the heart, called pericardium, by which, and the large vessels, it
is kept in a fixed position, within this membrane there is a small portion of a
serous fluid.

As we have considered the brain to be the source of all incitability, so do we
the heart one at least, and that the principal source of irritability, whose
chief office is to promote the circulation of the blood, an account of which
may not in this place be improper.

But before we enter on that subject, we must observe, that all the arteries of
the machine ramify from the aorta, as branches of a tree from its trunk,
dividing themselves into minute ramifications, in which there are no valves,
except at the origin; whilst the veins must be looked upon as branches forming
a large trunk, in which there are valves inserted, which open to the heart. Now
in the former of these vessels there is required no such contrivance, because
the blood, having a quick progressive motion from the contractile power of the
heart and arteries, has a sufficient force impelling it from behind, which
prevents its retrocession, whilst, on the other hand the slow motion of the
blood in the veins and their weaker contractile power, unassisted with a force
adequate to that of the heart, have great need of such an invention to prevent
its regurgitation, and secure its return to the heart.

Now for a moment let us suppose the heart full of blood, that is, the
ventricles have ceased to beat, and that it is put into motion by some cause,
what will be the result with regard to the circulation? The lesser circulation
through the lungs will be performed in the following manner; the blood will be
propelled into the pulmonary artery from the right ventricle, pass through the
lungs, and return to the left auricle by the pulmonary vein; in the same manner
in the greater circulation it will also be forced into the aorta, diffused
through the rest of the machine, and return to the right auricle by the vena
cava, passing through the different glands, in order for them to secret such
fluids as they are destined for; whilst, at the same time, the capillary or
hair like tubes, where there is no such glandular contrivance, will pass off
the matter of perspiration, the auricles then being filled with blood will
contract; eject their contents into each ventricle, and the same routine be
performed again as above described.

The particular organs which we have now mentioned must be looked upon as the
three most material ones for the support, and preservation of life, and the
sources and instruments of incitability, and irritability, by which they
perform their actions, and on which all the moving powers of the machine
depend; but into the account we must also take the blood, which, with the
lungs, we consider as the recipient and diffuser of that fluid, or those
particles which animate nature, and supply an universal stimulus, which
occasions the action of these sources and instruments of vital motion.

The BLOOD is a red homogeneous or apparently uniform fluid, as it circulates
in the vessels, from whence all the other fluids of the human machine are
secreted, or separated; but when out of the body, and left to itself, divisible
into three distinct substances -- serum, gluten, and red globules, by a very
simple process; though untouched, appearing only as two, called serum and
crassamentum, the latter floating in the former; but the crassamentum is of
different degrees of firmness in different subjects.

The SERUM in an healthy state is almost colorless; at other times, it is
yellowish, or perhaps of a greenish hue, while the top of the crassamentum has
different degrees of firmness, and puts on different appearances with respect
to color, according to the age, sex, and state of health of the subject from
whence it is taken. The serum of the blood, like the white (...) egg,
coagulates when highly rectified spirit of wine, called alchohol, or any of the
mineral acids, are mixed with it, or wh^^^ ^eated to about 160th degree of
Farenheit's thermometer; (...) otherwise it continues in a liquid state.

The CRASSAMENTUM is composed of a peculiar substance, which gives redness to
the blood, and of, what physiologists term, coagulable lymph, from its
coagulating spontaneously: This coagulable lymph may be separated from the red
part in two ways; either by stirring the blood which is fresh drawn, with a
whisk, when the lymph coagulating in a short time, will adhere to the twigs,
and appear like a firm membrane of a whitish color, composed of fibers
interwoven with each other; or by placing a piece of crassamentum on a
strainer, and pouring on water repeatedly, until the red particles being washed
away shall leave only the whitish substance behind.

With regard to the red globules, it is not perfectly agreed of what nature
they are; but it is asserted that the red color is owing to a mixture of some
portion of ferruginous or iron matter; in confirmation of which it may be
observed, that the blood always becomes florid after a course of medicines of
that nature; but whether it arises chiefly from the addition of ferruginous
matter, or owing to the increased motion which these medicines always produce,
will admit of some dispute, for it is always found that the blood grows more
red, in proportion to the action and the strength of the vessels, and these
medicines are allowed to produce such effects.

The proportion of the red part is small in respect to the other constituent
parts, for one grain weight of this coloring matter, will tinge, in a
perceptible degree, a thousand of pure water.

Now as the blood in its healthful state is a tenacious fluid, capable of
receiving a greater portion of heating particles in proportion to its tenacity,
as it passes through the lungs, so according to its stronger or weaker
tenacity, will it be capable of retaining more or less of these stimulating
particles, thus from this cause, will it be more or less stimulant, and assist
in producing different deviations in the constitution, besides it is from
different causes liable to undergo many alterations; hence also will other
differences be formed, of which we shall take notice in the succeeding pages.

Indeed we might give some general practical ideas respecting this point; but
as many peculiarities arise from the state of other organs in the machine, that
are worthy of observation, and necessarily combined with those already pointed
out; we must now (...) leave to describe them also with their uses, but first
we shall (...) something on --

THE THORAX or BREAST. This is a large cavity, somewhat (...) the shape of a
cone, reaching from the lower part of the neck to the abdomen or lower belly,
from which it is divided by the diaphragm, or midriff. The bones which form
this cavity are twelve vertebrae of the back behind, twelve ribs on each side,
and the sternum or breast bone before. This cavity is considerably shorter
before than behind, from the diaphragm slanting downwards, and backwards. The
ribs which guard the greatest part of the cavity of the thorax, are all
articulated with their respective vertebrae, in such a manner as to admit of a
motion upwards and downwards; they are all, except the lowermost or twelfth
rib, connected and articulated with the sternum, or breast bone; by the
intervention of cartilages, or gristles, so as to admit of the same motion
upwards and downwards.

From the structure of the ribs which are more or less arched, being unequal
outwardly, and concave inwardly toward the cavity of the thorax, it follows,
that if the ribs are all moved upwards, round their articulation with the
vertebrae, their arched middle parts must be pushed outward and laterally, and
the sternum, to which they are joined, outward and forwards; and consequently,
the cavity of the thorax will be widened and enlarged.

But there is a set of muscles which perform this office, which are called
intercostals, from their being situated between the ribs, and are both internal
and external; they run obliquely from the edges of one rib to those of the ribs
nearest each other, for the whole length of the ribs, and from the highest rib
to the lowest: the fibers of the external have a direction contrary to that of
the internal, by which contrivance their joint action becomes the more steady,
and the ribs being pulled in the diagonal of those two directions, endeavor to
pull the ribs nearer one another; drawing the inferior ribs nearer the
superior, and thus the cavity of the thorax is widened, that the lungs may
expand themselves in inspiration.

But there is another contrivance to promote this purpose; the DIAPHRAGM or
MIDRIFF. This muscle, which divides the breast from the lower belly, arises
from the breast bone before, from all the ribs on each side, from the seventh
to the twelfth; and behind from the last vertebrae of the thorax, and the first
one of the two loins. Its fibers run fleshy from the circumference to the
center some way, and then become tendinous; the whole diaphragm slants, its
anterior origins being remarkably higher than its posterior ones; it is not
plain, but remarkably unequal toward the thorax, and concave toward the
abdomen; insomuch that its middle or center rises always higher in the thorax
than its highest origin at the sternum; when it acts, the fleshy fibers
shortening, pulls the tendinous center toward their origin, that is,
downwards, thereby rendering it plainer, and less unequal, and so lengthening
the cavity of the thorax down; hence the enlargement of the breast is promoted
two ways, by the intercostal muscles raising the ribs, and making it wider; and
the action of the diaphragm rendering it longer or deeper -- and by these means
the several uses above specified from the action of respiration, is promoted.
See page 28.

Immediately under the diaphragm lies the LIVER. It is of an irregular shape --
its right part fills almost all, what is called the right hypochondre, or side
under the ribs below the diaphragm, in an adult body, when sound, reaching
commonly no lower than the short ribs. In the foetus it is bigger, in
proportion to the rest of the body, in all its dimensions -- its middle part
lies in the region over the stomach, called epigastrium; and its left in the
upper part of the left hypochondre, not reaching so far down as the right; some
of its exterior parts are smooth and unequal, humouring the concavity of the
diaphragm; its under part is concave on the right side answering to the gut
called the colon before, and the right kidney behind; its middle part, in which
the gall bladder, called the vesica fellis is placed, lies over the gut, called
duodenum, which touches the gall bladder; its left part covers the stomach --
it is thick in the middle, and upper substance, toward its sides it grows
slenderer, at length terminating in a thin edge; by a furrow in the interior
and concave part which receives the umbilical vein, or that of the navel in the
foetus, on its anterior part; and by another answering to that backwards
reaching to the posterior limits of the liver, which receives the venous duct,
both which canals are pervious vessels in the foetus, but in the grown animal
degenerate into ligaments, the liver is divided into two unequal parts called
lobes; the right being much larger than the left; there is besides, a small
lobe in its posterior concave part, commonly called the lobule of Spigelius;
there is likewise a transverse fossa, or furrow, running along the middle of
its concave, and under part, in some measure separating its anterior and larger
from its posterior and smaller part; it is attached to the diaphragm, and its
weight is in some measure supported by ligaments from that muscle, which are
productions from the membrane which lines the inside of the lower belly called
peritonaeum, where it lines its concave surface, and is united by other such
productions, with the neighboring parts: it is furnished with arteries from
ramifications of the aorta, called coeliac, mammary, phrenic, renal, and
capsular -- but it is furnished with veins of two kinds -- totally differing
from each other, which cannot truly be said of any other part of the body: to
wit, the vena portarum, and its branches distributed through the substance of
the liver, which perform the office of arteries, carrying blood into it; and
the other veins, which carry blood out of it, emptying themselves into the vena
cava, like the rest, all over the body.

As the rest of the arteries and veins may be compared to the trunk of a tree
with its branches, so may the vena portae and its different ramification, be
compared to the root, trunk, and branches -- for it is formed by a conflux of
all the veins, which return the blood from the stomach, omentum, spleen,
pancreas, intestines, and mesentery; and answer to the coeliac, and mesenteric,
both superior and inferior, arteries. -- It is worthy to be observed, that all
this venous system, which by its union constitutes the vena portarum is
unfurnished, unlike the other veins of the body, with valves; so that from its
trunk it may be injected backwards to the minutest origins of small veins, in
all the parts just now mentioned. The trunk of the vena portarum, thus formed,
enters the liver between two eminences in the little lobe, called by the
ancients, portae -- that is, ridges forming a little channel or straight
between them: as soon as it is formed into a trunk it is found to have got
stronger membranes or walls than other veins, and even tougher than the aorta
or large artery of the body itself. This new and extraordinary strength of the
coats of the branches of the vena portarum, they carry with them throughout all
the substance of the liver; and they are distributed from trunks to branches,
smaller and smaller, in the same manner as arteries are in the other viscera.

Thus is blood brought into the liver by arteries, called hepatic, of the
common sort; and besides by the vena portarum, furnished with strong coats, and
performing the office of an artery, the only instance of that kind in the whole
body. The ultimate small capillary branches, both of the hepatic arteries, and
vena portarum, terminate in minute venous twigs, which arising all over the
substance of the liver, and forming larger and larger branches by uniting
together, at length open by several large mouths into the vena cava about the
posterior, or gibbous part of the liver.

The liver is supplied with nerves from the intercostal, and par vagum so
called; -- they are but small in proportion to its bulk, and therefore it is
not liable to violent pains.

The great use of the liver is to separate bile, for many good purposes in the
animal economy; and as it is now and then wanted more at some times, than at
others, there is in the liver a receptacle for part of this fluid, called the
GALLBLADDER, which is a pretty large hollow vessel, nearly the shape of an
oblong pear -- situated in a fovea or furrow, in the anterior concave part of
the right lobe of the liver, reaching from before backwards; attached to the
liver in different places by a cellular texture, covered over in its under
part, by a portion of the membrane of the liver, which reaching beyond it keeps
it fast in its situation. Under this, all over its surface, is a cellular
texture -- next to that, a thin muscular coat, consisting of pretty
conspicuous, longitudinal, oblique, and circular fibers; under that a second
cellular -- then a nervous; and innermost of all a villous coat, similar to
what is found in the stomach and intestines. There are likewise, especially in
its smaller part or neck, pores, which yield a mucous juice, to defend it
against the acrimony of the bile: from the same part is produced its duct,
which stretching toward the left is inserted into one called the hepatic duct,
which arises from the repeated union, and conflux of the biliary ducts all over
the liver; the union of these two ducts together forms the duct, called the
ductus communis cholidochus, which penetrates into the duodenum, or first of
the small guts, just below the stomach. Thus we find the bile separated by the
pori biliarii of the liver, passes into the hepatic duct, part of which is
constantly pouring into the duodenum, and part into the gallbladder, whose use
is to receive the bile, there to retain it, until it be squeezed back again by
pressure of the distended stomach, and action of the diaphragm, through the
ductus communis into the duodenum; -- by staying there, the bile is tendered
thicker, some of its aqueous parts being resorbed by the inhaling vessels of
its villous coat, and therefore stronger, and of a more saturated yellow; it
likewise becomes more sharp, bitter, and rancid, by the heat of the contiguous
and circumjacent parts; while the stomach is empty the gallbladder is at
liberty to be distended and filled, and therefore becomes fuller after long
fasting; and the fuller it is, the less compression of the stomach is required
to squeeze the bile out of it -- so that the more we are prompted to eat, and
stuff the stomach by violent hunger, the greater quantity of bile will be
poured into the duodenum, by the swelling of the stomach during digestion, to
promote so much more effectually the coction of the aliments; and the cystic
bile will be the sharper, and stronger, by having remained so much the longer
in the gallbladder.

So that we find the duodenum receives two sorts of bile flowing into it from
the same canal, viz. the hepatic fresh secreted from the liver, which never has
been in the gallbladder, but goes straight on into the intestines, and the
cystic also.

Both biles are of the same natures and properties, differing only in degree,
insomuch as many species of animals have no gallbladder, and therefore are
only furnished with hepatic bile, as amongst quadrupeds, the elephant, horse,
ass, and deer; amongst birds, the ostrich, whose digestion is so strong, the
stork, and the pigeon -- not to mention some fishes.

The BILE is somewhat viscid; coagulable by heat and alchohol; of a saturated
yellow color, inclining to green, extremely bitter; the sharpest, and most
stimulating of all the circulating humors of the body, neither acid nor alkali
when fresh, but strongly inclining to, and quickly susceptible of,
putrefaction; and promoting that disposition in any substances with which it is
mixed, if they are capable of it; it mixes readily with water, it flames not in
the fire, unless it be dried, and then it burns almost all away; it is a
powerful penetrating soap in every respect; it dissolves all gums and resins,
being rubbed with them.

By these properties, when poured upon the alimentary mash in the duodenum, it
must effect, first, a more intimate dissolution, and mixture of the
heterogeneous parts together, as it is readily miscible with water, and renders
oil and oily substances so; secondly, though it is not actually an alkali, yet
it nearly approaches toward it; and must diminish the acescent disposition of
the chyle, of which we shall speak hereafter, and render it more similar to
animal nature, which is alcalescent: and lastly, by its stimulating power, as
it is the most acrimonious of all the animal fluids, it, no doubt, helps to
excite the peristaltic motion of the intestines, and thereby promote
concoction; and, as like aloes, it is a purgative, which it resembles not a
little, it assists in the expulsion of the faeces; so true is it what Lord
Bacon says, " that the bile is the incentive and stimulus of many functions of
the body."

The PANCREAS, or SWEETBREAD, so called, is a long, whitish, tender, and
friable glandular mass, situated behind the stomach and spleen, under the
liver. Beginning at the spleen on the left side, it stretches transversely
across the vertebrae, and with its other extremity, is connected with the
duodenum. In the human adult, it is about seven or eight inches long, and one
or more thick; its end at the spleen is smallest, and it grows gradually
broader, at it approaches to the duodenum, where it terminates: it has
arteries from the coeliac; its veins run into the splenic vein, which opens
into the vena portarum; its nerves come from the par vagnum, and as they are
but small, it has, like the liver, but small sensation: its structure consists
of small round acini or glandular shoots, connected together with much cellular
texture; from each of these, there is a small duct sent out toward the middle;
all these ducts open into the principal duct, which runs along its axis all its
length, and opens into the duodenum, five or six inches from the pylorus, or
lower orifice of the stomach, at the same place with the biliary duct.

As the structure of the pancreas is the same with the salivary glands, so its
juice perfectly resembles the saliva in every property -- and therefore may be
presumed to have the same use -- to dilate, open, and dissolve the alimentary
mash, and render the chyle, to be made out of it, more similar to animal
nature; as it is considerably larger than all the salivary glands put together,
and situated in a warmer place, its juice must far exceed the saliva in
quantity. It is propelled into the intestine by the common impetus and course
of circulation, assisted by the pressure of the adjacent parts upon it in
breathing: It is poured into the gut at the same place with the biliary duct,
that it may be immediately mixed with, in order to temper and dilute, the bile,
which is both thicker and sharper than itself.

The OMENTUM, or CAWL, is a broad membrane, thin and transparent, tender, and
easily torn, arising from the anterior and inferior border of the stomach, and
falling down commonly as low as the navel, sometimes much lower; then doubling
backwards and upwards, is connected with the intestine called the colon, under
the stomach, thus forming an empty bag. Besides, its principal connection with
the stomach and colon, it is likewise attached to the duodenum, to the spleen,
pancreas, and mesentery; it lies immediately under the peritoneum forwards.
being a production of its cellular part, and covers part of the stomach, and
the greatest part of the anterior surface of the intestines.

It is every where a double membrane -- but every portion of the thin membrane,
by itself, may be divided into two thinner membranes or sloughs, which are
joined together by a thin cellular texture, in the cells of which fat is
deposited: the secretion here is performed in the most simple manner, their
being no other apparatus besides arteries, veins, and pinguidinous ducts,
leading to the cells, or vesicles. The fat is distributed in the omentum very
unequally, being in some places thin and transparent, in others an inch thick
in fat; in corpulent persons it contains a vast quantity of fat; it has its
arteries from the coeliac; its veins terminate chiefly in the splenic branch,
and all of them ultimately in the vena portarum.

The uses of the omentum are, first, to interpose between the peritoneum and
the intestines, and part of the stomach -- that all three parts may be
preserved warm, moist, and slippery, and hindered from growing together: and
secondly, to furnish oily matter for the bile.

The SPLEEN is situated in the left hypochondre, that is, under the cartilages
of the left short ribs; it is connected with the colon, stomach, left kidney,
and by its upper part with the diaphragm; its situation is changed by the
fullness or emptiness of the stomach; it follows the motion of the diaphragm,
and is affected by the inflation or subsidence of the colon. In general it is
placed upwards, and backwards from about the middle of the short ribs on the
left side; in its natural and sound state, it is about six or seven inches
long, about three in breadth, and one in thickness, of an irregular and
somewhat oval figure, and of a dark livid color; it receives arteries from the
coeliac, these entering its substance, are divided into innumerable branches,
and by their evanescent extremities terminate in minute veins, forming, by
their union, the splenic vein, which flows into the vena portarum. The vessels
of the spleen are very large in proportion to its bulk, and yet it has no
excretory canal but its vein; its nerves are small and few.

As the substance of the spleen is entirely vascular, with a tender cellular
texture to support the vessels and keep them together; its chief use has been
considered to consist (...) dividing and attenuating the blood that runs into
and flows through it; and from its situation, as it is much agitated, this also
assists in the circulation and comminution of the blood through it, and thereby
rendering it fit to temper the sluggish mass sent from the omentum and
mesentery into the vena portarum, and expedite the secretion of bile in the
liver.

As we consider the OESOPHAGUS and STOMACH continuations of the same tube, we
shall proceed to describe them together, and afterward make some observations
on the intestines.

The OESOPHAGUS, or GULLET, begins at, or is continued with the PHARYNX or
THROAT, runs down along the posterior part of the thorax, behind the windpipe,
and most commonly somewhat to its left, passes through the diaphragm, and a
short way under it opens into the stomach, into which it conveys the aliments;
it is made up of several membranes or coats: the external one is cellular --
next to that is the muscular coat, consisting of two pretty strong plains of
fibers, the exterior of which are nearly longitudinal, the anterior nearly
circular. When the former act, they shorten and widen the tube -- thus fitting
it to receive aliment; when the latter exert themselves, they render it
narrower and longer, and propel the aliment onwards: this alternate action,
begun at the origin of the canal, and continued downwards successively through
its different portions, one after another, determines the rout of the aliment
into the stomach.

Its innermost coat, called nervous, is tough and strong, fit to resist the
hardness and roughness of what may be swallowed; it is lined with short villi,
standing up like velvet, somewhat in the manner of those of the stomach and
intestines, of which we shall presently speak. There are likewise numerous
secretory ducts opening into it, which yield a mucous liquid, by which it is
moistened and lubricated, in order to facilitate the passage of the aliment
through its cavity.

The STOMACH, or VENTRICLE, is situated in the abdomen, or lower belly,
immediately under the liver, which covers a great part of it above, and
laterally; it is placed transversely, in the main, from right to left, but
somewhat obliquely, so that its left or upper orifice, called cardia, which is
continued to the oesophagus, lies more toward the vetebrae; and the right or
lower, called pylorus, which opens into the intestine duodenum, more anterior.
In figure it resembles a bag-pipe; its thickest part being its left extremity,
at the implantation of the oesophagus, from which it tapers to the pylorus. The
CARTILAGO ENSIFORMIS, or lower part of the breast bone, answers nearly to its
middle: the spleen lies contiguous to its lower part, on the left, and the
pancreas behind its bottom.

The structure of the stomach is in general the same as the oesophagus, of
which it may be considered a dilatation. Its most external membrane is a
continuation of the peritoneum; its next is cellular, in which its great
branches of blood vessels and nerves run; in it there are likewise conglobate
glands and lymphatic vessels. Under this lies the muscular coat -- the exterior
layer is a continuation of the longitudinal fibers of the oesophagus, which
open and disperse themselves over the stomach -- and as the stomach is by much
the larger of the two, and of an irregular figure, they must of course be
thinner, and less numerous in some places than others. They run mostly along
the length of the stomach, and terminate at the pylorus; they seem to shorten
the stomach, though but in a feeble manner, and widen its middle. The other
stratum or layer, answering to the circular fibers of the oesophagus, is by
much the stronger of the two; its fibers run in a general way round the
stomach, at right angles with its axis, though with considerable and intricate
deviations: they seem like the analogous stratum in the oesophagus, to lengthen
the tube they encircle, and contract its cavity, a remarkable plain of this
same stratum runs from the left orifice to the right by the shortest way, viz.
along the upper and lesser curvature of the stomach; and appears to counteract
its other fibers, by drawing the two orifices toward each other. And it is
observed, that at the entry of the oesophagus into the stomach, the circular
fibers are remarkably thick and strong, which therefore may serve, in some
measure, as a sphincter to it, to shuts its cavity there; but, upon the whole,
the exact course of the muscular fibers of the stomach is so extremely
difficult to be traced and described, that hardly any two anatomists, unless
they copy from one another, agree in their account of them. It is sufficient to
conceive them to be so framed and distributed, as to enable the stomach to
press upon its contents every way, and gradually to expel them. -- Next to, and
immediately under the muscular coat, is another cellular texture, more
conspicuous than the exterior one, in which pretty large trunks of blood
vessels and nerves run, after having penetrated through the muscular coat.
Under it lies that called nervous which is a firm, tough, white, and pretty
thick membrane, constituting the principal and most peculiar coat of the
stomach. The sixth in number is another cellular web, much thinner and more
subtle than the two former -- made up of shorter threads and laminoe -- The
innermost of all is the villous coat, so called, because it has villi, or pile
like that of velvet, standing out from it; these villi are small membranous
productions, or sheaths containing minute tubuli, both of the arterial and
venous kind, opening into the cavity of the stomach. The arterial tubuli pour
into the stomach a liquor much more subtle than blood, to be mixed with the
aliments for the purpose of digestion -- and when the stomach is empty, this
liquor growing sharper concurs with the saliva in exciting the sense of hunger,
as has been said; the venous tubuli are absorbent, and resorb liquids from the
stomach; the innermost or villous coat being larger than the rest, forms
wrinkles here and there, more or less conspicuous, but at the pylorus there is
a remarkable one; where a duplicature of the coat formed by this wrinkle all
round the pylorus, and projecting into the entry of the duodenum, serves,
together with the circular fibers of the muscular coat, to contract, and almost
shut that orifice, and let only the thinner parts of the alimentary mash be
expelled out of the stomach into the intestine very gradually, and in small
quantities at once; over all the inside of the villous coat, there open
excretory ducts of mucous glands, seated in the second cellular membrane, which
furnish a lubricating liquor, as in the oesophagus, serving to defend the
acutely sentient inside of the stomach from the acrimony or otherwise hurtful
qualities of what we may eat or drink.

The stomach is plentifully furnished with blood vessels; its arteries all come
from the coeliac, and its veins all empty themselves into the vena portarum: it
is no less largely supplied with nerves, every branch of which arise from the
par vagnum.

Now the use of this organ is for the digestion of our food, in order to
promote the nourishment of the other parts of the body, as well as itself --
and this it is supposed to promote by heat, moisture, agitation, and
fermentation -- all which, that it is capable of producing, it will be easy to
conceive, when we consider its structure and situation -- for we find it is
almost covered with the liver, lies contiguous to the spleen and pancreas -- is
possessed of a muscular coat -- has large trunks of blood vessels running through
its substances -- lies close under the diaphragm -- and fluids profusely
excreted into its cavity, and perpetually pressing down the oesophagus --
besides its lying over the aorta, or great artery of the machine -- and thus
the texture of the aliment is broken, the juices they afford set at liberty,
mixed with the gastric juices, or those of the stomach, thrown into a state of
fermentation, and changed into materials proper for forming nutritious fluids,
as far as the first process extends -- which are farther perfected when they
pass into the intestines, whose structure is similar to that of the stomach --
by being mixed with bile, pancreatic, and intestinal fluids; converting them
into a white liquor called chyle, which is absorbed by the lacteal vessels, and
there in their passage through the lymphatic glands to the receptaculum chyli
further mixed and diluted with lymph; from this receptaculum the chyle is
carried into the vena cava, thrown with the blood into the right auricle of the
heart, thence into the right ventricle, which ejects it into the lungs, by the
pulmonary artery, in which organ it is further elaborated, thrown from thence
into the left auricle and vetricle, and then into the round of the greater
circulation, where it meets with fresh attrition; and thus, in a little time,
converted into a perfectly nutritive fluid, which is applied to the particular
parts for their support as wanted. But the stomach, besides being the
instrument for performing the first process of digestion, is possessed of
another material power, that of promoting sympathic affections in the
constitution. These are such affections as appear in parts far distant from
those, where the action of any substance caus^ng such distant affections, are
locally acting -- as sweat induced by antimonials taken upon the stomach, and
only acting immediately on that organ -- vomiting produced by a stone
stimulating the kidney, etc. -- but of this however we shall speak more at
large, when we come to treat particularly on this subject -- and now proceed to
describe the intestines, and their uses -- which have been divided, and are six
in number, three small, and three large, viz. DUODENUM, so called from being
twelve finger breadths long; -- JEJUNUM, from being commonly found empty, --
ILEUM, from being supported in part by the bones called ilia -- these form the
three first, or small guts.

The DUODENUM is wider than the others -- as it received all the mash expelled
out of the stomach; which cannot be said of the other guts, some part thereof
being resorbed by the way, but chiefly on account of its having, for a great
part of its length, from its origin progressively, no external tough covering
from the mesentery to limit its size; it is likewise redder and more fleshy
than the jejunum and ileum, its muscular fibers being thicker and stronger.
About its middle it receives the duct from the pancreas and liver, called
pancreatic and biliary, which passing through its coat, obliquely open into it
through one orifice; it makes several curvatures -- the most considerable is
that by which it ascends almost perpendicularly some way, soon after the two
ducts open into its cavity, whereby the alimentary mash must needs be somewhat
retarded in its passage through it; and the bile and pancreatic juice the more
thoroughly mixed therewith, and with one another; in its beginning, its
innermost coat is even, without wrinkles or furrows, such as are called
valvulae conniventes; but in its progress, and toward its terminations, it
gets many such; which must further retard the progress of its contents; it is
supplied with arteries chiefly from the same trunk that supplies the stomach,
viz. the coeliac; some lacteals, though but few arise from it.

The JEJUNUM. -- It is not easy to fix exactly the limits between the duodenum,
nor ileum, and this gut: one way of distinguishing the jejunum from the ileum,
and perhaps the best, is to call all that jejunum, whose circumvolutions are
above the umbilicus, or navel; and whose cavities are remarkably furnished with
rugae or valvulae conniventes; this will make it about a third shorter than the
ileum; it is narrower than the duodenum; its muscular fibers are thinner and
weaker; it has some clusters of glands, called Peyer's, from their discoverer,
and sends forth numerous lacteals.

The ILEUM makes its windings chiefly below the umbilicus; the lateral foldings
are supported by the ossa ilia, above the thigh bones; its structure is much
the same with that of the jejunum, except that in it the valvulae conniventes
decrease gradually, both in number and size, till at length they disappear. It
has more of Peyer's glands than the two former, especially about its
termination, and sends forth extremely numerous lacteal vessels, the jejunum
and it furnishing almost the whole of these canals: it is considerably longer
than the jejunum, and is continued to the first of the thick guts called colon.
Both the jejunum and ileum are furnished with blood vessels from the
mesenterica superior. These small guts are the instruments immediately employed
in making the chyle: whose coats are pretty much the same with those of the
stomach.

The thick or large guts are also three in number -- the CAECUM, COLON, and
RECTUM.

The ileum, the last of the small guts, terminating near the right kidney,
opens into the colon; at its junction with the CAECUM: this is a short wide sac
about three inches long; its diameter about thrice as large as that of the
small intestines: it is situated under the right kidney, and hid by the last
convolution of the ileum, and has an appendix arising laterally from its
bottom, called appendicula vermiformis, and is about the same length, but very
slender, its diameter commonly not exceeding a quarter of an inch; its
termination is shut, and it fluctuates loose.

The COLON from its origin makes a large turn upwards as far as the liver; then
proceeds transversely to the left under the gallbladder, which it touches
under the bottom of the stomach, toward the spleen and lest kidney, to which
it is fastened; from thence passing, it makes several turns, the whole of them
pretty much in the figure of a capital S inverted, then terminates in the
rectum; so that it surrounds, in a manner, the whole abdomen, sometimes
ascending, sometimes descending; hence it happens that one stool is often
succeeded by a second: by this contrivance likewise the faeces are longer kept,
and hindered from being every now and then indecently voided.

The RECTUM or STRAIGHT GUT, so called because its course, if the length of the
body is regarded, is straight, though it is bent backwards and forwards,
humouring the direction of the os sacrum and os coccygis, bones situated at the
lower part of the back, begins where the last curvatures of the colon end, and
is terminated at the anus.

It is worthy to be observed, that there is a remarkable contrivance at the
junction of the ileum with the colon and caecum, by which the contents of the
small intestines are allowed a free passage into the thick ones, but small
regress or retropulsion from the latter into the former is effectually hindered
and stopped, this is called, valvuli Bauhini -- Tulpii, or -- Coli. Its effect
in the animal economy is very salutary; for as the contents of the intestines
begin to putrify, and become foetid in the caecum, by their being retarded
there, both upon account of its capaciousness, and the almost perpendicular
ascent of the colon, which is continued from it, if their repulsion into the
ileum was not effectually hindered, the chyle in the small guts would be
tainted with putridity, and even excrementitious matter thrown up at the mouth
in obstinate costiveness; whereas not so much as a faecal halitus, or the
subtilest effluvia, can get that way in a state of health, though (...) should
be wanting ten or twelve days together, as happens in a common way to many.

The caecum being much wider than the small intestines, and at the same time
lower than the implantation of the ileum, the contents must, in some measure,
sta^nate there, especially as the colon from its origin mounts in a manner
perpendicularly as far as the liver in the right hypochondre. By stagnating in
so warm a place, their putridity increases there, and they acquire a faecal
odor, which is not observed in the contents of the small guts; they likewise
become less fluid, and more consistent, by the resorption of the more liquid
parts through the lacteals and other bibulous veins, still continuing.

The vermicular appendix of the caecum, by the numerous glandular outlets in
its cavity, serves, as well as a receptacle for the meconium in the foetus, to
lubricate the contents and membranes of the caecum, into which it opens, as
well as its own, in order to facilitate the propu^^ion of the faecal matter,
and prevent its adhesion to the coats of the caecum and its own, and where it
must stagnate longer than it had stagnated hitherto any where in the intestinal
tract. This use likewise takes place in the born animal; and besides in
obstinate costiveness, by affording more room or stowage for the congested
faeces it renders that complaint more easy to be borne, and less detrimental
than it otherwise might be.

The caecum and colon, besides having a stronger muscular coat than the small
intestines, are furnished with three ligament-like bands, running length-ways
on their outside, dividing their surface into three portions, nearly equal^.
Though they appear like ligaments externally, they are made up in their inner
structure of true muscular fibers, and strengthen the longitudinal fibers of
the muscular coat; as they are longer than the proper coats, they keep them
drawn up into folds or wrinkles.

Through these intestines is propelled and urged on the remainder of the
alimentary mash, after having undergone the action of the small guts; it
consists of the earthy part of the materials taken in for food -- of the
membranous, fibrous, cartilaginous, and bony parts, that could not be
sufficiently broken, and comminuted by the stomach or intestines so as to be
taken up by the lacteal, and other absorbing vessels; the recrements of the
bile, and mucus furnished by Peyer's glands, all mixed together.

The causes of its propulsion are the same as in the small guts, viz. the
action of respiration, and the peristaltic motion of the intestines themselves;
but its course is slower than in the small guts, upon the account of its
thicker consistence, the ascent and windings of the colon, the delay it meets
with from furrows within the tube, and the great stop from hard faeces, pent up
in the rectum by the sphincter any. The putridity is increased as it goes on;
and as putrefaction generates air, the colon is commonly found distended with
flatulency. The whole is more and more gradually exhausted and robbed of its
most fluid parts; and as what putrid miasmata are absorbed by the mesocolic
veins, are determined finally into the vena portarum, to contribute toward the
rancidity and putrescent disposition of the bile, so that even here the faeces,
which are upon the point of being expelled out of the body altogether, are
rendered useful and made subservient to the perfection of what is left behind.

The RECTUM begins in the pelvis where the last curvatures of the colon end;
its muscular coat is much stronger than in the other intestines; the
ligament-like bands, which in the caecum and colon are collected into three
portions, are spread equally over its surface, that no part of it may be weaker
than another, lest it should give way in the effort of throwing out its
contents. Into this intestine the faecal matter, now consistent and shaped by
the cylindrical cavity of the colon, especially in its last curvatures, where
it is more uniform, and not so much distended by flatulency, is received and
accumulated therein, until, by its increased bulk, weight, and acrimony, it
becomes troublesome, and would prove hurtful if long retained. Then it is
expelled by the muscular powers furnished for that purpose -- and strong powers
there are and admirably fitted to answer their end.

The INTESTINES are not left to move at random in the cavity of the abdomen,
but artfully tied down by a membranous web, which prevents their
circumvolutions from being entangled in each other -- at the same time allowing
them a gentle but limited motion. That part of it, which is connected with the
small intestines, is called mesentery; the other part fastened to the colon,
meso-colon. The rectum has a particular membrane allotted to itself for fixing
it.

This membranous web, for the mesentery, and meso-colon are one continued
membrane, is a double production of the peritoneum, arising from the vertebrae
of the loins; its two laminae are joined together by a cellular texture, in
which the lacteals, blood vessels, etc. run, and the mesenteric glands are
placed: when this double membrane has arrived at the intestines, its laminae
separate and quite surround them, thus furnishing their external covering.

Upon a slight survey of the uses produced by the mechanism of this part of the
human machine, we cannot avoid being struck with wonder at its apparent
simplicity, answering so many salutary purposes. If we trace the materials
thrown into the stomach for our support through the intestinal tube, we must
more and more admire the excellency of the divine workmanship; for as soon as
we take our food it is received into a place, in all points calculated to
render it fit for yielding its nutritious contents, by mixing with the salivary
and gastric juices -- having its texture broken by muscular action, not only of
its own coats but the organs of respiration, and the quickly repeated shocks of
the largest artery in the human machine, and from heat, increased from its
situation, soon thrown into the process of fermentation -- by all which it is
rendered fluxile, and passes, from the contrivance at the lower orifice of the
stomach, slowly into the head of the first of the intestines -- more capacious
than its inferior part; it is there mixed with the bile, increased in its
quantity in proportion only as it is wanted, by the very means of those things
which require it, and pancreatic juice, calculated to convert the various
portions into a nutritious fluid, by mixing the parts uniformly together, at
the same time affording a stimulus to promote the propulsive force of the
intestines, and consequently increase the action of those vessels implanted in
the sides of them to convey it through the mesenteric glands, where it receives
more liquid, thinner than itself, to increase its fluxility into the receptacle
appropriated for this purpose, and from thence into the blood -- the faeculent,
or thicker part, being at the same time pushed forwards into the larger bowels,
from whence there can happen no regurgitation of any, even of its finer parts,
though delayed for some time, in order that a portion of its alkalescent or
stimulating materials may be carried through the vena portarum, into the liver,
to increase the acrimony of the bile; and as here the faeces acquire a greater
hardness, consequently stand in need of a greater force to propel them forwards
for their exit, the bowels in this place are possessed of greater strength, and
require a stronger stimulus to excite them to more powerful action, which the
putrescent state of the faeces, acquired by delay, affords.

But besides the uses, herein specified, appropriated to the stomach and
intestines, there is another very considerable one bestowed on them,
particularly the former, by which very material affections are diffused to
almost every part of the machine, and from which all the sensible parts of the
body receive very peculiar and extraordinary advantages -- I mean that of
conveying action to different parts, and feeling the effects from these
sympathetically and instantaneously; -- for in many cases the stomach not only
will experience perceptible effects locally of things received into its cavity,
but communicate effect to different parts from that local action; nay, will
produce them sometimes without the animal being sensible of any action going
forwards in that organ; and will itself be affected by some causes acting on
other different parts, with the same unconsciousness of the locality of action,
as well as sensible perception of such action -- so close an union is there
between this organ, and the intestines, with various parts, the most distant as
well as the more contiguous.

Opium, the active preparations of antimony, bark, and a number of those
medicines called cordial and antispasmodic, will diffuse their effects to the
machine in general, and some particular parts, from what they exercise on the
stomach, particularly itself. Hence will opium produce sleep -- take off pain
-- promote perspiration or sweat -- stop evacuations -- alleviate and conquer
some convulsive or spasmodic affections. -- Antimonials take off cuticular
spasms, productive of febrile affections, allay febrile heat -- promote
insensible perspiration and sweat. -- Bark increase the tone and strength of
the systems -- stop some evacuations -- increase others -- and give firmness to
the muscular fibers.

Cordials invigorate the habit -- increase the circulatory powers of the
constitution -- subdue lowness -- fainting -- warm the habit -- and produce
discharges from the skin.

Musk, asafoetida, camphor -- take off several convulsion affections -- and all
these things are done by the stomach, diffusively communicating effects to the
various parts, whose office it is to perform their different operations, or to
those where these morbid effects may be manifested.

And it will also be affected by the sensations induced on different parts
distant from itself. Spasmodic affections of the pores of the skin will produce
sickness, nausea, vomiting -- so will a stone in the kidney; violent blows on
the head, or (...) on the brain, will occasion similar effects -- and a variety
of others might be adduced tending to prove the same points; but enough has
been here advanced to prepare us for the fuller discussion, and better
understanding of these consequential particulars, when we come to speak more
fully on them, as they occur repeatedly in the course of the subsequent sheets.
-- We must now avert to the kidneys.

The KIDNEYS are two pretty solid glandular bodies, situated in the posterior
part of the cavity of the abdomen, on each side of the vertebrae of the loins,
between the last false rib, and the ossa iliaca or hip bones. The right kidney
lies under the great lobe of the liver, the left under the spleen, and
therefore is higher; they are commonly about five inches long, about three
broad, and one and a half thick; they are connected with the colon, duodenum,
liver, and spleen, by the productions of the peritoneum. They are in shape not
unlike a large bean, their circumference being unequal on one side, and concave
on the other -- the concave side is turned toward the vertebrae, or back bone.

The Kidneys are surrounded with a loose cellular texture, in which there is
much fat; this likewise invests the arteries and veins of the kidneys. The
proper coat or membrane of the kidneys is double, being composed of two
laminae, or layers -- betwixt which there is a very fine cellular texture; the
external laminae is very thin, and only surrounds the body of the kidney; the
internal one penetrates every where by numerous elongations into the substance
of the kidney, from which it cannot be separated without tearing. The substance
of the Kidneys is smooth, even, and uniform in adults -- in young children
divided in a manner into several lobes and tubercles, or portions.

They are supplied with very large blood vessels -- commonly called emulgents.
The arteries arise from the great descending artery of the heart, nearly at
right angles, one large trunk for each kidney; they run horizontally to the
kidneys, and commonly without division -- and having sent off branches to the
external surface of the kidney, the chief trunk enters into its body at its
concave part, and is distributed by an infinite number of small branches over
all its substance. The veins running along with the arteries open in a large
trunk from each kidney into the cava descendens, or large descending vein, near
that part of the aorta where the arteries arise.

If the kidney is cut through its unequal, toward its concave part, into two
equal portions, there appears a threefold substance composing its body -- the
exterior part called cortical, round the whole circumference of the kidney, of
a bright, whitish, gray color; -- a middle substance, called medullary,
striated, or streaked, which terminates in the third, called papillary, as it
ends in eleven or twelve papillae, or nipples, from the ends of which the urine
drops through several small holes in the cavity of the kidney.

The intimate structure of the kidney is entirely vascular -- the small
arterial branches proceeding toward the papillae are reflected back with
serpentine circumvolutions toward the surface of the kidney, then are bent
again toward the papillae and, at length, send off straight urinary ducts
perforating the papillae, and tending to the cavity of the kidney called
pelvis, which is continued to the ureter, a vessel which runs into the bladder.

The pelvis, which is truly the head of the ureter, is the reservoir into which
the urine drops from all the urinary ducts or tubuli. It is formed by the
confluence of three large urinary canals, into which the small urinary ducts
open by holes laterally. This cavity, or pelvis, is straitened at length into
the ureter, one to each kidney; so that the kidney may be imagined to be a
vascular congeries, consisting of arteries, uriniferous ducts, or those which
convey urine, and veins, all running together over the substance of the kidney;
the urinary ducts opening at length into the great urinary reservoir, or
pelvis, which terminates in the ureter. In the kidney there are no follicles
between the last arterial branches, and the first urinary ducts.

By this apparatus is the urine separated in the substance of the kidney and
sent into the ureter: the vast largeness of the emulgent arteries, and their
proximity or nearness to the heart show, that a great quantity of blood comes,
in a small space of time, to the kidneys. Now the blood, which is newly come
from the heart, must contain a great quantity of water, as, besides our drink,
and the stomachic and intestinal juices, almost all the lymph of the body is
poured upon the chyle, in its receptacle in the lower belly, and the duct in
the thorax, immediately before it is mixed with the blood.

This water is impregnated with the salts of the blood, and some animal oil,
attenuated by the process of concoction, or digestion, and circulation, and
rendered miscible with water, and united with these salts, together with subtle
terrestrious or earthy parts, abraded from the inside of the animal tubes,
constitute the matter of urine. The diameters of the urinary ducts are adapted
to admit these, and exclude, in a sound state, every thing grosser, as globules
of blood, mere oil unattenuated, milk or chyle, and serum or lymph, that is
concrescible by fire, urine being not so; at the same time they transmit every
thing that is thinner, if it arrives at the kidneys; so that urine is the
lixivium or ley, as it were, of the blood; by the separation of which it is
edulcorated. Its salts and oils, which begin by repeated circulations to be
more acrid than the tender vessels of the nerves and brain could bear, being
washed off, and thrown out by the urinary passages.

The URETERS, arising from the pelvis of the kidneys, run down obliquely, and
with a very small inflexion from the kidneys to the lateral parts of the inner
and anterior side of the os sacrum, or lower part of the back, and passing
between the rectum and bladder, are inverted in the latter. Their structure is
much a kin to that of the intestines, though the innermost coat is smooth and
membranous, furnished with glands separating a mucilaginous liquor to defend it
against the sharpness of the urine; they open into the neck of the bladder on
each side, penetrating obliquely through its coats.

The BLADDER is a membranous and fleshy sac or bag, capable of contraction and
dilatation situated in the lower part of the abdomen or belly, immediately
behind the joining of those bones, called o^^a pubis -- and opposite to the
beginning of the rectum. The figure of it is nearly a short oval -- it is
broader on the fore and back, than on the lateral parts, rounder above than
below, when contracted; and broader above than below when distended. It is
conceived, as divided into the body, neck, and bottom, into anterior and
posterior, and into two lateral parts, right and left.

The upper part is termed its bottom -- its neck is part of its lower portion,
with respect to its situation in the body. The bladder is not within the cavity
of the peritoneum, that membrane only covering a part of its bottom or upper
part, and coming down no farther anteriorly, but being reflected over the
bladder, descends, covering it, as far down as the insertion of the ureters.

The structure of this organ is nearly the same with that of the ureters, viz.
besides the peritoneum, which covers but part of it, there is first an external
cellular, under that a muscular coat; then a second cellular, then a nervous
coat, and the innermost of all, a coat, in some measure, villous, furnished
with glands which separate a mucilaginous liquor, necessary to defend it
against the sharpness of the urine, which stagnates within it often, for a very
considerable time together.

The fibers in the muscular coat run in all manner of directions, the
outermost, and most remarkable series is longitudinal, running from the neck
upwards, and has been thought to deserve a particular name -- detrusor urinae,
expeller of urine -- the others run obliquely, by different degrees of
obliquity, and some altogether transverse: the neck, or under part of the
bladder, is shut by a muscular sphincter, like that of the anus.

The use of the bladder is to receive the urine which keeps constantly slowing
from the urinary ducts and kidneys into the pelvis and ureter -- and to retain
it; that it may not indecently dribble, and disturb the functions of life. It
seems to change its nature no otherwise than by its being kept at rest in a
warm place, thereby becoming more acrid and stimulating. The urine is detained
in the bladder by its sphincter, till by its distension, and the acrimony of
the urine, either or both, we are made, uneasy and endeavor to expel it
through the urethra -- see page 53, 54, etc. -- out of the body, which is done
in the same manner as the faeces are thrust out -- by the joint action of the
diaphragm, and the muscles of the abdomen, assisted by the proper muscular coat
of the bladder -- and the pyramidial muscles, in a particular manner, favor
the evacuation of the bladder, as they lie nearly over it.

The UTERUS, or WOMB, the habitation of the foetus, is situated between the
urinary bladder, which is placed before it, and the intestinum rectum placed
behind it. In a grown woman, not with child, it is about three finger breadths
long, two in breadth, where it is broadest, and one in thickness; it is of the
figure of a flat flask, unequal before and behind, with edges inclining to
sharp; its broadest extremity, which is called its bottom, is uppermost; and
its small part, called its cervix or neck, is downwards -- it is covered over
with a production of the peritoneum, two portions of which, one on each side,
fasten it to the sides of the pelvis, and are called the ligamenta lata, or
broad ligaments.

The womb, when impregnated, has but a very small cavity, its walls being very
thick; the cavity is, in some measure, of a triangular shape, and it is lined
with a very thin small membrane.

The womb is made up of a compacted cellular substance, with a copious
intermixture of blood vessels -- there appears something like muscular fibers
amidst the cellular substance, especially in women newly delivered, variously
distributed in little circles.

The smaller and lower part of the womb, called its neck or cervix, abounds
with callous rugae, or folds; in the interstices or spaces of which there are
mucous sinuses, and here and there round vesicles full of a pellucid lymph,
where it opens into the vagina, described below; it forms a round protuberance,
not unlike the glans penis, called the os uteri, mouth of the womb, or os
tincae, because supposed, like a tench's mouth, divided by a rimae or chink; on
which protuberance there is plenty of a mucous, glutinous liquor, furnished by
numerous sinuses there: this glutinous liquor serves to shut the os uteri in
pregnancy.

The VAGINA, or canal of the uterus, is about six or seven inches long; it is
stretched from the mouth of the uterus to the pudendum, or external parts; it
is of the same texture with the uterus; cellular, with numerous blood vessels
interwoven: its inner surface has several rugae, or wrinkles; there are
likewise nervous papillae spread over it, which render it more sensible; its
external orifice is surrounded with muscular fibers, which constrict it.

The uterus, as had been ^^id, is plentifully stored with blood vessels; they
are furnished from the hypogastrics, by which, likewise, the inner and greater
part of the vagina is supplied; its outer extremity is furnished from the
external haemorrhoidal.

The womb is adapted for the retention of the embryo, and its nourishnent, till
the time of birth; and with the vessels of the vagina, for affording the
monthly evacuation called menses, or catamenia.

But to the womb, for the purpose of promoting the generation of the human
species, there are united two other contrivances on each side, the one called
tubae Fallopianae, Fallopian tubes, from the discoverer, Fallopius; the other,
ovaria, from their retaining small round substances of the nature of eggs.

On each side of the fundus uteri the former open by two small orifices, which
in a dead subject, with difficulty admit a hog's bristle; from this small
opening each tube proceeds somewhat transversely from the fundus toward the
lateral parts of the pelvis, running between the duplicatures of the broad
ligaments -- their diameters gradually augmenting to their extremities, where
they are about a quarter of an inch wide; they run not straight from the womb,
^ut wind in such a manner as to turn their wide, open extremities toward the
ovaria; these extremities are jagged or scollopped; their external membrane, or
covering, is from the peritoneum; their proper coat is plentifully furnished
with vessels; there are some obscure, seemingly muscular, fibers interspersed,
supported by a spongy cellular texture.

The OVARIA are two whitish, oval, flat bodies, situated on the sides of the
fundus uteri, to which they are joined by a kind of short ligament, and
enclosed, together with the tubae Fallopianae, in the duplicature of the broad
ligament -- their substance is cellular and close, without fat -- in it there
are found, even in the ovaria of virgins, little round vesicles, called ova, or
eggs -- of an uncertain number, commonly ten or twelve, full of a transparent
coagulable fluid. These ova adhere closely to the texture of the ovaria.

The OVARIA and TUBAE Fallopianae, are supplied with blood vessels from the
spermatics, which have nearly the same origin in females as in males -- viz.
the arteries of the aorta, near the rise of the emulgents, and the veins from
the vena cava, and emulgent vein; these inosculate with the vessels that go to
the uterus.

These also are supposed to perform particular functions in the propagation and
formation of our species -- for the ovaria are squeezed by the edges of the
tubes, disengage some of the ova, or eggs, which are impregnated, generally
one, now and then two, three, or four, which are forced into the tubes and
carried into the cavity of the uterus, where they fix themselves and are
retained, and here the foetus is nourished to the proper time for its birth,
which happens almost always in the space of nine months.

We might now, according to what we first proposed respecting the nature of our
subject, finish our anatomical account, as sufficient has been described to
give a tolerable idea of constitutions in general; but as we also intend to
show the methods of preventing, or stopping the progress of particular
complaints, local as well as general -- we must, before we conclude, speak of
the testes, urethra, and penis, the male parts of generation -- as they are
subject to some complaints which require early attention, by which several
disagreeable consequences may be prevented.

The TESTES, or TESTICLES, with regard to their situation, are sufficiently
known; they are defended from cold, and other injuries, by several membranes or
coats.

The outer one is called the scrotum -- which is made up of the epidermis, or
scarf-skin; -- the skin, and immediately under the latter, a thick cellular
texture, closely adhering to it, but without muscular fibers: next under this
is what they call dartos, from its drawing up the skin. This coat envelopes
each testis singly; and by the junction of both together, where their sides are
contiguous, make a partition or septum between the two testes: it is likewise
wholly cellular, without muscular fibers, and without fat. Under the dartos is
the crema^^er muscle, so called from suspending the testicles; there is one to
each, and arise from the tendon of the obliquus descendens, oblique descending
muscle of the lower belly; yet some fibers from the obliquus ascendens, oblique
ascending muscle, the embracing the body of testes all around, serve to raise
it, and squeeze it in the act of generation. It is probable, that by the action
of this muscle, that the scrotum is gathered up into rugae by cold, as neither
it, nor the dartos, are furnished with muscular fibers. Under this muscle is
another coat of a loose cellular texture, called vaginalis, from forming, as it
were, a kind of sheath to the testes, between which and the innermost coat of
all is a loose space, in some measure like that between the heart and
pericardium, where a watery humor is contained -- the last and innermost coat
is called, from its whiteness, the albuginea; it is a thick, close, strong
membrane, immediately contiguous to the kernel of the testes* the substance of
which kernelly part is of a white color, and from reason and analogy, it is
concluded to be a continuation of the evanescent branches of the artery called
spermatic, from its supplying blood to the testes, from whence the semen is
secreted, rolled up together. It is divided into more than twenty portions or
clusters, separated from one another by as many partitions, which are
productions of the albuginea. Each cluster, contained between two partitions,
terminates in one duct; which ducts, above twenty in number, meeting together,
form a kind of network adhering to the albuginea; every duct anastomosing with
those contiguous with it: from this duct arise ten or twelve other distinct
ducts, which being separated, bent, or folded in a wonderful manner, make as
many vascular cones, and by their uniting constitute the head or beginning of
the epididymis, or small testicle. This single duct, variously bent and folded
into serpentine windings, such as there is no instance of in any other part of
the body, its windings being fastened together by cellular texture, makes a
roundish body on the upper and posterior part of the testicle, called
epididymis, which, at length, terminates in a firm and tough cylindrical tube,
called vas deferens.

The PENIS consists of two bodies called corpora spongiosa, or cavernosa,
spongy or cavernous bodies -- part of the urethra, the glans or nut at its
extremity, and its integuments. The integuments are, first the scarf-skin, and
true skin -- which being folded back, and adhering round the root of the glans,
forms what is called the praepuce, in the inside of which there are small
glandular folliculi, which separate an oily substance, serving to make the
praepuce slip over the glans, and hinder them from growing together: this
substance forms white flakes, and grows rancid and foetid by long stagnation.
In hot countries, it is more apt to corrupt and create inconveniences, than in
temperate climates. This seems to have introduced circumcision, which was early
practiced all over the East, and made a part of the Jewish religion. It is
performed by cutting off the praepuce quite round, close by the root of the
glans.

Under this common integument, the penis has a proper coat covering all its
body, from the glans exclusive backwards and is of a tough tendinous texture.

The TWO CORPORA SPONGIOSA arise from the os pubis on each side, and are
continued to the root of the glans: they are so called, because they are porous
like sponge, and capable of being enlarged by a fluid penetrating their
substance, chiefly in the living, by blood -- or in the dead subject, by
mercury or inflation of air.

The URETHRA is a continuation of the neck of the bladder, and runs in a furrow
between the two corpora spongiosa to the extremity of the glans -- it consists
of two thick spongy membranes, with a spongy texture between them -- its
beginning is covered by glans called PROSTATE -- at its emersion from which, it
becomes thicker and wider for the length of an inch, which thick part is called
its bulb, from the resemblance it bears to a bulbous root; its inner membranes
are pierced with many holes, here and there, through which, from a glandular
apparatus in the spongy substance of the urethra, a mucilaginous liquor is
furnished, serving to defend it against the acrimony of the urine. Besides
these orifices, there are three other glands, two near the bulb of the urethra,
one on each side, about the size of a pea; each of which sends off a long duct
which opens into the urethra, and a third single one, less than the other two,
at its bend under the os pubis -- which f^nds off two ducts opening likewise
into that canal. The first two are often found, but sometimes wanting or very
small; the third is but seldom met with -- the orifices are called by some
lacunae; these glands -- Cowper's glands; they both, probably, serve for the
same purpose.

The GLANS is a continuation of the spongy substance of the urethra, reflected
over its extremity, and expanded in the form we see: it is covered over with a
thin epidermis or scarf-skin, under which there are numerous nervous papillae,
rendering it extremely sensible.

The penis is plentifully supplied with blood vessels from the ilia^s, both
external and internal -- its nerves come from those of the loins and sacrum.

The use of the parts we have now described are for the propagation of our
species, and some for the evacuation of urine.

We shall now conclude what we mean to advert to on the anatomical part of the
machine, which we have rendered very easy to be conceived, and think will be
highly useful in assisting the uninformed readers to have just conceptions of
what we mean by particular constitutions in general, -- what of general
diseases, and those called topical, or confined to some particular part, -- and
make them perceive the reason why such and such particular remedies or regimen
should be employed in such and such particular cases, as come within the reach
of every man's power -- whether they aim at preventing the accession, or
shortening the progress when begun; all which will be much better, and easier
understood, by the sketch, concise as it is, which has been given. For,
certainly, laying down rules and directions for a man how to proceed in nervous
cases, who has no idea of a nerve; in inflammation, who knows not any thing of
the vascular system; in jaundice, stone, gravel, who is totally ignorant of the
liver, spleen, bladder, kidneys, is as bad as leading a man blindfold through a
country to discover its beauties, and give him a knowledge of its situation,
soil, produce, etc. -- And to talk to a man of discovering the nature of his
constitution, and directing him to proceed agreeable to its disposition,
without t^lling first of what it is composed, and making him sensible of the
natural action of its component parts, would be as vague and useless as
chopping logic to a ^^stic -- it might confound, but could not inform: and it
is for want of true knowledge in these particulars, that men, in other respects
sensible, are so often heard delivering a profusion of nonsense on medical
subjects. We therefore, in order to correct errors so often detrimental in
their consequences, have presumed to alter the general plan of publications of
this sort; by thus beginning anatomically -- and shall now proceed to show the
different constitutions -- what they are, and how they may be discovered.

But, first, we must take notice of those parts which are called the moving
powers, by which all constitutional action is promoted, and life preserved; and
these are -- the brain and nerves -- the heart, and vascular system -- the
lungs and blood -- and the muscular fibers.

Now in proportion to the different degrees of power which these possess in
their natural state, so may constitutions in general be properly denominated.

The brain and nerves are considered as the origin of incitability -- that is,
motion produced in them by mental affections, and sympathy.

The heart, vascular system, and muscular fibers, as the fountains of
irritability -- that is, motion produced by material stimulus.

The lungs and blood, the source from whence all animal heat is derived -- the
universal stimulant of the human machine.

The muscles or muscular fibers, as the instruments of motion.

The stomach, intestines, and other viscera, as parts which may themselves be
acted upon, and produce action of some of the general moving powers, and each
on parts distant from them.

But we must observe, that with respect to the term, irritability -- it is by
all authors equally applied to the nervous and vascular system, as well as
muscular fibers, which we have shown it necessary to alter, and confine it to
the two last alone -- because, independent of the nerves, they cannot be put
into motion without some material stimulus locally applied to them -- whilst
the nerves may be brought into action by affections purely mental -- the
precise nature of whose action we cannot describe, and know them not but by
effects. Besides, though they are in the habit united closely, they may exist
independent of each other, and may be separately affected -- showing those
affections belonging to themselves, without disturbing each other in many cases.

It was, therefore, unavoidable to separate the two -- that constitutions might
be precisely and distinctively marked, where the action of one or the other
were most prevalent, and hence great confusion prevented; add to this, it
empowers us to account more rationally for sympathetic affections, that is,
where parts distant from others, show manifest signs of affection, though the
cause producing them lies in some more distant part; or where affections are
suddenly produced in the habit, from some external appearances out of the
habit, no matter being at that time inherent that occasions these affections
from the locality of irritation. But we must allow also, that the nerves are
capable of being put into motion by material stimulus.

Hence then it is clear -- that

The nerves are capable of being brought into action by mental affections,
sympathy, and material stimulus, themselves abstractedly considered.

The vascular system, and muscular fibers, under the same consideration, only
by material stimulus.

That in their combined state, they mutually act on each other, in many cases,
or may be separately affected.

Now as the moving powers vary in their different degrees, and different
combinations respecting those degrees, so do we conclude constitutions ought to
be determined -- and so ought different regimen, and applications of medicine,
be advised -- for preserving health, preventing, retarding the progress, and
curing of diseases.

SECTION II. On CONSTITUTIONS.
THERE is no subject on which we hear valetudinarians so much converse, as the
particular nature of their constitutions; nor any on which they form such a
variety of conjectures, at the same time to speak so positively, as if they
understood what was meant by the term; nay, even are angry if you dispute their
want of the most minute knowledge in this respect; and, indeed, it is almost
held as an undoubted truth, that all men are the best judges of their own
constitutions.

Notwithstanding, I can by no means allow this to be a truth, yet I can very
readily conceive how they make the mistake, and on what it is that they build
such a conceit -- they mean, that (...) men can tell what things best agree
with them, which commonly occur, and which they have observed from repeated
experiments; but this only comprehends the effect produced by different causes,
and may assist in giving information to scientific men in investigating the
precise nature of particular constitutions; but never can lead men, who have
not made the medical art their study, to sufficient discoveries, for
understanding the subject properly; a subject which cannot be scrutinized too
closely, as perhaps the whole good to be derived from judicious assistance upon
that knowledge totally depends. We shall, therefore, go a little deeper into
this matter, in order to lay a foundation for the application of those
remedies, from whence every man may derive benefit, with some degree of
certainty, and after which all naturally thirst with the greatest avidity. But
to make this business easy, we shall confine ourselves to the terms of which
people in general make use, and endeavor to show, what ought to be understood
by them, applied to the varieties presenting themselves in different shapes in
the human machine.

Mankind in general have furnished a great number of constitutions -- under the
following appellations: 1. Strong robust 2. Weak, relaxed, delicate 3. Nervous
4. Irritable 5. Torpid 6. Costive 7. Lax 8. Bilious 9. Plegmatic 10. Scorbutic
11. Gouty 12. Rheumatic 13. Scrophulous 14. Flatulent 15. Plethoric, or full
16. Hot 17. Cold 18. Consumptive.
And these have been deduced from the different appearances of the constitution
-- the various effects to which they were prone; the humors considered as
inherent; and to the affections of particular parts, which they constantly, or
on slight occasions, experience. But before any benefit can accrue in the
application of remedies, or the manner pointed out by which mischief may be
avoided from the same source, we should be acquainted with the corporeal
construction and nature of their powers, which constitutes most of these
deviations; and it is for want of this knowledge that self created physicians,
doctors of imagination, occasion very often a multiplicity of evils to their
credulous patients, and to themselves, under many morbid circumstances --
prescribing boldly the same applications to constitutions diametrically
opposite to each other, and which require very different materials to conquer
the same complaint. For want of this knowledge, I have known coughs converted
into pulmonary consumptions, and that not unfrequently; gout into apoplexy;
colds, inducing slight febrile affections, into inflammatory fevers; sore
throats, easily curable at first, made dangerous, and too often fatal -- and
many other deleterious transitions occur from the same fountain -- for it is a
certain fact, there is not any man that does not fancy himself, in several
cases, a physician; and when, by his ignorance in advising improper remedies,
he has created mischief, perhaps death, he consoles himself, and the unhappy
friends, by saying, he did it for the best.

To guard, therefore, against the unfortunate consequences of these good
actions, our duty calls upon us to specify the particular nature of these
constitutions, that we may hereafter, when requisite, point out properly
adapted remedies, that the patients may not fail in the attempt to alleviate,
or cure, or prevent particular complaints.

In STRONG, ROBUST CONSTITUTIONS,
The muscular stamina are firm, and well compacted; powerful and agile in
motion; the pulse strong and full; the nerves equable and forcible in their
influence; the circulation of the blood free, and the texture of that fluid
possessed of great tenacity; the complexion healthful, and the whole habit in a
state of strong activity.

In WEAK, RELAXED, and DELICATE,
The reverse of these occur -- the muscular stamina are weak and loose,
imbecile in motion, and soon wearied; the pulse small and quick; the nerves
irregular and debilitated in their influence; the circulation of the blood
languid, its texture loose; the complexion pale or fellow; and the whole habit
in a state of debility.

In the NERVOUS -- the constitution is like the l^tter in a great degree, but
the nerves are easily in^itable from slight causes, creating spasmodic
affections in different parts. People of this constitution are generally timid
-- have great variability of spirits, and much subject to hysterio fits,
cramps, and flying pains, -- putting on the appearance of various complaints,
according to the parts affected; the urine is commonly pale, sometimes made in
small quantities, then becomes turbid -- or in large quantities, then remains
limpid. In these, therefore, the nervous system is in such a state, so as to be
quickly incitable, and readily and frequently thrown into morbid action.

In the IRRITABLE,
There is a strong propensity in the vascular system, and muscular fibers, to
be thrown into quick states of contraction -- the constitution being in an
intermediate state, between the robust and relaxed, and participating, in some
degree, of the nervous. These are subject to have the circulation of the blood
readily increased -- flushings in the face -- are irascible, and easily moved
to anger -- they are soon heated by any stimulant taken internally.

Opposite to this constitution is the

TORPID. -- In these the circulation of the blood is languid, seems rather to
creep, or undulate, than circulate; the extremities are generally cold, and
they feel, without any cause very often, internal oppression; dreading, and
fearful of imaginary calamities -- they are naturally inactive, and indolent,
unless roused by some pleasurable pursuit; irresolute, mutable, and very often
timid in the extreme, where any difficulties are to be surmounted, and the
habit is generally costive.

The PHLEGMATIC.
In these the lungs, stomach, and intestines, are apt to be loaded with too
great a quantity of viscid phlegm -- from the digestive organs being in too
weak a state, and wanting a due secretion of bile -- the habit costive -- in
general cold -- subject to chronic coughs, and expectoration of tough viscid
phlegm -- the circulation of the blood sluggish -- the breathing laborious --
the muscular fibers and vascular system torpid -- though corpulent, they very
often are gross, and frequently subject to oedematous, or pasty swelling of the
legs.

The PLETHORIC.
These are such whose constitutions is apt to breed a great quantity of blood,
and are chiefly of the irritable class, more inclining to the robust and
athletic. In these the digestive powers are good -- the appetite sometimes
voracious, sometimes moderate -- frequently haemorrhages occur, and very often
copious evacuations of different sorts -- also headaches of the dull, heavy
kind, attended with frequent giddiness -- they are liable to become often
drowsy and sleepy, and fond of that species of indulgence -- and these
generally arise from too great plenitude in the sanguinary system.

The BILIOUS.
Are such as have a very copious secretion of bile, which is apt to collect in
its repository the gallbladder, nor be regularly excreted, or pass into the
duodenum, or first intestine -- by which means, stagnating there too long,
perhaps from its viscidity, it acquires a degree of acrimony, which, when
poured into the intestines, occasion bilious colic, cholera morbus, or a
vomiting up and purging of bile -- bilious looseness. In these, the complexion
has generally a sallowish cast; they complain frequently of bitterish taste in
the mouth -- are commonly costive, and have deep-coloured urine often,
depositing a yellow sediment; their appetite is very variable, and their
digestion, for the most part, weak.

The COSTIVE.
In these constitutions, some of them are naturally so inclined -- but if not,
it depends on particular states of the intestines, abdominal muscles, and the
different viscera that pour forth their contents into the bowels; in these
cases, the intestines are either in a state of too great torpidity, or there is
a deficiency of the internal fluid -- pancreatic juice -- or bile, which last
may be too inert -- or the abdominal muscles may be too relaxed -- which occurs
sometimes in women who have had several children.

The contrary of which happens in

The LAX;
for in them the intestines may be in too irritable a state -- slightly moved,
or may be too slippery, from an increased discharge of the pancreatic and
intestinal glands -- or the bile may be too acrimonious -- or acrid humors may
be too constantly poured into the intestines, and stimulate them to too strong
and quick repeated action.

The FLATULENT
Are such as have too great a quantity of wind, or air, in the habit, in a
loose unfixed state -- particularly in the stomach and bowels, which is
discoverable very often by flying, wandering pains, increased on warmth by its
rarefaction -- by distension of the stomach and intestines -- a ^umbling noise
in the bowels -- emissions of wind upwards and downwards -- and these may occur
from a weak digestion -- allowing particular materials to emit their air, and
the juices formed from them incapable of re-absorption -- from their not being
properly elaborated in the first passages: from being also too tight laced,
women often induce this complaint -- and by the too common and frequent use o^
warm ^lysters -- by a relaxed state of the stomach and intestines -- and by
feeding constantly on flatulent food, and keeping long fasts.

The SCORBUTIC.
Such are indiscrimately so styled, who have the appearances of eruptions on
the surface of the skin of different (...) -- (...) pimples, nettle-rash, or
dry scurfy scales -- the^e truly indicate a prevalent acrimony in the habit of
some sort; but the true scorbutic constitution is known by other marks --
black, or livid, or yellow spots, on the surface of the skin -- tender gums --
bleeding on the slightest touch -- sallow complexion -- rank fetid sweats --
loose texture of the fleshy parts appearing puffy and flabby -- and this owes
its origin to the texture of the blood being in a broken or very loose state --
whilst the former depends more upon acrid humors in the habit -- obstructed, or
rather diminished, perspiration -- weak digestive powers, and feeding on
unwholesome food, or eating and drinking too freely and luxuriously. -- These,
therefore, are better divided into acrimonious and scorbutic -- the first where
the acrimony of the fluids is indefinite and cannot be ranged under any known
species.

The GOUTY
Are such as are troubled with flying pains, occupying chiefly the small joints
of the hands and feet -- and having regular fits of that disease -- being
subject frequently to indigestion, and to be seized with pains of the joint of
the great toe -- or having pains of the stomach and kidneys, alternating with
those of the hands and the feet -- subject, from the same cause, to be teased
with pains in various parts before the fit of the gout has become regular, or
has retroceded, or is misplaced, owing often to debility of the active powers
of the constitution -- particularly the stomach and vascular system.

The RHEUMATIC.
These are such constitutions as are replete with rheumatic acrimony, which
fixes itself in different parts of the machine, chiefly on the large joints,
and runs along the course of the muscles -- or fixes itself also on the
membranes of the muscles, sometimes affecting one, sometimes another -- and
flies constantly from place to place, assuming different appearances according
to the peculiarity of the habit in which it resides -- becoming in some acute
and inflammatory, particularly in the robust and athletic, who have strong
stamina, and are readily irritable -- in others, painful and chronic -- in such
whose constitutions are more debilitated or torpid.

The SCHROPHULOUS.
Are such, in which that taint called scrophula, or King's evil is inherent,
manifesting itself by glandular tumors, chiefly of an indolent kind, in the
neck, for the most part, but also in other places of the body, where the
lymphatic glands are dispersed, particularly in the lungs and mesentery --
attacking the fair complectioned and delicate most commonly -- showing itself
also by an enlargement of the upper lip and alae nasi, or sides of the
norstrils -- and swelling of the belly -- a preternatural slight heat generally
attending the whole habit -- and febrile affections -- and sometimes a short
tickling cough.

The HOT and COLD
Depend upon the quantity of blood, in an healthful state and different degrees
of vascular action -- if the habit is full, and the vessels are in a state of
irritability, the constitution will be of the former class -- if there is a
paucity of that fluid, or no redundancy, and the vascular system is in torpid
state, whereby circulation is not duly performed, it will be of the latter --
for where the blood is most superabundant, and irritability of the vascular
system great in degree there will always be the most heat, and vice versa.

The CONSUMPTIVE.
These are generally such whose texture of solids are very delicate -- the
vascular system irritable, and some degree of acrimony in the humors -- pale
complectioned -- narrow chested -- long necked -- subject to febrile heats,
imitating hectic -- easily thrown into pulmonic haemorrhages -- and frequently
affected with slight tickling coughs -- their teeth clear, with an appearance
like transparency -- their eyes often bright, sometimes toward evening languid
-- the ends of the fingers rather bulbous -- and the nails curved inwards,
particularly when they approach near a morbid state.

We have here attempted to point out what is to be understood by the terms
commonly made use of in applying them to particular constitutions; but we find
that some have allusion to, and involve general ideas -- whilst others are only
confined to single or particular ones, and of which no use can be made, whilst
in such a vague, and unsettled state -- for in order to be of service, either
in our preventive or curative plan, we must advert to those particulars which
form constitutions in general -- for it is by the regulating of them we must
administer relief, when afflicted with diseases to which they are prone -- and
prevent those whose seeds are disseminated through the habit from becoming
active, and by that means constituting complaints to which they are
specifically adapted -- we, therefore, form constitutions into separate
division^ -- such as are simple and general -- mixed and general -- and such as
are peculiar.

SIMPLE, and GENERAL are,
1. Strong and robust. 2. Nervous. 3. Irritable. 4. Torpid. 5. Weak, relaxed,
and delicate.
But these may be combined -- and form others, As STRONG -- ROBUST -- and
Irritable, Torpid, Nervous. Though the first of these is what most commonly
takes place.

The WEAK, DELICATE, and RELAXED -- may also be subject to the same
combinations -- Nervous, Irritable, Torpid;
Apt to take place in the order here set down -- with regard to the most
general mode.

The MIXED and GENERAL -- are 1. Plethoric. 2. Hot. 3. Cold, 4. Consumptive. 5.
Acrimonious.
For these may be combined with any of the former -- but depend upon the
quantity and quality of the blood -- and the greater or less degree of the
irritability, or incitability of the vascular or the nervous system.

The PECULIAR are, The 1. Lax. 2. Costive. 3. Bilious. 4. Phlegmatic. 5.
Scorbutic. 6. Gouty. 7. Rheumatic. 8. Scrophulous. And 9. Flatulent.
Any of which may be combined with those which are simple and mixed -- as a
constitution may be

Strong, robust, plethoric, hot, costive, gouty -- so may the weak, relaxed,
and delicate -- though plethora is most generally the concomitant of the former.

It will be unnecessary to form any other combinations in this place, as the
reader will very readily conceive them himself; we shall only, therefore,
observe, that there are some which can never exist in a combined state, viz.

The strong and robust, with the weak, relaxed, and delicate -- the hot and
cold -- the irritable and torpid -- the lax and costive.

Now as there is certainly such a diversity of constitutions, many of them
diametrically opposite to each other; and as there is also a variety of
accidents and diseases which will affect the different constitutions in similar
modes, how can it happen that one and the same application shall be proper to
all? For it is owing to the operations of the habit that diseases are prevented
-- made milder, or cured; and it is to our applications, that these salutary
operations are often brought about where nature is defective -- and,
consequently, obliged to our assistance. We must, therefore, select our
remedies, and appropriate them to the particular constitutions; and let our
directions be formed, with respect to diet and conduct, consistent with the
same constitutional points -- and more especially where our attempts are
levelled at the prevention of morbid attacks; in completing of which we are to
aim at keeping the constitution in a state of health, adequate to the powers
with which it was originally endowed; so that the common causes of diseases may
not be enabled to produce their effects; which originate from different
qualities and changes of the air; called constitutions, climate, morbid
effluvia, and intemperance or indiscretion; under which last we comprehend all
those actions which, in their regulations, depend upon our own power, or are
deduced from necessity.

Or, that such diseases, as are unavoidable, may be made to produce their
influence on the machine in the most mild and gentle state; such as, small pox,
measles, and various fevers, and other complaints of the infectious or
contagious class; or those which arise from an hereditary cause: in
accomplishing which purpose, it will chiefly depend upon the proper use and
application of what are called the NON-NATURALS; which, before we can be
enabled to give proper directions in these points, we must examine, and show
the peculiar influences they are capable of producing in the habit.

SECTION III. OF THE NON-NATURALS.
THE celebrated HOFFMAN, to whose labors the art of physic is much indebted
for its improvement, says, A physician assisting in the curative operation of
nature, should use the milder and simple diaetetic remedies, rather than those
which are very active, and compounded of the pharmaceutic class. By diaetetic
is to be understood, those materials which are taken from such things, as every
body requires for the preservation of health and life, and which are received
in the schools, under the denomination of non-naturals; for, inasmuch, as from
a wrong or inordinate use of these, the first foundations and proximate origin
of diseases arise, and also have their violence increased; so nothing is better
adapted to expel or subdue morbid affections of various kinds, than a proper
use of them, with a regular mode of living, for without that, nature can do no
good in healing, nor medicine produce its desired effect. Whence the truth of
GALEN's assertion, That medicine has no efficacious remedy which can bring any
permanent assistance, if the mode of living should resist it, or should not act
in conformity, and become an useful auxiliary. And he solemnly asserts, That by
diaetetic remedies, (in which change of air and climate, proper exercise, well
adapted meat and drink, also a prudent use of whey and mineral waters, with
abstinence and ease are to be included,) he has performed such things in
conquering obstinate chronic diseases, which chiefly had their long and fixed
seat in the weakened system of the nerves, as spasmodic, convulsive,
hypochondraic, and hysteric affections, which others had in vain tried to
accomplish by medicines elegantly compounded, and judiciously administered, and
he himself had expected from medicines of great fame.

And certainly the doctrine is perfectly true -- medicine can do very little in
a variety of cases, without a strict adherence to a well-adapted regimen -- and
in preventing the machine from being afflicted with a diversity of maladies,
nothing. The failure of all the arcana, spoken so highly of by a number of the
ancients, as to be called panaceas -- nay, the hands of Gods -- indeed, those
supported by names of no less consequence than FRIAR BACON, and LORD VERULAM,
have proved how little dependence can be placed on the most extolled nostrums
-- whilst Carnaro, and several others of more modern date, have experimentally
and incontestably proved what may be done in these points by a proper regimen,
selected with judgment, and persevered in with resolution -- not only curing
different obstinate diseases, which had resisted the force of the art of
medicine, in the hands of the most well-informed and sagacious practitioners,
but insuring a continuance of health in a green old age. For Carnaro says, At
eighty-three I now enjoy a vigorous state of body and mind -- I mount my horse
from the level ground -- I climb steep ascents with ease; and have lately wrote
a comedy full of innocent mirth and raillery; when I return home, either from
private business or the Senate, I have eleven grand children, with whose
education, amusement, and songs, I am greatly delighted; and I frequently sing
with them, for my voice is clearer and stronger now, than ever it was in my
youth. In short, I am in all respects happy, and quite a stranger to the
doleful, morose, dying life, of lame, deaf, and blind old age -- worn out with
intemperance.

Great as are these advantages -- how happy should it make us in our
reflection, and how thankful to the benevolence of Providence ought we to be,
that these, in a great measure, lay within our reach; for enviable as are the
blessings CORNARO enjoyed, he emerged from a state of constant torment, by a
steady adherence to, and uniform perseverance in temperance, approportioning
his regimen to the nature and exigencies of his constitution only -- which is
extremely worthy of imitation, as its consequences will amply reward for any
mortifications we may have to encounter in the beginning. In order to qualify
ourselves for which, we must proceed to enquire into those sources from whence
he drew such consolation -- and here we shall find, they all concentered in the
proper use OF THE NON-NATURALS -- so called, because they affect man without
entering into his composition, or constituting his nature -- but yet are so
necessary, that he cannot live without them -- we should rather term them
necessaries -- as they are things natural in themselves, and to man's existence
necessary, and unavoidable. However, as our business in this place is to give
information on material things, we shall refrain from verbal investigation, as
of little moment -- and consider them in the following order -- showing their
manifest qualities, and explaining their perceptible effects. They have been
divided into six heads, viz.

1. Air. 2. Aliment. 3. Exercise and Rest. 4. Wakefulness and Sleep. 5.
Repletion and Evacuation. 6. Passions, and Affections of the Mind.
But before we enter on a full discussion of these separately, we must observe,
that the six might, with great propriety, be reduced to four -- as exercise and
rest produce pretty nearly similar effects on the constitution, as wakefulness
and sleep -- hence might these not improperly be reduced to one head, allowing
something more to exercise, than wakefulness, because of the muscular motion
employed in the former.

As for repletion and evacuation, they, we shall find, more properly belong to
the class of diseases, as these being too profuse or too sparing, constitute
morbid affections of the habit. -- However, we shall speak of each in their
place, agreeable to their arrangement -- and first of

AIR. -- And here we mean not to enter into philosophical or chemical
subtleties of the nature of this fluid, but confine ourselves to that of
atmosphere, whose different states and changes produce perceptible effects on
the constitution -- and which all ages have considered as one of the occasional
causes, and that very material, of health or diseases, according to its good or
bad properties, affecting the body by inspiration, as well as its
circumambiency. It is a fluid possessed of specific gravity, elasticity and
transparency, and compressible -- it surrounds the earth, and when agitated, or
driven in currents, forms wind: it is extremely subtle, penetrates, and
mingles with every part of the body, and by its elastic property, gives an
intestine motion to all the fluids, and a lively spring to all the fibers,
which promote circulation; it is never absolutely pure, but always mixed with
heterogeneous particles, and that air which we call pure, is such as is not
overcharged with any steams.

It has its varieties, and differs with respect 1. To its weight or levity. 2.
Heat or coldness. 3. Dryness or moisture. And 4. Purity or impurity.
Now these properties of the air separately, or by their different
combinations, produce many unpleasant effects on the constitution -- give rise
to and aggravate many symptoms in particular complaints -- as well as are the
origin of many diseases themselves.

1. For if the air is too heavy, it produces inflammatory affections of the
membranes in the chest and lungs, called pleurisy and peripneumony, headache
and giddiness, etc. by pressing upon the surface of the body -- obstructing the
pores of the skin, hence impeding perspiration -- accelerating the motion of
the blood -- occasioning it to crowd on the internal parts, and there circulate
too rapidly -- hence it is impelled too forcibly upon the lungs, and too
copiously upon the brain -- impeding, indeed, the natural functions of those
organs which lie remote from the surface of the machine.

2. If it has too much levity, its elasticity, is increased, and hence
produces, by vascular distension retarding the circulation of the blood, and by
diminishing the resistance of the fluids contained in the pulmonary vessels,
discharges of blood from the lungs -- hysteric, and hypochondriacal affections
-- rheumatism -- gout, etc.

3. Should the air be too hot, by rarefying the humors, and weakening the
fibers, it increases the circulation, and augment; perspiration, in which it is
greatly aided by its additional stimulus on the vascular system -- whence
acrimony is induced in the remaining fluids.

If too cold -- local inflammations -- as quinseys, pleurisies, peripneumonies,
are brought on by over distending the lungs from its gravity -- increasing the
tone of the vessels by constringing their fibers -- condensing or thickening
the humors -- and lessening perspiration. And should this state of the air
suddenly succeed too long-continued heat -- ardent, bilious, and other fevers
are the consequence -- by producing its effects on the constitution, where the
blood is in too rarefied and acrimonious a state, and the humors participating
of that acrimony with which the sanguinary mass is so replete.

4. Too dry an air shrivels (...) the solids, incrassates or thickens the
fluids, and disposes to febrile affections -- whilst too great moisture in that
fluid, relaxes, and debilitates, lessens perspiration, renders the blood too
watery -- and by these means becomes extremely injurious, laying the foundation
for coughs, asthmas, dropsies, intermittent and nervous disorders.

From the combination of some of these different qualities of the air,
different affections found their origins. -- Coldness and moisture are
offensive, we find, to the constitution -- but heat, moisture, and levity, are
more pernicious, because these, acting together, supply the habit with a
putrescent tendency, from whence many of our most dangerous complaints arise,
as vomiting and purging of acrid bile, called cholera, bilious looseness,
malignant fore-throats, and putrid fevers.

5. The purity and impurity of the air depends upon the greater or smaller
quantity of heterogeneous particles; these are particles which belong not to
the air in its natural state, which float in it -- hence it has, besides the
above evident qualities, others which escape detection by the senses, though
from their deletrious or mischievous effects, sufficiently manifest -- such are
from infections of various kinds -- as smallpox, measles, scarlet fever, etc.
malignant effluvia, exhalations, etc.

With regard, however, to the salubrity of the air, we must observe -- that is
most salutary, which is pure, dry, and temperate, untainted with noxious damps,
or putrid effluvia, from any cause whatever; but the surest mark of good air in
any place, is from the longevity of its inhabitants.

The evident marks of a bad, or insalubrious air in any house, are dampnesses,
or discoloring of plaster or wainscoat; -- mouldiness of bread, wetness of
sponge, melting of sugar, rusting of brass or iron, and rotting of furniture:
-- and nothing is more conducive to render air noxious, load it with putrid
steams, and breed bad distempers, than permitting common and crowded burial
places to be within the precinct, of populous cities; or numbers of poor people
living in uncleanliness, collected together in small houses, or narrow streets.

Valetudinarians experience the most agreeable sensations when the wind is
westerly, though when at north, or north east, it is accounted bracing and
healthful. Indeed so powerful an effect has the influence of the winds,
agreeable to the quarters in which they were fixed, been supposed to have, that
it has been asserted, our dispositions and tempers are greatly affected by
them; -- long continued easterly winds make people, who are naturally cheerful,
very irritable and morose. Nor does our tempers being affected by the different
states of air, seem at all improbable, inasmuch as the body and mind are linked
together in such close and intimate bonds of union, that they reciprocally
affect each other: for as corporeal affections will, we know, alter the natural
dispositions of people -- making the placid and sweet tempered, often petulant
and peevish -- the courageous, timid, fearful, and irresolute -- the most
patient, restless and unquiet -- the lively and volatile, languid and
desponding -- and the most active, indolent, -- so may the air, as it conduces
to throw the constitution into states nearly morbid, produce, in some degree,
similar effects -- as has been repeatedly experienced by men, not divested of
observation.

A west wind, in general, is esteemed the most salutary -- then a north-west --
after which succeeded, in degrees of salubrity, in the following order -- east,
north-east, and last, south and south-east -- and these may be accounted for,
from the different qualities of the air, in proportion to the excess or
deficiency of heat, coldness, moisture, dryness, weight, or levity -- or the
different noxious or contrary combinations they bring along with them.

From what has been advanced, the situation of our habitations will be a very
material consideration, in conducing to the preservation of our health.

The most healthy exposure, we have been told, in any place fixed for
residence, is to be found by cutting one of the trees near the place where the
house is to be built, transversely with a saw, then closely to observe the
rings which appear on the surface of the section; the side of the tree on which
the distance of the rings from each other is greatest, is the most healthful
exposure. And this is obvious, because there has been the greatest accretion of
matter by the healthful disposition of those parts so made, from always being
blown upon by air from the most salubrious quarter, which it faces, and being
hid from that which comes from the opposite, which seems to produce a different
effect -- and it is an admitted fact, that in all places, or parts of country,
where vegetation is most vigorous, manifested by the strength and richness of
the vegetable class; there will also animals enjoy the same consequences --
hence should the windows of the house, all other circumstances being the same
have a similar aspect.

That house is considered as healthy which is situated on rising ground, or
side of a hill, and gravelly soil, because it is less exposed to damps and
stagnant waters, in an open dry country; the rooms should not be small, but
rather large -- though not cold; the exposure prudently adapted to the nature
of the climate, but so contrived, that it may be perflated by the east and
north winds, whenever you please, which should be at least once a day -- to
blow away animal steams, and other noxious vapors; -- but the air of the
bedchamber, especially, should be pure and untainted, not near the ground, or
any kind of dampness. We may in general conclude, those situations are most
salutary, where these different properties of the air commonly attend in
degrees of mediocrity, steering in a medium between two extremes -- nor will it
be a small addition, if they are near a river or brook, whose stream is
constantly running over a gravelly or sandy bottom -- for standing water is
always detrimental.

The country is more healthy than cities, or large towns, which are populous,
from the greater purity of the air, if they are in similar situations; but some
countries are extremely unwholesome, from the noxious vapors with which the
air is impregnated -- as those near the marshes of Essex, fens of
Cambridge-shire, or contiguous to lead mines, and smelting houses; for in
grounds close to these two latter, animals which graze there are often
destroyed, and vegetation greatly impeded: indeed the miners, smelters, and
people in the vicinity, are subject to the dry or convulsive colic, and
paralytic affections.

These are the principal effects of the air -- we must proceed to examine

2. ALIMENT;
Under which term is comprehended all those esculent animals and vegetables, as
well as liquids, by which we are supported, and which we use in common for the
purpose of nutrition; and these are supposed to possess different degrees of
nourishment, most of them having passed through some culinary process, more or
less adapted to our nature, before they are received into the stomach, but
which have particular portions proper to be assimilated, and form parts
congenial with those of the human machine to which they are applied.

But before we enter on the particular nature of our various, aliments, as we
are writing to people who are not thoroughly conversant with the animal
economy, it may be necessary to premise some account for their information, of
the different processes nature has affixed toward the completion of this
assimilation.

As soon as the morsel is put into the mouth, it undergoes, by the teeth, and
action of the muscles of the jaws, a considerable division, by the office of
mastication or chewing, in order that its texture may be broken, and mixed with
a due proportion of saliva, before it passes into the stomach -- some more
fluid being acquired in its descent; -- when it arrives at the stomach, it
there gets blended with the juices of that organ, supposed, and proved by
Spallanzolli, to be a powerful solvent of our food, and some small portion of
bile; and, during its residence there, experiencing the effect of heat, and
muscular action, from the coats of the stomach, and motion of the diaphragm,
lungs, intercostal and abdominal muscles, and the large blood vessels and parts
which lay contiguous; it thence passes gradually over the pylorus, or lower
orifice of the stomach, and the^e meets with the bile from the gallbladder and
liver in much larger quantity -- the pancreatic juice, or that of the
sweetbread, similar to the saliva, but rather more viscid -- and the fluids
separated by the intestines; and here it is subservient to the further action
of the muscular coat of the intestines, and their peristaltic motion --
churning, as it were, their contents and minutely mixing and blending together,
the food taken in; and the different juices, which it has received in its state
of comminution and solution -- from all which a milky juice is formed called
chyle -- this is separated from the faeculent sordes, and taken up by a set of
small absorbent vessels called lacteals -- which open upon the inner coat of
the intestines, and pass through the medium of the mesentery, which is the
connecting membrane of the bowels, to the lower vertebrae of the loins, and
there empty themselves into a vessel, called the thoracic duct, or receptaculum
chyli -- but there are, through the mesentery, various glands interspersed,
through which these lacteals pass, and where the chyle is mixed with a thin
lymph separated there for this purpose, in order to rend it more fluid. It is
by these lacteal vessels, the motion of the intestines, and the force of the
circulation unavoidably carried forward to the thoracic duct, as it cannot
regurgitate, on account of the valves in various parts of these lacteals, which
prevent its retroceeding motion -- because they open only forwards -- and are
shut closer by any fluid pressing backwards: thus then is the chyle thrown into
the receptacle -- which continues its course, to the subclavian vein, along the
vertebra -- into which it enters, and from whence the chyle i^ poured, and
thence immediately thrown into the right auricle and ventricle of the heart,
where it mixes with the blood, and passes into the lungs -- here it receives a
considerable trituration, receiving material alterations from thence, and from
what it receives from the atmospheric air inspired into that organ; -- from the
lungs it returns through the pulmonary vein into the left auricle of the heart,
then into the ventricle -- from whence it passes, mixed with the sanguinary
mass, into the aorta, or large artery; and is diffused universally through the
machine, where it is completed for the purposes of nutrition -- being perfectly
assimilated into the nature of animal juices -- and by its proper application
to particular parts, wanting the addition of nutrient fluids, renews what has
been abraded, and thus keeps the machine in a state adapted to the performance
of its necessary functions, supplying portions proper for the requisite
secretions. By these various means is this assimilating effect produced -- a
contrivance, which nothing but divine and beneficient Wisdom could be adequate
to bestow -- for let the animal be fed upon food, ever so various, and
dissonant in their own peculiar properties, still that power can convert
materials so disagreeing to the advantage of the creature feeding upon them;
nay some, such as goats and asses, will be nourished by the products of nature
-- which, to horses, oxen, sheep, etc. prove the most fatal poison.

It is most probable that our first food was of the vegetable class, in the
selection of which, man was directed by experience, led to it from the smell
and taste; and the support and increase of strength from thence consequent,
would confirm their use. But beasts being troublesome to the cultivators of the
earth, and vegetable diet not being proper to support sufficiently those who
were employed in such labor, the flesh of animals made a necessary addition;
of which we find a great variety at present are appropriated as common food,
and the catalogue of which luxury has, in no small degree, augmented.

Notwithstanding food is required to repair those particles which have been
worn away, and dissipated by perspiration, still a constant and quick
repetition is also requisite; for the blood, from its own disposition apt to
run into the nature of lixivial salts, continually approaches near to
putri^^nous acrimony, from the circulatory motion and heat it perpetually
suffers, by which the animal humors are greatly disposed to putrefaction.

But the blood also from perspirable matter passing off, acquires a disposition
to coagulate, and the restitution of the watery fluid; that its globules may be
separated, and preserved in a state of stupidity; and consequently the rest of
the humors in a proper disposition for secretion.

These truths are demonstrable, not only by their causes, but the appearance of
men and animals, who die of hunger -- for it is common for them to have an
acrid, fetid, offensive breath; their teeth loosened by corrosive saltness --
violent pain in the stomach -- acute fevers, and delirium.

The nutritious part of the food, from animals, consists of a gelatinous lymph;
-- from vegetables of a farinaceous substance -- in which is a portion of
vegetable acid, oil, and saccharine or sugary matter; consequently, where the
digestive powers are perfect, those which abound most with such matter in their
respective classes, are the most nutritious.

But animal lymph, or the finest or most subtle part of the fluids, affords
the quickest and strongest nourishment, as it is nearly elaborated into juices
similar to our own; vegetables (...) so, as most of the esculent roots, plants,
and fruits, are of an acescent nature, few are alcalescent, or replete with
stimulant or aromatic particles; few are possessed of gelatinous lymph, and
only are nutritious from their farina; not many changing into those humors
called indigenous, or natural, after having passed often through the course of
circulation.

Notwithstanding which, it would be extremely improper for men to live alone on
animal food; lest a habit should be induced too full of blood, and too replete
with putrescent juices; creating ferocity, scurvy, faetor, leprosy, and all
kinds of lixivial corruption; as in the case among the anthropophagi, or those
who feed on human flesh; all which mischiefs, by change of diet, and living
solely on vegetable food, are conquered.

Hence, in warm constitutions, hot climates and seasons of the year, men who
are indisposed, as well as those in health, have a greater propensity to
acescent vegetables, in proportion as the heat is more or less excessive; and
hence men in very hot countries, commonly live on vegetables, seldom or not
without danger, on animal diet; but in cold countries, the practice is safer,
and more free from inconveniences: for this reason, bread, or farinous
substances analogous to bread, is universally made use of; but we should
observe, that vegetable food, besides its acescent property, is replete with
fixed air.

From what has been said of the nature of aliment, the utility of mixed diet,
vegetable, and animal, will be obvious; as they are correctors of each other;
hence likewise will be allowed, the propriety of uniting acids, or four sauces
with high-seasoned dishes, or eating them with the flesh of animals, whose
juices tend to promote saline acrimony; as fish, wild fowl, etc. and we may
deduce also the following conclusion: -- That ANIMAL FOOD is must nutritious,
heating, and stimulant, disposing to putrefaction. -- VEGETABLE -- less
nutritious, cooling, diluent, acescent, slightly aperient, and corrective.

We must now advert to our third point --

3. EXERCISE and REST.
And when we speak of exercise, we include that of the mind, with the body; for
these two are so intimately connected, that they produce a variety of effects
one on the other.

To exercise, the ancients have, as well as the moderns, indeed ever attributed
great utility, particularly in pursuing it with propriety, and have allowed,
that great constitutional mischief may be derived from its abuse or neglect.

It has with great justice been considered the sole instrument of the cure of
many diseases, especially those of the glandular system; and SYDENHAM had so
high an opinion of it, particularly riding on horseback, that he affirms,
Mercury for the lues venerea, nor the bark for intermittents, are not more
certain specifics, than riding on horseback for a consumption; though here he
seems to be sanguine in his opinion, and has given too great latitude to the
salutary effects of this remedy; for, certainly there are cases of consumption
where riding becomes injurious -- but the consideration of the subject belongs
not to this place -- we shall speak more minutely of it, when we come to give
particular directions on that complaint.

Exercise consists in local motion of the body, and that motion more powerful
of the limbs. It has been divided into serious, and amusing: that belonging to
labor is of the first class -- diversions the second. GALEN has written
pretty copiously on the subject, and pointed out when it might be salubrious,
and otherwise.

Severe exercise, when we exert quick motion, called gymnastic, extenuates the
body; the contrary renders it gross; long continued, dissipates its moisture,
and occasions dryness; moderate makes it fat. However, well-regulated exercise,
we find, in general, produces a freedom of circulation, assists digestion,
promotes perspiration, and increases glandular secretion and excretion; by
which mean such as is proportioned to the strength -- carried beyond that, it
occasions fatigue, and becomes instrumental in producing those evil
consequences, it otherwise is calculated to remedy; for when too freely used,
it is the source (...) loss of appetite, great thirst, loathing of food, heat
in the bowels, costiveness, chillness, rigors, and fainting. And this must be
the case, when we consider the effects produced in the system, by that which is
judiciously adapted; as by increasing the oscillatory motion of the vessels;
that is, making (...) contractions and dilatations quicker, their contents are
properly comminuted; all crudities destroyed -- the blood rendered blank and
mild -- the fordes, or gross part, thrown out of the habit -- (...) the
vascular system strengthened, by which the nervous power becomes equable in its
action, and, consequently, the solids of the animal firm, and the fluids pure.

The mind also has its influence, for though by its exercise it may be made
stronger -- still, if not kept within proper bound it brings on fatigue, and
hebetates, or renders the moving powers of the machine inert and dead. Hence
the exercise intended (...) promote and preserve health, should be such, as is
united with mental amusement, rather than labor -- inasmuch as in the former,
the mind is exhilirated; will communicate agreeable sensations, and give
firmness to the moving powers.

REST is also necessary to relieve both the mind and body such as is sufficient
to free the vessels from the stronger exertions of their elastic force, recruit
their strength, and set thinking faculties at rest from their labor. But this,
if carried to excess, becomes indolence, and lays the foundation for those
disorders, which arise from inactivity -- and this brings on universal
relaxation of the solids -- glandular obstructions: -- enervates the system,
vitiates the humors, creates pains in the stomach, flatulencies, indigestions,
etc. and renders the affections of hypochondriac people, and those who are
gouty, in a great measure incurable.

From what has been advanced on this subject, the subsequent deductions may be
drawn --

That EXERCISE and REST may be considered mental as well as corporeal; the
FIRST, in moderate, degrees, should be esteemed properly stimulant, a
strengthener of the system, promoting digestion, circulation, secretion, and
excretion; the SECOND, restorative chiefly, but both in extremes, debilitating.

The next of the non-naturals which present themselves to our consideration,
are,

4. SLEEP and WAKEFULNESS.
And these produce nearly the same effects as the former -- only muscular force
is less employed in wakefulness than exercise, and the animal receives most of
his detriment from vascular action, and debilitating the nervous influence; and
by too much sleep the body is apt to become sooner relaxed -- have the mind
more inert, and, consequently, more liable to those complaints which arise from
universal indolence -- though these, in moderate degrees, are essentially
necessary and salutary; for moderate sleep increases perspiration, promotes
digestion, cherishes the body, and exhilirates the mind -- whilst the contrary
extreme renders the habit phlegmatic and inactive, lo^ds it with crude humors,
renders the vascular system sluggish and inert, disposes the solids to
relaxation, impairs the memory, and stupefies the understanding: -- on the
other hand, excessive watching dissipates the strength, produces fevers, dries
and wastes the body, and anticipates old age. It has been thought that
different ages of life, as well as constitutions, require more or less sleep --
for youth, o^ manhood, six or seven hours for infancy, or old age, eight or
nine; but the infirm ought not to be limited, they should be permitted to
indulge in such a measure, as is found from experience necessary for
refreshment.

From the general effects produced by sleep and wakefulness, they may be
considered as nearly similar to those of exercise and rest, and may also be
concisely marked down -- as stimulant and sedative -- producing every good
effect by their moderate use, and proper adaption; and a variety of mischiefs
by their abuse, or excess.

The next in order follows the fifth series --

5. REPLETION and EVACUATION.
But little can be said relative to these in this place -- for if what should
be evacuated is retained too long, or in too great quantity; if what should be
retained is evacuated too freely, they all constitute diseases -- and will be
treated under their respective heads.

If perspirable matter passes off not as it ought, but is obstructed --
plethora, or too great plenitude, fevers, headache, giddiness, inflammations,
etc. will ensue.

If what we eat lies too long on the stomach -- indigestion, heart-burn, pains
of the stomach, flatulence, etc.

If there is any retention in the lungs -- coughs, inflammation, asthma, etc.

If in the liver -- inflammation.

In the gallbladder -- jaundice etc.

In the bowels -- costiveness, and its consequences.

In the bladder -- difficulty in making water, inflammation, etc.

As the retained matters, from their delay, may acquire different properties
according to their nature, and may create disorders confident with their
acrimony, viscidity, quantity, or weight.

If too great a flux happens from the salivary glands -- it constitutes a
ptyalism, or salivation.

If from the liver, pancreas, or sweetbread, or intestines -- cholera morbus,
or vomiting and purging of bilious matter, alim ent^ry flux, white flux,
looseness.

If from the bladder -- diabetes, or morbid efflux of urine.

If from the genitals -- seminal gleet.

If from the skin -- morbid sweating, called ephidrosis, besides a variety of
others, which may produce general affections, either by sympathy or acquired
acrimony, as the nettle-rash, infantile hectic fever, etc. And these retentions
or evacuations are to be remedied by such applications as the medic art
affords. Nor need these have been mentioned here, only to show their
consequence in the animal economy -- as for the well being of the machine, it
is necessary that parts where these retentions and evacuations occur, should
perform their functions properly. -- Of these nothing more can be said, we
shall, therefore, advert to our last subject.

6. PASSIONS, and AFFECTIONS OF THE MIND.
Every man is truly sensible of the ^ll effects arising from giving way to
those variety of affections which we call passions; and fatal experience often
convinces and makes them lament being so prone to act obedient to their
impulses. So strongly do they affect the human machine, that the most
surprising consequences have been known to originate from these sources on the
corporeal, or solid parts, as well as the system in general.

There are innumerable instances of fear creating a sudden and powerful action
of the bowels and urinary passages. Fright has put off a fit of an
intermittent, when all remedies had failed; a pistol fired in the chamber of
James the First had this effect, occasioning also a sudden action of the
intestinal canal downwards; it has also given rise to an indissoluble tumor in
a woman's breast; excess of joy has caused fainting and stupor; anger, induced
apoplexy and phrenzy.

We cannot account for the precise mode in which these happen for a certainty.
Hence, says a learned author, We must content ourselves with knowing they are
positive facts, for, till we are informed by what means the mind and body are
united, we cannot even form a probable conjecture, how the operations betwixt
them are performed. -- In these cases, however, I think that the peculiar state
of the constitution, with regard to its nervous incitability, vascular
irritability or torpor, renders people more or less liable to feel these
impressions, if not totally, still in a very great degree; for all those, which
we call nervous, are more subject to manifest the action of these sudden or
mental affections, than those who have an apparent firmness of the nervous
system, and whose vessels are not so irritable as very readily to feel the
impulses of their affections -- to me it has appeared to be universally the
case.

However, with respect to the passions themselves, they may be medically
reduced to two heads -- volatile and saturnine; or active and sedative.

But as disquisitions of this sort would lead us more into the field of
speculative curiosity, than practical utility, I shall content myself with
taking a quotation or two from a judicious writer on this subject -- and from
thence make the application to ascertain the propriety of the division.

Fear, grief, and those passions which partake of them -- as envy, hatred,
malice, revenge, and despair, are known by experience to weaken the nerves;
retard the circular motion of the fluids; hinder perspiration; impair
digestion; and often to produce spasms, obstructions, and hypochondriacal
disorders; and extreme terror has sometimes brought on death.

These I term -- saturnine or sedative -- because they affect the nervous
system in such a manner, as to impede its influence in general -- consequently,
the action of all those parts that are dependent upon it, and where any of them
seem to act supernaturally, that action is occasioned more by irritability, or
pre-disposition of the part, than from any other cause.

Moderate joy or anger, on the other hand, and those passions and affections of
the mind, which partake of their nature -- as cheerfulness, contentment, hope,
virtuous and mutual love, and courage in doing good, invigorate the nerves,
accelerate the circulating fluids, promote perspiration, and assists digestion:
-- but violent anger, which differs from madness only in duration, creates
bilious, inflammatory, convulsive, and sometimes apoplectic disorders,
especially in hot temperaments -- and excess of joy destroys sleep, and often
has fatal and sudden effects.

These I term volatile or active -- because they so affect the system of the
nerves, that they increase its influence -- consequently the action of all the
parts dependent upon them, which, whilst moderate, produces salutary effects;
but when too violent, necessary deleterious or dangerous ones, from too great
an excess of action.

Hence, though we cannot influence the mind in the particular manner we wish
always, we should endeavor to raise such sensations, as may be productive of
those purposes, we are desirous by other means of promoting.

Where the action of the vascular system is too violent, we should attempt to
inculcate fear -- where too torpid, cheerfulness; for these may in some degree,
have effects on the moving powers.

In treating of the non-naturals, though we have spoken of the solid aliments
by which we are nourished, we have not said any thing of the liquids we in
common use, we must, therefore, in order to render our labor completely
useful, advert to them, as much benefit is to be derived from a thorough
knowledge of their properties and effects, and no small degree of mischief
avoided.

It is indeed a melancholy consideration to reflect, that, though health is the
only foundation of all pleasure, and may, by easy methods, be preserved, men
should neglect these means, which would enable them to pursue their darling
Goddess through all her varied scenes of rational delight; but so it is, for
notwithstanding innumerable authors have written professedly on the dioetetic
regimen, from the unwillingness valetudinarians have in complying with rules,
which lay a restraint upon the gratification of their appetites, though
calculated to preserve health, it has been too much neglected.

Election treats, Parish dinners, Session and City Feasts, and free luxurious
indulgence, have numbered many with the dead, which proper abstinence might
have preserved. However, as men will not refrain, but rather become slaves to
excess, duty calls upon us to apprize them of their danger, at least to inform
them in what things they may exceed with the least possible inconvenience. In
addition, therefore, to what has been already advanced, it appears necessary to
take a survey of the properties of those liquids we in common drink -- which
have been considered with regard to their powers -- as either DILUENT,
SHEATHING, NUTRITIVE, STIMULANT, ANTISPASMODIC, or SEDATIVE, which in their
order we shall now attempt to explain.

1. The DILUTING LIQUORS -- are all such, as added to the circulating mass of
fluids, renders them more fluxile -- by producing no other effects than what
arise from mere mixture and divisibility of the integrant parts, and solution
of the acrimonious and saline particles therein inherent. -- Of this class
therefore, we consider Water, Small Beer and Tea.

The former of which appears to be the most eligible beverage, as it is free
from saline matter, and abounds not with air, in such a proportion as might
occasion fermentation: that is preferable which flows from mountains through
sandy soils; is the coldest, limpid, most light, and insipid to the taste -- as
it is better calculated to afford a well-diluted chyle: but of all, that which
is distilled is the most eligible, as being thrown into a state of vapor by
heat, it is divested almost totally of those earthy, heterogeneous materials
with which other waters are apt to abound -- hence, consequently, in its purest
state.

This fluid, besides thinning the blood, and dissolving the saline and
scorbutic acrimony of the juices, renders the circulation easy and uniform by
attenuating any viscidity; it restrains, by by its coolness, the quick motion,
and intense heat of the humors, moistens, and mollifies rigid fibers -- and if
a glass of cold water is taken going to bed, it promotes perspiration, and
often brings on gentle sweats.

Good small beer has the same properties, but is more apt to occasion
fermentation from the saccharine substances with which it is, though slightly,
impregnated, and is more viscid -- and from these it may be considered as
rather more nutritious.

Tea is also a proper diluent, and assists digestion, drank a proper time after
dinner; where it does not disagree with the stomach, as in some peculiar
constitutions, affecting the nerves of that organ, and the system of them in
general, so as to occasion sickness, tremors, and fainting.

2. Those liquids are called SHEATHING which are mixed with mucilaginous
substances, and produce their good effects, by involving the acrimonious
particles of the blood -- increasing its viscosity, and preventing them from
producing, of at least lessening their stimulating powers on the vascular
system in general -- or guarding the stomach and intestines from feeling the
effects of any irritating materials which may be therein contained -- the
principal of which are water mixed with oatmeal or wheat flour, called gruel --
or with hartshorn shavings, salop, sagoe, tapioca -- and boiled till the
mucilaginous parts of these are dissolved, and then are considered as
emollients or demulcents -- or where substances are replete with oleaginous
particles, suffering similar solution in the same menstruum -- hence partake
they also of a nutritious property: here then to the list may chocolate be
added -- fat ^broths -- milk mixed with fuel -- the last, a food not uncommon,
and very useful to such as are subject to constant diarrhoea, or looseness,
from acrimonious humors poured upon the bowels -- which is improved by the
addition of a little starch -- and all these are considered much more
nutritious than those of the former class.

3. The NUTRITIOUS -- are all such whose particles are capable of being
assimilated to the nature of the animal juices by the digestive powers of the
constitution, and partake of these properties in a greater or less degree, as
their parts approach nearer to, or are more distant from, the nature of our
fluids, before they are taken into the habit: -- hence the most nutritious are
-- beef, mutton, or veal tea, as replete only with the finer juices -- soups,
broths -- the soups sometimes, in the first digestion, are more stimulant,
owing to the spices with which they are seasoned, consequently the most
heating. Any of these above, however, made from the flesh of the older animals,
are most nutritive -- as they partake less, of vegetable nature, and have their
juices more perfectly elaborated, and less subject to promote viscidity, than
those from the younger species -- and here may be enumerated those made from
hartshorn, or the jelly from that and isinglass.

The next is milk, which approaches very near to the nature of chyle, whilst in
the breast of the animal, though more closely allied to its perfect juices. It
is divisible into serum or whey, cream, curds -- of which last is formed common
cheese.

Milk when cold loses some of its finer parts, and boiling robs it of more, by
more copiously dissipating them: it is demulcent and nutritious, and partakes
of a middle nature, between vegetable and animal, and is apt to curdle on the
stomach, if it meets with a strong acid, too suddenly, or in many febrile
disorders.

To some constitutions it is perfectly agreeable, creating no uneasiness, be
the stomach in what state it may; still in others it increases acidity in the
first passages -- it, in some, produces diarrhoea -- others it renders costive;
in some it occasions the headache; in others an uneasy sensation in the stomach,
and pain -- and many cannot enjoy the least ease, till it is ejected by
vomiting: but where it agrees, no food can be more pleasant or salutary, where
it does not increase corpulency. It has been the food of several adults for a
series of time -- and those who refrain totally from animal food, in this
acquire an agreeable substitute.

The milk of an healthful young woman is, to the human frame, infinitely the
most preferable, so is that of any animal to those of their own species, as
more completely finished to their particular nature. -- For medical use next
succeed, the milk which has the greatest affinity with that of woman -- in
which respect these are thought to pursue the following order -- asses, mares,
goats, that of sheep and cows.

The next which succeeds to this is --

Chocolate -- though it partakes not of animal nature, still from its being
more replete with oil and saccharine substance, it is not only nutritious but
demulcent -- though it is apt sometimes to ^it uneasy on the stomach, if it is
made too thick, or not well milled or ground -- but more particularly when the
nut is badly prepared, or when it is decayed, greasy, and rancid -- made thin,
it is light: therefore when chocolate, from its richness, creates any uneasy
sensations on the stomach, a glass of water taken afterward, by rendering it
more dilute, will prove a remedy -- but from its abounding with a quantity of
oil, it requires the powers of digestion to be very active for its
assimilation: hence, it should never be drank in too large quantities at a
time. The least nutritious of this class are some of the sheathing liquids we
before mentioned, as gruels, sago, salop, tapioca -- because they partake
solely of vegetable nature, and are not so replete with oleaginous or
saccharine substances, but are merely mucilaginous.

4. The STIMULANT are --
Coffee, wine, punch, perry, cider, ardent spirits; taken in moderate
quantities -- in larger, they exert sedative effects perceptibly; but as we
conclude they always exert this last effect, though in a degree only
proportionate to the quantity taken, we think it right to take a view of them
in their state of combination to avoid perplexity -- and therefore we mark them
down as

STIMULATING and SEDATIVE.

The first of which consist of such materials, as by their active powers,
irritate the stomach, occasion warmth there, communicate it to the constitution
in general, either by sympathy or vascular irritation -- increase the
circulation of the blood for a time -- exhilirate the spirits, increase
perspiration, and invigorate the whole system -- or, taken in large quantity,
produce such effects sympathically upon the common sensorium, or force the
blood so copiously and powerfully upon the brain, that it is incapable of
feeling the effect of pain or rather uneasy sensation -- indeed, sometimes this
insensibility may be carried so far from this cause, that people become
apoplectic from the increased pressure on the brain -- or from impeding
sympathically, or mechanically, the power of nervous influence, expire.

Of this class, we consider

Coffee -- though never attended with any of these violent consequences, must
be ranked under this head, as one of the slightest kind -- for it is of a more
heating nature than tea -- gently stimulant, astringent, and resists
putrefaction; it also moderates alimentary fermentation -- though, like tea, it
is not agreeable to every constitution; as in some it will produce,
particularly in those who are delicate, nervous symptoms: it decreases
corpulency, and is serviceable to gross, phlegmatic habits.

Dr. Cullen, speaking of coffee and tea, says,

Their effects, in my opinion, are very much mixed, depending on the warm
water; -- the assisting digestion -- relieving the stomach from a load of
aliment -- from crudities -- alleviating head-achs arising from them --
promoting the secretion of urine, and, perhaps, perspiration, may all fairly be
attributed to the warm water. These are the chief virtues to be attributed to
tea and coffee.

The weakening the tone of the stomach by frequent use -- and the system in
consequence, inducing tremors and spasmodic affections, are the effects of the
tea itself, though, in some measure, of the warm water. And, certainly, great
mischiefs are done by drinking them too hot -- a very common practice by very
delicate constitutions; for, by these means, the stomach is brought into too
great a state of relaxation -- indigestion occasioned -- crude chyle thrown too
freely into the habit -- obstructions formed in various parts, and a general
state of debility, with a variety of painful consequences, occasioned through
the whole system.

Wine, spirits, ale, porter, cider, perry, punch -- may all come under the same
description with regard to their powers, if we make some allowances with
respect to a few trifling peculiarities which occur; for they all of them are
stimulants to the stomach and system in general; possess some antispasmodic
powers, and increase circulation.

Spirits are more powerfully stimulant than wine, less antispasmodic, and not
disposed to run into the acetous fermentation.

Wine is endowed with stronger antispasmodic effects; cider and perry next;
porter and ale the least. Wine is more powerfully stimulant than these; less
disposed to acidity, if pure, than cider and perry -- and all of them free from
that tenacity or viscidity in ale and porter.

Ale and porter are apt to load the stomach more, and require strong digestive
powers to assimilate them; porter is supposed to possess stronger diuretic
effects than ale -- though they all have them in some degree -- but amongst the
spirits, that called Geneva shows them the most manifestly -- of which the
common sort, ^o^med of ardent spirits, impregnated with terebinthinate
substances, is the strongest -- those impregnated with juniper berries the
weakest.

But, as we can never get wine, though so valuable an article, whether
considered as a luxury, or a medicine, completely perfected, even that esteemed
the mo^^ (...) and as it is made such general use of -- it will be advantageous
to examine the parts of which it consists, by which means, we shall be enabled
to discover how its action may be varied; and, perhaps, the same holds good in
all the rest, except spirits, though most probably in an inferior degree.

WINE has for its basis saccharine substances, of which it is formed by the
process of fermentation, which converts the whole, not at once, but
progressively, into a vinous fluid; one part remains unassimilated -- one is
assimilated -- and one becomes acid.

Hence wine is composed of three parts.

Must, pure wine, and vinegar.

Must, HIPPOCRATES describes the juice of grapes, recently expressed, crude,
flatulent -- only having one good property, it is aperient; and if it does not
act as a laxative, it becomes so much the more noxious to the body. It is,
perhaps, owing to this that new wines, or other fermentable liquors, drank too
early, prove purgative as they generally do.

Some authors have said, that must is, properly speaking, what is called sweet
wines. It should, with more propriety, be considered as something different,
formed by the fermenting process; because, by fermentation of sugar on the
stomach, a subtle fluid, called by the scholiasts, gas sylvestre, and
considered by them as a fixed, factitious, and fixable air is produced, which
acts on the bile, proves laxative, etc. But must acts in a less quantity than
sugar, and therefore must be something altered from the saccharine substance,
now changed in its properties: -- whatever it is, it destroys the tone of the
stomach -- disposes it to spasmodic contractions, and, consequently, disturbs
and interrupts digestion. If acidity is produced, it will join with the gas
sylvestre in weakening the stomach -- the acid thus formed will unite with the
bile, produce a strong stimulus -- thus occasion a flow of mere bile to the
intestines, and cause what is called the cholera morbus, a copious evacuation
of bile upwards and downwards, with violent spasmodic affections -- but these
effects are seldom produced to such a degree of vehemence.

The active part of the juice of the grape is called ALCHOHOL, or the spirit of
wine, but weakened in its action in its compound state. This exerts itself on
the nervous system, chiefly, if not altogether, by means of the stomach; hence
it is stimulant, increasing circulation, and the force of the nervous power
universally.

In large doses -- ALCHOHOL DESTROYS THE MOBILITY OF THE NERVOUS POWER --
WHENCE, FROM ITS STIMULANT AND SEDATIVE EFFECTS -- confusion of ideas and
delirium; STILL REPEATED, the nervous flow is arrested -- voluntary and
involuntary motions destroyed -- sleep, lethargy, apoplexy, and death, are the
consequences.

In WINE, the effects are almost never so rapid, on account of their dilute
state, and small doses in which the alchohol is throws in; on which account it
proves only more stimulant and exhilirating -- it may produce stupor, but as it
is apt to be rejected by the stomach, and by other matters with which it is
mixed, the powers of alchohol is moderated.

PUNCH, which is only an artificial wine, is less noxious than alchohol and
water, though more so than wine.

Though an acid is evolved, and enters into the composition of wine, and
alchohol, still another, and more copious and separate, is formed -- which is

VINEGAR. -- This commonly contains some sugar, may be laxative -- have the
effects of unconverted sweet wine -- generate gas sylvestre, that subtle
fluid; and, in short, have all the properties of fresh juices: when thoroughly
converted, it determines other vegetable juices to acescency -- weakens the
stomach -- prove spasmodic -- and has all the consequences of acids there
generated.

But combined with wine, these qualities are more innocent; as the action of
must, alchohol, and vinegar, separately may prevent each other's simple and
deleterious effects; and also the water may, in the proportion in which it is
mixed, have its efficacy in weakening the properties of the other component
parts.

CIDER and PERRY may be considered as having the same properties, though in
much less degree than wine, with regard to their stimulant and sedative
effects; but are more replete with acescency -- generate too great degrees of
flatulency, run quicker into the acetous fermentation, and produce uneasy
gripings, and more painful sensations of the bowels, besides being more
productive of calculous complaints, and the convulsive colic; or dry belly-ach,
terminating often in palsy.

From this review we can easily judge of the effects, whether advantageous or
otherwise, which are likely to ensue from wine, and also from the different
compositions sold by our retail venders and wine merchants, under that title;
which produce disagreeable consequences to those who drink freely of it --
laying the foundation for a variety of dangerous, lingering, and fatal
complaints. In order to show which, we have been at the pains of going more
minutely into this subject, that we might explain the particular parts of which
wine was composed -- declare the properties of them separately -- manifest what
were salutary, what otherwise; as also the necessity of a proper combination to
form their utility; and hence be enabled to discover how the poisonous
compositions, sold under that appellation, must invariably produce their
baneful effects; for these are made of the unfermented juices of some
vegetables -- sweet raisin wine, cider, and British spirits; and this jumble is
colored with some ingredients agreeable to the wines intended to be imitated
-- with the addition, sometimes of a small portion of wine, and constantly of
that noxious material called sugar of lead, or lead itself, forming this
substance by the union with a portion of acid they contain. Now compounds like
these must be replete with those mischiefs which we have enumerated under must
and vinegar -- and others brought on by the sedative astringent powers,
occasioned by preparations of lead -- rendering the action of the stomach and
intestines torpid, relaxing these organs, obstructing the exit of materials
which ought to be thrown out of the body -- filling the machine full of crude
and acid humors -- contaminating the whole mass of fluid -- and preventing
digestion, that parent of almost all chronic diseases. When we, therefore,
speak of wine, we would not be understood to mean these baneful compounds; but
that which is pure, as can be imported, which MACKENZIE says, is an admirable
liquor, and, used in moderate quantity, answers many purposes of health; and
beer, well brewed, light, of a proper strength and age, if we except water and
wine, is, perhaps, the most ancient and best sort of drink in common use among
mankind.

But with respect to wine we may carry the matter further, for it is generally
allowed to be the most agreeable and powerful cordial we can have recourse to
in the last stage of some fevers, completing of itself the cure. In low
nervous, and putrid fevers, it is beneficial throughout -- when there appear
symptoms of great debility -- and it may be very often taken in large quantity,
where the moving powers of the system abate much of their salutary action, and
the fluids seem to be running rapidly into a state of putrescency.

How much, therefore, is it to be lamented, that we should be deprived of so
valuable a liquor -- replete with so many useful properties by the avarice of a
set of beings, who are suffered to impose upon, and injure the public with
impunity, and amass fortunes, by selling poisons for our destruction, instead
of wine for our preservation and recovery of our health. For, I am persuaded,
thousands have fallen devoted victims to this illicit and infamous practice. In
lieu of these, where people are under the necessity of purchasing wines, rather
than depend upon the worldly integrity of these dealers, I would recommend the
wine properly made of raisins, or the fruits of our own country, they are
infinitely less noxious, nay, indeed, may be made equally efficacious to the
others in their purer states.

5. The next which are to be spoken of, are these invested with

DILUTING and NUTRITIVE POWERS.
And these are chiefly all those where water abounds, and are, impregnated with
farinaceous, saccharine, and animal substances; in which will be included,
gruels and weak broths -- the latter of which, as also soups, when thrown into
the habit, may be considered as possessing some degree of stimulus, adequate to
the nature of animal food in its solid state, but weaker in degree: and these
will be more or less diluting and nutritious, in proportion to the quantity of
water and other substances they contain -- the diluent property depending upon
the former -- the nutritious upon the latter; the particulars, relative to each
of which, may be collected from what we have delivered in our first and third
section on this subject.

6. Our last are,

The NUTRITIVE, STIMULANT, and SEDATIVE;
Such as, in some degree, possess these separate properties -- which may be
confined to

Ale and Porter -- the stimulant and sedative powers of which have been spoken
of when we treated of wine, of which these may be considered as species, made
of malt -- though to porter there is a mixed and strong sedative power,
inasmuch, as it appears to have some narcotic ingredient infused it, as the
cocusus indicus, the Indian berry, opium, or some materials of a similar
nature. However, that they are very nutritious, needs no arguments to prove, we
have only to depend upon facts; for it is observable, that all who drink
copiously of these liquors, are corpulent, if they have powers of digestion
adequate to their assimilation -- common porters, coal-heavers, chairmen, etc.
chiefly exist on this -- drinking some gallons in a day; and indeed such, whose
labor is very severe, require it: but in all such, it is necessary for their
digestion to be extremely good, for these liquids abound with a great share of
viscidity, which requires great constitutional strength, and strong labor to
subdue. To delicate, relaxed habits, whose stomachs are weak, they create great
load and oppression, much heat, and febrile affections temporarily induced.

What we have here delivered, perhaps may be by some thought of too trivial
consequence; and is by many too much, even in the practice of medicine,
neglected -- still will be found, on experience; worthy of very close
attention: for the knowledge from thence to be collected, and properly applied,
as we shall soon have occasion to show, forms one part of medicine,
comprehending that which is styled -- prophylactic or preventive -- is, in many
cases, solely curative, and should in all go hand in hand with the
administration of the more active and powerful remedies in the cure of
diseases. Indeed ignorance in these points, or an injudicious diaetetic course,
will counteract remedies the most salutary on the one hand, whilst, on the
other, an accurate knowledge, and proper combination, will greatly add to their
efficacy.

Having now laid down the principles on which we shall proceed through the
course of the subsequent work, almost solely in that part which is intended as
the preventive, and, in a great measure, in the curative -- we shall proceed to
the former, after recapitulating some particulars, in order to form general
rules for our proceedings, and render all our directions easy and intelligible.

SECTION VI. CONSTITUTIONS MORE PARTICULARLY SPECIFIED.
WHEN speaking of constitution in our former Sections, we have enumerated that
variety which is generally adopted, in order to show what ought to be
understood by the different terms, and by what constitutional causes they were
produced -- and have divided them into simple and general -- mixed and general
-- and peculiar -- as The strong and robust, Weak, relaxed, and delicate,
Nervous, or incitable, Irritable, Torpid,
And their combinations -- that is, the union of two or more, as they happened
to be possessed of incitability, irritability, and torpor; and these could only
occur, with respect to the solids -- but as the fluids also are concerned, it
was necessary to take them into the accounts; we therefore conjoining them with
the former, with respect to their quantities, qualities, and effects -- have
styled them MIXED -- as when associated with Plethora, Acrimony, Heat, Cold,
Or having Consumptive tendency. As for those we denominated peculiar, they
depended on accidential circumstances, as a review will convince us, and
unnecessary to be taken into the general account, as to those alone must our
modes of prevention, mitigation, or cure, be directed; for it is by regulating
their operations alone, that we must in all cases expect to derive benefit.
Some also of which may be omitted, as they deduce their origin from particular
affections of the other in combined states, as the hot, cold, and consumptive.

We, therefore, shall arrange Constitutions under the following heads.

A. The strong, and robust,
Plethoric, Acrimonious. More or less irritable, -- torpid, -- incitable.

B. The weak, relaxed, and delicate.
Plethoric, Acrimonious. More or less incitable, -- irritable, -- torpid.

With respect, then, to the first of these Constitutions; 1. The strong,
robust, and irritable.

They are subject to many inconveniences, chiefly from the rapidity of the
blood's motion; hence are liable to fall into violent continued fevers, and
inflammatory disorders. To prevent which all excesses of hot or cold air should
be avoided; stimulating aliment, high seasoned dishes, and such as are
extremely nutritious; too sudden and violent exercises, repletion, and the more
boisterous passions. They should observe temperance in all things, and
especially keep free from immoderate drinking, and take care that none of the
natural evacuations, should be checked, or obstructed, such as that of
perspiration, urine, faeces. They should have recourse to occasional bleeding,
when the head feels loaded, giddy, or when they are drowsy, and prone to sleep,
or symptoms of general fullness are prevalent, but not use in unnecessarily, or
too frequently, and empty the habit now and then by purgatives; they should
drink diluting liquors, as water, or such where that is superabundant; in
general be sparing of animal food, and rather eat freely of vegetable diet, for
these are apt to be plethoric, or loaded with too great a proportion of
sanguinary mass: for such, a moderate, warm, and moist atmosphere is the most
eligible situation; in fine, nothing should be allowed them that will increase
too powerfully the action of the living solids, or occasion too great an
increase of the fluids. These Constitutions are in general warm.

2. The strong, robust, and torpid.
Where, though the stamina are firm in too great a proportion there is a defect
of irritability the vascular system being in too torpid a state. These require
not any particular attention, as from the want of proper sensibility they will
not be exposed to feel particular changes arising from common causes, or such
as would effect those which are more irritable. These constitutions bear all
evacuations well, as they are not apt easily to have their solids too much
relaxed, but are rather prone to become plethoric, from indulgence, which they
are apt to run into, from not feeling those effects, which people of different
habits so frequently experience. They should endeavor to prevent an
overfulness either by abstinence, or proper evacuations, which they bear in
general without inconvenience, though bleeding in these is less advisable than
purging, owing to the torpid state of the system; and, which, being neglected,
should a plethora be the consequence, some of the internal parts of the habit,
as the brains, lungs, etc. might be affected by dangerous, or at least
troublesome oppressions, and we very often find men of this Constitution for
want of timely care, and from indiscretions, afflicted with sudden vertigos or
giddiness of the head, coughing, or spitting of blood, apoplexy, etc. and these
are sometimes of a cold habit, though plethoric, and apt to fall into
hypochondriac affections from visceral accumulations, and languid circulation.

3. The strong, robust, and incitable.
This Constitution sometimes, though more rarely occurs, and when it does, it
generally is united with vascular torpidity. In this there is too great
incitability of the nervous system; and men of this habit are subject to a
mixture of hysteric, and hypochondriac diseases; irascible at trifles,
desponding nearly approaching to melancholy, they are apt to be afflicted with
various spasmodic affections, particularly of the throat, intestines, and
stomach; sometimes make profuse quantities of pale, limpid water; at others,
small, but turbid and high colored; they are frequently tormented with
flatulence, and perplexed with whimsical and inconsistent ideas; the
extremities are generally cold, and moving from place to place, or any motion
almost is performed with languor -- most of the evacuations are lessened, or
irregularly performed; sleep is imperfect, they are troubled with frightful
dreams, and are subject to the incubus, or what is called the nightmare, and
all these are derived from the same constitutional sources, when torpor
attends; for from the want of due power of the muscular fibers, the circulation
of the blood is not carried on with full freedom to the extremities, the
internal parts consequently are loaded, hence in those parts there is an
additional fullness and stimulus, for the stimulus is always in proportion to
the quantity of blood flowing to a part or collected in it, from the evolution
of the heat, and the superabundance of acrimony, for the fluids of these
constitutions generally abound with acrimony, particularly such as is
productive of the nettle-rash; hence, then, the internal parts become more
sensible to the nervous influence, consequently solicits it the more freely;
and hence arises the appearances above enumerated.

In these habits -- frictions on the extremities, warm clothing, warm bath,
riding on horseback, are essentially necessary; generous diet, wine,
stimulating vegetables should be adhered to, food of easy digestion, the mind
should be kept perfectly at ease, cheerful company, change of scene, and such
amusements as divert the attention, produce a moderate degree of mental
hilarity, should be procured; and as for medicines, they should be such, as at
the same time, that they allay the incitable power of the nervous system,
diffuse a general warmth through the habit, and these given occasionally, as
asafoetida, musk, vitriolic, ether, camphor, but all opiates must be avoided,
because they are apt to render the muscular fibers too torpid -- in general
chalybeates may be persisted in, and Bath waters should be recommended.

But where instead of torpor, vascular irritability is a concomitant, besides
being subject to inflammatory complaints, and continued febrile affections from
slight causes, they are subject to permanent spasmodic affections, such as
those which are denominated by medical men, tetanic complaints, where, when
spasms arise, the muscular fibers remain in a fixed state, not contracting and
relaxing alternately, nor fugitive as in common convulsions: these are liable
to be seized with a locked jaw, and continued muscular rigidity. In these
constitutions, warm baths are peculiarly useful, gentle and constant exercise,
cooling diet, and copious dilution with aqueous liquids, thin acescent wines,
milk and vegetable diet, evacuations of all kinds should be constantly and
moderately produced, particularly perspiration, and the body should never be
costive; I have said moderately, because in endeavoring to abate the
irritability of the system, we must be careful not to increase the
incitability, which is apt to be the case, from evacuations too copious.
Opiates are in these habits extremely useful, and may be freely given under
particular circumstances. With regard to regimen, what we have said before in
the beginning of this section may be adhered to, taking especial care to avoid
all mental uneasiness. These constitutions are apt to be plethoric and attended
with heat.

What we have delivered appertains to those who are considered to possess
strong degrees of muscular firmness, differently combined. We must now proceed
to such as have a WEAK, RELAXED, DELICATE HABIT, JOINED WITH TOO GREAT
INCITABILITY. And this circumstance generally occurs in these habits, that they
have also too great a share of irritability. These are subject to painful and
spasmodic diseases; and the more delicate sex of this constitution are prone to
hysteric affections from the relaxation and irritability of their habits. They
also are constantly a tacked on every slight cold, with slow fevers, and have
their digestive powers loaded with faburra, or different kinds of ill digested
matters in the stomach and bowels, making their way into the habit in this
noxious form.

To these, a dry, clear air is essentially necessary, moderate exercise,
particularly riding, cold bathing, and chalybeate waters; animal food easy of
digestion, and free from fat, and a temperate use of astringent wines.
Vegetables should be administered sparingly, and those of the less flatulent
kinds; food and liquids, viscid and tenacious, such as flour puddings,
potatoes, oysters, strong soups, and malt liquors, ought to be prohibited.
Every thing calculated to strengthen the tone of the system, and preserve it in
an equable state ought to be had recourse to, and all things likely to weaken
it must be desisted from. Cheerful company and moderate amusements are
serviceable, but pursued too freely, the reverse; for all fatigues, both of
body and mind, are prejudical -- the custom of taking vegetable acids too
copiously is also pernicious -- hot tea, or any thing drank too warm -- for
these all contribute to relax and load the stomach and intestines, with foul,
viscid materials, which produce therein internal stimulus, create flatulence,
and communicate general irritability through the system. Blood should never be
taken from people of this habit, but upon the most urgent occasions, and then
only sparingly, in which cupping is preferable to the lancet; and it is safer
to take it away at two operations, than at one, some little distance of time
from each other, if more than six ounces should be required. All sudden changes
should be avoided with the utmost caution, either with respect to clothing or
diet, the mind kept free from anxious cares -- hence watering places are
useful, where those impregnated with chalybeate particles, or iron, may be
drank; in fine, every thing ought to be advised, which, in a moderate degree,
can exhilirate the spirits, and contribute to give strength to the solids.
These constitutions are generally warm, subject to irregular flushing heats,
and have for the most part no small degree of acrimony in the habit. But there
are some who possess too great a share of torpidity, and then they form that
kind.

2. Where a WEAK, RELAXED HABIT IS JOINED WITH A DEFECT OF SENSIBILITY; and
these are subject, not only to nervous affections, but to chronic and
destructive diseases; for the circulation in all these is languid, and the
absorbent system acts not with proper freedom. Hence will arise those
complaints which depend on an acrimonious state of the humors, and an
accumulation of the fluids in the whole, or particular parts of the system --
as dropsy, jaundice, corpulency, scorbutic complaints, green sickness so
called, obstructed menses, glandular tumors, etc.

In these torpid habits, stimulants are useful, as also are evacuants; to
these, a dry air and high situation are most suitable, with a generous diet of
the more pungent class -- such as the juices of the older animals, fish,
mustard, horseradish, cabbage, and all of that class: brisk exercise on
horseback, emetics, and frequent purging, in order to shake the vascular and
glandulous system, prevent accumulations, remove obstructions, hinder the bile
from stagnating, and the mucous fluids from collecting. All the natural
evacuations should be kept free from suppression, to accomplish which, the
system ought to be perpetually roused to action; hence indolence and indulgence
in bed is to be particularly avoided; the thinner stimulating liquids, as white
wine diluted with water, should be the common beverage, and the mind kept in a
state of cheerful activity, free from all gloomy and desponding reflections.

Were the rules here laid down observed before our mass of humors had been
contaminated by indiscretions and various species of debaucheries, which weaken
and disturb the system in its performance of the proper offices alloted to her
various parts, perhaps there would be little occasion to consider of those
things, which are necessary to prevent diseases arising from a default of the
natural humors of the machine; but as that is not the case, they call upon us
for our consideration, as well as those which are fortuitously thrown into the
Constitution. And those we shall divide into such as are first,

NATURAL, And those which are

ACCIDENTAL. The natural fluids are divisible into General, or Partial.

. 1. In the first or general, the blood offends by its too great quantity or
state of acrimony. From the too copious state of this fluid, a variety of
complaints may arise, and, therefore, when symptoms of oppression appear from
this cause, which will generally manifest itself by languor, a sense of weight
or fullness in the head, when rising in the morning from bed, or in stooping,
and fullness also of the pulse; abstinence, indulging less than usual in sleep,
increasing the natural evacuations, and using more exercise, will effectually
reduce the body to its proper standard, if these things are had recourse to in
due time, and persevered in for a proper period; the diet should be the least
nutritious, more of the vegetable than animal class, the last eat of sparingly,
confining themselves to one dish, and having it only once a day, and water
should be the only beverage; but should inanition, or a want of a proper
quantity of blood be induced by any cause, nutriment should then be given of
the most quick and easy digestion -- as teas, and broths made of the flesh of
older animals, thin jellies, and the flesh of the younger animals, as chicken,
rabbits, lamb, veal, etc. and in such quantities, though that can be readily
converted into chyle -- for it is a mistaken notion, to suppose the larger the
proportion of nutrition thrown into the habit, the sooner it will be recruited;
the reverse will happen, for by these means the digestive powers being
overloaded, will be weakened, and consequently even a small portion be
prevented from being properly assimilated, or reduced to the nature of our own
healthful fluids, which they must be before they can answer the purposes for
which they are intended -- as on the contrary, it so much is only given as
those powers can conquer, they will gain fresh strength every day, by the
application of that which has been converted into a nature peculiarly adapted
to the end proposed; and this quantity may be repeated as often as the
constitution requires it. By this a further waste will be prevented, which may
also in this view be assisted by the use of stomachics, which chiefly consist
of bitters -- as gentian, orange peel, (...) wood, slight chalybeates, gentle
aromatics, and such like.

. 2. But the blood may become acrimonious, and this acrimony may be considered
of different natures They have been divided into acid, putrescent and muriatic,
so called from MUR^^ brine, a liquor made of common salt, which this muriatic
humor is supposed to resemble; but we shall not pretend to advance this as a
certainty, but confine ourselves to the effects of some acrimony, which seems
different from the two former.

The first then, or the aci^, is supposed to arise from weak bowels, and
particularly observeable in our infantile state, and, perhaps, the stomach and
intestines are the only place where such acidities are to be found. To prevent
which, we must endeavor to strengthen the digestive powers that they may make
good chyle; hence after clearing the bowels with the sal polychrest, or small
doses of calomel, and rhubard and gentle emetics, slight doses of chalybeates
may be had recourse to, mixed with rhubarb to keep the bowels gently open --
weak broth should be given once or twice a day -- panada, with a small portion
of some agreeable aromatic well boiled; and such things as have in themselves
the least tendency to acidity; frictions on the abdomen or lower belly,
stomach, legs, and feet, with smart exercise, will be highly serviceable -- as
these will invigorate, the system, promote a brisk circulation, and increase
the action of those organs intended to promote the formation of good chyle.

The second, or putrescent; where the fluids tend to a state of putridity,
shows itself generally by the face being puffed up, as it were, and tinged with
a hue, somewhat approaching to livid; the breath offensive; the gums spongy,
and bleeding on the slightest touch, nay, sometimes voluntarily: -- here fresh
air, austere wines, such as give a sense of roughness, or astringency to the
taste, vegetable diet, ripe fruit, water impregnated with fixable air, smart
motion, and corroborating bitters, with abstinence from animal food,
particularly fish, promise fair for stopping the effects, which might otherwise
arise, by checking the putrefactive disposition, and meliorating the fluids;
moist, warm situations should in this case be particularly avoided -- and
living in close places much crowded with inhabitants -- for nothing conduces
more to bring on, and increase such a state of the constitution as these -- by
relaxing the solids, and furnishing a constant supply of putrescent effluvia.

The third, or what has been styled the muriatic, is indicated by hot
eruptions, which itch much, attended with uncommon thirst and ^lushing heats;
to alleviate which, the sulphurous, saline waters are recommended,
particularly those of Harrowgate; Thorp-Arch, and those of Moffat, avoiding at
the same time all heating, acrid food -- such as turtle, high seasoned dishes,
and rich soups -- whey and milk in these cases are extremely beneficial, the
SCORBUTIC JUICES, made of the juice of garden scurvy grass, water cresses, both
expressed from fresh herbs, and of Seville oranges, two pints, spirituous
nutmeg water, half a pint, these are to be mixed together, and after they have
stood till the feces have subsided, the clear liquor must be poured off for
use. -- Of these juices, from two table-spoonsful to eight, may be taken two or
three times a day; or a DECOCTION OF THE WOODS, made of guiacum, or lignum
vitae saw-dust, three ounces; raisins of the sun, two ounces; sassafras wood,
shaved liquorice sliced, each an ounce; water, ten pints: -- the guaiacum and
raisins are to be boiled over a gentle fire, to the consumption of one half,
adding toward the end the sassafras and and liquorice; strain off the liquor,
and having suffered it to rest for some time, pour off what is clear -- a
quarter of a pint of this may be taken two or three times a day, and all such
as are diuretic, and cooling; hence some of those waters are of service, which
abound with saline substances, that are gently aperient, and move the urinary
passages -- as Epsom waters, those of Cheltenham, Stoke, or Jessop waters,
those of Pancras, Holt in Wiltshire, Stretham, and some others.

All cosmetics and repellent lotions are dangerous; for if the acrimony cannot
be corected or carried out of the habit, its most salutary situation must be
external; and, perhaps, it may be the only means which nature has to unload the
habit, or prevent the deleterious effects, which would be occasioned, were any
of the more noble organs subjected to the depredation of humors so inveterate.
To valetudinarians of this description a cool air should be recommended, and
summer situation near the seacoast; -- all salted meats and fish should be
prohibited; the body kept cool by saline aperients, and the mind unruffled by
violent passions, and all excess in drinking refrained.

These constitute the first class of natural humors -- the second are the

PARTIAL. -- Where they only affect some parts of the constitution, and are not
diffusive, but produce particular diseases from a peculiar species of morbific
matter; and these are either generated in the habit spontaneously, or seem to
arise from errors in diet, indulgencies, or irregularities with respect to the
management of the animal economy; but these, if incapable of being eradicated,
may be alleviated, and in some degree prevented.

The FIRST of which we shall mention is the gout; respecting which, though so
painful, so dangerous and common a malady, I believe little doubt remains but
it may be weakened in its attacks, even in those who have been long subject to
it, by temperance; that is, by properly regulating constitutions consistent
with the powers they possess: and I am firmly persuaded it may be prevented
from returning in the younger class of mankind, would they, on its first onset,
prescribe to themselves and follow such regulations, as experience has, in many
similar cases, proved to be conducive to the^^ ends.

Adhering strictly to a milk diet has in many cases put a stop to returns of
the gout; and regularity of living, with proper exercise -- abstaining from
wine and high-seasoned dishes, pickles, and other incentives, that stimulate
the appetite, and occasion men to overload, and weaken the tone of the stomach,
and digestive powers, have rendered this malady infinitely more mild in its
paroxysms. Men, with this propensity to the gout, should avoid every excess
that has the least tendency to reduce the habit below the proper standard of
health -- either in eating, drinking, or venereal enjoyments: for it is by the
slavish and constant pursuit of these particulars, and the great indulgence
which they allow themselves, that we see so many martyrs to gouty devastation.

Early rising, moderate exercise, and that daily; bland mild food: abstinence
from inebriating liquids, or a very moderate use of them, as also of
concubinage, will ever be succeeded with such consequences, as will amply repay
us for philosophic forbearance. -- People of this constitution ought to refrain
from weighty cares -- the labors of the mind -- much thought, anxiety, and
solicitude: they should avoid all vexation, particularly as no thing disposes
more to bring on fits of the gout, by occasioning crudity, and indigestion,
from weakening and rendering the action of the stomach too torpid.

Various modes have been recommended for preventing the accessions of the gout
-- but what seems to have gained credit from the experience of several
intelligent men, is the use of sulphur; of which a drink is made by
impregnating water with a proper proportion of it, and this has proved
salutary, in not only mitigating fits of the gout, but some say of totally
preventing their return. Indeed if we consider the action of sulphur on the
habit, we shall not be averse to think favorably of its use.

Dr CULLEN says, It is certainly a mild and safe cathartic, never producing any
considerable evacuation, but keeping up the natural excretion by the
intestines, without any irritating or heating effect. -- And Dr. LEWIS -- That
pure sulphur, in doses of from ten grains to a dram or more, gently loosens the
belly, and promotes perspiration; it seems to pass through the whole habit, and
manifestly transpires through the skin, as appears from the sulphurous smell
of those who have taken it, and silver being stained in their pockets to a
blackish hue, as by the vapor of sulphurous solutions.

But we must observe in this, as in every other constitution, we must be
directed in our specific course by the particular nature of the habit,
according as it tends to one or the other, which we have before specified.
Hence in this case we must sometimes enforce an abstemious regimen altogether
from animal food -- sometimes allow its moderate use, proportioning the degrees
of exercise to the degrees of tone, or strength of the system, always
prohibiting the use of wines and other fermented liquors, except in cases of
great debility, or long habit; and preserving the strength of the stomach and
digestive organs.

2d. RHEUMATIC. -- In these, the same rules will hold good as in the former,
and not be attended with dissimilar effects, and those very often more certain;
for it has sometimes been prevented by wearing a flannel shirt, which keeps up
an increased degree of insensible perspiration, and using the cold bath or
sea-bathing without interruption.

3d. That disease, which in inland countries we seldom or never see affect the
natives, called the PUTRID SCURVY -- by exercise, warm clothing, drinking
acescent wines, and living chiefly on fresh vegetables, or eating freely of
them, will be prevented. It generally affects those who live on seacoasts, and
feed on fish, and sailors: -- hence sour crout has been considered as
preventive. I have heard captains of some ships say, great benefit has been
derived from vinegar, and they give it the preference to lemon or lime juice --
why, I know not, unless from the saccharine substance in vinegar, a degree of
fermentation takes place, and affords some portion of fixable air, from whence
possibly some antiputrescent effects may be produced.

4th. Where we have reason to fear a scrophulous taint, or the seeds of that
disease called the king's evil predominate in the habit -- those means exerted,
which give strength to the solids, begun in time, bid fair to act as preventive
in this case; at least hinder the offensive matter from producing its unhappy
effects in a violent degree.

Living in a free country air, particularly on the seacoast, taking exercise
and nutritious diet; moderate use of wine and a course of gentle chalybeates,
or drinking the chalybeate waters once or twice a year, might answer the
intention.

5th. Where there is a redundancy of bile, or a collection, those
constitutions, we have said, are called bilious, and have often a bitter taste
in the mouth. The stomach and bowels of such should be always kept clear, by
taking aperient medicines every now and then, and such as are not likely to
leave the body costive after the operation. In these habits, aloes and soap are
useful, castor oil, saline purgatives -- as Glauber or Epsom salt, or the
natural purging waters -- as those of Thorp-Arch -- Northaw -- Colchester --
Dulwich -- Epsom -- Action -- and Cheltenham. -- Fat and oily substances should
be sparingly, if at all thrown into the habit. Exercise should be persisted in,
and some species of vegetable food preferred to any other, as the dandelion --
endive -- and such like.

6th. The stomach and bowels are apt to be loaded with different kinds of
noxious materials, called saburra -- and these are either acid, rancid, or
viscid. In all constitutions that have one or more of these particular
tendencies, they generally arise from weak, digestive powers. Emetics and
purgatives are now and then to be prescribed on that account, and those things
which give force to the weakened organ.

If the acid is most prevalent, which will discover itself by sour belchings
and heart-burn -- animal diet is most proper; crude vegetables, milk, butter,
and other oleaginous substances should, be foreborn, and also fermented
liquors; the most proper drink is water alone, or warmed with a little ardent
spirits, or having ginger infused in it -- stomachic bitters with elixir of
vitriol, or bark; absorbent powders, as hartshorn burnt and prepared, chalk,
magnesia, are useful for immediate relief. In all relaxations of the stomach we
must aim at strengthening its tone, preventing fermentation, and promoting the
expulsion of its contents; -- the alkaline waters, as those of Upminster,
Brentwood, Seltzer, and Tilbury, may be recommended.

If the eructations should be rancid, or occasion a putrid, offensive taste;
called nidorous, like that of bad eggs, and nausea attend, with the throwing up
of liquids, that will blaze in the fire like oil, a diet containing a large
proportion of acescent vegetables will be proper, with a very sparing quantity
of butter and oil -- made dishes should not be allowed, nor rich sauces, or
much gravy -- acid fruit, such as are ripe may be indulged in, and water is
generally the properest liquor to drink.

But if the matter should be viscid and ropy, that is there generated -- such
things as will assist in dividing in carrying it off, are the mo^^ eligible --
as calomel and rhubarb occasionally, or aloetic purges -- elixir proprietatis
with bitters, or pilulae Ruffi with Venice soap -- exercise, chiefly riding, is
necessary, and all things which have in their own nature too tenacious a
viscidity, such as puddings, thick gruels, potatoes, should be avoided -- the
flesh or juices of older animals are preferable to those of the younger sort --
and also vegetables of the warmer class, mustard, horse radish, water cresses,
etc.

And in all cases where the digestive powers are too languid, where there is
not too great an acrimony of the humors, and the habit is not liable to be
heated from slight causes; -- chalybeate waters, such as Pyrmont -- Tunbridge
-- Hampstead -- Islington, -- and the sulphurous, as Buxton -- Bath --
Aix-la-Chapelle -- Harrowgate -- and Llandridod, will always promote some good
purpose in this respect, without being in others detrimental.

But sometimes the lungs will be subject to be loaded with viscid, tough kind
of phlegm, in order to prevent which, the mode above laid down will be highly
conducive, and what will contribute much toward being more successful -- are
emetics taken occasionally.

3. Besides what we have above described, there are fluids which get into the
habit from contagion or infection, and will produce disease by the action of
their morbid matter, if not prevented, before they have manifested their effect
-- and these we call

ACCIDENTAL. -- The FIRST of which we shall take notice of, is that creative of
the lues venerea -- or pox; and where there is strong suspicion of having had
commerce with an infected object, the malady may be prevented by such
applications, as will wash off all the natural mucus of the parts, and thereby
carry away the virus, or venereal poison, which lies entangled in it; and these
are solutions of the caustic alkali; soft or common soap, corrosive sublimate,
etc. in water, with which the external parts should be well washed, as soon as
may be after coition, at least within the space of six or eight hours; and some
should be injected within the urethra; but great care should be taken not to
make the solution too strong, lest the parts should be excoriated, and
inflammation brought on by that means, with its painful and disagreeable
consequences. It will be sufficient if the solution is of such a strength only,
as will give a slight sensation of pungency on the tongue or inside of the lips.

The SECOND -- the poison of the viper. -- The ill consequences generally
attending the bite of vipers, by which means they pour their virus into the
wound, and so communicate it to the habit, have been prevented, it has been
asserted, by the immediate application of the fat of that reptile to the
wounded part. -- It was, in the more early periods, considered as a specific in
that case -- but olive oil has been known to answer the purpose full as
effectually. -- These means may also be useful in abating the pain originating
from the stings of wasps -- bees -- bugs -- gnats -- or preventing the effects
from burns, or scalds, before the skin is raised into blisters; but the more
effectual modes are the immediate application of spirits of hartshorn, or of
sal ammoniac, or spirit of wine, and continued some time.

The THIRD. -- The saliva of a mad dog, or another mad animal, communicated by
a bite, gives rise to the most dreadful of all human calamities; and its
effects, if not prevented, generally terminate fatally: but these have been
said to be warded off, by using the cold bath, and persevering for some time in
taking the PULVIS ANTILYSSUS, See (...) Lewis's New (...), 8^o. (...).
a dram and a half of which was to be taken in half a pint of cow's milk in the
morning, on an empty stomach, for four mornings together, and occasionally
persisted in, so much recommended by Dr. Mead -- or applying to the Ormskirk
medicine; but these have so repeatedly failed, that I should not depend upon
them -- but where people are strongly wedded in opinion to these compositions,
I should advise their administration -- but not till after the following mode
had been completed: -- Immediately after the wound was given, I would advise it
to be sucked some time, which may be done with the greatest safety, the mouth
of the operator being guarded with oil, for his satisfaction, and the saliva
not swallowed; then the part, where it can, should be cut out, or burnt with a
hot iron, deeper, and more extended than the wound itself; -- after which, the
wound should be filled with mercurial ointment, and a blister applied over the
part -- kept open for some time -- and mercury thrown into the habit, so as to
raise, and maintain a salivation, for some weeks. For by these means, the
poison will be prevented getting into the habit; and should a portion of it
have made its way inwards, by the quick action of the absorbent vessels, it
might be thrown out, by quickly and constantly promoting salivary secretions
and excretion.

The FOURTH -- The noxious particles, which by infection occasion malignant
ulcers of the throat, putrid fevers, or dysentery -- and which are generally
ushered in with shiverings, sickness, and sudden loss of strength, have had all
their consequent mischiefs prevented, by the instantaneous exhibition of
emetics; and should these fail, so that the whole symptoms do not immediately
go off, a large blister applied between the shoulders has commonly removed
them. Nurses, in the naval hospitals, have, it is said, from the most undoubted
authority, by this mode prevented mischief.

The FIFTH, and LAST of which I shall take notice in this place, are the putrid
particles, apt to be taken into the habit, by persons wounding themselves by
dissecting of putrid bodies, or parts mortified -- and of which many instances
have recently occurred, where the unfortunate, though praiseworthy, curious
inquirers, have fallen sacrifices to the deleterious effects.

In cases where, under these circumstances, wounds occur, I should recommend
sucking the part immediately, and having it well washed with vinegar; then the
application of strong mercurial ointment, and mercurial purges, taken
occasionally at proper intervals; for I know of no medicines which so
effectually clear the serous, and lymphatic system as mercury. -- And in the
intermediate days a cour^^ of antiputrescent medicines and diet should be
persisted in -- as bark -- moderate quantities of wine -- or vinous liquors --
and vegetable diet -- and bark may be very judiciously united with such other
materials as promote perspiration, and these should be insisted on, and
persevered in for some time, and I have little doubt but they would prove a
security from future danger.

Having now delivered fully what may be thought necessary for understanding the
nature of constitutions in their simple, and mixed general state, and also
peculiar, with the modes necessary to be pursued, in keeping them in an
healthful state, or of preventing diseases, as far as respect these particular
points; we would observe to the young practitioners, or those who thirst after
medical information, or love to engage in practice from motives of
philanthropy, where medical advice may be far distant, that the eye should not
only be carried to these constitutional points in cases where prevention of
diseases is studied, but particular attention should be paid to them in
diseases, wherein they will be found altered from their natural state, and some
different combinations taking place from the effects of the malady itself;
which deviations, when discovered, should regulate the conduct; and it will be
perceived that medicines highly proper in the beginning of a complaint, are as
improper in the conclusion, and so on the contrary, and this alone owing to the
alteration made in the habit: for instance, in inflammatory remittent fever,
where at the onset, the constitution is possessed of great firmness -- strong
vascular irritability -- and equable nervous incitability -- to give bark would
be madness, little less than butchery, because it would too much increase the
already too heightened powers, and occasion the worst consequences: but at the
latter end, or during the progress in its later stage, the same is a cure,
owing to the constitution being altered by the violence of the disease at this
time; for it loses its firmness -- increases vascular weakness -- and induces
too great nervous incitability, all which are conquered by bark augmenting the
tone of the system. But as we have examined particular constitutions in an
healthful state, and pointed out their variability, and spoken of some points
necessary to be observed in our conduct, in order to preserve them in that
state, we shall now make the application on a more extensive scale.

SECTION V. NECESSARY CAUTIONS respecting FOOD, EXERCISE, etc.
WHEN men' are in a state of perfect health, the moving powers of the
constitution act in unison with each other, the force of one being in exact
proportion with that of another, so that they perform their functions with ease
and regularity -- neither ex^r^ising themselves superabundantly nor defectively
(...) machine in lively and active -- the thinking faculty alert and clear --
the blood and humors are bland, moderate in quantity, and (...) from acrimony,
which may be distressing -- the appetite is good -- the digestion sufficiently
strong -- all the secretions and excretions performed in due order -- sleep
sound, and refreshing, -- and no perceptible defect manifests itself in any of
the vital animal, or natural actions; and this situation of the machine is the
greatest blessing human wishes can desire, and empowers man to enjoy every
pleasure of moderation and propriety, within his reach, with the greatest zest
and inward satisfaction. But unfortunately, men under these circumstances often
plunge themselves into the opposite extremes, by imprudencies and indulgencies;
for it must be observed, that the most perfect state of health is not far
distant from disease, and very often trifling indiscretions lay the foundation
for great mischief, if the consequences occuring from thence are not soon put a
stop to; which, indeed, by a little care and attention, might frequently be
prevented; -- certain rules for which we shall endeavor to point out, which
one would scarce think necessary, if we consider the latitude given by CELSUS,
to those in health, did not experience every day convince us, that the
documents he lays down require some restrictions. -- He says, A man, who is
healthful, and at his own disposal, ought not to be confined to any particular
regimen; as he wants not the advice of a physician, his mode of life should be
varied; -- he should sometimes reside in the country sometimes in cities, but
oftener in the former; -- he should now and then ^ail, hunt, or live at ease,
in perfect rest; -- he should use sometimes the warm bath, sometimes the cold;
-- eat, in common, all kinds of food; -- sometimes be in company, and feast
himself; sometimes live retired, and abstemiously; now and then take more or
less nutriment than might be exactly proper; but refresh himself rather twice
with diet, than once a day, and that in a plentiful portion, if it can be
concocted; -- but though exercise and food in this mode are necessary, in
inordinate degrees they are not serviceable; for business, preventing the
exercise, which may happen on account of attendance in various avocations, the
body will be injured, as those which receive nourishment in their usual way,
will quickly decay and become disordered.

Though this latitude is given, we must observe it is only to a man in full
vigor of health; but even here, during the state of allowed indulgence, some
caution becomes necessary, especially against every species of excess; for it
is a known and allowed truth, that excess of every kind, whether corporeal or
mental, disorders he human frame, and lays the foundation for a variety of
complaints, even in those things, a moderate share of which is necessary for
the support of our machines -- conduces to invigorate our mental powers, and
promote our pleasure.

In eating and drinking, this is an obvious truth, though in the latter it is
much safer to exceed than the former; in proof of which, let us examine them.

We find that by drinking a quantity of vinous and spirituous liquor, in which
all those which cause inebriation are included; the vital principles, or that
which supports life, and renders the machine active, is rendered extremely
powerful by the stimulus applied partially to the stomach, or more diffusively;
the spirits are elevated, sometimes even to madness; a more than common stress
is laid upon the constitution; the habit becomes fuller so long as this
stimulus continues, and liquor is poured into the stomach; which stimulus
ceasing from constitutional fatigue, the system feels too much loaded and
enervated; the stomach relaxed, and all the vital powers incapacitated to
perform their functions properly; hence pain, sickness, headache, languor, or a
temporary fever, perhaps after a debauch, the whole, or most part of these
inconveniences are experienced.

To remedy which, lying in bed and plentiful dilution with watery liquors -- as
weak tea -- small broth -- thin gruel, etc. should be persisted in, to promote
perspiration; or recourse should be had to riding on horseback, by which means
the superabundant load will be carried off, and the body restored to its proper
tone. Either of these methods may be pursued, as is most agreeable to the
constitution: the former I should recommend to plethoric habits, and those of a
strong stamina; the latter to the more relaxed whose stomach is generally in a
weaker state. Sometimes taking plentifully of the following: -- One dram and a
half of salt of tartar, called now prepared kali^ four table spoonfuls or five
of lemon juice water which has been boiled, half a pint -- brandy three or four
table spoonfuls, and this sweetened with sugar; or if the stomach is very
(...), a dram and a half of aromatic confection, or two table spoonfuls of
tincture of bark may be added; -- a tea cup or more of which may be taken often
in the day; -- or what is better, the salt of tartar may be dissolved in the
liquid, without the lemon juice; and after every six spoonfuls drank, let a
table spoonful of lemon juice be taken, and this repeated in the same manner;
-- or some warm and grateful cordial, as ratifia -- usquebaugh -- brandy, mixed
with peppermint water, may be administered, which will give immediate relief to
those whose stomach is affected with nausea, sickness, or oppression, a common
practice with men devoted to liquor; but this should be had recourse to only on
very particular occasions, for it is a custom may be attended with disagreeable
consequences, if too frequently used, because the stomach, once accustomed to
any particular stimulus, requires the constant repetition of that stimulus,
which, in time, destroys its tone, and lays the foundation for those maladies
which arise from inebriation; and it is this which often induce men to turn
drunkards; low spirited women, frequently from taking things of this fort to
exhilirate their spirits, are converted into shameless sots, and become the
disgrace of their own sex, and contempt of ours. However, this furnishes one
proof of the power which the stomach contains over the system in general; as by
the stomach being stimulated, all that lassitude -- languor -- nausea --
sickness -- and every uneasy sensation attendant on its relaxation, are
removed, except heat.

By excess in eating, the stomach is apt to be over-distended -- the digestive
powers weakened -- the vessels filled with crude chyle -- respiration retarded;
hence a sense of weight at the stomach -- pain and flatulence -- propensity to
sleep -- inactivity, and fullness of the head -- obstructed viscera -- jaundice
-- dropsy -- asthma -- apoplexy -- and a number of chronic complaints, if the
practice is continued.

But if an error has been committed, and especially if that has been with
high-seasoned dishes, a draught of cold water, acidulated with elixir of
vitriol, taken soon after eating, will relieve the stomach from that weight
with which it is often oppressed, assist digestion, restrain fermentation, and
prevent flatulency; from hence, perhaps, the use of ices may be approved.

I remember an account given me of a dignified clergyman, who was so great a
slave to his appetite, that he was obliged constantly to have recourse to some
application to prevent indigestion, he gormandized so abominably; as a proof of
his gluttony, I cannot give it a gentler term, the following is recited of him:
He was invited to dinner, where every rarity the place afforded, was provided,
of which he eat in his usual manner; but the gentleman, with whom he dined,
knowing he was extremely fond of venison, and being well acquainted with his
disposition, reserved the haunch in succession, of which he had advertised he
rest of the company; on its appearance, the already satiated divine, after
expressing his surprise a^ not being informed of this luxury before, retreated
into the yard, disgorged the load he had before swallowed, and returned to the
attack of the venison, with his accustomed vigor and prowess, to the
astonishment of his companions. Hence we may infer, vomits in many cases are
also serviceable; however, at an early period, he became the victim of disease,
and died of a dropsy, succeeding an irremediable jaundice, brought on from this
course of living.

With regard to our food, however, in quantity and quality, it should be
properly proportioned to our exercise. The farmer, who follows his plow, and is
perpetually toiling from morning till night, could not exist on food
appropriated to those who pursue not the severer exercise of the body; his diet
must be of the coarser kind, such as old milk cheese, salted meats, bread made
of rye, potatoes, etc. etc. and these in pretty large quantities. This food
answers to him the purposes of nature, keeps his body in a state of health,
because his digestive powers are very active, and form from these materials
good chyle, on account of the occupation in which he is engaged; which in the
more delicate and less laborious, or indolent, would occasion great
indisposition. In Herefordshire, and some other counties, men are not allowed
fit for service, nor get hired, without, as it is termed, they can bolt bacon;
that is, swallow it unmasticated, cut into pieces, about an inch and an half,
or two inches long, and half an inch square, or thereabouts, and this in
tolerable quantities; and this is done in order that they may attend closely to
their labor, without spending any time in taking in nourishment for their
necessary support; for bacon being fat, and of a firm texture, from being
hardened by salt in its curing, will lie a long time in an undigested state, by
which means the cravings of the appetite are kept off, and the strength
supported.

But should abstinence he unavoidable, a man, during that period, should not
undertake any laborious employment: as in that case, the consumption of the
thinner fluids would be too great, the solids would be rendered weak for want
of proper support, and the liquids disposed either to form concretions, that
is, degenerate into too thick masses, or run into a state of putrescent
acrimony.

There is one custom to which the generality of mankind are apt to be addicted;
when they have suffered fatigue, and that perhaps severe, from hunting,
shooting, cricket playing, walking, etc. they commonly indulge their appetites
by eating copiously of solid food; and think it one of the benefits from thence
arising, that they are enabled to throw down such a load of gross materials;
nay, not content with this, they make them float in porter, ale, or some other
viscid liquor, and afterward indulge themselves with a jolly bottle; and this
they think supported by reason, for where the machine is weakened, it seems
natural to suppose it requires much refreshment. If we examine the effects of
such indiscreet conduct, we cannot hesitate to pronounce it erroneous, and
condemn the practice: for after eating and drinking, in this manner, they grow
dull and heavy; and general lassitude comes on; the pulse grows quick; the face
flushes; a temporary fever succeeds; sleep is disturbed; profuse sweats break
out or a too great general heat, with dryness of the skin, is perceptible; the
mouth is clammy; thirst is an attendant; and they rise in the morning weary,
and afflicted with pain, or stiffness in the joints, wanting that alacrity and
activity they ought to pos^^^^ on the night's indulgence. Indeed, oftentimes a
foundation is laid for infinitely more serious complaints, according to the
peculiar nature of the fever; nay, sometimes immediately brought on, such as
inflammatory or slow fevers, local inflammations, rheumatism, etc. Nor can it
be otherwise, for all the vital, natural, and animal powers are weakened, and a
load la^d on nature in her debilitated state, for her to conquer, before the
vascular system has recovered its strength sufficiently for the performance of
such an office.

Were they to confine themselves to liquid food, or that sort readily
digestible, such as weak broth, milk, light bread pudding, etc. with wine and
water for their beverage, all these inconveniences would be prevented; the
body would only receive that nutriment it could readily digest, and the vessels
from not being over distended and their actions too powerfully solicited by a
constant stimulus, soon recover, by ^est, their natural elasticity; then with
impunity might they pursue their festive joy.

It is also prejudicial after suffering severe hunger, to eat immoderately --
or after a full and constant feeding, to fast absolutely. Neither is running
into the extremes of rest and labor successively, by any means at ended with
safety.

The constitution may be brought to ^ear many alterations, but these must be
accomplished in a gradual manner, for few of any consequence happen, but they
occasion an alteration in some of the solid of the system, producing either a
greater degree of extension or contraction -- consequently also a change is
created in the fluids: and if any defect should happen in one part, from the
mode of producing those changes, nature provides against such defect by
adapting some other parts to the performance of their duty, i^ a greater or a
less degree, or a duty that is not naturally intended for them; as we see in
the decrease of one evacuation, it often promotes the increase of another: and
vessels appropriated to the discharge of one fluid, will often emit another, as
in cases of obstructed menses, where blood has issued periodically from the
eyes and lungs; so that all sudden changes may be productive of a variety of
complaints, not only on account of the parts being unaccustomed to perform
their proper offices, and from want of use being rendered too weak, but want of
time for nature to make suitable dispositions, to alleviate distress arising
from sudden contingencies.

Therefore, if a man has labored under severe hunger, his stomach will be in a
state of contractility, lessened in its capacity more than usual; loading it
consequently too heavily, will either occasion vomiting, or uneasy sensation of
weight: heart-burn, perhaps inflammation, or a spasm of both the orifices, or
either of them -- or mischief might be created in other parts of the machine,
from filling the vessels, which must also be in too contractile a state, too
full of crude ill formed chyle; for in this situation, neither the peculiar
juices of the liver -- sweetbread -- nor those of the stomach itself, can be
separated in their proper quantity, nor will be endowed with their natural
qualities, sufficiently perfected for the business of digestion -- all which
are absolutely necessary for forming the nutritious fluid in a salutary state.

And what on the contrary will happen, if a man, after full feeding, filling
the habit copiously and constantly with liquids, should submit to absolute
fasting?

As it is necessary to keep up a plenitiude in the vessels, that the fluids may
preserve their power of reaction, as a stimulus assisting powerfully the
promotion of vascular contraction, and thus maintaining an easy and equable
circulation, we from time to time throw in food to supply the defect of the
fluids, which arises from the constant and natural action of the vessels; and
this not only constitues a requisite equilibrium, or necessary equality in the
powers of the circulatory system, but also supports a continuance of pressure
upon the brain, which is very material for the performance of its duty in the
body; since we find in proportion as that organ is deprived of that pressure,
it performs not its functions regularly -- hence convulsions -- faintings --
death; and we also find the more plethoric a man is in a state of health,
generally the more warmth he has in his habit.

Now if a man is filled with fluids from eating and drinking inordinately, the
constitution will act under the impulse of increased stimulus.

Sudden and total abstinence therefore would prevent the regularity of the
brain's action, and render the system languid from withdrawing the stimulus, by
which it had been actuated -- the vessels would collapse -- circulation would
be carried on with difficulty -- the heart oppressed -- and in the first
instance, sanguinary concretions might be formed. But should the cause be
permanent, the humors, for want of fresh supply of new fluids, would grow sharp
and acrimonious -- general irritation take place -- a fever ensue -- an
inflammation of the brain come on -- and a delirium close the scene.

Having examined the effects produced by severe hunger, and gratification of
the appetite copiously and constantly, and suddenly changing from one to the
other; let us now examine the consequences of the extremes of rest and labor,
succeeding each other in the same manner.

And first -- What will be the result if total rest should succeed hard labor?

The constitution being habituated by custom to any particular practices,
especially where the motion of the solids are principally concerned, is so used
to the impressions made by those practices, that they become necessary to its
welfare. Hence a man accustomed to hard labor, enjoys a better state of
health, under that circumstance, than if he was to fall entirely into habits of
indolence; for the system being divested of those particular impulses, usual to
be given, would experience a degree of torpor, or sluggishness -- the fluids
constantly increased to supply the dispendium or consumption, having no
occasion to be appropriated to that purpose, would form collections in the
vascular, glandular, and cellular system -- and hence would arise a variety of
complaints from fullness, and corpulency -- and a foundation be laid for
numberless chronic disorders.

And we may observe many men, retiring from avocations which require bodily
activity into the arms of idleness, though possessing their health under former
situations, plunge into disease -- and numbers of them die apoplectic --
paralytic -- asthmatic -- or dropsical.

But, on the contrary, if men apply to hard labor suddenly, from a state of
absolute rest -- the constitution will become languid, from want of proper
support, and be affected with different kinds of consumptions, not of the lungs
particularly, but gradual wasting away -- dropsies -- fevers, etc. -- for the
vessels not having been solicited to strong action, and the fluids, though
abundant in quantity, not properly elaborated to repair the loss severe
exercise occasions, the former will be weakened by a sudden increase of action,
and want of adequate supplies; -- while the latter may form congestions in the
head, or internal parts, by being pushed suddenly forward, and too violently,
and soon acquire a dangerous and noxious acrimony from crudity, or deficiency.

But though extremes in these particulars are highly injudicious, becoming the
prolific parents of many maladies, yet pursued under proper limitations, are
replete with innumerable advantages -- for exercise and rest are the certain
supporters of a pleasurable life, as far as it depends on general health --
Hence must we allow every species of the former very beneficial -- but then it
must be limited by the strength -- for when in proper proportion it gives
constitutional vigor, and muscular firmness -- while inaction renders the body
listless, and relaxed -- and, indeed, if exercise is pursued to the distress of
the natural powers, it creates a number of injuries, which its judicious use
would inevitably prevent.

Besides we must observe, that all exercise, of whatever nature, whether
walking -- running -- fencing -- riding on horseback -- or in a carriage --
playing at cricket, tennis, etc. should be adapted to the prevention of any
disease the person so using it may have a tendency to fall into -- to those
liable to fall into gravelly complaints riding on horseback should be
recommended; -- to have collections of phlegm upon the lungs, reading aloud --
singing; -- those subject to the gout, walking; -- indigestion, or visceral
obstructions, riding; subject to catch cold, walking; -- those of strong
muscular stamina, having a sluggish circulation and coldness, playing at
cricket or tennis; -- to hysteric diseases, or melancholic affections, where
the mind broods too much over imaginary calamities -- driving a carriage --
shooting -- hunting, or some, where their reflection may be withdrawn from
unpleasant objects, etc. -- and those exercises which are more or less violent,
should be advised according to the ends we wish to promote; -- for the grand
business of these are to increase the tone of the solids -- make the different
glands perform their functions; promote insensible perspiration; and prevent
the fluids from becoming detrimental to either by their thinness, viscidity, or
acrimony.

Exercise may be divided into these three degrees -- the STRONGEST of which are,

First -- Playing at tennis, cricket, fencing, and running, etc, where great
muscular exertions is necessary.

Second -- Walking, reading aloud, riding on horseback, or in a carriage:

Last -- Sailing, chamber-horse, dumb-bells, and frictions: which last are
appropriated to old age, where muscular force begins to grow effete; and are
necessary for the preservation of health, by promoting the circulation of the
blood, and motion of the fluids, through the minute vessels.

But sleep is esteemed the grand preserver and restorer of health, such as is
well-timed, and properly proportioned; for some constitutions require much more
than others. -- It is one thing the most essentially necessary to life, as this
is the time when the system is freed from all encumbrances, undisturbed by
mental reflections, which often disorder the animal economy, and prevent the
human frame from acting, through all her departments, with equality, and full
force, in which the nutritious particles, properly perfected by the operation
of the constitution, or chiefly applied to repair the waste, and replace those
which have been abraded, and washed off by the labor and exercise of the day.

Thus situated, the moving and assimilating powers of the body have only that
business by which the parts are renewed to perform, and the vessels are
properly disposed to receive such additions as are required, and cooperate to
that end; but if the machine is too much indulged in this particular, it
becomes much disposed to be corpulent, languid, and weak, and feel a number of
inconveniences from thence arising.

With regard to the time necessary for the producing the good effects it is
various in different constitutions: six or seven hours rest is sufficient for
many adult constitutions, though some require nine or twelve. -- A lady whom I
attended, of a relaxed and delicate habit, subject to hysteric affections, and
an acrimonious state of humors, though by no means indolently disposed, was
advised to rise early, and gradually lessen the time she used to devote to her
bed, which was constantly twelve hours, and which was supposed to contribute
much to the relaxation of her habit -- she made the attempt for some time, but
could never enjoy so comfortable a state of health, as when she indulged
herself in her usual custom.

Still in many this indulgence enervates the system -- renders them
hypochondriacal and hysterical -- relaxes the solids -- disposes the humors to
be viscid, or acrimonious -- blunts the vital powers -- and brings on a
diseased, and early old age.

But, notwithstanding, we will allow that nature herself requires, in different
constitutions, such variability; -- the custom of sleeping long, and indulging
in bed, is very frequently the result of indolence, early induced, and long
encouraged: -- such a disgraceful waste of time should be discountenanced, and
the habit conquered, which may always be accomplished, in the early and middle
part of life, where it arises not from constitutional necessity, naturally
implanted; but it must be done by slow degrees, for all extremes of change are
detrimental.

It is the practice of numbers to indulge themselves in sleeping in the
daytime; some immediately after dinner -- still, notwithstanding what has been
advanced by some authors, that sleep is useful even at those times, as it
promotes digestion, I think the rule, very often, more salutary in the breach
than the conformity; for it creates giddiness and languor, especially in those
addicted to study -- deadens their thinking faculties, destroys perspicuity,
and clouds the imagination; but if no such effects are perceived, and people
find themselves recruited, alert, and active, it may be allowed.

In proportion as the powers of digestion are more or less strong in different
ages, with respect to DIET, they have claimed different kinds.

To the younger class of subjects, and children, therefore, viands of the
milder, and softer sort, are considered as the most proper, as being more
readily assimilated.

To grown persons, those which are more substantial and solid -- and

For old people, it has been thought advisable to retrench of their solid,
take that nourishment which is more fluid, and increase rather in drinking;
because they not only digest less freely, but the machine approaches more to
dryness, from a deficiency in their juices.

Were the regulations here laid down observed with tolerable attention, and
those adverted to which have been spoken of, when treating of the Non-naturals,
adapting them to the peculiar circumstances of different constitutions, a plan
may be formed by every individual sufficient to contribute toward the
continuance of health; nay, be fully adequate to insure its preservation, if
closely pursued.

These rules, though, are calculated for those who are arrived at the years of
maturity, or at such a time of life, that they may become subject to the
directions of others, who have made these things their study, and have from
thence acquired a competent knowledge.

But before we conclude this part of our work, it seems proper to take notice
of what is necessary to be done in the infantile state, in order to promote for
our offspring, in their tender years, the same benefits -- and this leads us to
consider the good or evil consequences of proper or injudicious Nursing, which
we shall make the subject of our next Section.

SECTION VI. On NURSING.
IF we look into and examine the bills of mortality, to be informed at what
ages the greatest number of people die, we shall find that half of them go off
under the age of five years: -- to what are we to attribute this? That nature
is defective in her operations, and that half of mankind are born in so
imperfect a state, formed of materials so bad, or so defectively united, that
they cannot support the operations necessary for the continuance of their
existence any longer? Or are we to conclude that in that period they are
subject to more fatal maladies, and die the victims of disease in greater
proportion than at any other time? Were such conclusions to be formed, we
should be accusing the Omnipotence of Providence, or arraigning the principal
Agent of Heaven, NATURE, of executing her office wantonly, or improvidently.
This, then, cannot be the case; for if we look through the vegetable or mineral
kingdom, we shall never find that any of their productions are subject to be
destroyed, merely because they are in a state of primary existence -- or in the
brute (...), because they are young. When destruction happens to them, it is
from being placed in such situations, and under such circumstances, as are not
congenial with their peculiar nature: -- so happens it, I have no doubt, with
the human species that this mortality in the infantile state is owing to bad
nursing, where, by these means, the operations of the constitution are impeded,
or perverted from the indolence, ignorance, or superstition of those allotted
to rear the infant in its tenderer years -- and it is astonishing, that, in a
business requiring the utmost simplicity for its success, so many, and such
great errors should be committed, as to become too certainly, and too commonly
fatal, particularly in children born of delicate and weakly parents; who,
partaking of their constitutions, are liable to be severely afflicted from
indiscreet management, and want strength to struggle through calamities
originating from that source.

Let us cast our eye amongst the hardy sons of the rustic race -- compare those
with the offspring of the more refined and polished -- what a difference in
appearance! Amongst the former, we find the children firm, robust, lively,
healthful, active, and strong; amongst the latter, weak, puny, relaxed, and
sickly. Amongst the former few die, but from the accession of unavoidable
illness, as measles, smallpox, chin-cough, dentition, etc. Among the latter
numberless expire from gripes, loosenesses, hectic fevers, worms and
convulsions.

But there are greater evils than dissolution in this state from this cause;
for from hence disease itself is generated, and so fixed in the habit, that the
life of many is oftentimes one continued scene of misery; -- nay, I have no
doubt but, from this source, the temper and disposition acquire so fretful a
cast, and oftentimes is so soured, and rendered so petulent and peevish, that,
whilst they do exist, they continue unhappy and miserable in themselves, as
well as troublesome and offensive to their attendants and their associates; for
it has been allowed, that the faculties of the mind, very often depend upon the
organs of the body; for when these are in a tolerable perfect state, so as to
perform their separate functions properly, the thinking part is more alert,
active, and cheerful; and good humor the consequence of such freedom -- whilst
the contrary effects are produced, when the organs are disturbed, or diseased.
To avoid, then, which disagreeable effects, it is our business to lay down such
regulations as are ^ounded on rational principles, supported by experience, and
which consist in bringing up children in a plain and simple manner, the mode
most consonant with nature; and if we observe the method she invariably
pursues, we shall find that she delights in simplicity alone. View but the
brute creation, and those of the feathered race -- see what occurs in them;
examine what method they, rearring their young, instictively adopt, and mark
their success; cleanliness, proper feeding and exercise, comprehend in these
the infinite wisdom of her laws; and if we add judicious clothing, so should
they that of the human species.

As soon as quadrupeds bring forth their young, the first care of the mother is
properly to clean them, and keep them perfectly warm, till all the moisture is
exhaled from the surface of the body; so happens it with birds: after which the
young sleep for some time -- almost constantly for the first few days; in
brutes, supported by the mother's milk alone, which is ready in the breast at
an early period, the young soon walk, and become playful and sportive, by which
means they procure to themselves sufficient exercise, and in this manner are
brought up with ease and certainty: with respect to cleanliness, the feathered
race do the same, never leaving their young after they are hatched, till they
are perfectly clean and dry; the mother, as soon as the egg is freed from the
young, placing it under her in the warmest part; but as they are divested of
milk, in order to nourish them, if of the granivorous kind, she endeavors to
render their nutriment the most easily digestible, and as nearly fluid as
possible, by picking up grain, macerating for some time in her stomach, and
then throwing it up into the mouths of her young, who, whilst feeding, flutter
their wings, and agitate their whole bodies in a surprising manner, which
serves as a species of exercise, and this universally prevails in all such as
lay in the ne^^ some time before they can use exercise by flight, or running
about, and feeding themselves.

In raising up our young, we therefore cannot do better than imitate these
laws, so universally prevalent, of which we (...) take a general survey; --
which consist in, 1. Cleanliness, 2. Clothing, 3. Exercise, 4. Food,
under which all will be included necessary for the proper conduct of those who
make nursing their particular business, or undertake that office from necessity
or inclination. -- And first we must observe,

That numbers of children, as soon as they are born, are covered with a mucus,
or white sordes, which ought to be washed off with soap and water; but should
it be very adhesive, there is no necessity of rubbing the infant severely at
first, for on the second dressing, if any remains, it will readily come off;
and long continued or violent friction is apt to create uneasiness, subject the
child to (...) cold, and produce inflammation; and as cold, at this (...)
period, occasions several disagreeable consequences, particularly sore eyes --
cough -- stuffing at the breast -- gripes -- looseness -- or stoppage in the
nose, at the birth, it should be wrapped up in a flannel receiver, lined with
fine old linen, and kept from the contact of the cold air, for a quarter or
half an hour, before it is cleaned, and this should be performed before the
fire; indeed, before the infant is taken from the mother, it will be prudent to
cover the eyes by a soft linen bandage, and fasten it at the back part of the
head. As soon as the child is cleaned, and well dried, the naval string should
be carefully folded up in a piece of scorched rag, in two or three folds; for
this not only prevents the infant from running the risque of being griped by
the coldness of the naval string, but absorbs the offensive liquid which is
generated by its running into a corrupt state.

It is the custom next for nurses to rub the child's head extremely well with
their hand after washing, and apply brandy or some ardent spirits at the same
time, and then forcibly press the head in different directions, under the
notion of aiding in joining the bones, where the sutures are open, a
contrivance of nature, apparently that in labor the dimensions of the head may
be lessened by the different bones riding one over the other, and delivery, by
these means, be facilitated; after which the child's head is tight bound up
with with a forehead cloth.

This over officiousness is highly detrimental and derogatory to the intent of
nature; for by pressing the head too forcibly, and keeping it in a confined
state, prevents the proper circulation of the blood through the vessels of the
brain, and brings on convulsions and other complaints from congestion; and all
this without in the least answering the intent for which this absurd custom is
practiced. For the bones join not by the edges of them coming in contact with
each other, but from bony matter deposited in the cartilaginous and membranous
substance of the cranium, and forming a junction in this way, and therefore the
head should be lest entirely to itself, after being well cleaned, without the
labor has been very severe; then sometimes the vertex will be greatly swelled
by the long continuance of labor, occasioning great pressure upon the larger
part of the head, and impeding the return of the fluids, by which the skin on
the vertex of the cranium will be so loaded with fluids, as sometimes to
produce a tumor, not inferior in size to a large egg, which may in ^ame and
suppurate, as I have observed, particularly where imprudently managed.

Instead, therefore, of submitting the head to so severe friction, let it be
bathed, where swelled, with brandy -- arquabusade water -- or some other ardent
spirits; or rags, three or four doubles, may be dipped in Goulard's saturnine
water, mixed with about a fourth or fifth part brandy, and applied to the part
affected; and then the head should be covered with a loose flannel cap, over
which may be placed a linen one, tied under the chin only just so tight as to
keep it upon the head: and this operation may be repeated once a day till the
swelling subsides, which will commonly be in the space of two or three days.

Under the idea of giving strength to the child's back, and enable it to
support itself, it used to be the practice, and still continues in some country
villages, to swathe or roll the child very tight round the abdomen, with a very
broad roller; by which means the circulation of the blood was impeded, the
superior parts loaded, the peristaltic motion of the intestines, and the action
of the abdominal muscles, hindered from properly performing their offices;
hence gripes -- convulsions -- coughs -- and general uneasiness. Instead,
therefore, of this roller, a short flannel petticoat, with a broad head should
be tied round on the waist, only so tight, as that a finger will easily pass
under it; so that if the child's belly swells, as it sometimes will from
flatulence, it may experience no uneasiness: and if after this a long linen
gown is put on, the child will be sufficiently dressed, be perfectly easy, and
no obstruction occur to prevent nature performing her proper operations. But
there is another error frequently committed with respect to what they think
necessary to give the infant internally; therefore, as soon as it is dressed,
they cram down its throat a large lump of butter and coarse sugar; or give it
oil of sweet almonds and syrup of violets: or should the infant lick its lips,
it must be fed with pig, that is, it must be permitted to suck the fat of that
animal, in order to appease, it is supposed, a sensation which arises from its
mother's having longed for something or another during her pregnancy.

Were there nothing but the mere folly and absurdity to be considered as the
result of this practice, it would not be necessary to say any thing to induce
its forbearance; but these things are pernicious, inasmuch as they mix with the
meconium, or humor with which a child's bowels is naturally loaded, prevents
its growing sufficiently acrid to produce its purgative effect, or sheath the
bowels from feeling the effect, and thus produce many complaints which load,
oppression, and distension of the intestinal canal are apt to bring on: for
nature seems to intend this meconium to clear, at an early stage, the first
passages of the sordes which have accumulated there. If, therefore, it is
determined to give something to the infant, a little castor oil, and simple
syrup, will be the best, because it answers the purpose intended by the
meconium. For if we consider the state of the infant during labor -- the
effects of the meconium left to itself -- the time before the mother acquires
her milk, and that its property is at first aperient, we shall obviously see
the reason, why nature preserves this regularity in soliciting a discharge of
fluids through the primae viae; and show that if any thing is to be attempted,
her plan ought to direct all our operations. For besides clearing the stomach
and bowels of its contents, which, by continuance there, might produce
disagreeable and dangerous effects, it seems intended to prevent the too free
determination of blood toward the vessels of the brain, which might be in a
weakened state from the severity of labor: for the brain very often suffers
great compression from the bones of the head passing through the pelvis; indeed
it is often so great, that the bones will wrap considerably one over the other,
and consequently the capacity of the cranium be much diminished; by which means
the blood will be prevented from passing into the exterior part of the brain,
which is thrown into the head by the arteries appropriated for that purpose,
consequently the internal vessels will receive a more than proper quantity, and
by being too much distended, of course be weakened, and that in proportion to
the continuance and violence of such pressure; in order, therefore, to prevent
the mischiefs which would arise from such debility, if continued, and the
succeeding accumulation, I conceive nature very wisely constituted purging,
that the vessels may recover their due tone; and that this is one principal
reason, I am induced to believe, from the first of the mother's milk always
having a purgative property.

But however, I think that the less any sort of these things are given the
better. As soon, therefore, as the child is dressed, and the mother laid in a
clean and comfortable situation, the child should be placed in bed by her, and
both left to go to rest, which they will soon do, and sleep perhaps for six or
seven hours, by which means they will be refreshed, and recover in a great
degree the fatigue they have both undergone: then the mother should be fed with
some thin broth, or weak wine gruel, and a little bread, or some such simple
materials; and the child, if the mother intends to nurse it, set to the breast;
notwithstanding what some authors have said to the contrary, under the idea,
that as nature does not furnish any quantity of milk in the breast, till the
expiration of three days or thereabouts, it is useless, and only teazing to the
mother and child, to have it set to before. This I am perfectly persuaded
though is erroneous, and often attended with disagreeable consequences, both to
the mother and infant, disposing the former to febrile affections, and bringing
on a milk fever, from pain created by distention of the vessels of the breast,
and keeping the infant too long from that salutary food which nature has
provided for it, and acts at first in a double capacity, as we have before
specified; besides it supplies an opportunity for ignorant and over officious
nurses to cram the children with a variety of dabs, and too viscid food; by
which means a foundation is laid for a number of complaints, from loading and
oppressing the alimentary canal, by such things as are unconquerable by the
digestive powers of the infantile state; hence arise crudities, acidity,
flatulence, and convulsions, which by a different management would be
prevented. For by setting the child at an early period to the mother's breast,
by the gentle stimulus on the nipple from sucking, the milk is solicited in a
gradual manner into the breast -- the vessels are made by degrees permeable --
the infant receives it at first in small quantities, adequate to its wants and
digestive powers -- no superabundance of milk is collected, nor a sudden ^low
of it into the lactiferous tubes, by which distension, pain, and febrile
affections to the mother are prevented; the child's stomach is not overloaded,
nor too great a quantity of fluid thrown into the habit, which would be
injurious to several parts of the machine, particularly the head -- lungs --
and liver -- as the circulation of the blood is now altered from what it was
before the birth, and consequently the vessels in those organs incapable to
bear sudden and too free distension; for the parts of the human machine are
always better enabled to suffer changes brought on in a gradual and temperate
mode, than by such as operate in the contrary extreme; and this seems, in the
case of which we are speaking, to be the intent of unerring nature; it is so
perfectly rational, that the description alone carries along with it
conviction. Indeed, I am so clearly convinced of the great utility and good
consequences arising from the adoption of this method, both from reason and
experience, that I universally recommend it to those who are capable and
willing to suckle their own children; and in all healthful subjects, it is a
practice which should on no account be dispensed with; for to me, there is
little doubt but that the milk of the mother is better adapted to the
constitution of her own offspring than of any other; besides the advantages
attending the first, as much so, I think, as the natural soil is to any
indigenous vegetable: nor do I stand single in this opinion; for many authors,
who have written best on this subject, not only support the same doctrine, but
think that the mother's milk is sufficient for the nourishment of the infant
for the first twelve months, and recommend that, to that alone they should
adhere.

Could we insure the health of the mother and child, I should not hesitate to
enforce the custom; but as both are liable to fall into dispositions, which may
either, on the one hand, render the milk improper, from its nutritious
qualities being altered; or, on the other, from its increasing some complaint
in the primae viae. I think, during the child's being nourished from the
breast, it should be fed once or twice a day with the boat; that if any
accident should render it absolutely necessary to wean the child, or take it
for a time from the breast, no inconvenience may arise from such an alteration;
for many children feed solely by the breast -- take very ill to the boat: nay,
some indeed are obliged to be supplied by the breast of a stranger, a
circumstance often painful, and almost always disagreeable to the parents --
and as a succedaneum for the mother's milk that of asses is the best, or
artificial asses milk with a little bread, called tops and bottoms; or roll, or
biscuit -- not the common bread, for that has in its composition too much of
alum, and may, in habits where there is a propensity to costiveness, be
particularly hurtful.

But as children are apt to have most of their complaints originate from
acidities in the stomach and bowels, or to have such acidities very often as a
distressing consequence, it would be right to use them to the taste of other
viands; particularly weak veal broth, or that of mutton; or beef sea, if they
should have no disposition to febrile affections: -- but, whatever the food,
care should be taken never to overload the stomach, as is too commonly the
custom; so much so, that often, in the day, they may be observed restless,
uneasy, and sick, and relieved alone by frequently puking -- a happy remedy
against the mistaken humanity of over-fond mothers; for it is a common practice
with them, and other nurses, as soon, or as often as a child cries, or appears
fretful, to appease it by giving the breast, though it should, a few minutes
before, have sucked to satiety. Instead of this, the child should be amused by
dandling gently, or by some other means diverted: exercise however is the best,
in proportion to its age. In the first months, such as is moderate, and of the
gentler kind; afterward, as its strength increases, so may the exercise; for
this quickens circulation, augments perspiration, assists digestion, and helps
to clear away visceral obstructions, and prevent costiveness. Indeed, in the
early stage, it is useful, twice a day, when dressing and undressing the child,
for the nurse to rub it well with her hands, particularly on the extremities,
down the back and abdomen, before the fire, for a quarter of an hour each
morning and evening. -- The infant will show its approbation, and the utility,
by kicking and throwing about i^^ legs, smiling, crowing, and by a perceptible
brightness in its eyes, and cheerfulness in its countenance. In some countries,
particularly in some parts of Scotland, mothers very early adopt the custom of
dipping their children every morning into cold water; on which custom Dr.
Cullen makes the following observation: That he had seldom, or never seen the
offspring of their women, so treated, subject to the rickets. It has long been
recommended, and I think with some advantage, to wash the legs, thighs, back,
and head, with cold water. In this custom there appear two very material
advantages -- cleanliness, and gently increasing the tone of the system: by
which the system is unloaded, and strength given to the muscular fibers. And
upon these two principles, regularly promoted, is it, perhaps, that we may
attribute, in a great degree, the prevention of that complaint we have just
alluded to -- a complaint, the constant concomitant of nastiness, inordinate
feeding, with improper food, and indolence.

Though this practice is very serviceable to healthful children, still, in such
as are delicate, and disposed to intestinal complaints, some attention ought to
be paid to the degree of cold used on this occasion; and therefore, in these,
it may be prudent to mix a portion of warm water with that which is cold, so
that it may still remain a proportionate degree of cold, compared with the
natural warmth of the constitution, but of warmth compared with other common
water; for we know that some will bear cold bathing, or washing, and receive
abundant benefit, if the degree of cold only be such, that the internal part of
the system shall be capable of producing re-action adequate to the impulse of
the fluids occasioned by the external application; if not, many disagreeable
consequences occur, arising from a load being thrown upon the internal parts
too suddenly, and too copiously, so as to overpower their action, such as
congestions in, obstructions, and inflammations of the brain, lungs, viscera,
and some of the glandular parts, wherever they appear, from their debility, to
be most predisposed to such affections.

In this method it may be necessary to persist for three, four, or five months;
but as children grow stronger, they then generally require thicker and stronger
food, given them once or twice a day; cow's milk with roll, biscuit. Tops and
bottoms may be made use of, moderately sweetened, or panada, mixed with new
milk, warm; and this food should be made fresh twice a day in winter, and three
times in summer: the new milk should not be boiled, but mixed with hot panada,
or pap; nor should the viands be made sweeter than that of mother's milk, nor
given hotter than milk from the cow; for victuals too hot, or too sweet, are
apt to occasion relaxation of the stomach and bowels, and create morbid
ascidity; and should the child be of a costive habit, soft Lisbon sugar, if
laxative, superfine sugar should be made use of: broths also should make part
of their food, minced chicken, or rabbit, with panada, and bread puddings,
particularly after they are weaned; consequently, a little before, it would be
right to accustom them to such sort of food. Potatoes is a food which numbers
of children are fond of, and are very early accustomed to; however, to those of
delicate habit, I think them by no means proper, nor any other that are
possessed of much viscidity, inasmuch as the accumulation of such tenacious
food in the stomach and intestines is apt to form a nidus for worms; but to
those of strong digestive powers, born of healthful, athletic parents, such as
common rustics, this prohibition is less necessary; as it has been observed, in
countries where this vegetable root frequently and commonly makes part, and a
great share of their diet, no such inconvenience has been observed; but this
depends not upon the salubrity of such sort of diet, but upon the firm stamina,
and great strength of the digestive powers of those who feed on it -- to the
more delicate it is certainly injurious; and it is upon the strength or
debility of the constitutional powers by which we must in general regulate our
conduct in our directions. -- If children are born healthful, and strong, such
regulations as are above laid down, will be sufficient to conduct them
forwards, with ease and safety, for the first twelve months, or longer; but
should they be born sickly, as is sometimes the case, it may be asked, are the
same rules to be observed? Under such circumstances, cleanliness, proper
clothing, gentle exercise, and the mother's milk, certainly form the best
preventive and curative plan; for, by their proper adoption, I have no doubt
but constitutions, weakly in their origin, may be strengthened, and a number of
complaints, the natural result of debility not only cured, but often prevented.
Though some caution may be necessary in feeding children naturally weak, great
care should be taken never to overload the stomach, notwithstanding the food
should be confined to that afforded by the mother; it, therefore, should be
advisable to give the breast to the child much oftener, so that a little milk
only may be taken at a time, which will be easily and readily digested. This
may be considered troublesome to the mother, yet will she be amply repaid, by
seeing her offspring improve daily under such judicious management, and
meliorating a constitution, which otherwise would be made worse, and fall a
sacrifice to painful disease; for, by overloading the stomach, that organ would
be weakened, crudities and acidities be generated, green stools, looseness,
gripes, and convulsions be the unvoidable consequences; for almost all
complaints with which infants are at a very early period afflicted, except
those which arise hereditarily, from mal-conformation of some particular parts,
infection, or contagion, deduce their origin from defect in the alimentary
tube, and that generally acidity, occasioned too often by indiscreet and too
copious feeding. But when such acidities are too prevalent, they constitute
diseases, and will be taken notice of when we treat of such as are incident to
children; we shall only observe, if there appears a proneness in the habit to
produce them, besides the mode here directed for invigorating the constitution,
it might be proper, now and then, to put a little magnesia into the victuals,
if costive: if otherwise, some of the other prepared absorbent earths, such as
chalk, crabs eyes, or prepared hartshorn; feed the infant once or twice a day
upon broth, and use rice instead of bread, for it is less apt to turn four than
any other of the lighter ^arinaceous substances.

But many authors have, respecting mothers suckling their children, laid it
down as an indispensable duty, and advanced, that almost all, of whatever
nature their constitution may be, are capable of performing that office with
the greatest advantage to their own constitutions, as well as to their
children; for, says Dr. Cadogan, When a child sucks its own mother, which, with
a very few exceptions, would be best for every child, and every mother, nature
has provided it with such wholesome and suitable nourishment, supposing her a
temperate woman, that makes some use of her limbs, it can hardly do amiss. The
mother would likewise, in most hysterical nervous cases, establish her own
health by it, though she were weak and sickly before, as well as that of her
offspring. -- For these reasons I could wish, that every woman that is (...),
whose fountains are not greatly disturbed, or tainted, would give suck to her
child. I am very sure that forcing back the milk, which most young women must
have in great abundance, may be of fatal consequence: sometimes it endangers
life; and often lays the ^oundation of many incurable diseases. The reasons
that are given for this practice are very frivolous, and drawn from false
premises; that some women are too weak to bear such a drain, which would rob
them of their own nourishment.

This is a very mistaken notion: for the first general cause of most people's
diseases is, not want of nourishment, as is here imagined, but too great a
fullness and redundancy of humors; -- good at first, but being more than the
body can employ, or consume, they stag^^te, degenerate, and the whole mass
becomes corrupt, and produces many diseases.

However, notwithstanding this authority, I am certain that there are many
mothers totally incapable of giving suck, particularly such as are of very
delicate nervous constitutions, weak appetites, and possessed of bad digestive
powers -- whose fluids are acrimonious and habits subject to hysteric
affections; for these, in general, neither afford milk sufficient in quantity,
not properly elaborated for nutrition: hence, when they attempt to suckle their
children, they do infinite mischief to their own constitutions, by having it
debilitated by the constant drain of what should support themselves, and lay
the foundation for a variety of complaints in their offspring, by pouring into
it such crude unwholesome fluid. The children of such women should either be
set to another woman's breast, or brought up by the boat. IF (...), there are
some precautions requisite to be observed, such as we are directed to by the
imitation of nature -- as the infant is deprived of the mother's first milk,
which is purgative, and clears the primae viae of their sordes, art must supply
the deficiency by gentle means: the infant, then, should have some aperient
ingredient mixed with its food, as will prove purgative -- the best of which is
manna, and pulp of cassia. These may be given in such quantities as will
procure the child four stools every day for about eight or nine days; or a
little castor oil, mixed with syrup, may be given at proper intervals. Once a
day, perhaps, may be sufficient; or the nurse may take some aperient electuary
for the first week of suckling, which will sometimes answer the purpose
equally, in such doses only as may impregnate the milk with some of its
aperient properties; after which, the same directions should be pursued as have
been before set down.

But with regard to the selection of a nurse much is necessary. She should be
young, cleanly, active, healthful, free from any complaint, possessed of a good
appetite, and quick, easy, digestive powers; and, above all things, her milk
should not be too old -- the nearer the time to her having laid in the better,
for the milk will then partake more of the nature of the mother's milk. I have
said she should be young -- by that I mean between twenty and thirty, for, at
this time of life, they are generally in the most healthy state, most active,
and more capable of contending with fatigue, and other unavoidable casualties,
without prejudicing their milk -- which fluid it will be necessary to examine,
for some women's milk is apt to be too thick, sweet, and rich, whilst others
appear thin and watery -- that is best which partakes neither too much of the
one or the other of these extremes.

Sometimes I have known parents very solicitous of dieting nurses, in order to
keep the milk in proper order, and this I have seen productive of bad effects.
I would by no means take any nurse from that mode of living by which she
enjoyed a good and perfect state of health; for though we may tell what appears
likely to produce general effects in the habit, if we form our judgment from
experiments made on different materials out of the constitution, still the
peculiarities there existing, which can only be discovered by effects, make
such alterations, the cause of which we are unable to investigate, and should
therefore be content with observing the consequences. I should, therefore,
recommend that nurses should live in the common plain mode, of viands simple
and nutritious, composed of animal and vegetable substances, avoiding all
high-seasoned dishes, or salted provisions; for these become difficult of
digestion, create thirst, induce febrile affections, and promote an acrimonious
state of fluids. I specify this, because nurses, often taken into great
families, are very desirous of quitting their homely fare, and indulging in the
luxuries of high life.

If the BOAT is MADE CHOICE OF, a similar mode should be pursued with regard to
(...) the primae viae, and the viands with which the child should be fed, must
be such as most resemble the mother's milk, fluid, not too sweet, nor given too
hot, and partaking, in some degree, of animal and vegetable nature -- asses, or
artificial ass's milk, mixed with thin panada, made as above directed, or milk,
warm from the cow: perhaps, in both cases, feeding children at stated periods,
about four times a day will be sufficient, if that custom is begun very early.

So essentially necessary has exercise been considered toward the support of
health, that it has been advised by every author; but it should be such as is
adapted to the age and constitution of the patient: in the first periods very
gentle, afterward increased, as the strength of the infant increases, and that
will be always the best, which, at the same time it gives motion to the body,
appears to divert and entertain, for the spirits by these means are
exhilirated, and the mind, from being amused, gives also quickness and strength
to nervous and vascular action -- rubbing the child well before the fire twice
a day we have specified, gently swinging, or ^oisting for some time together,
before some objects which engage its attention, causing the little infant to
laugh, kick its legs, and exert its whole body by little springs, in the
nurse's arms, will be proper; for no child can continue long well that is
suffered to sit like a log in an indolent nurse's arms; for such a sedentary
position breeds crudities, occasions the habit to be overloaded, blunts the
activity of the vessels, retards circulation, and breeds a variety of
complaints from internal congestion; -- nor should nurses be permitted to carry
children always in one arm, a custom too many acquire, but more particularly if
the infant is inactive and weakly; for, from always reclining to one side,
distortion is apt to take place: therefore, they should constantly be removed
from one to the other. It is highly useful to suffer little ones to roll upon
carpets, and be amused with some little toy or other, that may entice their
exertions, to creep from place to place after it. This is a pleasant exercise,
and early teaches an active use of their little limbs -- and I have observed
children, so brought up, more early get upon their legs, and run about, than
others who have been used to leading-strings, go-carts, and contrivances of
these kinds; it is most advisable first to lead them off gently by the finger,
and that may be attempted at a more early period than some advise -- for the
idea of setting children upon their legs very soon, occasions them to be
crooked, is not in fact true -- so far from that, it gives them additional
strength; and it has been observed, that the legs of children which have at
first appeared crooked, have, by early exertions to walk, become stronger, and
perfectly straight.

Besides these things, children should often be taken into the fresh air, and
remain therein for some time, at least twice a day, and always be kept
perfectly clean, changing their cloths immediately upon being fouled; for
suffering them to continue in a ^^thy state, for any time, disposes the parts
to become tender and excoriated, creating pain, rendering children peevish, and
inactive. They should also be often washed with cold water behind the ears, as
well as other parts of the body; for, from neglect in this particular, the
moisture, which naturally collects there, becomes acrimonious, irritates, and
inflames the parts, and occasions an acrid discharge, which brings on
disagreeable and painful excoriations. When it is from the neglect of this
custom that this complaint arises, which we may conjecture to be the case, if
the child appears healthful in every other respect, washing behind the ears
with warm milk and water, or Goulard's water, or spreading a very fine rag,
extremely thin, with saturnine ointment, and cleanliness, will generally
promote the cure; but should we have reason to suppose it a drain exerted by
nature for the relief of internal indisposition, other management seems
necessary, which we shall specify when we come to treat on infantile diseases.

As we think that a vast deal depends upon proper Nursing, in order to preserve
the human species, and prevent a variety of diseases, which too often end
fatally, or lay the foundation for various morbid affections, which are too apt
to continue the painful concomitants of our future days, and embitter life
through the whole of its progress, we have dwelt longer on this point than may
to some appear necessary, but which we think cannot be too minutely observed;
and it may not be useless to attempt to comprize the whole in a few short
axioms -- and, first, we lay it down as an invariable rule,

That, immediately after the birth, children should be wrapped in a warm
wrapper, to preserve them from cold; afterward, in about half an hour be well
cleaned before the fire, loosely and lightly clothed, not crammed with any
dabs, but laid by the mother and set to her breast as soon as possible.

That, where the constitution will permit, all mothers should suckle their own
children, at the same time not depend totally upon the breast, but occasionally
use them to the boat, or spoon, in order to be prepared against the effects of
indisposition, either in one or the other, should they occur.

That cleanliness should ever be invariably, and constantly observed --
children never have their stomachs overloaded, but be fed fully only at proper
intervals, five times a day; if not, oftener, and more sparingly.

That all food, besides the mother's milk, should be of a nature as similar as
possible to that milk, compounded of vegetable and animal materials, as ass's,
or artificial ass's milk, cow's milk mixed with thin panada, or rice used
instead of bread, and weak broths occasionally.

That they should be constantly exercised, agreeable to their age and strength,
and such used as seems to afford them pleasure, and employ their attention;
they also should be much out in the air, and be attended by clean, young,
lively, and active nurses.

SECTION VII. ON MEDICINE.
BEFORE we enter on that part of our plan, wherein we intend to describe
diseases, and lay down their most approved modes of cure, it will be proper to
say something on the different nature of the remedies which will be
recommended, in order to render the knowledge in their application more safe,
easy, and certain; -- as well as to explain the different general terms under
which they are classed -- as to these general terms we shall be unavoidably led
very often to have recourse.

But previous to the forming our arrangement, we think it necessary to specify
the different modes of action of various medicines taken from their known
effects, as we find from experience they act in various ways -- and we shall
first observe --

That -- active medicines produce their effects, by confining their action to
the moving powers of the constitution, page 56, locally, or sympathetically; --
if we except water, considered as a diluent, or such substances, where water
abounds in a superabundant quantity.

That no medicine acts upon the femina morbi, or particles, which form the
origin of some diseases; -- except they lodge in the stomach, intestines, or
some other cavities, where they come in contact in an unaltered state with the
cause of the affections: -- consequently that there are very few, which can in
any case be considered as specific; -- and then only in this way.

That -- all medicines, caeteirs paribus, (...) their own peculiar, inherent
power in an unaltered state, and always exert similar effects: -- that when
they appear to have any variability of action, it is owing to the constitution
being different; -- to the same constitution having suffered some change, -- or
some peculiarity; -- or to something they must meet with in the habit forming a
new compound.

That -- the strong inherent power, or primary action of any medicine being
known, its secondary or consequent effects may be traced in general from the
same source -- and that when these are altered, it is owing to some
constitutional cause last specified, or to the difference of the dose, varying
its action only in degree.

That -- some medicines, to which are attributed particular powers, have no
such powers inherent in themselves; but are inactive, and have their action
dependant on some other materials with which they meet, and form combination in
the habit, making a new substance, different from the principles of which they
are composed, and to which must be attributed their active powers.

That -- some medicines, when thrown into the habit, have not the power always
of exerting their primary action of themselves alone, but when joined with
other materials, produce the effect intended, consistent with the power allowed
inherent in them.

That -- medicines do not always in similar doses produce the same effects, on
dissimilar constitutions -- nor, before the trial, can the active dose be
discovered; -- therefore in the exhibition of all powerful medicines, this
general rule should be observed -- to begin with small doses, and gradually
increase them, till the proper constitutional dose is manifested; -- that is,
till nausea, sickness, or some uneasy sensation in the stomach is created, then
by lessening the dose in a slight degree, the full one may be ascertained --
and this holds good in all active medicines -- except such where benefit is
supposed to be derived from occasioning nausea, or sickness -- as occurs often
in the administration of quills -- ipecacuanha -- and some antimonial
preparations.

Now, as we find a number of these actions depend upon the stomach, and its
intimate connections with different parts of the human machine, we may say
every part, that are possessed of moving powers, and influenced by them, it
will not be improper to say something relative to the effects produced by this
intimate union.

With regard to connections -- sympathy -- or consent this vis^us has with most
parts of the body, and the mind also, it is very close, known from a variety of
appearances obvious to our senses; as well as the observation of the most
judicious and sagacious practitioners. -- A very late writer, of no small
eminence, says -- Nothing affects the mind more than the state of the stomach,
and nothing draws the stomach into sympathy more than affections of the mind.
-- This is evident from hypochondriac people, whose disease being chiefly
seated there, has often grievous effects upon the sensorium commune, that part
where the senses transmit their perceptions to the mind -- or the seat of it,
the head -- Does not, in these cases, the vomiting of bile proceed from consent
between the stomach and liver.

The stomach has a considerable connection with the viscera of the thorax, or
cavity of the chest -- abstracted from its contiguity or distention. -- In
hypochondriacal cases, the heart and lungs are variously affected by the
stomach -- Convulsions of the diaphragm are often occasioned by slight
irritations of the cordia, or upper orifice of the stomach; -- many other
symptoms might be adduced in proof of the same thing, were it necessary.

The stomach is connected with the abdominal, viscera; -- and first, with the
intestines; -- secondly, with the other contiguous, as well as more distant
organs -- as spleen -- pancreas, or sweetbread, kidneys, bladder, etc.

This vis^us is connected with the extremities, as has been experienced by the
transition of the gout from the stomach to the extremities, and vice versa --
Cold and heat applied to the extremities affect the stomach.

It is connected with the whole surface of the body, and seemingly with the
extreme vessels every where. -- This is demonstrable by many observations --
for no sooner do some aliments reach the stomach of particular persons, than
spots and efflorescences are occasioned on the skin. -- VAN SWIETEN gave such
another instance from crabs eyes. -- DR. CULLEN had a patient laboring under
the hypochondriacal disease, who was relieved of his complaint by pimples
appearing between his thumb and finger -- and as immediately oppressed by their
retropulsion or disappearing.

Vomiting from constriction of the cutaneous pores is another instance of such
sympathy. -- Such symptoms, therefore, are safely attributed to acrimony --
and, upon the whole, we may conclude, that the stomach has a general consent
with the system universally.

If we consider what has been said on the action of medicines, deduced from
experience, founded on their effects, and the sympathetic power of the stomach
derived from the universality of its connections with continuous, as well as
distant parts of the machine, we shall be able to account for a number of
phenomena which would, without such knowledge, appear miraculous, and exceed
all belief; -- and also be enabled to arrange medicines under their respective
heads, all which will be extremely useful in giving us the necessary
information how, and in what cases they ought to be applied.

For as nothing can be done effectually in the living machine without the
action of the vital principle -- and as we have no mode of regulating, or
producing any effect upon that primarily, we are limited to direct all our
operations on the parts of the constitution, that they may be put into such
states, us to receive benefit from the salutary induence of that vital
principle; -- consistent therefore with this idea we shall form our arrangement
-- which we shall here concisely set down -- leaving the full explanation of
each particular, till we come to treat of them under their respective heads.

The arrangement consists of five heads:

First -- MEDICINES which act upon the inert solids by means of the vital
principle, under which will come 1. Nutrients 2. Astringents, and 3. Emollients.


Second -- MEDICINES which act upon the living solids by means of the same
principle.

Here will follow 1. Stimulants 2. Antispasmodics 3. Sedatives 4. Errhines 5.
Sialagogues 6. Expectorants 7. Emetics 8. Catharties 9. Diuretics 10.
Diaphoretics, and 11. Emenagogues.


Third -- MEDICINES which act upon the fluids through the system.

To this place belong 1. Attenuants 2. Inspissant, and 3. Demulcents.


Fourth -- MEDICINES which manifest their sensible action only in the primae
viae, or first passages, from the throat to the anus.

Here succeed 1. Antalkaline 2. Antacids, and 3. Antiseptics.


Fifth -- MEDICINES which produce their consequences from external application,
or on substances formed within the machine, and lodged without the verge of
circulation -- as 1. Epispastics 2. Blood-letting 3. Anthelmintics 4.
Lithontriptics.


This then the arrangement, we shall now proceed to explain the different parts
of which it consists specifically.

CHAP. I. MEDICINES which act upon the INERT SOLIDS by Means of the VITAL
PRINCIPLE.
1. THE first of which are NUTRIENTS, from the latin word nutrio, to nourish.
-- These consist of all such materials as are calculated to be assimilated to
our own specific nature, by the action of the digestive powers; -- and the
application of which so assimilated, repairs the waste which had been
occasioned by the different operations passing on in the human machine --
Hence, from their affording nourishment, do they take their name.

But these vary in several respects, either as to their being more or less
perfected in themselves toward the nature of animal juices. -- being of easier
or more difficult digestions, -- and also with respect to their fluidity or
solidity.

But though they are possessed of such various properties, they are all of them
reducible to one state, in order to promote support to the animal; and the
changes they undergo for this end are brought about by three different ways in
the first instance -- for first, the solid food is minutely divided, and has
its texture in a great degree broken down by chewing, and farther reduced by
the action of the stomach and intestines -- this is called COMMINUTION. -- It
also forms an union with the saliva, air, juices of the stomach and intestines
-- those of the liver and sweetbread -- this is termed COMMIXTURE -- and add to
these the heat it receives, by which it is thrown into the third mode, or
FERMENTATION -- and all this it undergoes in the first passages. -- In the
second, it experiences great divisibility, union, and mixture, in passing
through the lacteal vessels, and by the force of the lungs; -- and, lostly, it
is brought into its most perfect nutritive state by the impressive influence of
the circulatory system upon their contained fluids. Hence we may concisely say,
that the assimil^^^^ or our food, for the purpose of nutrition, is performed by
COMMINUTION -- COMMIXTURE -- and FERMENTATION.

And from this we may understand why all nutritious substances should be
adapted, both with regard to their quantity and quality, to the strength and
vigor of these powers collectively considered -- and also are we taught what
mischiefs often arise from the indiscreet indulgence of fond mothers, and
ridiculous nurses, who load those, who are weak in some or all these
particulars, too freely with food, considered in itself so be nutritious, in
order that they may acquire strength, -- and by these means, destroy the
effect, by large quantities being poured into the habit, which smaller
proportions of the same food would have indisputably supplied; -- for if the
digestive powers are loaded with a superabundant quantity more than they can
conquer, they become, as it were, diseased; and even the small portion of food,
to which their powers were adequate, left in a state too imperfect for
affording any nutrition. And this rule is extremely worthy of attention -- for
valetudinarians, however proper their food, should never take more than they
can bear with the greatest ease. Indeed, in people recovering from very severe
illness, where the active powers of the habit have been greatly enfeebled,
though it is always right to throw in food of the most nutritious nature, the
most easy of digestion, and such as sits the most light on the stomach, still
should we begin with small quantities, increasing them, and altering the food
in proportion as the patient recovers strength; and this for very obvious
reasons, which will soon appear, as we examine the nature of our food more
minutely than we have done in speaking of the non-naturals.

Though we have before said, that perhaps our first food partook most of a
vegetable nature, yet as all substances are the more nutritious, the more they
approach to that of animal, a division seems here requisite, in order to show
the different degrees they maintain with respect to the nutriment they afford,
and the proper modes of best acquiring and applying them to the constitution.

NUTRIENTS, therefore, may not improperly be arranged under three heads:

1. ANIMAL 2. VECETABLE 3. MIXED.

Of the FIRST -- All those are the most powerfully, and most quickly
nutritious, which have the least acidity, and are most elaborated, or brought
nearest to the nature of animal fluids -- hence the finer juices of the older
animals become the most eligible, and these are best procured by slight
boiling, or infusing, in such a diluted state as the circumstances may require;
that is, in proportion to the strength of the digestive powers; -- for, as we
consider the very fine juices of animal substances the most nutritious, because
more readily assimilated to our own nature, for very weak debilitated habits,
infusion is the most advantageous process, as by these means the subtler parts
are preserved, which by long or quick boiling would be dissipated -- but for
those possessed of stronger digestive powers, there is not so much necessity
for this nicety.

Of these materials the most nutritious are, beef -- and muttontea -- as they
are called -- made in the following manner.

Take of the lean part of beef, or mutton, one pound, cut it into thin slices,
and let the texture be well broken, by bruising it, then add to this one quart
of boiling water, in an earthen or tin vessel, keep i^ close covered till it is
quite cold -- or boil them over a quick fire, for five minutes; separate the
^^um, and decant the clear liquor for use; -- but should we require more of the
stronger parts of them, the liquor may boil ten, fifteen, or twenty minutes,
and then proceed as before directed.

The juices of the older animals are preferable to those of the younger,
because those of the latter are more tenacious, and partake not so much of the
nature of our own fluids, consequently yield, in that respect, to the former.

But when it is requisite that the flesh of animals should be given in its
solid form -- that of young ones is considered the most proper, as their fibers
are much more tender, most easily broken down by chewing, and yield their
nutritious part more readily to the acting powers of digestion.

MILK, of which we have before spoken, pages 82, 83, though of a mixed nature,
between animal and vegetable, we consider next; for it is a fluid only half
perfected, and partakes, in some degree, of each of the other classes. We have,
in another place, delivered our sentiments on the allowed degrees of preference
one species of milk has to another, and have shown that of asses to be the best
of any which could be procured in proper quantity -- we shall here, therefore,
only observe, where that cannot be acquired, either from the greatness of the
expense, or the scarcity, of the animal, the following, called artificial asses
milk, is not an inefficacious succedaneum:

Take of candied eryngo root, one ounce; pearl barley, half an ounce; liquori^e
root, three drams; boil them in two pints of water till they are reduced to
one, then add one pint of milk fresh from the cow, boil them gently together,
and strain for use. Half a pint of this should be drank, in general, two or
three times a day; but should that quantity be too large, it may be reduced,
and repeated oftener.

The VEGETABLE CLASS has been considered as more difficult of assimilation than
either of the other, because it is more distant in its nature from our fluids;
and perhaps those may be found the most nutritious that approach nearer to
milk, that is, more impregnated with oil, not essential -- saccharine substance
-- and a small portion of vegetable acid; for it is from these qualities that
all nutrition, in food of this sort, is supposed to be derived.

We have spoken here, and in another place, of these things, merely as
appropriated to afford nourishment only to the animal; but they must be allowed
to have other properties, which it is necessary to specify, as by these means
different changes are produced in the constitution.

ANIMAL FOOD, particularly fish, is more stimulant and alcalescent, because
more prone to run into that state, which generates pungent acrimonious salts,
consequently becomes more heating.

VEGETABLE, more diluent and acescent, from its being more replete with aqueous
particles, and having strong propensities, from their very nature, to become
acid -- hence more cooling.

Milk, in this instance, partakes more of the latter, as it is subject, left to
itself, to become acid; besides, vegetables are more emollient and sheathing,
as most of them abound not only with watery particles in great proportion, but
also with those which are mucilaginous; and seem to have inspissating, or
thickening powers, from their mixture with the fluids: hence, if we take in the
account the quantity of fixed air with which they are replete, we may be
convinced of their utility in cases of the sea or true scurvy, and in all those
morbid habits, where the fluids have acquired too great degrees of thinness,
from inherent or accidental acrimony. Milk also retains the same properties.

Roasted -- broiled -- or fried animal food, is more stimulant than boiled, and
runs quicker into a state of putrescency -- from the different culinary
processes they undergo: the first being prepared only by the action of strong
heat, by which means the fluids are rendered more pungent, and more highly
alcalescent -- the last receiving a less degree of heat, and through an aqueous
medium, with which part of the animal juices are mixed, rendered more dilute,
and less highly subtilized; -- but when stewed down, to a great degree, and eat
with the ^luids with which it is prepared, it approaches nearer to the former,
than when only infused, or gently simmered; nay, indeed, often exceeds them;
and hence becomes also more difficult to be concocted or conquered by the
digestive organs.

Of the vegetable class, we have said farinaceous substances are the most
nutritious, and those which have undergone some culinary process, because their
fibrous parts are rendered more tender: and those which are most easily
assimilated, which contain the must (...), saccharine substance, and a small
portion of vegetatable acid; consequently those which have suffered (...) and
fermentation, as they become sweeter, and have their viscid parts rendered
thinner, and more flexile, by those means are more easily digestible; -- But we
must in this place make one observation, which affords an objection to what is
advanced. -- There are another class of vegetables, which are supposed to be
more nutritious -- and these are the FUNGI, or those fungous extuberances,
called Mushrooms, or Champignons -- Truffles -- Mor^^^es, named by NERO, the
Victuals of the Gods -- they are considered to afford more nutriment, from
yielding, on their chemical decomposition, materials similar to animal food.
DR. CULLEN says, if they are truly vegetable matters, of which some have
doubted, they are very different from every other vegetable with which we are
acquainted -- for in the first part of their distillation, without addition,
they give out no acid, but a large proportion of volatile salt; -- and exposed
to undergo a spontaneous fermentation, they manifest no acescency, but become
immediately putrid -- hence show they a very near resemblance to animal
substances; and it may be presumed, that they are more considerably nutritious
than almost any truly vegetable substances.

I have inserted thus much relative to these fungi, in order that we may be
acquainted with their particular uses, not as correctors of animal food, like
other vegetables, but rather as animal food itself, and correctors of acidity
in the stomach -- and on this account become a pleasing delicacy to such, who
are forbid the use of all vegetables, on account of a prevalent redundancy of
acid in the first passages.

All the acrid -- bitter -- or highly flavoured vegetables, as they consist of
parts which are not readily subdued by the digestive powers, but pass in an
unaltered state in the course of circulation, come more properly under the
class of medicinal substances.

Under this head of Nutrients we shall have no occasion to supply a general
catalogue, for all those things fall under this class which we employ as food,
and include whatever we eat and drink for the purpose of supporting the animal
machine, and repairing its waste. -- And if we revert to what has been said in
treating on aliment, p. 70, and on those liquids we in common drink, p. 80,
with what we have here advanced, we shall be supplied with knowledge sufficient
properly to direct us in our selection; for I am fully persuaded, that we
oftener err by the quantity of food that we take, than the quality; as it is
certain, such is the power inherent in our habits, that though our food may be
in its own nature in any particulars dissimilar, still if we only supply such
quantities as are judiciously approportioned to our digestive powers, whatever
the aliments on which we feed, they will all be reduced to the same state,
adapted to the preservation and nourishing of the machine; we shall therefore
advert to our next subject.

2. ASTRINGENTS, from the Latin word astringo, to bind, or condense, which are
all such substances as by their action render the softer parts more compact,
give a greater firmness to the solids, and a cohesive tenacity to the fluids.
Their particular power in condensing the solids is obvious from the effects
which they produce in tanning, or making of leather.

BOERHAAVE was of opinion, that, when applied, they bring two distant parts of
a moving fiber into closer contact, and into a more firm cohesion, and this by
insinuating between each particle of the fiber another of the same kind.

Dr. CULLEN thinks, that as a fiber is composed of solid and fluid, the
cohesion of the whole is increased by diminishing the watery, or by addition of
the solid substance: but is rather a favourer of the first opinion.

With respect to the addition of any solid substance, it may be the case when
acting on the inert solids, free from the influence of the vital, or nervous
power; but in the living machine, we cannot suppose medicines of this class
derive from this source their operation; for under those circumstances the
medicine must be universally diffused, and come in contact immediately with the
parts upon which it acts.

This, therefore, cannot be true -- if we consider the very small portion of
those which show their general astringent power, when taken upon the stomach,
and the very quick mode in which they produce their effects; besides, the
variety of substances which manifest a constringent efficacy, when the machine
is variously affected from different causes.

In proof of this we shall mention some few particulars:

ALUM, when given in doses of a few grains, has been known to stop profuse
bleedings, arising from a relaxation of the solids, in a short space of time.

WHITE VITRIOL -- BARK -- STEEL -- and some other of the strongly acting
medicines, have caused the cessation of other discharges, by invigorating the
system, and not from the locality of their application.

PUNGENT STIMULANTS have produced instantaneous effects, though not durable, in
cases of laxity.

SEDATIVES, or those medicines which manifest their effects by alleviating
pain, and abating the quickness of vascular action, have early shown their
power in the abatement of acrid defluxions.

Now it appears evidently that all these produce their influence by their
action on the stomach sympathetically conveyed to the machine in general, and
to the parts particularly affected, which, as being in a more morbid state,
they experience more powerfully.

With regard to the fluids, those medicines which have the power of sheathing
acrimonious particles, from whence discharges have proceeded, may be considered
as astringents. In fine, whatever will promote a contraction of the solids, or
coagulation of the fluids, come under this class.

But it must be observed, that many of these excite their action
instantaneously, but do not give the system the power of continuing the effect;
-- whilst others act more slowly, still occasion, as it were, a permanency to
that action in the constitution.

VOLATILE substances -- essential oils, and others of this class promote very
quickly the influence of the vital powers, by which means the constitution very
early is made sensible of their power, but as soon as they cease to act, which
they do in a short space, the morbid effects, they seem to have conquered, are
reproduced. -- Alum also labors under the same disadvantages.

But the more slowly acting astringents continue their force longer, and appear
to give a stronger and more lasting cohesive power to the particles of the
solid fibers, as if they increased their attractive influence inter^se.

From this knowledge we shall be able to deduce a mode of prescribing, of
infinite use in practice, which would at an earlier period have been considered
as contradictory, and ridiculous, because deviating from the commonly received
opinion -- for, from what has been advanced, we see that volatiles and
astringents may be judiciously united, and will be the means of assisting the
effects of each other, by producing them sooner, and making them more lasting
-- as I have often found in the course of practice, particularly where the
constitution has been defective in vascular irritability, and nervous
incitability; for, by adding volatiles and pun^ent stimulants to bark, in many
cases, the wished-for effects have been produced, which could not be attained
by bark alone.

To these, where the humors are acrimonious, sheathing medicines, called
demulcents, may be joined; -- and sedatives occasionally had recourse to, where
spasms attend relaxation of the solids.

But we must here observe, that where the astringent saline minerals, such as
those (...) -- white, and blue vitriol -- the preparations of lead -- alum,
etc. may be thought proper, volatiles must not be joined with them, as they
will occasion a decomposition, and render the astringent power of the compound
mineral less active, nay, perhaps, destroy it altogether.

The catalogue, presented to us by various authors, is extremely copious, but
we shall content ourselves with a few, which are in general allowed to be the
most efficacious.

ASTRINGENTS from the Mineral Kingdom.
IRON, filings, or rust prepared -- dose from five grains to 30. Ammoniacal
iron, 3 grains to 15 or 20. Tartarized iron, 10 grains to 30. Vitriolated iron,
3 grains to 20. Tincture of muriated iron, 10 drops to 60. ALUM, burnt, from 2
to 15 grains. Whey, from 2 to 4 ounces. Curd, externally. CHALYBEATE WATERS --
Tumbridge Pyrmont Hamp^^ead Islington, etc. ZINC -- Calcined zinc, 2 grains to
6. White vitriol, 1-2 a grain to 2. COPPER -- Blue, or Roman vitriol, 1-4 of a
grain to 2. LEAD -- Water of acetated litharge, from 1 to 3 drops. Acetated
ceruss, 1-2 a grain to 1 and 2.
From the Vegetable Kingdom.
ROSES -- Conserve, 1 or 2 drams to 1-2 an ounce. Infusion, 2 ounces, or more.
TORMENTIL ROOT -- In powder, 8 grains to 40. In decoction, 2 to 3 drams. KINO
-- powder, 1-2 a scruple to 2 scruples. MADDER -- powder, ^0 to 30 grains. In
decoction, 1 ounce in 3 pints boiled to 2 -- dose, 2 ounces. WOOD SORREL --
Conserve. WATER-DOCK ROOT -- In decoction, 1-2 a pound to 6 pounds of water
reduced to 4 -- dose 8 ounces. CUP MOSS -- in decoction, said to cure the
chincough. QUINCES -- Marmelade. MULBERRIES -- Syrup. MEDLA^S -- Fruit, not to
be eaten before long keeping. S^OES -- Conserve, dose 1 or 2 drams. NETTLE,
stinging -- Juice, or decoction, 2 to 4 ounces. BEARS WORTLE BERRY, the leaf --
Powder, 15 to 30 grains. Decoction or Infusion, 1 or 2 drams in a pint and 1-2
of water reduced to one pint -- dose from 6 to 8 ounces. TINCTURE OF CATECHU,
which was called JAPAN EARTH, 1, 2, or 3 drams. POMEGRANATE -- In decoction, An
ounce to a quart of milk and water reduced to a pint. OAK and ASH BARK --
Slight decoction, gradually increased. SIMAROUBA; or GUIANA BARK -- Powder,
from 10 to 20 grains. LOGWOOD -- Extract, 10 to 40 grains. Decoction, 1-2 an
ounce to a pint and 1-2 reduced to 1 pint -- dose 3 ounces. GALLS --
externally, 1 part of powder to 8 of hog's lard.
All the acids, vegetable as well as mineral -- all the bitter Stimulants --
Sedatives -- and all the stimulant Balsams. We shall not supply any formula
here, from the different combination of these articles, but specify them more
particularly, when we come to treat of those cases where such applications are
required.

Though we have set down the doses according to what is generally held proper
for adults, expecting they will be varied according to the age and constitution
of the patient, and the exigence of the case to which they are necessary, one
observation it is proper to submit here, for the information of the reader;
which will apply in all the other departments on the subject of medicine, as
well as in this place.

That, as the same dose of any active medicine will not be adequate to produce
the intended effect on all constitutions, the dose specified being too large
for some, and for others too small -- we should always begin with a very
moderate dose at first, and increase it gradually, till the full proportion can
be discovered; thence we shall be certain of deriving every advantage which the
medicines can procure. Besides, we shall avoid producing too violent effects
upon those habits which have a natural antipathy to any particular medicine,
which can only be discovered from experience.

3. EMOLLIENTS -- so denominated from the latin word emollesco, to grow soft or
supple.

These act in a mode opposite to the preceding class, inasmuch as astringents
give firmness to, these induce a relaxation in the solids.

They have been called RELAXANTS, and may be considered as such, if we include
their mode of action in a double sense; for though they have been thought to
produce such a change in the solids as occasioned them to be extended, more
than they were before, without rupture; still they have been acknowledged to
reduce a part of the body, indurated and compacted in one uniform bulk, into
its state of contained liquid, and containing solid.

It has been conjectured, that emollients act chiefly upon the solids, by
introducing their particles, which consist mostly of the watery, mucilaginous,
and oleaginous kind, between those which compose the solid fiber, thus forcing
them farther from their sphere of attraction, and bringing them nearer to a
state of fluidity; for solids and fluids differ but in proportion to the
stronger or weaker attractive power of their component parts.

But notwithstanding this may be the case in many, nay, perperhaps most
instances, still they may produce their effects generally over the system by
their action on the stomach; for if that organ is relaxed, so will all the
other parts, dependent upon it, without having any watery particles introduced
to weaken their texture.

FEAR and GRIEF are powerful relaxants, but these may be said to affect the
mind and vital power, and hence produce their effects.

INEBRIATION has with numbers the same consequence, but this arises from the
relaxed state of the stomach, which is soon taken off by stimulating that
organ, as has before been specified in the beginning of this work.

Women in general experience similar mischiefs, from repeatedly drinking hot
tea, and other liquids under the same circumstances.

EMETICS given only in small nauseating doses, enervate, and relax the system
from the same cause.

SEDATIVES (chap. 2. 3.) may also be considered in some degree under this head.

Those, however, which produce their effect upon the machine in general by
sympathetic power, will be considered under different heads. Under emollients
we mean to rank only such substances as act from their watery, mucilaginous,
and oily particles, of which they consist; and these prove most effectual on
the parts to which they are more immediately applied, which DR. CULLEN
conceives to act in one of these two ways; the one by being insinuated into the
substance of the solid, and thereby diminishing the density of the whole of the
mixed, they diminish its force of cohesion. The other is, when, by being
insinuated into the interstices of, or spaces between dry particles, they
diminish the friction which might otherwise occur, and thereby render the whole
more flexible. The former seems to be the operation of water, the latter of
mucilage and oil.

And these three seem to include all the emollients, if we were to examine the
articles, multifarious as they are, which constitute this class. Indeed, for
internal use, the writer above specified rejects the whole, and gives the
preference to the infusion or decoction of lintfeed; which is fully as
efficacious as any other.

And here, though we must observe, that as in many febrile complaints the use
of emollients seem absolutely necessary, where the degree of febrile affection
runs very high, we are rather to adhere to those of the watery, mucilaginous
and farinaceous kind of the vegetable class, than to those abounding with oil,
or animal substances; because, from heat, they are apt to grow rancid, acquire
acrimony, and hence become too stimulant, and much increase the febrile effects
we wish to restrain.

The catalogue of EMOLLIENTS furnishes us with a great variety of substances,
out of which we form the following selection -- which, as they are so very
simple in their own nature, and produce no powerful action in the habit when
taken internally, require not to have any particular doses annexed to them.

EMOLLIENTS from the Animal Kingdom.
Weak broths, crude yolks of eggs, honey, milk, cream, butter, suet, fat,
spermaceti.

From the Vegetable Kingdom.
The seed of quinces, line, faenugreek, white poppy, wheat, rye, oats, barley,
particularly the farina of these, figs, raisins, dates, marshmallows, balm. --
Decoctions or infusions of these are pleasant and efficacious for common drink.

Oil of almonds, olive oil. All bland expressed oils.

Beat, spinach, white lily root, boiled onions. Liniments, ointments,
fomentations, or cataplasms formed of these substances, which we shall, in
their particular places, hereafter specify, have similar effects -- perhaps the
warmth with which they are applied may have some gently stimulating powers, and
hence prove also in some degree efficacious in those complaints for which they
are advised.

To these we should have added the warm vapor of an animal recently killed --
for we have instances of the arm, and other parts, put naked into the body of
an animal immediately after it has been slaughtered, receiving great benefit,
in cases where relaxing applications seemed requisite; and where many of the
others had been tried without any advantage.

But the most emollient of all is VAPOR, either received by the mouth, or
injected by glyster, moderately warm -- and indeed it is almost universally
esteemed so, whether applied internally or externally.

These form the class, it has been said, of medicines which act upon the inert
solids by means of the vital principle. That astringents and emollients may act
upon the inert solids also, perhaps, without the aid of that principle, in many
cases, when brought into contact with them, may be allowed -- but that in the
living machine they do, is much to be disputed -- and that the nutrients
cannot, is evidently clear; for if that principle is defective by which the
nutritious matter is applied to particular parts for their support and
reparation, the matter itself will avail but little. This seems clear from our
observations on paralytic limbs, receiving such slight degrees of support, and
of being scarce at all benefited by the application of astringents or
emollients, where such deficiency takes place. However, in a work of this
nature it seems not necessary to go too minutely into a subject of so much
intricacy; it is enough for our purpose to point out effects produced by the
particular materials specified, without being very solicitous of investigating
the precise mode by which they are accomplished.

Our second position leads us to treat

CHAP. II. On MEDICINES which act upon the LIVING SOLIDS by Means of the SAME
PRINCIPLES.
THE first of which are,

1. STIMULANTS, so called from the Latin word stimulo, to prick or goad: -- and
these are all such medicines as increase the oscillatory or vibrating motion of
a fiber, or excite the action of the moving fibers in the living animals.

How stimulus increases action we cannot point out the precise mode; but this
we know, that all those things which can increase the influence of the vital
powers, either diffusively or partially, are real stimulants, and as such must
be considered.

They have been concluded to be of two kinds -- DIRECT and INDIRECT. The first
are imagined to act directly on the moving fibers; -- the second on the organs
of sense, by which means a perception is excited on the common sensorium, which
acting there, determines the nervous power to flow more copiously into the
whole, or particular parts of the system. These are the most common and
universal. But stimulants do excite motion in the moving fibers themselves
independent of any connection with the common sensorium; for if the heart, or
some other of the muscular parts, are separated from the body, they may have
their action excited by the application of particular stimuli: this then is a
certain proof of an irritable power inherent in themselves independent of
connection with any nervous power. And again, it is as clear; that a stimulus
applied to the stomach will diffuse its power to the whole habit; or if to a
part, other parts far distant will experience its influence, as in cases of
general heat being occasioned by the use of cordials or volatile substances --
vomiting from irritation of the kidneys, etc. Hence then we may fairly
conclude, that action is produced by sympathy, as well as local stimulus.

Besides, in many of these actions, mental power is the first cause, as we may
discover in longings, desire for that food of which we see others eating with
uncommon relish; by which means the stomach is stimulated, and a strong
sensation of hunger is induced, which did not before exist -- weeping also from
sorrow, -- vomiting and sickness from recollection and reflection, etc. These
are incontestable proofs of the truth of our assertions.

Hence, then, stimulants may be properly divided into three classes:

GENERAL -- and these are such materials as are taken into the stomach, and
communicate general affection through the system, owing to the connection of
that organ with every other part of the machine.

LOCAL -- where irritation is produced on the part affected.

MENTAL -- where, without the application of any material substances, applied
to the stomach, or any other part, similar affections will be produced by the
powers of the mind.

Indeed, almost all active medicines might be ranked under the head of
stimulants, were we to class them according to their known operations;
submitted to different divisions under this general term, agreeable to the
effects they produce -- but we shall confine ourselves to such substances as
invigorate the system, increase the action of the nervous and vascular power
locally or universally,

And from hence shall we see their use, by facilitating the passage of the
blood through the parts in which it moved too slow, or was morbidly obstructed
by augmenting the force and celerity of the circulation -- they quicken the
senses where morbidly affected, rouse the mental faculties when in a lethargic
state, and exhilirate a desponding condition.

They restore the powers of motion where morbidly defective, and also the
strength of motion where morbidly weak.

From their uses have they been divided by some authors into such as are
diffusable -- cordial -- and topical by their action -- that is, such as have
their action conveyed over the system -- such as exhilirate the spirits -- and
such as are applied to some particular parts morbidly affected. Examples of the
FIRST have we in

Volatile alkaline salts, Electricity, Heat.

Of the SECOND in Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Wine. Of the THIRD in Mustard,
Cantharides, Preparations of mercury.

These we have specified for the ease of selecting the particular substances,
according to their uses, from the following catalogue of

STIMULANTS -- most of which, when taken internally, have a power of increasing
the force of circulation, and invigorating the system -- and some proving also
more immediately cordial, by revivifying the spirits.

Of the FIRST CLASS are
Horseradish Mustard Garlic Onion Leek Turpentine Balsams of Copaiba, Gilead,
Peru Gum Guaiacum Lavender Rosemary Pennyroyal Pepper-mint Aniseed Carraway
Cardamom seed Cinnamon Cassia wood Mace Mustard Horseradish Cow-itch
Cantharides Euphorbium Preparations of mercury Myrrh Guaiacum wood Sassafras
Contrayerva Snake-root Cascarilla Wake Robin Volatile salts. Of the SECOND,
Nutmeg Cloves Pimento Pepper Ginger Capsicum Grains of paradise Wine Essential
oils
Those used topically are Volatile alkaline salts And these made either into
plasters, epithems, cataplasms, ointments, or liniments.

The following, though truly considered as possessing a greater or less degree
of stimulating power, produce not the effects before specified so sensibly:
Zedoary Gensing Cascarilla Common and Roman wormwood Camomile Orange and Lemon
peel Quassia wood Hops Dandelion Millipedes Hyssop Ground Ivy Hedge-hyssop.


All the NUTRIENTS and ASTRINGENTS are of this class; and many others of the
succeeding classes, though stimulant, are more particularly appropriated to
other purposes, under which heads they will be arranged. The catalogue here
given will be sufficient to answer the purposes to which stimulants, merely
considered as such, are calculated to be of any use.

But as some of them have been thought, by very respectable authority, to
possess some peculiar powers, and are easily attainable, we shall beg leave to
specify them.

HYSSOP has been reputed to be attenuant, resolvent, pectoral, in coughs and
asthmas occasioned by viscid phlegm; thought to produce expectoration, drank in
form of tea, and sweetened with honey; and to have the power of promoting the
menses attributed to it.

GROUND IVY, drank in the same form, or in decoction, has been esteemed
corroborant, aperient, and detergent, used also in coughs and asthmas, to
attenuate viscid phlegm and mucus, and to brace and strengthen the vessels of
the lungs; formerly much ordered in consumptive cases, and ulcers of the
kidneys, as an efficacious remedy.

PENNYROYAL. This has been considered cordial -- of great use in hysteric cases
-- to increase the tone of the system -- and the chief vehicle for other
medicines, to which were attributed the power of promoting the monthly
discharges of the female sex. Indeed, in this last case, by some practitioners,
it is held in no little estimation.

SPEAR-MINT. To this has been assigned cordial virtues, and a powerful
restrainer of vomiting -- tea made of this herb often answering this purpose,
where every other effort has failed. It is recommended in flatulent cases,
fluxes, worm cases, and many other disorders; and, though considered as a
stimulant, it is not heating, a peculiar advantage it possesses over many other
of the cordial class. Pepper-mint seems also to possess the same power.

HEDGE-HYSSOP. This is named a hydragogue, or an evacuator of watery humors
from the body -- hence useful in dropsical cases, and also worms, from its
purgative power. In substance it is said to promote vomiting, sweat, and urine,
to be of service in maniacal and venereal cases, after mercury had been given
freely without effect -- the dose, in powder, from 10 to 30 grains.

DANDELION. This has been considered as peculiarly useful in visceral
obstructions, particularly those of the liver, as it seems calculated from its
stimulant deobstruent powers, to promote bilious discharges -- and, from
experience, has been concluded highly efficacious in all biliary infarctions of
the liver.

WAKE ROBIN. Much has been said by men of the first medical authority in favor
of this medicine, and used to be recommended as promoting watery excretions,
quickening circulation in cold phlegmatic habits, and in diseases from viscid
phlegm.

In deep seated, fixed rheumatic pains, it has been given with success, in
doses of from ten grains to a scruple of the fresh root two or three times a
day.

GEOFFROY and BERGIUS speak highly of its powers, as restoring lost appetite,
curing intermittents. In the jaundice, greensickness, hysterical,
hypochondriacal, and other diseases, it has been found useful. In cases also of
obstinate head-achs, which return at intervals, without fever, mixed with
alkaline aromatics and absorbents. It is given in the following manner:

Take powder of wake robin, vitriolated tartar, of each ten grains powdered
rhubarb, five grains. If these purge too violently, the quantity of the arum
may be lessened.

GEOFFROY used to give it in doses of from half a dram to a dram; and by being
boiled in vinegar, he says it becomes powerfully diuretic.

LEWIS gives from ten grains to a scruple of the fresh root twice or thrice a
day, made into a bolus, or emulsion with oily, or mucilaginous substances -- it
generally produced, whilst the patient was warm in bed, a copious sweat. It is
now kept in the shops made into a conserve, half a dram of which may be given
as a dose, and gradually increased.

Thus much has it been thought necessary to say of stimulants, in order to
furnish a general idea of their extensive utility, under proper management; but
as their uses are so multifarious, and almost the whole catalogue become
repeatedly under our consideration in the succeeding part of this work, wherein
we shall-be more particular in the specification of their doses, and the
peculiar cases to which they are applicable, we shall quit this part of our
subject, and proceed to our next head.

2. ANTISPASMODICS, derived from antispasmata, medicines which take off spasms,
or what are commonly styled convulsive affections of the human machine.

Though there certainly appears a difference between spasm and convulsion, as
they never run one into the other; yet there have been many disputes relative
to the definition, so that their distinctions may be properly marked.

Some have said, if the solids are drawn into involuntary contractions, and
they do not continue long, but go off, and frequently return again, these
affections are termed convulsions -- but if they remain a considerable time,
spasms.

GAUBIUS defines a spasm, a violent, involutary, inordinate action of the
moving fibers; and says, they who distinguish a spasm from convulsion, call the
first a continued, the latter an alternate contraction of the muscles.

They have been distinguished by the terms tonic and clonic, from the Greek
words teino, to stretch or fix, and kloineo, to shake. Hence, by the former are
to be understood, such spasms as are continued; by the latter, such as are
tremulous; -- or, in other words, SPASM we would understand those muscular
contractions which, once excited, remain in that state of contractility for
some length of time -- by convulsion, such as are irregular, and have
relaxations and contractions alternating quickly with each other.

Though this distinction is necessary to be known, for the better understanding
the authors who have written systematically on the subject; yet still it will
be of little use in a practical view; as we shall find, according to the cause,
what will be useful in one species, will also in the other. Indeed, there are
such a variety of causes, so very different in their own nature, which may
produce spasmodic or convulsive affections, that there will necessarily appear
to be a great diversity of medicines which ought to be ranked under this head.

SPASMS arising from laxity, are removed by astringents; from an over
distension, by emollients, from acrimony, by demulcents, or such medicines as
sheath the offending particles; from acidity in the first passages, by
absorbent, or alcalescent substances, which, by uniting with the acid, form a
third substance, inoffensive in its action, and thus remove the cause; from
wind, by those materials which disperse wind by their stimulating powers, and
are called curminatives; from worms, by those styled anthelmintics, or
destroyers or evacuators of them, etc. -- but these are considered, in regard
to their known action, under their respective heads, calculated to operate
against, and remove the acting cause. dies, are such medicines as are
serviceable, from their influence on the nervous energy, or increased nervous
power, by removing spasmodic contractions taking place in different muscles;
and by allaying convulsive agitations, where the cause is too latent to be
discovered precisely; or, if conjectured at, too obstinate to be removed by
medicinal applications with any degree of certainty; so that the constitution
being relieved from the violence of these effects, nature may be left more at
liberty to exercise her power for the extirpation of the operating morbid cause.

And in our administration we must observe, where the constitution appears to
have an inflammatory disposition, we must select such as are the least
stimulant; where relaxation or debility seems prevalent, those which are more
powerful.

Besides, as the class of antispasmodics consist of medicines diametrically
opposite in some of their sensible properties -- some being highly foetid --
others as greatly odoriferous -- and are considered as medicines of equal
efficacy, we might suppose that there is no limitation in our selection -- but
we shall find that some will be efficacious in one constitution, and not in
another -- for where foetids agree, the odoriferous ones will, very often do
not -- and so on the contrary; therefore, where one class has been tried
ineffectually, we must have recourse to the other. And here also it will be
useful to observe, that very often, for want of giving these medicines in full
doses, their effects have not been produced; consequently it is proper to
increase them, very often freely, till that point can be properly ascertained.

The following supplies the useful catalogue of ANTISPASMODICS.

From the Vegetable Kingdom.
PENNYROYAL -- Infusion -- Distilled water -- Essential oil, from 1 to 5 drops.
Page 151. RUE -- Extract, from 10 to 20 or 30 grains. SABINE -- Extract, from
6 to 20 grains. Powder, 20 to 30 grains.

ASA FOETIDA -- from 5 grains to 20. Tincture, dram to a dram. GUM AMMONIAC --
from 10 to 20 grains. Milk of, 1 ounce to 1 and 1-2. GALBANUM -- Tincture, from
10 drops to 60 CAMPHOR -- from 5 to 20 grains. Mixture, 1-2 an ounce to an
ounce or more. Spirit, for external application. VALERIAN -- Powder, from 1-2
dram to 2 drams; Tincture, 1 to 2 drams. Volatile, 1 to (...) and a 1-2 or 2
drams.

From the Animal Kingdom.
MUSK -- from 10 to 30 grains. Mixture, from 1 to 2 ounces. CASTOR -- Powder,
from 10 to 20 grains. Tincture, from 20 to 60 drops. AMMOINIA prepared, and
SALT OF HARTSHORN, from 3 to 20 grains. Liquor, from 20 drops to 60. Oil, or
animal oil, from 5 to 30 drops.

From the Fossile Kingdom.
AMBER -- Oil, rectified, from 5 to 20 drops. Salt, purified 5 to 15 grains.
Though this salt, notwithstanding it is sometimes given in hysteric cases,
more properly belongs to the diuretic class, as allowed to be a promoter of the
urinary evacuation.

ROCK OIL -- externally applied, as is also the oil of amber, in rheumatic and
paralytic cases.

All the essential and empyreumatic oils are of this class.

ETHER -- vitriolic, externally applied -- dose from 20 to 60 or 80 drops.
Spirit of vitriolic ether, 20 to 60 or 80 drops.
To two articles, which we have specified here, besides their antispasmodic
power, others have been attributed of no less consequence -- which, as
medicines easily attainable, we shall particularize.

RUE has been recommended in cases where viscid phlegm has abounded, and the
circulation of the blood been languid. As an attenuant, resolvent, and
deobstruent it has been much extolled; also in hysterical cases; and as a
promoter of the menstrual discharge. BOERHAAVE had the highest opinion of it.
CULLEN says, it is certainly an useful medicine. It is best given in conserve,
from half a dram to half an ounce, two or three times a day.

SABINE. This is considered as a warm aperient medicine, increasing glandular
secretions, and a powerful promoter of the menses. It is a very heating and
acrid substance, and therefore requires much caution in the administration. Dr.
CULLEN thinks it more powerfully determines to the uterus than any other
medicine -- of which truth experience has often convinced me. Dr. HOME, out of
five patients laboring under obstructions of the menstrual discharge, cured
three, or rather four, by giving half a dram of the powder twice a day, though
a dram is the dose commonly recommended. Of the extract, from six to twenty
grains is a dose. Externally applied, it has been esteemed a powerful destroyer
of fungous excrescences, in taking of venereal warts, where other applications
have failed.

3. SEDATIVES. This is derived from the Latin word sedo, to assuage, rest,
calm; and they properly belong to such substances as diminish motion in the
system, and the force of the moving powers -- and also alleviate pain.

Hence, whatever diminishes motion in a part, or in the whole of the system,
whether by rendering it insensible to any painful stimulus, or by arresting, by
any means, the impulse of the vital powers, may be called sedative. All
medicines, therefore, which cool the habit, or take off inflammation -- some of
the acids -- neutral salts -- emollients -- astringents -- and antispasmodics,
may properly come under this head, as they diminish motion in the system -- but
in this place our objects are limited to the consideration of such substances
only as are thought particularly to act on the nervous power.

With regard to the precise mode of action of those selected to form this
class, we can say very little, as our knowledge of the nervous system is so
incomplete. However, thus far we may venture to assert, that they act either by
having a peculiar power of restraining the violence, or rendering more equal
the irregular motions of the nervous power, by their influence on the common
sensorium, and its appendages primarily, (56) or by blunting the irritability
of the living solids, and thus preventing the same power from exercising too
forcibly its influence. And this they do either sympathetically, by having
their action more diffusively communicated from the part they first affect; or
by the locality of their action, when they are applied to the parts themselves;
for it has been proved, that the heart taken out of the body, has been made to
act by the application of some stimulus, and consequently, that this power of
contraction was dependent on something foreign to the influence of the common
sensorium, or nerves, which was certainly inherent in the muscular fibers
themselves; and if opium is dissolved and thrown upon the heart so separated
from the machine, no action from stimulus will take place -- which proves,
that, by means of this sedative solution, irritability is destroyed.

And it is commonly known, that if a small dose of opium be taken on the
stomach, it will alleviate pains of the extremities, and other parts distant
from that organ, very expeditiously, as well as procure sleep.

(...) then we take the influence sedatives have on the common sensorium, and
the irritable power, inherent in the muscular fibers of the system, we shall be
possessed of the most certain known idea of the operation of medicines of this
class; and be furnished with the knowledge where, how far, and in what mode,
the application of these substances may be serviceable, or hurtful, in so far
as they act as sedatives; but it must also be remembered, that some of them are
stimulants.

Hence then, in all cases where there is too great a rapidity in the
circulating fluids, or pain, or spasm from an inflammatory cause, they would be
hurtful, otherwise they are in general serviceable. In cases also of
infarction, or strong obstruction, which sometimes happens in the lungs, though
attended with spasms, they must be cautiously used. But where neither of these
objections occur, they may be allowable, and attended with use in diminishing
the force and celerity of the blood's motion, where morbidly augmented, or the
impetus of the blood against parts similarly affected, in abating violent pain,
and procuring sleep ill cases of preternatural watchfulness, in restraining
inordinate motions, and moderating excessive evacuations.

But where the circulation is preternaturally languid, or there is a lethargic
or drowsy disposition, or a high degree of torpor in the system, to them in
these cases we should not have recourse.

According to the purposes they have been given to effect, they have received
different appellations -- if to alleviate pain, anodyne; if to abate it by
their demulcent power, paregoric; if by bringing on stupor, narcotic; if by
inducing sleep, hypnotic; however, their action is similar, and requires no
such distinction. They are more properly divided into such as produce sleep, as
opium, henbane, poppy; and such as alleviate from their cooling property, as
neutral salts, acids.

Our catalogue of SEDATIVES, of which opium is the principal, consists of POPPY
-- Syrup of, 2 drams to 1 ounce or more. OPIUM -- purified, from 1 to 2 grains.
Tincture, as a sedative, from 5 to 10 drops -- as procuring sleep, 10 to 25.
Camphorated, from 5 to 60 drops. CICUTA -- Hemlock, Inspissated juice, 2 grains
and gradually increased. Powder,
HENBANE --
1 grain to 5 and more. Powder, Extract,

TOBACCO --
See page 155. Smoke, Infusion, Glyster, Extract,

Of all these medicines, however, we think it necessary to give a more
particular account -- and, first,

The POPPY HEAD is in use for making a syrup, possessed of virtues to relieve
pain, and procure sleep -- for these purposes, it is chiefly given to children,
in doses of from half a scruple to half a dram or more; and it will be
efficacious sometimes, where opium and its preparations are apt to disagree
with the constitution.

It is also used for making fomentations for alleviating pain, particularly
after proper evacuations in inflammations of the eyes and breasts.

OPIUM is anodyne, from its relieving most painful affections -- hypnotic, from
procuring sleep -- incrassant, from thickening the humors -- diaphoretic, from
increasing perspiration; and, joined with ipecacuanha, antimonials, camphor,
volatile salts, and such like, the most powerfully so of any medicine with
which we are acquainted -- sedative, from allaying the too great irritability
of the nervous system -- and the most efficacious antispasmodic in the materia
medica; -- taken in too large quantity, it renders the nervous system so
totally insensible, produces such general relaxations, that lethargy,
convulsions, and death, are the consequences; but, in a variety of cases, given
judiciously, it is one of our most noble remedies, particularly where nervous
incitability, or thinness or acrimony of the humors are too prevalent in the
constitution, admit too great degree of fever, or heat, or fixed obstructions,
do not contra-indicate its use.

Hence the benefit arising from its administration in hysteric and
hypochondriac diseases; in convulsions from violent pain; in too great
watchfulness, at the latter end of fevers, smallpox, and measles; in coughs,
from acrid, stimulating defluxions; in looseness, and dysenteric complaints,
called bloody fluxes, very often. It has been said to cure the venereal
disease. That in irritable habits it assists the operation of mercury, by
preventing the too powerful exertions of mercurial stimulus, alleviating pain,
and promoting insensible perspiration, will not be denied, (...) it being of
itself curative, I cannot believe -- though, after the humors have been
rendered too thin and acrimonious by the use of mercury, I will not dispute its
power; for I have seen its good effects in totally removing what have been
called rheumatic pains from that source.

Asa-foetida joined with opium is said to weaken its narcotic effects, and
prevent that stupor, heaviness, and vertiginous affections, which opium is apt
to occasion after its operation.

Besides, this medicine not only alleviates pain, and takes off spasmodic
affections, when administered internally -- but when applied externally, as in
fomentations, cataplasms, lotions, liniments, or injections, it produces the
same consequences.

HEMLOCK has been used much in scrophulous, schirrous, and cancerous cases; --
in the last highly recommended by Dr. Storck, as a successful medicine, though
not answering the expectations of the physicians of this country;
notwithstanding which, I hesitate not to declare, I have found it in some
degree serviceable in schirrosity -- in scrophulous tumors, joined with bark,
it has been useful; as also in ulcers, and foulness of the bones from that
cause; in some obstinate rheumatic cases it has been efficacious, and I have
evidently seen it produce good effects in the chincough. Joined with mercury,
it has been useful in venereal complaints, and has been successfully given in
some cutaneous disorders.

It is commonly given in doses from four or five grains to a scruple, and
pushed on to one or two drams in twenty-four hours half an ounce has been given
in that time; and, in one or two cases, Dr. MONRO says, he has known an ounce.
However, Dr. CULLEN remarks, and that with great propriety, that if some
sensible effect is not perceived, when the dose is about twenty grains, he
should dispute the goodness of the medicine, and have recourse to different
parcels of it.

HENBANE. This has been considered as a narcotic, not producing heat like
opium; and, besides, it is, in large doses, laxative -- evident advantages over
opium. In palpitations of the heart, it has been said to be useful -- in cases
of mania and convulsions, in doses of the extract from one grain to five.
Though STORCK extols the remedy in spasmodic affections, and profuse bleedings;
yet, from Dr. HOME's experience, it appears in these affections not to produce
any good effects. It seldom produces sleep, or alleviates pain, except till the
dose is arrived at eight or ten grains, nay, often it has been obliged to be
increased to fifteen or twenty; though, in full doses, it is more apt to
occasion delirium than opium. Sometimes it will agree where opium will not; and
it is not, except in large doses, that its aperient effects are very remarkable.

From a case related by Sauvages of its curing a cataract. I once, under those
circumstances, tried it with evident utility; but during the trial, my patient
left town, nor have I heard what was the ultimate result However, such were its
effects under my inspection, that I should, in all cases of recent cataractous
appearances, recommend the trial.

TOBACCO, though in common use, and certainly considered as a luxury, from
being chewed, taken in snuff, and smoked for pleasure, is a deleterious and
noxious herb, possessed strongly of those powers producing stupor; hence
considered as a narcotic. It is highly stimulant, a powerful emetic, purgative,
and promoter of the salivary discharge; -- applied by way of poultice to the
stomach, we are told it excites vomiting, and produces the same effects applied
to wounds. In the iliac passion, incarcerated ruptures, and obstinate
costiveness, thrown up into the bowels, by way of smoke, or in strong infusion,
it has proved efficacious -- and also in cases of worms, particularly those
very small white worms, called ascarides, which affect the lower part of the
large bowel, called rectum, occasioning itching in the anus: -- Indeed, it is
said that no remedy is more powerful in opening the bowels, procuring stools,
and in destroying and bringing away these worms than this -- though it must be
observed, that given in this method, it will often produce great sickness and
vomiting, especially if pushed far into the intestinal canal.

In Sweden it is a domestic medicine, and often given to vomit and purge, in
the beginning of putrid fevers. An extract made of it, which renders it more
mild in its operation, has long been used in Germany as a pectoral in coughs --
and, of late, in this country, recommended as a powerful diuretic, and of great
use in dropsies; -- but its inefficacy in small doses, and from its producing
severe sickness and vomiting, in large ones, such as were sufficient to make
its diuretic effect apparent -- from the nauseousness of its preparations, and
the roughness of its action; it has not yet been brought into general use
internally. Externally applied, BERGIUS considers it as efficacious in
discussing that tumefaction of the prepuce (55) called phymosis.

4. ERRHINES. This class of medicines, so called from the Greek en in, and rin
nasum, the nose, or STERNUTATORIES, from producing sneezing, are all such as
stimulate the internal membrane of the nose, occasioning a ^low of mucus from
thence, or causing that action from whence they derive their name.

They act altogether by their stimulus; and though they have been said to have
effect upon the fluids, they do it in other way, than by increasing the action
of the solids on their continued liquids. Indeed all evacuants are general
stimulants. Even these medicines carried into the stomach, or thrown upon other
parts of the machine, would produce such effects as were consistent with their
irritating power, and might vomit, produce gentle sweat, or urine, or become
expectorant, according to their elective properties.

The use of these medicines, though much insisted on by the ancients, have, by
the moderns, fallen into neglect, though they may in some cases certainly be of
no small service, either in unloading the parts contiguous to the nose, or
removing obstructions by the shocks given to the system in sneezing.

Where the mucus secretion is defective in the nose, producing a morbid
diminution, by determining the fluids there, they might be of service; or by
occasioning a derivation from parts morbidly affected in the neighborhood of
that organ -- also by agitating the system in general, and by obviating nervous
affections of the convulsive or spasmodic kind -- but where there is great
fullness of the habit, morbid debility of the viscera, uncommon sensibility of
the nose, or ulcerations of that part, and those which are contiguous, the use
ought certainly to be forbid.

From considering the operation of these medicines, and the effects likely to
be produc^d by the application, we may learn how they become useful in
rheumatic affections of the head; for temporary relief has not only been
acquired by them, but the rheumatic disposition conquered -- the toothache
also, and other rheumatic affections. In chronic and long-continued
inflammations of the eyes, in opacities, or cloudiness of that part of the eye
called cornea, beginning cataracts, and in some cases of deafness.

In some complaints of the head of the spasmodic kind, they promise much
utility; but in all full habits, or in cases where the^e appear any
preternatural load in the head, they are not only doubtful, but may sometimes
become dangerous.

And notwithstanding it has been asserted, that their use tends to remove
lethargies, epilepsies, palsies, apoplexies, head-achs vertigos, catarrhs,
gutta, serena, etc. and may, in some particular species of these complaints,
where the nervous system is primarily affected, be attended with no small
advantage; still should there be fullness of habit in people thus afflicted,
prudence should direct us to have that fullness taken off before the
application of sternutatories. During their use, we should carefully avoid
cold, for that has sometimes produced unpleasing effects; -- they should also
be administered at intervals of one or two days, and then the patient should be
kept warm. From the general shock they give to the system, they have been said
to be more beneficial than vomiting, and hence also greatly useful in removing
the remotest obstruction.

ERRHINES consists of two classes -- MECHANICAL, MEDICINAL.


The FIRST are, dust -- feathers -- animalcules vellicating the membrane of the
nose, and blood accumulated, either from obstruction or inflammation -- whence
it happens that in a beginning catarrh, the mucus of the nostrils usually flows
pretty plentifully.

The SECOND -- Hyssop Savoury Beat Betony Marjoram -- Assarum Herb Mastich
Tobacco Snuff White Hellebore Orrice-root Pellitory Pepper -- Euphorbium
Turpeth Mineral Corrosive Sublimate.


The first are esteemed the mildest, the seven succeeding more active, and the
three last the most violent in their operations; -- but corrosive sublimate is
considered as invested with the most superior power; for patients who have
applied it, have sneezed for some hours, although it has been used in very
small quantity.

There are different ingredients added together to form HERE SNUFF,

As the dried leaves of Asarabacca Sweet Marjoram Syrian Herb Mastich Dried
Lavender Flowers --
equal parts of each -- but three parts of assarum and one of marjoram, beat
into a fine powder, are superior to most of those sold under the name of HERB
SNUFF -- and indeed are the more agreeable and efficacious errhines. If taken
to the quantity of five or six grains at bed time, they are said to operate the
succeeding day as a powerful sternutatory, inducing frequent sneezing, but
still more a large discharge from the nose -- and are often employed with great
advantage in cases of obstinate head-achs, and inflammations of the eyes,
resisting other modes of cure.

Sometimes in obstinate deafness they have been given with success, with the
addition of a small portion of turpeth mineral, and repeated at shorter or
longer intervals, in proportion to the effect they produce of greater or less
violence in their operation.

5. SIALAGOGUES -- derived from the Greek words, sialon, saliva, and ago duco,
to draw forth, comprehend all such medicines as produce a slow of saliva into
the mouth, from the glands named salivary, there situated.

They have been divided by some authors into three classes.

The FIRST -- such as immediately act upon these glands, as fomentation,
friction, and suction, either internal or external of these parts; -- hence,
moreover, cataplasms applied to those glands, called parotid, from their
situation under the ear, and chewing tobacco moisten the mouth; -- all pungent
stimulants also.

The SECOND, are all such as occasion a flow of saliva into the mouth, by
intercepting a flux of moisture into other parts; for it is observable, that if
any of the viscera should be obstructed, as the liver, spleen, pancreas, at the
same time the kidneys, or intestinal ducts, then is the mouth always moist --
whence hypochondriac people are called SPUTATORES, from their spitting so much;
and, therefore, whatever prevents a secretion of lymph in those places, should
be esteemed sialagogue.

The THIRD CLASS takes in all those substances which are supposed to break down
the sanguinary mass, and by that means supply the mouth with too great a
proportion of fluids, thus dissolved.

Of this tribe quicksilver is the principal, and may be applied in various
modes.

From its external application a salivation may be raised, though in its crude
state -- but it may be applied in form of liniment or fumigation; for if twelve
grains of quicksilver are placed upon a fire, or a heated iron, they will emit
a smoke, which, received by the nostrils, in two or three days will occasion a
spitting. It may be taken internally with the same intent, and succeed, if
given in a small quantity; but if in too large, it is apt to pass off by the
bowels; if handled much, and for a long continuance, similar effects will be
produced, as we learn from gold-beaters, who make great use of quicksilver,
falling into salivations.

Quicksilver formed into a salt by sublimation, if taken in small doses, if
applied externally to wounds or ulcers, or if attracted by the nose, has
similar consequences, from its reception into the habit.

It was the opinion of BOERHAAVE and others, that all these effects were
produced by dissolving the fluids, either by its mechanical action, or by its
dissolving or putrescent power.

Had not these doctrines been previously refuted by such arguments as are
uncontrovertible, from the considerations, that mechanical force never divides
mixts, but aggregates only; that, from the minuteness of the division of gold,
even it may be made to become incapable of overcoming the cohesion of water or
spirit of wine, and be suspended in them -- and also that the smallness of the
quantity introduced would be inadequate to produce the effect. And, with regard
to its dissolvent or putrescent power, that, during the operation of
quicksilver on the habit, no symptoms of putrescency appear in any part of the
system -- that there is no alteration of the blood in that respect during a
salivation, but its texture appears as strong then as at any other time; --
that salivation is attended with an inflammation, and the blood shows an
inflammatory crust; and, finally, that after the operation of the salivation is
over, no taint appears in the blood, but, on the contrary, the person is in
better health than before, and gives marks of a firmer state of it; -- one
single instance would be sufficient to overturn them, if we consider that a few
grains of calomel has in many constitutions raised a salivation very suddenly,
which has continued for some days, nay weeks. Instances of which have fallen
within the course of my own observation.

I cannot myself doubt of its producing its action in the salivary glands by
the means of its elective stimulus, though it is capable of exerting its
stimulus in other parts of the machine, as on the stomach, intestines, kidneys,
and perspiratory vessels, producing, according to the parts affected, vomiting,
purging, discharge of urine, and gentle perspiration.

Indeed, upon the whole, it should be considered as a stimulant in general, in
particular, a salivary one, and an evacuant, more peculiarly of the serous or
lymphatic fluid, or both; and one of the most universal aperients and
deobstruents we have in the whole catalogue of the materia medica.

In its combined state, forming metallic salts, quicksilver sooner exerts its
activity on the system, but less certain, I think, in its effects; -- it
appears more efficacious, having its parts only divided by some unctuous or
oleagmous substances; and, perhaps, its virtue depends upon its being so
entirely unconquerable by the assimilating powers of the constitution, and
capable of such minute divisibility, for it will pass through any body except
glass.

Quicksilver, though here ranked as an internal sialagogue, or a promoter of
the excretion of saliva, because its elective power seems to be more determined
to the salivary system, than any other part of the machine, may fairly be
considered as an universal stimulant, deobstruent, purgative, and general
evacuant, increasing the whole of the excretions of the human body.

It was thought that, from the great discharge it produced from the salival
glands, and the foetor accompanying it, that it dissolved the texture of the
blood, and disposed it into putrid acrimony; but experience proves the case to
be far otherwise, as we have proved above.

The great effects produced by quicksilver seem to proceed from its increasing
the whole of the animal excretions, and thus carrying off the virus of the pox,
for the cure of which it is the most remarkable and certain; -- and, indeed, it
has been, and still continues to be, by many, considered for this disease a
SPECIFIC; -- but as it will not, by itself, in all cases, cure that complaint,
nor prevent the venereal poison from taking effect, even in constitutions
loaded with it, that idea must fall to the ground.

Though quicksilver, in its original state, is inactive respecting the human
machine, and only has been given in this state to conquer obstinate
obstructions of the intestines, though inefficaciously, still from mechanical
division, as united with viscid, oleaginous, or unctuous substances, rubbed
down with dry powder calcined, or united with different acids, forming
mercurial salts, it has been rendered extremely active; and though preparations
of this abound, the chief use are confined to a few.

GUMMOUS mercurial pill, from 20 to 30 grains. MERCURIAL pill, from 8 to 12
grains. QUICKSILVER acetated, from 1 to 6 grains. Calcined, from of a grain to
2 grains. Muriated, or corrosive sublimate from 1-8 of a grain to 1 grain. Mild
muriated CALOMEL prepared, 1-2 a grain to 2 grains or more. QUICKSILVER with
chalk from 5 to 20 grains. White calx of quicksilver, or white precipitate, too
acrid for internal use. Sulphurated quicksilver, or aethiops mineral, from 10
grains to 40. Red sulphurated quicksilver, or factitious cinnabar, used chiefly
in fu migation. Red nitrated quicksilver, or red precipitate, used as a
destroyer of fungous flesh, or for dressing venereal ulcers. Vitriolated
quicksilver, or turpeth mineral, from 1 grain to 4. Quicksilver ointment, from
external use -- from 1-2 (...) dram (...) 2 drams.
Now several of these preparations are appropriated to different purposes. The
MILDER SORT, as alterants -- Gummous pill Mercurial pill Acetated quicksilver
Quicksilver with chalk;
or the more active preparations in very minute doses, which in this view are
considered as the most efficacious.

As a purgative, calomel claims the preference, joined with rhubarb or some
other of that class -- in doses of from 3 to 8 or ten grains; and in smaller
doses as deobstruent and alterant.

In venereal cases, the gum and mercurial pill -- calomel -- corrosive
sublimate dissolved in brandy -- calcined mercury joined with opium -- are
chiefly had recourse to.

Against the itch, the white precipitate, made into an ointment.

The quicksilver ointment is also used for raising a sallivation where thought
necessary, or loading the constitution sufficiently without producing that
effect, for the cure of venereal complaints.

Indeed calomel, and some other of the active preparations, have proved
efficacious in the early stages of inflammatory complaints of the breast,
brain, pleura, etc. when g^^^n freely, in repeated doses, sometimes with,
sometimes without opi^^^^ which has been, in these cases, rendered more
effectual by joining small doses of the antimonial powder along with it. In
spasmodic complaints, united with camphor and opium, they have been said to be
effectual -- as also in dropsical cases, given in conjunction with diuretics
and aromatics, particularly the squill pill. But these we shall particularize
more minutely when we come to treat of diseases to which they are appropriated.

Now, from keeping in view the peculiar virtues of this medicine, the reason
will readily occur why in a variety of complaints it is so beneficial -- as in
the venereal disease -- glandular obstructions -- cutaneous complaints --
obstructed menses -- dropsy -- worms -- some inflammations of the lungs and
other parts, properly applied, and judiciously united with other well-adapted
remedies.

Thus much have I thought requisite to say relative to this so extensively
useful a remedy; though in this place we should consider it merely as a
promoter of the salivary discharge, in order that we may be better prepared for
discovering its utility in a variety of different cases, on which we shall in
future treat. Here it stands as a sialagogue, and the only internal one of
which we make use -- the others in this catalogue are styled topical, from
their promoting the ^low of saliva from external application -- the principal
of which are Squills Tobacco Angelica Cloves Master-wart Pellitory.


From what has been said, we shall readily discover their utility to consist in
diminishing the force of the blood against parts morbidly affected in the
neighborhood of the salivary glands; and also the action of the vessels when
morbidly increased in the neighboring parts, as in some cases of toothache and
rheumatic affections; and in promoting the circulation of the blood freely
through the salivary glands when morbidly obstructed there: -- Besides, as they
so freely promote evacuation, they will be beneficial in evacuating morbid
accumulations of serum; in producing a thorough change in the fluids of the
body when morbidly vitiated.

But when there appears to be an uncommon determination to the salivary glands
-- any praeternatural sensibility in the glands -- when the serous part in the
circulatory fluids is defective -- or there is a high degree of inanition, or
general debility of the system, we must avoid using them.

6. EXPECTORANTS, so named from the Latin word expectora, to throw out of the
breast, or expectorate; and are all such substances as expel morbid matter
through the windpipe adhering in its branches; called bronchia (28, 29,) of the
lungs.

To promote which purpose, several particulars are necessary to be observed. It
is required, FIRST, that the matter contained within them should be rendered
moveable, and capable of being expectorated, taking care that the most fluid
part should not be dissipated, lest the remainder should be lest too viscid,
and not easily pumped up from the lungs; -- hence medicines to heating and
stimulating are hurtful; -- SECOND, that the passages of the lungs should be
open, cleansed, and lubricated; -- THIRD, that the excretion of the offending
matter should be promoted, which is best performed by coughing, to which end
proper stimulus, and proportionate strength are required; -- FOURTHLY, that the
obstructed vessels should have rest, by which means they may be relaxed -- for
should they be continually irritated, the humor from the glands of the
windpipe would be ejected with a sort of pain.

To accomplish the FIRST intent, all aromatic bitters, and, at the same time,
mild oleaginous substances are necessary, such as hore-hound, hyssop,
elecampane, pennyroyal, valerian, etc. and sulphurous medicines mixed with
alkalies -- all fixed saponaceous (...) or mixed with milk; -- all volatile
oily soaps, and volatile fixed salts, and, in general, all diluents and
stimulants mixed together.

For the SECOND purpose, we must apply to aperients and detergents, as oil of
poppi^s, almonds, olive^, honey particularly, as it is aperient, inciding,
attenuant, detergent, and lubricating -- here also belong emulsions, soaps,
yolks of eggs, with oily substances, saccharine substances, at least in small
doses; likewise balsams, as that of turpentine, Pern, Gilead, Copaiva, etc.
which act both as stimulant and lubricating -- to these we may add all relaxing
and emollient decoctions.

For the THIRD are useful all those which excite a cough, as wine, vinegar,
acrid spirits, sternutatories, squills, gum ammoniac, etc.

And, for the LAST, demulcents, anodynes, and narcotics, are proper, of which
the principal is opium; for when the windpipe is once excoriated, it is easily
thrown into violent spasms, and cough, which cannot be restrained by that
powerful sedative.

However, we may in general observe, where there is no inflammatory tendency,
and the moving powers are torpid, some of the stronger stimulants are extremely
useful, and are the things which chiefly contribute to promote expectoration;
but they should be very cautiously used in diseases of the breast, and
particular care taken, that the habit be free from any inflammatory
disposition, or, at least that no inflammation is fixed there -- for where
these take place, relaxing the vessels, and taking off the spasms is all that
is wanted, for in such constitutions the mucus itself supplies sufficient
irritation, either from its acrimony or weight, or distension of the cells of
the lungs.

From what has been said, the utility of expectorants appears -- when the
secretion of mucus in the lungs is obviously diminished, by promoting that
secretion, and rendering the mucus thinner, when too thick or viscid -- where
the excretion is insufficient, by evacuating morbid accumulations of mucus in
the lungs, and supplying irritation to that organ when defective.

When the lungs labor under a state of morbid insensibility, by removing that,
and promoting a free circulation through them, when it is there morbidly
impeded.

But when there is a high degree of increased sensibility in the lungs, and an
uncommon quick excretion of mucus from them, the stimulant expectorants ought
to be prohibited; and when there is too great a state of torpor, of the
relaxing ones we should by no means make use.

Our general catalogue of EXPECTORANTS, of which we shall furnish, for the
reasons above advanced, a proper division, consists of

Hyssop, Hore-hound, Ground Ivy, Pennyroyal, Colt's foot, chiefly used in
infusion or decoction, and sweetened with honey Garlic Mustard Horseradish
Onions Leeks Balsam of Copiava Gum Guaiacum Squills Myrrh Asafoetida Gum
Ammoniac Opium Tobacco smoke Acid vapors Blisters Warm baths to the feet
Watery vapors received into the lungs.
Now, as we find expectoration is to be promoted by different means, agreeable
to the cause acting in the lungs; and as our selection here has such different
properties, all of which are calculated to promote the desired end by judicious
application, a division of them, agreeable to their powers, becomes necessary.
FIRST, into such as act by stimulating the lungs taken internally.

The infusions of Hyssop, Ground Ivy, Hore-hound, Coltsfoot, Pennyroyal, made
into tea, and sweetened with honey. GARLIC, a clove of it taken now and then in
substance, formed into pills, or made into syrup.
eat plentifully with other viands. Mustard, Horseradish, Onions, Leeks,

BALSAM Copiava, Dose, 20 to 40 drops on sugar. GUM Guaiacum -- Powder, from 6
to 20 grains. Tincture, 1-2 a dram to 1 dram. -- MYRRH -- Powder, 10 grains to
60.


SECOND, such as act from taking off spasmodic affections -- See catalogue of
Antispasmodics. ASA foetida GUM Ammoniac,

OPIUM See Sedative. BLISTERS, WARM baths to the feet, WATERY vapor inhaled
into the lungs.


THIRD, such as irritate -- TOBACCO smoke, ACID VAPORS.

FOURTH, such as lubricate and relax. See the catalogue of Demulcents, all
which belong to this place.

7. EMETICS. This is a Greek word, from emeo, vomo, to vomit; by the Latins
they are called vomitoria, and are all such substances which, by their action,
cause the stomach to reject its contents upwards.

The effects produced by this action have been divided into eight heads; in
considering which we shall be enabled to perceive the utility to be derived
from the application of these remedies; on which, as we go along, we shall
furnish some remarks necessary for the more clear elucidation of different
parts of the subject;

FIRST. "Vomiting evacuates the contents of the stomach itself; though it is
not easy to know when that is fully performed. Many have got into a method of
promoting few repetitions in vomiting, and giving small ablutions; but it has
by others been thought that frequent ablutions are required to clear the folds
of various matters, or mucus, which may be detained within them."

If we wish to evacuate the contents of the stomach completely, frequent and
copious ablutions are certainly right; but it is sometimes necessary to give
gentle shocks only to promote some particular purposes, and these must be often
repeated, so that it would be hurtful to push vomiting to its extent, as, from
violent straining of that organ, it would become too relaxed, and our intent
frustrated; for it is from the repetition of the operation gently, not from
unloading the stomach, success is expected.

SECONDLY. "Vomiting causes a flow of liquids to the stomach, clears it, and
emulges its mucus glands." And,

THIRDLY. "It not only emulges the mucus follicles of the stomach, and promotes
a flow of gastric liquor, but has the same effect on the neighboring glands,
especially the sweetbread and the liver."

FOURTHLY. "Whilst the vomiting continues, it not only inverts the regular
motion of the stomach, called peristaltic but also of the intestines, which
pour out their mucus to be carried to the stomach, and evacuated with its
contents.

"Hence do we find vomits useful in loosenesses and dysenteries; but,
independent of that, they are beneficial, more probably, as purging the
intestines, occasioning a greater flow of liquors into the intestinal canal. If
the vomiting ceases, the increased secretion is carried off by stool, so that
at any rate the adherent foulness is washed away, by squeezing the tract of the
intestines."

FIFTHLY. "Vomiting squeezes, and occasions a constriction of the whole
abdominal viscera, especially the mesenteric glands, (46) and in consequence
pumps the whole Lymphatic system; -- on this account increases absorption, as
well as from its evacuating property; hence for these purposes emetics answer
equally well with purgatives, and may be useful in dropsical cases."

But here we should be careful no strong visceral obstructions has taken
place, or any great acrimony in the humors, and tenderness of the vascular
system, for in these cases they may be productive of the most fatal effects.

SIXTHLY. Dr. Cullen thinks, "vomiting has the power of affecting the kidneys,
for as irritation of the kidney will produce vomiting, so, on the other hand,
it is reasonable to think, that vomiting may also act upon the kidney -- hence
it would seem useful in propelling stones in the kidneys."

Notwithstanding some have recourse to such a practice, and it appears
imitative of nature, still I should conceive it almost always a dangerous
experiment, always doubtful, and often not necessary; for if the stone should
be so impacted with the kidney that it cannot pass, irritation on the part
would be strongly increased, of course pain and inflammation in similar
proportion, most likely abscess, and their consequences. Besides, we can never
be certain whether the stone is of such a size as to pass through the ureters
(50) by any propulsive force; and if it should, by relaxing the ureters as much
as we can, by proper remedies, we are more likely to produce the effect, and
certain to avoid all danger from too rash a practice; -- however, if the
attempt at propulsion was to be made, every means should be previously used to
render the passages as distensible as possible before the trial; -- but of this
we shall have occasion to treat more fully in future.

SEVENTHLY. "But the effects are extended, perhaps, to the viscera of the
chest, as expectoration has been promoted by vomiting."

EIGHTHLY. "It also increases the constriction of the fauces, and forcibly
emulges the whole of the salivary glands. It has had the effect of those
medicines called masticatories, which, by chewing and increasing a discharge of
saliva, relieve rheumatic affections of the head, toothache, etc.

"By preventing inspiration, vomiting occasions a regurgitation of the blood at
the end of expiration. The accumulating blood, which usually happens, produced
by vomiting, is only momentary, and may be soon counterpoised, as will be seen
by considering its advantageous effects on the system in general.

"During the time of vomiting, the pulse is small, weak, and intermitting; but
when it is over, if the stimulus continues, the circulation is increased, a
fullness and softness of the pulse, a determination of the fluids to the
surface of the body, and sweat; -- this last may be supposed to proceed from an
increased circulation, but Dr. Cullen thinks it may also from the consent of
the stomach and surface, and that antispasmodic virtue takes place with regard
to the extreme vessels, which is illustrated from this; that emetics combined
with other antispasmodics, (148) as opium, increase the power, so that combined
they become more efficacious diaphoretics," or promoters of insensible
perspiration or sweat, "than each when alone."

These are their primary effects, which, if we consider closely, will be
productive of a variety of others, infinitely a greater number, than by any
class of medicines with which we are acquainted; and indeed from them I have
seen the most serviceable consequences accrue. Not but I think their use, in
many cases, should be considered with the nicest caution; for advantageous as
they are, when properly applied -- in the hands of ignorance, or inconsiderate
rashness, they become too often fatal.

If we consider the general shock which emetics give to the system, the
evacuations they produce from the stomach, and the effects they have upon the
nervous power, we shall be convinced of their utility; by restoring equality to
the circulation, producing lymphatic absorption, and removing obstructions in
the system of blood vessels -- and in these senses they may be considered as
irritators of the habit; -- as evacuants, from clearing the stomach of its
contents, and morbid accumulations of secreted matters lodged there, and
discharging also serous accumulations in different parts of the machine: -- as
antispasmodics, from stimulating the nervous system, and the moving powers
through the machine in general, and also obviating violent affections of the
nervous power.

But in all cases of ruptures, or relaxations of containing membranes -- in
local inflammations of the internal viscera -- a high degree of morbid debility
in these -- and in fixed obstructions, unconquerable by the force of the
circulation, it has been advised that their use should be avoided.

Still, notwithstanding all these prohibitions, so apparently well founded,
from the consideration of the action of emetics, yet they have been
administered in cases of schirrhous viscera, in local inflammations, and
supernatural effusions of blood; though in the two latter they should never be
attempted without first bleeding; though perhaps haemorrhages may now and then
require this operation; but of these there are very rare instances, as they are
almost constantly attended by an inflammatory disposition of the constitution.

In all congestions of the head, they are said to be dangerous, in apoplexy,
palsy, and in smaller collections in the veins of the brain. They would,
doubtless, be extremely dangerous where these maladies arise from too great
sanguinary plenitude; but where from mere weakness of the nervous system, or
inability of the moving powers, I should prefer their use to other remedies, at
least on their first appearance; nor should I hesitate in prescribing them in
serous collections, where I was not afraid of any great relaxation of the
vessels, or system of the solids.

The class of EMETICS in use are not numerous -- indeed, three or four, where
we consider their action only in this point of view, are sufficient, arranging
them according to their mode of operation, or peculiar appropriation.

If expeditious vomiting is required, without much regard to more extended
action, White vitriol, Dose, from 10 to 20 grains. Blue vitriol, 2 to 6 grains.
Infusion of tobacco, 1 ounce to a point of boiling water -- 1 ounce or more to
a dose, will be sufficient.


If something more is wanted, particularly a determination of the fluids to the
skin, Tartarized antimony, Dose 1 grain to 5. Antimonial wine, 3 drams to 6.
Wine of tartarized antimony 1 dram to 2. Ipecacuanha -- Powder, 5 to 20 grains.
Tincture, 2 to 12 drams: And in venereal cases, Vitriolated quick silver, or
turpeth mineral Dose 1 to 4 grains.


In large doses, some of the vegetable bitters and cathartics come under this
class, as do also squills, asarabacca, fox-glove, mustrad, and horseradish.
Strong infusions of the two last are given with success in torpid, cold,
phlegmatic habits.

Systematic writers hence, from their peculiar power, have divided them into
IRRITATING EMETICS -- as
Tartarized antimony, Vitriolated zinc, or white vitriol, Quicksilver, or
turpeth mineral.
EVACUATING -- as
Ipecacuanha, -- Asarabacca, -- Squills. HEATING -- as Mustard, --
Horseradish. NARCOTIC -- as Tobacco, -- Fox-glove.


8. The next set of medicines in our catalogue are CATHARTICS, so named from
the Greek word cathairo, purgo, to purge, and comprize all such medicines as
evacuate by stool.

Purging, says BOERHAAVE, is an evacuation of all those things which can be
thrown out of the body by stool from any part of the machine. And most authors
have been very prolix on this subject, as the operation seems to be, and really
is, of such material consequence to the constitution.

However, we shall content ourselves with a more concise view of their effects,
and from thence be sufficiently empowered to deduce their utility.

By their operation they unload the intestines, and increase the motion of the
bowels downwards; by which means they clear the intestinal glands, and derive a
greater quantity of liquids, into them; they also empty the stomach downwards;
they evacuate the pancreas and liver, and affect the spleen, and all the
viscera of the lower belly; they promote the absorption of watery and other
thin fluids, stagnating in any cavity; and, by continuance, purge the whole
body; but in this last case induce debility, if too long persevered in; hence
are preferable to other evacuants.

They are apt to produce inflammation in the parts on which they immediately
act. They cause revulsion from the head, by determining the blood into the
large artery of the body, called the descending aorta, (29; 30) and hence may
be useful as promoters of the menstrual discharge, washing of virulence in
gonorrhoea, in ulcers, by evacuating the system in general; and in those of the
inferior parts, by causing a greater flow of liquids to the part. They excite,
or, at least, increase inflammation in the intestines, nay some propagate the
same over the system; and, when thrown into the blood, are most of them
expectorant and diuretic, causing evacuation of phlegm from the chest; and
urine through the kidneys.

Now these purgative effects are produced chiefly by such things as irritate
the fibers and muscular parts of the intestines; but passions of the mind will
also promote intestinal discharge; and some will have that occasioned from
smell alone, others from external application, some from the diminution of
insensible perspiration, but this happens in a moist thick atmosphere, and
others from eternal motion, as that of a ship or carriage; -- upon the whole,
it is tolerably conclusive, that purging arises from intestinal stimulus,
either mental or corporeal.

But, notwithstanding the use of purgatives are so very salutary in their
different degrees, according to the causes requiring them, yet, by being too
frequently renewed, they are apt to weaken the tone of the intestines, and
indeed their sensibility. Hence are produced, if we add the consequences of
evacuation, often irregular spasmodic affections.

Dr. CULLEN says, that all purgatives are endowed with an inflammatory
acrimony, not only exciting it in the part to which they are applied, but
acting in the same manner, as poisons; their stimulus, extended to the system,
produces and aggravates fever, and an inflammatory disposition; and as it is
chiefly directed to the rectum, they increase the piles, and extend their
irritation to the passage from the neck of the bladder, called urethra.

We are led to discover, from the concise view we have taken of the subject,
from whence their utility arises; -- FIRST, as evacuants from removing any
morbid retention of the contents of the stomach and intestines -- diminishing
the quantity of circulating fluids, when too abundant for the state of the
system at that time -- and carrying off morbid accumulations of serum.
SECONDLY, as stimulants, by promoting the free circulation through the
intestines in those cases where it is morbidly impeded -- diminishing the force
of the blood against parts morbidly affected -- removing torpor in the muscular
fibers of the intestines -- and restraining inordinate motion in these muscular
fibers, by stimulating them to regular and more constant action.

But we find that some of these have, besides the powers enumerated, those
which are cooling, astringent, and emollient.

Hence, should there be in the bowels any high degree of irritability, and the
circulation should there be morbidly accelerated, of the stimulating class we
should make no use -- if the circulation should be uncommonly ^low and languid,
those which are styled cooling will be improper -- if habitual costiveness be
an error of the habit, the astringents must be wrong -- and where uncommon
relaxation of the intestines is prevalent, the emollient ought not to be
applied.

The whole catalogue of PURGATIVES are EVACUANTS, and in this view differ only
in degrees of power. The MILDEST of which are all acescent fruits.

Of the SECOND ORDER are

Tamarinds, Cassia, Sugar, Honey, Manna, Water drank copiously, Milk whey,
Butter-milk, Spinach, Beat, Cabbage, Succory, Dandelion, Endive, Lettuce,
Celery, Asparagus, Artichoke, Mushroom.

Of the THIRD

All mild animal and vegetable oils, Venice Soap, Mustard, Sulphur, Animal
Bile, Gum Guaiacum, Tartar, fixed alkaline Salts, neutral Salts, Magnesia, if
it meets with an acid, not otherwise.

Of the FOURTH -- or more acrid,

Aloes, Rhubarb, Senna, Jalap, Scammony, Buckthorn Berries, Gamboge, Hedge
Hyssop, Bitter Apple, Wild Cucumber.

Of the FIFTH -- or most acrid,

Solutions of Gold or Silver in particular acids; but these, from the violence
of their effects, are out of use.

Emetics also got into the bowels prove purgative.

But as we find great use may be derived from a judicious selection under
particular circumstances, we shall pursue the subsequent divisions.

COOLING APERIENTS AND PURGATIVES.
Acescent Fruits Sugar Honey Water drank copiously Milk Whey Butter-milk.
Spinach Beat Cabbag^ Succory Endive Lettuce Asparagus Salary Artichoke
Mushrooms. These may be considered as food proper to assist in promoting the
desired purpose. TAMARINDS -- taken in p^i^an or decoction. CASSIA --
Electuary, dose, 1 to 6 drams. TARTAR -- purified, Crystal of Tartar, to 3
drams or more. MAGNESIA, 10 to 30 grains.

NEUTRAL SALTS.
ACETATED Kali, of diuretic salt, from 1 to 2 drams. TARTARIZED Kali, or
soluble Tartar, 2 to 6 drams. VITRIOLATED Kali, or (...) Salt, 1 to 3 drams.
TARTARIZED Natron, or Rochelle Salt, 6 drams to 1 ounce. VITRIOLATED Natron, or
Glauber's Salts, 6 drams to 1 ounce. EPSOM Salt, from 4 drams to 1 ounce.
SULPHUR -- The Flowers washed, from 1 scruple to a dram. Precipitated, or Milk
of Sulphur, 1 1-2 scruple to 1 1-2 dram.

EMOLLIENT APERIENTS AND PURGATIVES.
All bland animal and vegetable Oils, the most powerful of which are CASTOR
Oil, Dose, from 1 dram to 1 ounce, and, except this, few are given alone with
this intent, but only to assist in the operation of other purgatives, where
lubricating or relaxing materials are requisite. MANNA, from 1-2 an ounce to 2
ounces.
ASTRINGENT APERIENTS AND PURGATIVES.
Though almost all the smart purgatives leave the body costive after their
operation is over, the aloetic medicines excepted, still the restringent power,
when wished to succeed, is chiefly confined to RHUBARB -- Powder, Russia, 1
scruple to 1 dram. East India, 10 to 30 grains. Vinous Tincture, 1-2 an ounce
to 1 1-2 ounce. Spirituous Tincture, 1-2 an ounce to 1 1-2 ounce. ROSES --
Syrup of 2 drams to 3 or 4 for children; to adults it is seldom given with this
intent.
STIMULANT APERIENTS AND PURGATIVES.
MUSTARD -- Infused in wine, a table spoonful gently aperient. ANIMAL Bile, 1-2
a dram to a dram. GUM Guaiacum -- Powder, from 10 to 20 grains. HEDGE Hyssop --
Powder -- Extract, 5 grains to 10. BITTER APPLE -- Compound Extract, 10 to 25
grains. WILD Cucumbers -- Inspissated Juice, 1-2 a grain to 3. ALOES -- from 5
to 15 grains. Wine of Aloes, 6 drams to 2 ounces. Tincture of Aloes, 6 drams to
2 ounces. Aloetic pill with Myrrh, 10 to 30 grains.
SENNA -- Powder, Extract, from 1 dram to 2 scruples. SENNA -- Tincture, from 2
drams to 1 ounce. Compound Powder, from 1 to 2 scruples.
JALAP -- Powder, 10 grains to 20. Extract, 10 grains to 20. Tincture, 2 to 3
drams. Rezin, 5 grains to 10.
SCAMMONY -- Compound Powder, from 10 to 15 grains. Powder with Aloes, 5 to 10
grains. with Calomel, from 8 to 20 grains.
BUCKTHORN Berries -- Syrup, from an ounc to 1 ounce. GAMBOGE, from 2 to 10
grains -- better mixed with calomel.
Before we close the account of Cathartics, it may be of some use to observe;
that, as in all constitutions, and all diseases where too great an intestinal
discharge does not constitute the complaint; and a moderate evacuation from the
bowels is absolutely requisite; or in some a more copious one, it is necessary
that we should be acquainted with the particular nature of the purgative
employed: that whilst we are attempting to be of service, by promoting the
intestinal discharge, we may know what fluid each medicine will evacuate the
most powerfully, and not in other respects be detrimental to the constitution
by an improper choice -- as in cases of inflammatory complaints, it would be
very injudicious to order purgatives highly stimulant; so in those of bilious
obstructions of the liver from thick viscid inert bile, to have recourse to the
serous and lymphatic purgatives would be injurious; as by these, though the
intention respecting the operation might be right, we should rather increase
the original cause of the malady, by an improper ^lection of the medicines of
which we made use. However, here we only mention the necessity of such a
specification, which we shall point out, on treating of particular defects of
constitution, which require the necessary discrimination.

9. DIURETICS, taken from the Greek word diour^o, perin^o, to make water, are
all such substances us cause urine to be secreted by the kidneys, and excreted
by the bladder, which last in the repository for that fluid.

Notwithstanding the great labor different authors have bestowed in properly
selecting this class of medicines, and the confidence with which many have
spoken respecting their operations, still their effects are indisputably
uncertain.

How some things pass off by urine so immediately after being taken into the
stomach, is still a matter of dispute.

Some astringents have been considered of the diuretic class, from their
action; and doubtless have produced this way very good effects, as the leaves
of the bear's wortle berry, and bitters; nay some have publicly declared the
power of astringents in expelling a calculus. As diuretics act not by
dissolving the blood, but by their local or sympathetic stimulus under some
circumstances, I see no reason why astringents may not become diuretics in
relaxed and torpid habits -- many of the operations of the animal economy may
be produced by relieving the parts from any defect they may labor under, which
defect may retard, or prohibit their action.

Palsy of the kidneys will hinder a secretion of urine; torpidity in those
parts of the system, or relaxation, will proportionally weaken their power,
which being removed, they will be enabled to act; and certainly astringents bid
fair to produce the desired effect. However, in order to be acquainted with
their utility, we must now inquire what are the general effects produced on the
system by their application; -- where there is a superabundant quantity of
serous fluids in the blood, and the absorbents appear to be in too inactive a
state, they become beneficial, by removing the former, and increasing the
absorbent power of the lymphatic system -- hence drawing off water accumulated
and stagnating in any of the cavities of the body. In scorbutic habits, they
remove morbid acrimony from the blood, by carrying off the saline and
putrescent particles of the mass of blood, which are generally dissolved in the
serous part of that fluid -- and when there is a superabundance of circulating
liquids too great for the state of the system, by diminishing them they become
serviceable -- hence we find, their chief action is to promote evacuation.

When the natural secretion of urine is morbidly defective, they restore that
secretion, by soliciting a flow of fluids to the kidneys, and hence diminish
other secretions when morbidly augmented: and hence remove obstructions in the
canals of the urinary passages, and from them wash out all acrimony.

But, in order to promote their operation, they should be given in the most
dilute state; we might say, it is always proper to throw in with them much
aqueous fluid, except in cases of dropsy; and, even in this case, there have
been cures performed by drinking large quantities of mineral and common water.
But where the intention of any medicine is to pass off by urine, the patient
should walk gently in a cool air, and avoid all situations calculated to
produce a determination of fluids to the skin; for there is so intimate a
connection between the kidneys and the skin, that diuretic medicines, when
thrown into the habit, will often prove strong promoters of insensible
perspiration.

According to the particular nature of the separate action of diuretics, we
shall be enabled to judge where they are improper.

Should there be too high a degree of sensibility in the kidneys, a
considerable increase of urine, or any fixed obstructions in the urinary
passages, the administration of those which are stimulant must be
disadvantageous.

If there should be a deficiency of serous fluids in the system, the above also
are improper, and those of the cooling class -- but where there is a redundancy
of ^erosity, the prohibition of diluent diuretics are fairly pointed out.

Though we know not of any of this class that will always infallibly exert its
diuretic power, still the catalogue given us by a variety of authors is
extensively prolix; -- we shall select such as are considered the most
efficacious according to the particular states of the constitutions which may
require them; -- and these we shall comprise under three heads -- of stimulant,
cooling -- and diluent.

Of the FIRST CLASS, or STIMULANTS, are Nasturtium Horseradish Asparagus
Turnip Radish Onion Celery Parsley-seed. All these may be taken as food, in
decoction or infusion.
Fennel-seed Leek
See Expectorants. Garlic, Balsam of Copaiva,

See Stimulants. Hedge Hyssop, Wake Robin,

JUNIPER BERRIES, 1 or 2 ounces in a pint of water, boiled or infused. Spirits
of, from 1-2 an ounce to 1 ounce. Oil, from 2 to 10 drops. QUASSIA WOOD --
Powder, 10 to 20 grains. Infusion; 1 or 2 drams to a pint of water 2 ounces the
dose. BROOM -- Infusion, Decoction; 1-2 an ounce to a pint of water -- dose 1
ounce. Extract, 1-2 a dram to a dram. GRASS and ROOTS -- 4 ounces to a quart
boiled to a pint. WILD VINE -- Powder, 15 to 30 grains. Decoction; 4 drams to 1
pint boiled down from 1 1-2 pint -- dose, (...) ounces. TOBACCO -- See
Sedatives. SQUILLS -- Powder, from 1 to 6 grains. Fresh Root, 5 to 20 grains.
Pill, 8 grains to 15. MEADOW SAFIRON -- Oxymel, from 1-2 a dram to a dram.
Fox-GLOVE -- Powder, 1-2 a grain to 2 grains. Infusion, 1 dram to 1-2 a pint of
boiling water -- 1-2 an ounce to an ounce the dose.
Stimulant and diluent. BATH WATERS, HARROWGATE WATERS,

The COOLING CLASS are,
NITRE -- from 5 to 30 grains. Ethereal, or sweet spirit of, from 10 to 30
drops. AMBER -- Salt, from 5 to 15 grains. DIURETIC SALT -- 6 or 8 to 30
grains. FIXED SAL AMMONIAC -- 15 to 30 grains. CREAM OF TARTAR -- 1-2 a dram to
a dram.
1 dram to 1-2 a ounce. ADIDS -- Fermented, Native,

MINERAL ACIDS -- 3 drops to 6.


The following, of this class, we consider at acting on the principle of
neutral salts, from the union with the acids they meet with in the stomach and
intestines: TESTACEOUS ANIMALS --
These are taken by way of food. Crabs, Lobsters, Cockles, Mussels, Orsters,
Scollop, Periwinkle,

SOAP -- 1 scruple to 1-2 ounce. KALL or vegetable Alkali, from 5 to 30 grains.
ABSORBENT EARTHS --
from 10 to 30 grains. Crabs Claws, Eyes, Hartshorn prepared, Chalk,

LIME WATER -- 2 to 4 ounces.


The diluent are -- which also may be esteemed cooling -- all the sweet
acescent fruits: Dandelion Endive Lettuce Corn Sallad Artichoke Potatoes Boiled
Onion Water Milk Whey.
WATER, MALVERN CHELTENHAM

ACIDULATED WATERS,


10. DIAPHORETICS, derived from the Greek diaphoreo, transfero, to carry
through, include all such substances as increase perspiration, or sweat. This
class used to be divided from sudorisics, or such medicines as promoted
sensible perspiration, but unnecessarily; for they seem only to differ in their
degrees of action, promoting the same effect, more or less copiously or
perceptibly. But as different purposes may be answered by the different degrees
of action of those parts which produce these effects, it may be necessary to
make some specification respecting the two.

Insensible perspiration is promoted by all such materials as produce an
astringent effect upon, or contract the solids in a moderate degree, by
occasioning an increase of elasticity or springiness of the vessels, and thus
promote the circulation -- hence (...) bark -- all the astringent roots --
austere wines -- come under this division, as do exercise which is moderate,
either walking, riding on horseback, or in a carriage -- mild stimulants, or
those of the stronger class weakened.

Or, by such things as determine the matter of perspiration to the skin, such
as moderately warm air, temperate exercise, an equal circulation of the fluids
when the body is at rest, as well as in motion.

Or, occasion such a temperature of the skin, that it shall neither be too
relaxed nor more rigid than requisite -- hence frictions, lotions, and
detersion are recommended; and it is from producing this effect that these
things are found so beneficial to the studious, inactive, and those who are
advanced in life -- unloading the system by those means, without weakening it
in the smallest degree, but, on the contrary, increasing its power.

Now SWEATING is promoted by nearly the same means, for all such things as
relax the vessels, and determine powerfully to the skin, will produce this
effect, whether internally or externally applied.

Hence come under this class all those diuretics which act not upon the kidneys
electively -- warm water, or barley-water sweetened with honey, excite a
copious sweat -- a glass of cold water drank going to bed -- also those things
which take off spasm, whether they are demulcent, or moderate or correct
acrimony, as opium -- testaceous powders. All strong frictions, warm vapor,
particularly of water, warm bathing, or whatever will render the skin relaxed
or soft.

Nitre, and its preparations, and all those substances which dispose the
vessels to act upon their contained fluids -- thus vinegar sweetened with
honey, and diluted with water, is the best sudorific in acute cases, and was a
favorite remedy prescribed by HIPPOCRATES, in the following form, called
HYDROMEL, from udor, water, and mel, honey: each one ounce. Take of Vinegar,
Honey,



Mace, a small portion, to give it an agreeable flavor.

Water, twelve or fourteen ounces; let this be drank in bed after the manner of
tea or coffee; and the patient there wait the result.

Care though should be taken, that honey does not disagree with the
constitution; for, where there is any natural antipathy, it is apt to produce
violent affections on the stomach and bowels; sugar should therefore, in these
cases, supply its place, or treacle will have a better effect. Whatever is
taken hot, as well as heating aromatics, opiates, as also violent motion, are
highly sudorific.

Besides, such things as diminish the external pressure of the air, and those
which increase the strength of the heart, with respect to its number and force
of pulsations, come under the head of sudorifics -- such as Rhenish wine, fresh
juice of citron, penetrating aromatics, volatile salts, etc. -- those things
which stimulate externally, as all acrid matters applied to the skin, as
vinegar and ginger, which is the most subtle and penetrating, and much
recommended by HELMONT -- and lastly, whatever, restores impeded motion in the
internal parts, as passions and affections of the mind reproduce retarded
perspiration.

Though a number of the medicines mentioned above are styled diaphoretics;
still, strictly speaking, and considering them as such, independent of their
connection with sudorifics we have no one of which we can speak with any
certainty that has been tried by statical experiment, the only mode we have of
discovering them, except AS A FOETIDA, as handed down to us by SANCTORIUS --
yet I should suppose, that the power of all sudorifics weakened might be justly
considered as diaphoretics; for we find all those things which can increase the
circulation, determine the fluids externally to the skin, and take off the
spasm from the minute vessels, are certainly entitled to the character of
diaphoretics and sudorifics; and these three particular circumstances should be
adverted to, when we want to promote a discharge of this sort for any good
purpose; for though stimulants and sedatives, or medicines possessing both
these powers, may in many cases be very proper, they may in some, conjunctively
or separately considered, be detrimental -- and indeed there may be complaints
where sweating would be improper, though the promotion of gentle perspiration
might be useful, as in the scurvy -- but in the venereal disease, if the effect
could be produced with ease, sweating is the best method of cure, and
preferable to either evacuation by stool, or salivation.

From what has been advanced, we shall find that all general stimulants of the
system, as motion and heat, are powerful sudorifics; -- particular ones are
either applied to the excretories, those pores from whence the sweat issues, or
to the parts consenting with them, as the stomach and intestines; hence their
action is either general, local, or sympathetic.

The catalogue of DIAPHORETICS contains
BURDOCK -- Decoction, 2 ounces in 3 pints boiled to 2, taken every 24 hours.
Powder, 1 dram.
SENECA, or RATTLESNAKE-ROOT -- Powder, Dose from 20 to 60 grains. Decoction, 2
ounces in two pints of water to 20 -- dose 1 to 2 ounces. SNAKE ROOT --
Tincture, from 1 to 2 drams. Powder, 10 grains to 1-2 a dram. GUAIACUM WOOD --
Decoction, 2 ounces to 3 pints boiled to 2 -- dose 4 ounces. Gum, See
Cathartics. Tincture, from 1 to 2 drams. CONTRAYERVA -- Powder, from 10 to 30
grains. Compound, from 1-2 a dram to 2 drams. SARSAPARILLA -- Decoction, 2
ounces to 4 in 3 pints of water boiled to 2, from 4 to 8 ounces the dose.
MEZEREON, or SPURGE OLIVE -- The bark of the root, 1-2 an ounce in 6 pints of
water boiled to 4. -- Dose, 1-2 a pint. OPIUM -- See Sedatives.
See Antispasmodics. CAMPHOR, MUSK, SALT OF HARTSHORN, ASA FOETIDA,

ANTIMONY -- Laevigated, dose from 20 to 60 grains. Calcined, 10 to 30 grains.
Tartarized, 1-8 to 1-2 a grain. Glass of cerated, 2 to 20 grains. Precipitated
sulphur of, 3 to 6 grains. ANTIMONIAL POWDER -- 2 to 6. Wine, 10 drops to 50.
ANTIMONY -- Tartarized wine of, 20 drops to 40. IPECACUANHA -- 1-4 to 3 grains.
Wine, 30 to 40 drops. WATER -- WINE -- VEGETABLE and NATIVE ACIDS --
from 2 to 6 drams. ACETATED AMMONIA, called Myndererus's Spirits,

WATER OF AMMONIA, dose 10 to 30 drops. PREPARED AMMONIA, 5 to grains.
Essential and Empyreumatic Oils -- though they are seldom used in this view,
but more as cordials and antispasmodics.

From considering the operation of medicines of this class, we shall find that
their utility is derived from diverting the determination of the fluids, and
preventing them from crowding the internal viscera -- removing various causes,
which obstruct or impede the natural state of the circulation on the surface of
the body, and there restoring the natural discharge -- and also from their
evacuating power, lessening the quantity of the circulating fluids, when too
great for the powers of the system -- restoring lymphatic absorption -- and
discharging any morbid accumulation of serum.

But should the system be uncommonly relaxed, a great increase in the
determination of fluids to the exterior surface of the machine -- a great want
of fluids -- or the force of the blood on the basis of the brain much
debilitated, the prohibition of their use is obvious.

The last of which we have to treat in this section are

11. EMMENAGOGUES, from the Greek words emmena menses, and ago, daco, to
produce the menstrual evacuations of women; and all such medicines as have been
supposed to produce this effect are comprehended under this title.

A great deal has been written, and much time wasted, by authors, in
endeavoring to account for the precise manner in which nature performs this
operation in the female machine: the only present satisfactory conclusion we
have on this head is, that a fullness of the uterine system, from a peculiar
determination of the blood to that organ, a permeability in the uterine and
vaginal vessels, and an increased impulsive power, all periodically exerted,
are necessary for the salutary promotion of that discharge -- and when there
arises a deficiency in all or any of these particulars, obstructions will take
place, which require the aid of that class of medicines of which we are now to
treat; -- but as there are various purposes often to be answered, ever we can
promote the desired end, different medicines have been pointed out, and formed
into divisions according to their action.

Hence have we EMMENAGOGUES, Stimulating -- as Antimony, -- Quicksilver.
Irritating -- Aloes, -- Sabine, -- Cantharides. Tonic and Astringent -- Iron,
-- Cold-bathing, -- Exercise. Antispasmodic -- Asa foetida, -- Castor, --
Bathing the feet,
and a variety of others, possessing similar powers to those here specified.

But in the application of these medicines, one thing is to be particularly
observed, that not any of them ought to be used at all times, that is, previous
to, and when the menstruating period is at hand, except the astringent class
and quicksilver.

The irritating and antispasmodic are only to be called in aid, when there is
an aggravation of the symptoms, and an effort of nature at her accustomed time.
The reason of which is clear -- because the former are considered only as
preparatory, that by their operation the constitution may be put into such a
state, as to be enabled to feel, and answer to the effects produced by the more
powerful and forcible action of such medicines as add vigor to the circulatory
vessels, push forward the blood quickly and rapidly, and take off any
obstructions which may be caused by some spasmodic affections.

According, then, to the difference of the constitution we wish to relieve, so
must we make our selection.

If it should be necessary to give strength and firmness to the system.

Astringents may be had recourse to -- as iron, and its preparations -- bark --
and bitters.

If to increase the force in the moving powers in general, Cold bathing and
quicksilver. If to produce partial action by the same mode, Local Stimulants --

Partial warm baths -- fomentations -- stimulant vapor, or fumigation of
tobacco to the uterus -- aloetic medicines -- foetid gums -- cantharides --
acrid purgatives -- as they may communicate their stimulus to the part, either
immediately, or communicate motion to the vascular system from the exertion of
their action on the contiguous parts.

If to take off constriction. Antispasmodics -- Asa foetida -- caster -- but
particularly musk.

There is another class which we must have recourse to particularly where there
appears to be a scarcity of the sanguinary mass, in order, as far as in our
power, to increase the general volume of fluids, that the peculiar
determination may with more ease be brought about, and this is the class of
NUTRIENTS, selecting such to which the digestive powers of the constitution
appears adequate to assimilate.

If now we call to our recollection what has been delivered -- the means by
which these appropriate remedies are rendered serviceable, will be -- from
promoting freely the circulation of the blood in the neighborhood of the
uterus, when too much obstructed there -- from increasing the accumulation in
the uterine vessels themselves, which is necessary to the menstrual discharge
-- and removing morbid obstructions to the passage of blood into the cavity of
the uterus -- also, from augmenting the strength of the system in general,
particularly of the vessels of the uterus, when defective -- and removing any
spasmodic constriction taken place in them.

But strong objections may often arise to the use of some of this class -- if
the rectum should be in a particular irritable state -- or there should be any
local inflammatory affection, we must avoid those which are irritating -- If
the blood circulates with great force, or there should be particular debility
of any other parts, the stimulant must be avoided; nor must those denominated
tonic be meddled withal, if there should be any morbid rigidity in the system.

Our catalogue of EMMENAGOGUES supplies the following articles: See
Antispasmodics. PENNYROYAL, RUE, SABINE, ASA FOETIDA, GALBANUM, AMMONIACUM,

MYRRH -- See Expectorants. Tincture, 1-2 a dram to 2 drams. QUICKSILVER, See
Sialagogues. IRON -- Rust prepared, from 5 to 30 grains. Tincture of muriated
Iron, from 10 to 60 drops. Wine of, 1 dram to 1-2 an ounce. AMMONIACAL IRON --
dose from 3 to 15 grains. TARTARIZED IRON -- 10 to 30 grains. VITRIOLATED IRON
-- dose 3 grains to 20.


Cathartics -- Diuretics -- and Emetics -- may, if we consider the nature of
their actions, be fairly included, on particular occasions, in the list of
Emmenagogues.

CHAP. III.
WE are arrived at the third part of our arrangement, and must proceed now to
treat on MEDICINES WHICH ACT UPON THE FLUIDS THROUGH THE SYSTEM, in the same
manner as we have before spoken on those which acted upon the solids; and these
include ATTENUANTS INSPISSANTS -- and DEMULCENTS -- And, first, of

1. ATTENUANTS, from the Latin attenuo, to make thin, perfectly expresses the
nature of all the medicines of this class, and comprehends whatever can be
understood by diluting, inciding, and resolving medicaments; three terms into
which this class have been, by many, divided, because they all contribute to
render the fluids more thin and fluxile.

Butas this point may be accomplished in two ways, either by substances mixing
with a fluid, and rendering it more thin, but not changing or altering the
particles of which it was composed; or having the power of diminishing the
cohesion of the blood, and thus rendering its texture less firm and tenacious;
they may be certainly, and ought to be divided, according to their action, into
diluent and resolvent.

Among the first we cannot be properly said to have any other than water, which
is productive of a variety of good effects upon the habit -- but not merely by
its diluting property, it acts more particularly, immediately, and universally,
by its coldness. Now, as a diluent, it not only thins the fluids in the way we
have above specified, but it assists digestion, (106) quenches thirst -- is an
universal vehicle for solid food, corrects acrimony -- promotes fluid
secretions -- and is by many esteemed, much more than any other medicine, an
universal remedy.

Now, as it is clear that all diluents should be more fluid than the humors
which are by their intervention to be rendered thinner; and have at the same
time, when mixed, the property of making them retain their acquired fluidity --
we shall find, there is not any thing except water that possesses this power.

Though wine -- oil -- saline substances -- fermented spirits -- and some
earthy substances have been said to enjoy these virtues, still it is obvious,
that they are defective, and have not them in that degree so as to become
really diluent -- for wine, as a diluter, depends upon its watery particles
joined with its stimulating power -- oil renders the mass of fluids rather more
viscid -- saline substances resolve by their stimulus -- fermented spirits are
more apt to coagulate -- earths are of themselves solid and inert, and can
never be taken in this ^^ew, but as they may mix with some acidities in the
stomach and intestines, and thus change their form, and become active from
their assuming that of neutral salts, and with them may they be (...);
therefore it is to water we must resort, when we wish to call in aid alone a
purely diluting power -- to which, it has been said, if we add gentle heat, or
saline particles, as sea salt, Polychrest salt, sal ammoniac, or borax, we
shall improve its power, by the addition of their stimulating effects, but this
is adding a resolvent property -- Moderate motion is also said to improve its
powers.

But as for resolvents, they act by increasing the force of the moving powers
by the stimulus they possess in a limited degree; for should they act
violently, they would, by dissipating the thinner part of the fluids, render
them thicker, and become incrassants; but by gently stimulating, though they
produce evacuation, they permit the vessels to act more freely upon their
contained fluids, and hence become resolvent.

On considering the action of this class, we shall be empowered to discover,
that their beneficial effects arise, from removing any morbid viscidity in the
blood, and restoring a free circulation, when in the small vessels it is
morbidly obstructed -- from increasing the quantity of serous evacuations, when
too greatly diminished -- and rendering them, when too thick and viscid, more
fluid.

But their use must be prohibited in constitutions laboring under too great
thinness of the general mass of fluids -- having a propensity to morbid serous
accumulations -- or a remarkable increase of similar secretions.

The catalogue of ATTENUANTS are, WATER, MILK WHEY, ALL LIQUIDS abounding with
water, CUCUMBERS, MELONS, BEAT, SPINACH, BOILED ONIONS, CORN SALAD, CABBAGE,
DANDELION, ENDIVE, WHITE LILY ROOT, CELERY, ARTICHOKE, MUSHROOM, ENGLISH
MERCURY, And some others. All the SWEET ACID FRUITS. ALKALI --
in small doses, and continued for some time. Fixed vegetable, Fixed fossile,
Volatile,

NEUTRAL SALTS -- See Diuretics and Cathartics. SOAP -- See Diuretics.


2. INSPISSANTS -- these are also called INCRASSANTS -- from the Latin words
inspisso and incrasso, to thicken. These terms, like the former, give us a
perfect idea of their import -- from whence we understand all such substances
as give a degree of viscidity, to the circulating fluids.

From experience we know that our fluids do sometimes run into a state of
morbid thinness; but by what means, is very doubtful.

Some have supposed it to arise from too great a proportion of fluid aliment;
whilst others have been led to believe, it originated from a retention of some
of the serous secretions. But if we reflect, that children and many adults live
upon food totally liquid almost, yet no such appearance is the result; and that
nature always supplies the defect of one secretion by the increase of some
other, and the retention must be partial, it cannot be universal; both these
opinions seem by no means satisfactory.

I rather think that it is occasioned by a relaxation of the system,
particularly of some, or the whole of the digestive organs; for strong,
muscular, laborious rustics, whose digestive powers are good, have generally,
nay, I believe always, the blood sending to the opposite extreme -- whilst the
more delicate and relaxed, whose digestive powers are weak, have the sanguinary
mass too fluid: indeed people whose blood has possessed a proper texture, have,
from illness, had it reduced to a state manifesting a too weak cohesion, and
that apparently by the system being debilitated.

Whatever may be the cause, it is our business to remedy the effects; and these
we attempt by reproducing a proper proportion of viscid fluids, and by
increasing their attractive power one with another; and their consequences may,
we think, be acquired by the following catalogue of INSPISSANTS: Wine, Acids
vegetable -- mineral, Alchohol, Radish, Turnip, Carrot, Parsnip, Skirret,
Potatoes, Leeks, Comfrey Root, Cucumber, Poppy, and Melon Seed, Onions,
Farinaceous Grain, Mucilaginous and Oily Substances, Sago, Salep, Almonds, etc.
Gum Arabic, -- Tragacanth, Starch, Isinglass, Arrow Root, Animal Food, Fish,
Eggs, All the Astringents, Bark.


It has been remarked by some authors, that acids -- wine -- alchohol -- and in
some measure, the astringents used internally, have been said not to produce
their inspissating effect; and should therefore only be employed externally, in
cases of profuse bleedings; and that the nutritious and demulcent class, of
which we shall next treat, must, for restoring the viscid fluids, be depended
upon.

However, I cannot avoid thinking the whole, alchohol excepted, may be used
with much advantage; and greatly assistant in rendering those, which act merely
on the blood, more quickly efficacious, by invigorating the system, increasing
the strength of its vascular power, and consequently the action of the vessels
upon the contained fluids.

On this head authors have confined themselves to such substances as were
either farinaceous, as barley, wheat, rye, and such -- or mucilaginous, as
marshmallows, gum arabic, isinglass, etc. and conceived their utility to be
derived from removing morbid tenuity in the blood -- preventing the
transmission of red blood through vessels not naturally fitted to receive it --
diminishing the quantity of those secretions which were serous, and too
copious, and rendering them more viscid where morbidly thin and fluid -- and
have prohibited their use in morbid viscidity of the blood -- preternatural
diminution of the secretions in general -- and a high degree of debility of the
digestive organs.

I am persuaded that in many cases, particularly in those where a weak
digestion is prevalent, the use of some of the stimulant aromatics, mixed with
the invigorating astringents, such as bitters, bark, iron, would greatly
conduce to conquer many of those defects for which incrassants are prescribed,
and I have repeatedly seen their good effects; indeed I very often unite them,
and find, that, conjoined, they prove more efficacious than when administered
separately.

2. DEMULCENTS, from demulceo, to appease or mollify. These by some have been
considered to act in a double capacity, by blunting or sheathing the acrid
particles of our morbid humors, or promoting an entire change in such as were
offensive from their acrimony, and forming a third substance, perfectly
different in its nature with respect to its action. Hence have they been ranked
as general and particular demulcents. In the latter class are enumerated all
the acids and alkalines, as well as some metals, with regard to their influence
on each other; as if one was creative of any disturbance in the habit, by
exerting a morbid stimulus from its acrimony, the other on being given proved
corrective, and cured the affection; hence was styled demulcent; but these are
more properly arranged under other heads, as the antalkaline and antacids, of
which we shall soon treat in their separate places.

At present we shall consider them only as obtunders of, or blunting acrimony,
by mixing with and preventing the acrid part of the fluids from exerting
themselves on the solids, so as to create pain, or other uneasy sensations.

And it will appear then, that of all this class, in this view of the subject,
are either mucilaginous, oily, or a composition of both; and these manifest
their action immediately in the stomach or intestines; or, after having passed
through the circulation, in the secretory organs.

For it is imagined, that acrimony takes not place in the blood vessels, but in
the secretions, as the serum is thought to be the vehicle of acrid substances.
These demulcents, therefore, mixed with the blood are separated with the
serous, or thinner parts of the fluids, in those places of the system where
secretions happen; and thus, by enveloping the irritating particles, prevent
them from stimulating.

Thus they defend the kidneys, the lungs, the vessels of the vagina and uterus,
in nephritic or gravelly complaints; in defluxions on the lungs; and cases of
the whites; and are highly useful in haemorrhages, which are often maintained
by acrimony; for increased secretion of mucus is always acrid, till its thinner
parts are dissipated, by lying some time -- hence their use in coughs,
defluxions on the breast, the whites, and those discharges after childbirth,
called lochial.

Whatever good we may perceive can be derived from medicines of this nature,
may be acquired from some of the following selection of DEMULCENTS: Larger
Comfrey Root, Seeds of Cucumber, -- Poppy, -- Melon, Sugar, Honey, Raisins,
Dates, Figs, Hips, Liquorice, Gum Arabic, -- Tragacanth, Starch, Isinglass, The
Nutrients, Emollients, and Sedatives,
though these last can scarce be said to act in the mode we have described of
common demulcents; but rather take off the acrimony by diminishing the
sensibility of parts; and produce a viscosity of the secreted fluids, it is
obvious from the appearance of the matter, in those who have taken opiates,
after their narcotic effects have ceased.

And this I take to be owing to the vessels being by their power thrown into a
state of torpor, and thus suffering the secreted fluid to become more dense by
its continuance, and consequently less acrimonious from the dissipation of its
more serous parts.

They have been divided into LENIENT DEMULCENTS, such as Starch, Gum Arabic,
Olive Oil -- and those which are DILUENT, as Water, and watery substances; but
these last come not properly under this head, without being mixed with some of
the former; as they are apt, without such mixture, to pass off too quickly by
some of the emunctories.

The use to be acquired from the administration of these materials are, a
diminution of the action of the ordinary stimuli upon parts affected with too
great sensibility, and a supply of the natural coverings of the parts where too
defective -- diminishing morbid acrimony in the system in general -- and
rendering more mild those secretions which are praeternaturally, or too
violently acrid.

But their administration would be pernicious, if there was any defect of a
natural pungency in the secreted fluids -- a great degree of viscidity in the
coverings of the sensible parts -- or an uncommon want of sensibility in the
excretory organs.

CHAP. IV.
WE are now come to our fourth division, wherein we purpose to consider

MEDICINES WHICH MANIFEST THEIR SENSIBLE ACTION CHIEFLY, IF NOT SOLELY, IN THE
FIRST PASSAGES RESPECTING THE FLUIDS.

The first of which present themselves to our view are,

1. ANTALKALINES, from the Greek words anti, against, and alkali, alkalies,
consequently all acids and acescent materials come under this description; as
do all such medicines as conquer alkalies, and destroy their power of action as
such. But in this place the acids and acescents are only to be considered as
correctors of alkalescent substances; for we have before seen the diversified
power they appear to maintain as astringents, stimulants, sedatives,
inspissants, cathartics, diuretics, and they will also rank with
antiputrescents; at least such of them as have been selected agreeable to the
effects they have been thought to produce on the human machine: and here their
chief action appears to me to be in the first passages only, where, coming in
contact with alkalescent substances, there they neutralize them.

I am of opinion, that where there happens to be, from any disease, an
alkalescent state of the fluids, they are not of much service by acting in them
merely against, and correcting such alkalescency; for when our fluids are
affected to any considerable degree with this, little is in our power; but in
cases of this kind, should they be of any service. I am persuaded it is more
from their action communicated to the solids, particularly the mineral acids,
than from any other cause. Perhaps the utility derived from the native acids
depends more upon the fixed air, with which they are replete; for we have not a
more powerful corrector of putrescent acrimony than this species of air.

They have been divided into vegetable and saline antalkalines -- but the
better division is, into native, of which sorrel, barberry, and tamarinds, form
examples -- and into artificial, as the acid of vitriol, sea salt, nitre, and
vegetable.

The catalogue of ANTALKALINES, with which we are supplied, are, SWEET ACESCENT
FRUITS.
Pears, Apples, Oranges, Lemons, Strawberry, Raspberry, Barberry, Tamarinds,
Currants, Grapes, Cherries, Raisins, Dates, Figs, etc.
MOST OF THE CULINARY PLANTS.
Cucumbers, Melons, Beat, Spinach, Corn Sallad, Salary, Asparagus, Artichoke,
Radish. Turnip, Carrot, Cabbage, Nasturtium, Endive, Dandelion, Lettuce,
Parsnip, Skirret, Potatoes, Leek, Onion, Garlic. OLIVE, WATER DOCK, SORREL,
etc. WINE, VINEGAR, with the ARTIFICIAL MINERAL ACIDS above specified. SALT OF
AMBER. See Diuretics.
And likewise the whole class of DEMULCENTS; but these act by mechanical, not
chemical mixture -- that is, from merely mixing with and sheathing the
offending particles, not from altering them, by forming a new combination, so
that each body loses totally its natural properties, and becomes a third,
differing from both -- and, perhaps, some others here specified, may act in the
same mechanical mode.

It will, from this concise view, appear obvious from whence the whole of the
virtues of this class of medicines may be collected -- and where their use
ought to be prohibited -- their power of neutralizing alkalies.

For, ON THE ONE HAND, by this power they are capable of removing any sensation
of alkalescency in the first passages -- restoring the natural disposition to
acidity in the stomach -- and correcting in the alimentary canal praeternatural
putrescency. -- ON THE OTHER, if there should be, from an acid cause, any
natural disposition in the stomach to that painful sensation, called
CARDIALGIA, an uncommonly slow and languid circulation, or any considerable
diminution of animal heat, these defects they would increase; consequently,
under such circumstances, ought to be prohibited.

2. ANTACIDA, Antacids, from anti, against, and acida, acids. These comprehend
all alkalescent substances, most of the absorbent earths, and some neutral
salts -- and are such substances as counteract acidity in the same manner as
acids conquered alkalies -- and are in this light here only to be considered,
as we have before taken notice of them with respect to their different
operations in the habit, selected agreeable to their various powers, acting as
stimulants, antispasmodics, attenuants, antiseptics, cathartics, and diuretics
-- and in this place they seem chiefly to exert their efficacy only in the
stomach, now and then, perhaps, in the intestines.

The catalogue of ANTACIDS with which we are presented, sufficient to answer
any purpose they are capable of effecting, are TESTACEOUS ANIMALS. See
Diuretics.

ANIMAL FOOD -- LIME WATER -- Dose 6 ounces to 16 in a day.
prepared, from 10 grains to 2 drams. CHALK -- CRABS EYES and CLAWS --

BURNT HARTSHORN -- Decoction of, EGG and OYSTER SHELL prepared -- from 10
grains to 2 drams. ALKALI -- Vegetable, Fossile, called Soda, or Natron, from 5
to 30 or 40 grains. Volatile, from 3 to 20 grains. BORAX -- from 4 to 10 or 12
grains. TARTARIZED KALI, or SOLUBLE TARTAR -- 12 to 20 or 30 grains. SOAP --
See Diuretics. STIMULANTS -- ANTISPASMODICS -- SEDATIVES -- and DEMULCENTS --
Though most of these act by coming in contact with the prevailing acid
immediately, without considering the solids -- yet those under the general
titles, except the demulcents, which become serviceable by their sheathing
property, produce their effects by the influence they have on the moving
powers, which we have in their proper places before specified.

As the action of these, like the former, is so very limited, only to be
considered in this place as counteracting acidity in the first passages, we
shall have occasion to say little more than will be sufficient to show where
they will be beneficial, or in what cases their exhibition would be improper.

When there is a morbid prevalence and sensation of sourness in the alimentary
canal; when, from the same cause in the stomach, the natural appetite is
vitiated, and the action of that organ and intestines is disordered, they are
of service in removing the former, and restoring the two latter to their
healthful standard.

But when there is a prevalence of alcalescency in the stomach and bowels, or a
tendency to putridity in the general mass of blood, they must be highly
detrimental. And, perhaps, in this last case, the mischief which would arise
from their use may be more owing to the destruction of the acid in the first
passages, than from joining in their alcalescent state with the fluids, as
acids have been considered antiputrescent.

3. ANTISEPTICS, from anti, against, septica, putrefacientia, substances
occasioning putrefaction. These include all such materials as obviate the too
great putrescency of our fluids.

Now as the putrescency of our humors may be brought on by excess of heat and
motion, as well as receiving any putrid ferment into the vascular system -- as
it, when once fixed, and begun to exercise its deleterious action, induces
languor and great debility in the moving powers, we may see the reason of our
antiseptic class of medicines, exhibiting, according to the conception we have
of their action, such apparently contradictory views -- for in the same
arrangement we shall find, that we have the volatile salt, and those of the
neutral kind -- the former considered as highly heating, and a strong stimulant
of the moving powers -- the other as cooling the system, and mitigating
vascular motion.

From thence I presume, that they are only applicable in different stages of
putrescent action; or in different constitutions affected with putrefaction; --
and not unlikely the same may hold good with acids and alkalies, for they are
both enumerated under antispasmodics. Of these different substances it
therefore behooves us to be careful in the application.

In the first stages, where a putrid tendency may be accompained with high
degrees of circulatory motion and heat, or in constitutions where these are
prevalent, neutral salines and acescents may be the most proper; but* in
languid habits, or those made such by the continuance of the enervating power
of putrid particles, volatiles and cordials challenge the preference.

Nitre has been said to be strongly antiseptic, when applied to inanimate
animal matter, but not so in the living subject, as it lessens the powers of
the vital actions -- but this is only applicable in the advanced stage of
putrescency; and it is to that state of the disease alone they must mean to
advert, who advance, that cordials, and whatever invigorates the solids, by
increasing the vital heat, are properly antiputrescent, and by what alone
relief can be obtained in putrid complaints.

However, our chief intent in these cases is to keep up a due action of the
moving powers, and a proper tone of the solids, that is, an active firmness --
which effects, we conclude, may be produced by the subsequent selection of
ANTISEPTICS:

Those FRUITS which have sweetness coupled with acidity; Cherries, Apples,
Oranges, And such like, Acerb Fruits, Quinces, Medlars, Sloes, etc. Wine,
Vinegar,
See Diuretics,
Acid, Nitrous Muriatic Vitriolic

Salt of Amber,
Salts. Some Neutral, Mentalline, and Earthy,

Essential Oils, Empyrematic Oils. Acetated Litharge -- from 1 to 3 drops. Alum
-- Page 139. Nitre -- 176. Alchohol, All Vegetable Nutrients. Astringents,
Stimulants, Sedatives, Antispasmodics, Wormwood, Chamomile, Quassia, Oil of
Turpentine, Ale -- Porter -- Cider -- Perry, Camphor, Asa Foetida, Musk, Myrrh,
but, in cases of languor, certainly the most eligible are, Wine -- Bark --
dose from 12 to 1-2 dram. Extract, Resin,

Decoction, 1 ounce to 2 pounds reduced to 1 pound -- dose 2 ounces. Bark --
Powder, 20 grains to 2 drams. Tincture, simple, 1 to 2 or 3 drams. compound, or
Auxham's 1 to 2 or 3 drams.


They have been properly divided into such as are tonic, increasing the
activity and strength of the system, of which Peruvian Bark -- Warmwood -- and
Chamomile are examples.

Such as are cooling -- Acid Salines -- Neutral Salts.

Stimulant, as Wine -- Alchohol -- Oil of Turpentine.

Antispasmodic, as Camphor -- Asa foetida -- Musk.

The utility of these are derived from resisting and correcting putrefaction --
by preventing the assimilating quality of any putrid ferment received into the
machine -- correcting the putrid disposition of the humors -- obviating the
progression of putrescency taking place in the solids -- and restoring to a
sound state solids morbidly putrid.

But in cases where a peculiar sensibility of the stomach is prevalent, those
called TONIC are to be avoided -- the REFRIGERANT, where a debility of the
vital powers are manifest -- the STIMULANT, when we perceive too great a degree
of irritability, circulation too highly accelerated, or strong disposition to
profuse bleeding -- and the SEDATIVE ANTISPASMODICS, when there is a too
languid circulation, a lethargic disposition, or a considerable degree of
torpor in the system.

CHAP. V.
IN our fifth and last division we include MEDICINES WHICH PRODUCE THEIR
CONSEQUENCES BY EXTERNAL APPLICATION; -- OR ON SUBSTANCES FORMED WITHIN THE
MACHINE, THOUGH LODGED WITHOUT THE VERGE OF CIRCULATION. The first of which we
shall consider are,

1. EPISPASTICS, or VESICATORIES, from episp^^, to draw, and vesicatorium, as
raising a blister. They are therefore stimulants, in the first sense, locally
such; and, if continued, become evacuants.

But their action is not confined to those places where they immediately act;
they communicate that action to the system in general, and often in particular
to the urinary passages; but this effect is chiefly produced by cantharides, or
Spanish flies.

They have been formed into three divisions, viz.

1. Such as only occasion heat in the part -- of which class may be considered
the slighter stimulants.

2. Such which create heat, with some degree of inflammation, as Horseradish
-- Mustard -- Volatile alkali.

3. Those which raise blisters, as cantharides, Euphorbium; -- to which may be
added a fourth.

4. Those which produce a discharge of pus, as Setons and Issues.

They are often applied with different intents, either as they act on the
nervous power, alter the balance of circulation, or produce evacuation; hence
are their particular uses discoverable; -- in removing torpidity, or languor in
the system -- conquering the effects of more than usual sensibility --
decreasing violent pain -- weakening the circulatory force of the blood against
any part morbidly affected -- and also of action in vessels of the
neighborhood of those to which they are applied. They also decrease the volume
of the circulating fluids when too great in the habit, and evacuate morbid
accumulation of serum.

But should the system be in general highly irritable, the blood
praeternaturally thick, or the fluids in general too defective in quantity,
these circumstances demand the prohibition of their use.

2. PHLEBOTOMIA, bleeding, from phleps, vena, a vein or artery, and t^^^o,
seco, to cut.

Under this term are arranged all those modes by which blood is evacuated from
the machine by the medical art; and these operations are considered as either
producing general or partial effects, by relieving the system in general, or
only in some of its parts.

The division of this class has commonly been general, and topical, or local;
and instanced, in opening a vein, or an artery, a^ belong to the first; as to
the second, scarifications, or cupping-glasses, which are called cruentae, from
the drawing blood -- and the application of leeches; but the terms, it has been
thought, would be more judiciously confined to the quantity taken, as veins or
arteries must in all cases of blood-letting be opened. In general bleeding we
commonly take away such a quantity as will in some degree decrease the power of
the system -- in local, such a proportion only as may contribute to relieve a
part of the system near which the operation is performed -- or, we ought to
make such distinctions, for the sake of propriety, by which we should
understand, that in general bleeding, the larger branches of the veins or
arteries are opened -- in local, only the capillary, or very small branches.

From whence the use accruing from this operation is derived may be easily
conceived -- as it proceeds either from lessening the quantity of blood,
altering the state of its motion, or changing its course.

Hence it relieves in all cases where the mass of blood abounds too much in
quantity; or, when there is a too great tension or distension of vessels in the
system, when the force of circulation is highly increased, or the heat
immoderate, or when in particular blood vessels there is a morbid increase of
action, or the force of the blood is too great against parts morbidly affected.

But where there is too great a scarcity of blood, the circulation remarkably
weak or languid, or too great a debility in the voluntary motions -- these are
powerful objections to its use.

Though from this operation it is apparent that the highest advantages may
accrue; and indeed, in many cases which are inflammatory, or arise from
sanguinary congestion, nothing can be done efficaciously without it; still I
think it is made infinitely too free use of, especially in those places and
climates where people are liable to fall into putrid, and some malignant
complaints.

Where the patient is strong and athletic the pulse full and tense, and there
appear evident signs of too great plenitude, it is universally right to bleed,
otherwise there is some caution required; for it very often hurries the habit
into such a state of extreme debility, in some fevers, that nothing can
compensate the mischief it occasions.

In all doubtful cases, therefore, where it may be thought necessary for blood
to be taken away, I would advise the operator to lay his ^inger on the pulse of
the opposite wrist to that wherein the operation is performed; if, during the
slowing of the blood, the pulse rises, it is an indication to persist; if it
should flag, we should immediately desist.

3. ANTHELMINTICS, worm medicines, from anti, against, and elmius, vermis, a
worm: or VERMIFUGES. -- Thus are called such substances as destroy or expel
worms, whether situated in the gullet, in the passages to the stomach, the
stomach itself, or the intestines; but, though it has been said, worms are
formed in various parts of the machine, and have been found in different
places, as the liver, kidneys, lungs, membrane surrounding loosely the heart,
brain, cavities of the teeth, etc. we confine ourselves to medicines which
perform their office on those which lodge in the first passages.

BOERHAAVE used to divide this class into two, viz. those which destroy and
those which expel worms; -- but there may be cases where the exhibition of
these may be improper, because of the particular state of the stomach and
intestines being unable to bear their action -- hence modern authors have more
judiciously divided them into four heads:

FIRST. Those which are supposed to destroy, by poisoning the worms, termed
venenosa, poisonous as QUICKSILVER -- See Sialagogues. TIN -- Powder, dose 6 to
20 grains or more, SULPHUR -- Flowers of, See Cathartics.


SECOND. Those which expel worms, or cathartics, See Cathartics. SCAMMONY --
JALAP -- ALOES -- GAMBOGE --



THIRD. Those which have lubricating properties, called lubricantia,
lubricating, as OIL OF OLIVES -- LINSEED OIL --


FOURTH. Medicines supposed to have a tonic power, or giving activity and
strength to the bowels, named tonica, as SABINE -- See Emmenagogues. WORM SEED
-- Powder, dose 1-2 a dram to a dram. TANZEY -- Infusion, a pint to 1 pint in
24 hours. Powder, 10 to 30 grains or more.


Besides these there are a number of other articles exhibited for this purpose
-- INDIAN PINK ROOT -- Powder, 8 to 40 grains. FERN ROOT -- Powder, 1 dram to
3. COWHAGE -- the hairy part scraped off the pods, and mixed with syrup, to the
consistence of an electuary, dose 1 to 2 tea-spoon^. SALT -- in strong
solution. CAMPHOR -- See Antispasmodics. BITTERS -- OIL IN GLYSTERS --
HARROWGATE WATERS.


But I believe Calomel in general one of our most superior vermifuges.

The utility of these medicines naturally result from their action on the worms
themselves -- also on the system -- by which means they either destroy, expel,
or prevent their generation in the machine.

But some exceptions may very properly arise to the use of each under
particular circumstances -- if the intestines should be in an inflamed state,
or be abraded, the venenosa, or poisonous, should be avoided -- the
lubricantia, lubricating, if there should be accumulation of sordes in the
first passages -- if a peculiar sensibility of the stomach, the tonica -- and
the cathartic, if any topical inflammatory affection should occupy the
intestines, or should the constitution labor under any deficiency of fluids.

4. LITHONTRIPTICS, from lithos, lapis, a stone, and ^^rup^o, frango, to break.
By this term we should mean all such materials as dissolve the ^^one; -- but
our catalogue, under that idea, would not, I fear, comprehend any,
notwithstanding the variety of pompous pretensions some have published on the
certain existence of medicines endowed with this solvent property. But it is
the general opinion of the candid and rational practitioners; that those who
write now on the power of medicine, though they retain the term, only mean such
substances as possess a power of removing the disposition in the body to the
formation of calculi, or stony concretions.

Indeed, we have had much said on the dissolving power of alkalies and
quicklime -- soap ley taken in broth freed from its sat -- Mrs. Stevens's
solvent, and lime water -- for a long series of time; still few have found the
wished for success; but how far they may act as preventive remedies, as well as
some others, cannot be possibly determined. From the use of bitters and the uva
ursi, or leaves of bear's wortle berry, in this view, I have known some benefit
to arise in patients subject to gravelly complaints, from a collection of stony
or gouty matter. Much is said at present of, and indeed the many experiments
lately made seem to prove the utility of a solution of the VEGETABLE ALKALI,
called kali, impregnated with fixed air, half a dram of the (...) given at each
dose, dissolved in any proper liquid, twice a day, and this increased to two
drams or more, and continued for some time.

They have, however, been divided into such as are ANTACID, as LIME WATER -- 6
ounces to 16 in the day. SOAP -- 20 grains to 1-2 an ounce.
in veal broth -- 10 to 30 drops. CAUSTIC ALKALI -- SOAP LEY --

KALI with fixed air, in infusion, 2 ounces to a quart of water -- dose, 6 to 8
ounces.


Such as have an ASTRINGENT POWER, as BITTERS --
See Astringents. UVA URSI, or Bear's Wortle Berry,



But it has been alleged, that all alkalies in general possess this
stone-dissolving power, therefore in their caustic state they are by some
rejected; because they are apt to disagree with the stomach, and from thence
are they obliged to be employed in too small doses.

As solvents, I am of opinion, little can be said of the use of the class here
enumerated; but as preventives, having a power to obviate the generation of
stony concretions in the machine, they may be considered to be beneficial in
two ways -- in altering the state of the solids, by preventing a particular
state of laxity of the stomach, and in the kidney -- and in producing such an
effect upon the circulating fluids, that they become less liable to furnish
stony materials to be secreted by the kidneys.

But certain objections will arise to the use of the antacids, if in the
stomach there should be a disposition prevalent to generate alcalescency -- to
the astringents, if there should be a rigidity, or contraction in the coats of
that organ.

On vermifuges and lithontriptics we have been more concise than on other parts
of our subject; because they each are appropriated here only to the alleviation
of single complaints specified under their respective heads; of which, when we
come to treat hereafter, we shall be obliged to speak more fully; and enlarge
more on the particular nature of the remedies in each case administered: at
present it has therefore been thought sufficient to furnish a general idea, in
order to prepare our readers properly for more easily understanding what we
have to deliver on these heads.

And now we must observe; that, notwithstanding, in treating on medicines, we
have enumerated a great variety, which many professors have thought essentially
necessary to be produced; there have not been wanting some in the medical
world, who seem to despise all this labor, as well as the authority of
Hippocrates, Boerhaave, and all the men of eminence, who have been considered
as shining ornaments of their profession; and publicly avow, that a very few
medicines, properly applied, will serve every purpose of the medical a^t -- and
there are, CANTHARIDES, used chiefly as blisters, CALOMEL, TARTARIZED ANTIMONY,
ALOES, SENNA, JALAP, SALTS, OPIUM, With the use of nutritious diet and domestic
cordials.


However, we cannot avoid confessing, that we think this catalogue infinitely
too concise; particularly as there are some medicines omitted which have
surprising effects, for which we cannot so readily account; but whose efficacy
has been confirmed to us by practice; and others of which, from daily
experience, we are forbid to doubt the utility. I would, therefore, in order to
render the catalogue more complete, subjoin the following articles: OIL OF
CASTOR, ANIMAL OIL, OIL OF AMBER, VOLATILE ALKALI, FLOWERS OF ZINC, WHITE
VITRIOL, PERUVIAN BARK, ASA FOETIDA, MUSK, CAMPHOR, IPECACUANHA, IRON, RHUBARB,
SABINE.


Before I quit this subject, I would beg leave farther to observe, that though
I have placed the doses of medicines as usually administered to adults; in all
active medicines, I should recommend them to be given in small doses at first,
and gradually increased, till we have arrived at the fullest that the
constitution can bear with ease, as the only mode of trying what good effect
may be produced by their powers: and here we shall often find a surprising
difference in the quantity necessary to promote the end desired -- for I have
known two grains of a very active medicine produce as powerful an effect on the
constitution, as eight or ten would on another; and this knowledge can only be
obtained by particular experience. Indeed, I have known complaints cured by the
very same medicine under the management of one practitioner, that had failed in
the hands of another; which only arose from the different modes of management
respecting the quantity administered.

With regard to the forms in which medicines ought to be exhibited, the intent
to be answered should be particularly considered; whether the expeditious or
permanent action is most eligible -- if the former, they should be given in
liquid -- if the latter, in solid forms -- because in their diffused state they
act most quickly.

For a very great variety become effectual by communicating their power from
the stomach to the rest of the machine sympathetically; consequently the larger
surface of the stomach they touch at the same time, and stronger their action,
the quicker and more powerful will be their effect -- In acute cases,
therefore, these purposes will be best answered in a state of solution: but, on
the contrary, in chronic cases, solid forms are preferable; because they
occasion medicines to act slowly, and, of course, make that action more
durable, by remaining longer on the stomach; -- besides, all medicines which
are not easily suspended in any liquid, should be administered in form of bolus
-- pill -- electuary -- or powder mixed with syrup or some other viscid
substance; -- those which are volatile, very light, or readily miscible with
any menstruum, should be given in mixture or draught. Where a greater
proportion of any vegetable body is required than the stomach can bear in
powder, and where the active part can be extracted by water, decoction or
infusion is the most proper; -- and all oleaginous substances require the
addition of some intermediate viscid body, to make them properly incorporate
with watery fluids, or syrups, and are most elegantly administered in form of
emulsion or linctus.

Though some small difficulty may arise to readers slightly conversant in
medical researches, on the perusal of this part of the work which treats on
medicine -- still, by bestowing a little pains on each division -- from the
advantage they will receive, they will not find their labor ill bestowed --
for they will be taught the simplest, most easy, and certain mode of
prescribing, as well as the most powerful -- they will also understand, from
the knowledge of the different powers of medicine, not only where they are
likely to be serviceable, but where they will be of dangerous consequences -- a
species of information which every man ought to possess, who dares venture to
prescribe either for himself or others: -- for the first law of physic is, NOT
TO DO HARM IN ALL OUR EFFORTS TO DO GOOD; of which no man can be certain
without he knows precisely the active properties of such medicines as he
administers; and whether they are properly adapted to the constitution, under
the circumstances of the morbid attack which he labors to remedy.

SECTION VIII. ON DISEASE IN GENERAL.
HAVING finished those parts of our work which were considered as preparatory
to the more complicated, we must now enter on an inquiry into the nature of
diseases, with the best modes of discovering and curing them. -- But, previous
to this, it will be of use to say something general on the subject, in order to
show what is meant by disease -- how discovered and distinguished -- the
different causes -- with the indications of cure.

By DISEASE is meant a general or local affection, by which the system is
disturbed, or the action of a part impeded, perverted, or destroyed -- or, an
appearance deviating from health, from some general, partial, or local
affection, by which the system in general, or in a part, is oppressed or
disfigured -- and this is discovered and distinguished by an enumeration of
certain symptoms or appearances with which it is always associated. -- But
diseases differ; hence it is necessary to distinguish them from each other,
with which they may seem to have a near affinity -- this is done by the causes
and peculiarities that are connected to them; and from whence the deviation
arises.

The causes of the disease are threefold:

1. PREDISPOSING -- When the constitution collectively, or in part, is in such
a situation as is most favorable to produce disease; or to receive the
impression made by its cause immediately considered; -- and these are either
Inherent or hereditary, Adventitious or accidental.
put into action, or brought about by the

2. REMOTE, or INDUCING, which depend upon the state of their climate --
situation mode of life -- indiscretion -- or the elective power of morbid
particles, called miasmata -- virus -- effluvia -- occasioning the

3. PROXIMATE or IMMEDIAT^, which are such as from their action constitute the
immediate source of disease -- and from whence arise the

INDICATIONS OF CURE, which consists in the removal of the operating causes; or
the preventing the constitution feeling too powerfully certain effects, till
the matters occasioning them can be thrown out of the habit, either by the
efforts of nature, or of art.

But the most eligible mode is the PREVENTIVE, acquired by the consideration of
the remote or inducing causes, where practicable -- and hence preventing
predisposition from being rendered active, by intercepting these causes, or
guarding the habit against their influence.

This account, concise as it is, comprehends the whole practical part of
medicine; from whence though shoot forth a variety of branches, which we shall
dispose under the following heads, agreeable to such appearances as most
strongly manifest themselves to our perception, whether FEBRILE -- INFLAMMATORY
-- PA^^FUL -- NERVOUS -- or MENTAL -- or where evacuations are contrary to, or
more copious than what is natural, st^^led FLUXES -- where difficulty of
breathing is the crying symptom, called ASTHMATIC -- or where the complaint
depends upon the humors of the machine, or make their appearance upon the skin.

CHAP. I. FEBRILE AFFECTIONS IN GENERAL.
ALL those are so considered where there is an alteration respecting the pulse
and heat; for the most part, an increased quickness of the former, and the
latter augmented in some degree; -- many of the functions of the machine
injured -- particularly the strength of the limbs diminished; attended with
chillness, languor, lassitude, and other marks of weakness, without any local
primary disease.

Under this head are comprehended all the fevers, of whatever nature, by which
the human frame is afflicted; but, as they put on different appearances, they
are divided under distinct heads, according to those appearances, as 1.
CONTINUED, or CONTINENT, 2. REMITTENT, 3. INTERMITTENT, 4. HECTIC, and 5.
ERUPTIVE.


In which order we shall pursue them; -- but we should first remark, that all
those are called CONTINUED FEVERS, where they continue from their commencement
to their termination without any intermission, remarkable remissions, or
exacerbations, that is, increase of violence in the symptoms. To this class
belong Fever. 1. The simple continued 2. Inflammatory 3. Nervous 4. Putrid 5.
Anomalous, or mixed



These fevers in general begin with lassitude -- coldness -- shivering, but
without tremor or grinding of the teeth, and heaviness of the head -- then the
heat increases every day till the height, with prostration of strength, and a
constant desire of lying down -- headache -- and thirst -- no exacerbation or
increase of febrile affection, except from some perceptible cause. At the
decline of the disease, there appears a moisture, sweat, or some other
evacuation.

With respect to sensation, the symptoms discover themselves by a sense of
weariness all over the body -- a heaviness, attended with giddiness of the head
-- headache -- bad taste in the mouth -- often an imperfect, or depraved smell
-- a difficulty and tottering in motion -- unwillingness to speak -- a desire
to keep in an horizontal position -- a total want of, or scarce any appetite --
great (...) -- loathing of animal food, or any solids -- a desire for watery
acidulated cold liquids -- no lascivious inclination.

In the cold state, breathing is small, quick, oppressed; -- in the hot, deeper
and frequent; -- in the cold state, the pulse is small, intermitting,
interrupted, and frequent; -- in the hot, full and frequent; -- in the
declension, full and undulating.

The saliva is small in quantity, clammy; -- the mucus of the tongue, gums, and
lips is greyish, rather yellow, and sometimes black -- the urine in the course
of the disease becomes hotter and turbid -- there is a moisture in the skin and
a sweat in the declension of the fever -- the stools are liquid, yellow, often
foetid -- the mucus of the nose trifling; and sometimes from thence
haemorrhages issue.

Fevers of this kind are often ushered in with a coldness of the extremities
and paleness of the face -- very often without any shaking of the limbs; --
after that there is a constant uniform heat, for the most part, except that it
is greater toward the height; there is also in the declension a softness of
the skin.

This is the history of the continued order of fevers in general, with such
things as appear in the vital and animal functions with respect to sensation,
voluntary motion, appetite, respiration, and the pulse; and also in the
excretions and qualities of the solid parts.

Now as all the fevers of this kind have a greater or smaller number of these
symptoms attendant, under each head we must enumerate such as will best inform
us to which it particularly belongs, that we may be best enabled to make proper
distinctions; and as the simple continued fever is the least complicated, we
shall begin with that.

1. SIMPLE CONTINUED, OR VASCULO-PLETHORIC, FEVER.
Such I would name it, because an increased action of the vascular system, and
fullness of blood, are the immediate causes.

This fever is sometimes of very slight duration, terminating in one, at most,
in three or four days, and seldom requiring any medical assistance.

DESCRIPTION. It makes its attack very often suddenly.

There is a slight coldness -- the whole body grows red, particularly the face,
attended with some turgescence, and a vapourous warmth. The headache comes on
suddenly, the temples throb, the breathing is frequent, the pulse free,
uninterrupted, quick, and full. In the decline of the disease, there appears a
breathing sweat, with no remarkable change in the urine.

CAUSES. Whatever will supernaturally increase the action of the vessels, and
induce too great fullness of blood in the habit, as errors in diet, too violent
exercise, cold, suppression of some natural discharge, retention of some acrid
matters offensive in the first passages, from some external injury, happening
in an healthful constitution.

CURE. Medical aid is seldom in these cases necessary -- nature most commonly
is the physician. Drinking copiously of watery liquids warm, such as tea, weak
broths, lemonade, small negus; abstaining from all solid food; and lying in bed
to encourage perspiration, will be all that is requisite.

Or, if medicine must be employed, saline mixtures, or nitrous powders, may be
had recourse to. (No. 1, 2.)

But should the fever put on more violent appearances -- should the pulse not
only be full, but rather hard, with any considerable degree of oppression and
heat, and the skin dry; bleeding, according to the patient's strength, to the
quantity of eight, ten, or twelve ounces, may be advised -- and, in case of
costiveness, (...) cooling saline purgative (No. 3.) may be administered, to
produce three or four evacuations; and in order to appease any hurry which
perhaps it may occasion, a quieting draught in the evening. (No. 4, 5.)

Suppose these should not succeed to our wish, and the symptoms before recited
increase, the pulse excepted with respect to its fullness and hardness, these
being in some degree abated; and the patient has passed a restless night; we
must then fly to antimonials, as the most effectual in checking the violence of
the fever. The most eligible of which are, tartarized antimony, formerly called
tartar emetic, or the antimonial powder of the last London Dispensatory, a
medicine answering every purpose of Dr. James's Powder. (No. 6 to 9.)

The first dose of the mixture, (No. 8.) or the second, if it meets with any
foulness of the stomach, generally excites vomiting, which should be encouraged
by copious draughts of chamomile, or weak green tea, or thin gruel -- and
afterward the mixture continued.

It produces also in general a gentle sweat. One or two evacuations by stool,
quiets the pulse, takes off the oppression and nausea; this, by its
continuance, and ordering balm tea, barleywater, or some such diluting liquor,
to be drank plentifully, banish, in common cases, every complaint.

But, notwithstanding all these efforts, should things wear a more unpromising
aspect -- should the sickness and oppression continue; the thirst, heat, and
dryness of the skin increase; headache become intolerable; the patient very
restless; the pulse keep up, or increase in fullness and hardness particularly,
more blood must be taken away -- though, should there be indications of great
debility, and the pulse flag and grow low, it must be avoided -- the feet may
be put in warm water -- and, in continuing the antimonials, great care must be
taken that they do not operate too violently upwards or downwards, for these
would aggravate the symptoms, or bring on a train of others of more serious
consequence.

Under these circumstances, instead of the saline mixture before prescribed,
the neutral volatile saline (No. 10.) is more eligible, because this, I think,
determines more freely to the skin -- and, trifling as the alteration may
appear, I have seen changes obviously for the better on its being administered.

Notwithstanding the above caution, if emetics have been emitted in the
beginning, particularly if there has been any sickness or nausea, they may be
given at any period of the disease, if the strength of the patient will admit.
(No, 11, 12.)

SYDENHAM says, If any one should inquire at what time of the fever I would
have a vomit administered. I say positively, at the beginning; but should we be
called in so late, which is often the case, that we could not at the beginning
give a vomit to the patient for their relief, yet certainly I thought it
expedient that it might be done at any time of the fever, if the disease has
not so reduced the strength, that its violence cannot be borne -- I have,
continues he, ordered a vomit without hesitation on the twelfth day of a fever,
when all the retchings had ceased; nor was it unattended with advantage.

But, to return to our subject. If, by the use of antimonials, the body should
not be kept properly open, glysters, (No. 25, 26.) should supply the defect,
administered in the evening.

From this treatment, a continued fever of this kind seldom remains longer than
the fifth day; but should it pursue its course to any later period, it is
difficult to determine at what time it will cease.

Here we must be extremely cautious in our prognostic, both with respect to its
duration and danger; for there are often in the constitution many latent
mischiefs which do not show themselves; or some, which manifest themselves not
immediately, may be brought upon the internal and vital parts by the febrile
exertions, that when we have a right to expect every favorable conclusion,
these suddenly prevent the operations of nature, and in an instant overturn all
our flattering prospects.

However, if this fever goes not off on the fifth day, it seldom continues
longer than the fourteenth -- during that space, we are then to endeavor so to
regulate the moving powers of the solids, that they may neither act too
powerfully nor too weakly -- hence are they to be supported in a state of
moderation -- and this we do by thin diet, subacid drinks, such as the stomach
can bear and relish; as thin gruels, roasted apples, oranges, boiled turnips,
and such like, continuing, under various forms, the use of the antimonial
saline mixture.

Besides the attention we have to pay to the system in general, sometimes the
head, stomach, and bowels require our notice, in order to alleviate the
particular affections under which they labor -- for the head now and then is
greatly disordered -- blisters applied between the shoulders, bathing and
fomenting the sect with warm water, bring in these cases relief, and dispose
the patient to rest.

If sourness should affect the stomach and intestines, creating pain and
flatulence, we should unite with our medicines some of the absorbent earths, as
magnesia, chalk, hartshorn, crabs eyes or claws prepared, according as the
habit is disposed to costiveness, or otherwise -- under the first circumstance,
magnesia -- under the last, prepared hartshorn claims the preference.

In the manner above recited should we go on as occasion may require, till
nature throws off her oppressive load at some of her accustomed periods, which
will be either on the seventh, ninth, eleventh, or fourteenth day commonly --
or, if the fever is of longer duration, seventeenth or twentieth. After this
period they are seldom observed with any accuracy.

But suppose toward the close the strength of the constitution appears to be
in a debilitated state, the pulse begins to sink, and the machine requires some
stimulus, in order to rouse it to, and preserve its action -- here we must have
recourse to such applications as will invigorate the system; our former drinks
and medicines must be altered; we must now give wine and water, white wine
whey, or pure wine -- or, if medicines are prefered, cordial, camphorated and
stimulant medicines (No. 13 to 18.)

But wine will best answer the purposes we require, as it is considered to be
the most grateful cordial with which we are acquainted.

However, if any others are thought more eligible than what we have selected,
the class of stimulants will supply a satisfactory variety.

Before we close it will be necessary to observe, that much caution is
necessary in pronouncing the approach of a crisis, or termination, or its
perfect completion -- for it sometimes begins and recedes.

On this occasion we should take the symptoms collectively; and, if they all
appear favorable, wait for their continuance; for they will begin on one
critical day, and not be complete till the next. If, therefore, the pulse
becomes soft and full, and subsides daily, something below a healthful standard
-- the urine deposits a sediment to the bottom of the glass, or, on shaking, it
subsides -- the skin becomes soft, and a general sweat succeeds -- if the
patient's senses return after having slept, we may venture to pronounce boldly.

After matters are brought to this pleasing conclusion a dose or two or physic
may be exhibited. (No. 19, 20, 21.)

The patient should return gradually to his accustomed course of life, lest he
should, by throwing food into the habit in too large quantities, oppress the
digestive powers, which, with the rest of the body, must be in a state of too
great debility to perform their functions vigorously. His, diet, therefore,
should not only be small in quantity, but of the lightest sort; because, from
viscid food, the machine would labor under the same inconveniences as above
specified -- he should eat often, but sparingly, take fresh air, and use
moderate exercise, such as his strength will admit, but never pursue it to
fatigue himself. Under such prudent management, his spirits and vigor will
return rapidly; and he will every day perceive himself making large strides
toward his usual state of health.

2. INFLAMMATORY, or VASCULO-SANGUINEOUS INFLAMMATORY FEVER.
Because not only the same circumstances occur as in the former fever, with
regard to the increased action of the vascular system, and fullness of blood --
but the vessels have acquired a supernatural firmness, and the blood too great
tenacity, by which I understand an in inflammatory disposition.

DESCRIPTION. The patients at first feel as if they were wearied and had been
beaten; are apparently weak, and have cold and hot sits alternating with each
other; they tremble, and feel pains all over them, particularly in the
shoulders, back, knees, and head: to these succeed an intense and burning heat,
unextinguishable thirst; their eyes appear inflamed, with a redness and
fullness of the face; they are sick and vomit; are also restless and uneasy;
the pulse is full and strong; the skin dry; the urine for the most part high
colored, but sometimes like water; the tongue rough, dry, brown or black, and
furred; blood drawn is very tenacious, and, on standing, covered with a
coriaceous substance like buff-leather; they breathe with difficulty; the body
is costive; they sometimes cough; are very watchful and delirious; a stupor and
drowsiness come on; at last tremblings, twitching of the tendons, hiccough, and
an involuntary emission of faeces and urine close the fatal scene. With regard
to the heat, it is of a particular kind, which, though it affects the touch
very sensibly at first, yet seems to grow less violent the longer we hold the
hand upon the skin of the patient.

As to the pulse, its hardness, strength, and fullness, are in greater degrees
than are to be met with in any other species of fever.

And the urine is not only high colored, but sharp, and in small quantities.

CAUSES. Those which are called the remote or inducing, are said to be,
perspiration obstructed; sudden cold; too much exposure to the strong heat of
the sun; fatigue; anger; hard drinking; too long watching; cold water drank
whilst the machine is hot; or, in sine, whatever can put the vessel into too
strong and quick action, and for some time continue it.

The proximate or immediate, acrid and tenacious blood obstructing the very
minute, serous, and sanguinary vessels in different places and increased
strength and activity of the vascular system, which the remote causes are
concluded to confirm, as well as the appearances of blood taken away -- the
symptoms -- mode of cure -- and the inspection of dead bodies on dissection --
for in them the viscera are found in a state of inflammation and mortification.

Young people in the vigor of life, rustles, sanguineous habits, free
luxurious livers, and all those possessed of strong stamina and tenacity of the
circulating fluids, are most prone to fall into this fever.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. This fever generally attacks those who are formed with
strong vigorous stamina and dense blood: -- it is concisely defined, a great
increase of natural heat, a frequent, strong, hard pulse, high-colored urine,
sometimes watery, and the functions of the sensorium a little disturbed.

CURE. This is performed by weakening the strength and activity of the vascular
system, lessening the violence of their action, and thinning the blood.

If we were to remove the irritating cause soon after it had exerted its
action, there is no doubt but every good consequence would accrue; but that we
cannot do in all cases, particularly when morbid particles have got so blended
with the juices, that some time is required before they can be properly
prepared for being thrown out of the body; -- or, after the increased action
had continued so long, that it had by its effects contaminated the fluids; we
therefore endeavor to put the frame in such a situation, that no violent
mischief shall be created by the progress of the disease; and thus give nature
an opportunity of exerting her salutary efforts with effect, and enable her to
throw out the offensive materials from the mass of fluids.

For which purpose, if called in in the early stage, we depend upon bleeding
copiously, and repeat it agreeable to the patient's strength, until the pulse
is reduced to its proper standard -- nor must we be deceived by the apparent
oppression of the pulse, for by bleeding it becomes stronger -- indeed apparent
weakness and loss of strength proceed sometimes from too great fullness; so
that the volume of fluids seems too powerful for vascular action; and unless
this oppression is taken off, which bleeding most readily accomplishes, we
should run the risque of their total cessation. Indeed, so necessary is this
operation at the onset of these fevers, that if it is omitted, the neglect can
seldom be recovered during the whole course.

It is most proper before the fourth or fifth day, but, under some
circumstances, it may be performed at a later period -- in difficult and
oppressed breathing -- violent pain of the head, with high delirium, succeeded
by drowsiness, in full and strong habits -- for these symptoms indicate an
inflammation of the lungs, or a superabundant load of blood in the brain.

Notwithstanding it may be right in any stage of the disease, it is only to be
advised with extreme caution; for if this operation is carried to excess, so as
greatly to weaken the patient, nature may be disqualified for throwing off the
morbid matter at the time when the crisis should come on; which matter is most
naturally carried out of the body, either by discharges from the intestines,
kidneys, or the pores of the skin.

With respect to the necessity of repeating the bleeding, we are to be directed
by the urgency and continuance of the symptoms: therefore after the first
bleeding in six or eight hours, if the pulse should be nearly or equally as
hard and quick as before, and the other febrile symptoms similar, it may be
repeated, though in smaller quantity, and even a third or fourth time, or more,
under similar circumstances, may be necessary.

We are next to advert to the state of the stomach and bowels: -- if there
should be any oppression, nausea, sickness, flatulence, or weight at the pit of
the stomach, or fullness there -- should the body be costive, we should attempt
immediately to clear them of their contents by emetics, (No. 11.) and gentle
purgatives. (No. 3. 22 to 24.)

But should there be any inflammation of the stomach or intestines, vomits must
be by all means avoided, as they might be succeeded by the most fatal
consequences.

But should not any of the above symptoms occur, we must then endeavor only to
take off the spasmodic affections of the skin, and promote perspiration, by
creating gentle vomiting or nausea, by administering slight doses of
antimonials alone, or mixed with saline mixture. (No. 6, 7, 8, 9) Warm watery
liquids should be drank copiously, the legs and thighs fomented with flannels
wrung out of warm water, or the same liquid thrown in by way of glyster; for
these are highly beneficial in thinning the blood, and relaxing the too tense
fibers. And here we must observe, that bleeding, where necessary, should always
be performed before we exhibit a vomit, in order to take off the general
fullness of the habit, and prevent any congestion or obstructions taking place
by its operation in the brain.

In case of costiveness, we should add small doses of tartarized or vitriolated
kali, tartarized natron to the antimonials, (No. 6, 7, 8, 9.) cassia draught,
crystals of tartar whey, or infusion of tamarinds may be administered. (No. 22,
23, 24.)

We must next endeavor to allay the heat by vegetable acids mixed with small
portions of nit^e; and depend on such things as are cooling, diluent, and
aperient; and correctors of any acrimony which may keep up the irritation --
hence all animal substances are to be rejected, because they are apt to become
too stimulant and heating -- and for the support and assistance of nature, we
must depend upon barley water -- lemonade^ -- apple-water -- infusion of wood
sorrel -- current jelly mixed with water -- very weak white wine whey mixed
with Seltzer water -- in any of which may be dissolved small portions of nitre,
so that four or five grains may be taken at a time; or the ethereal spirit of
nitre, ten or fifteen drops for a dose -- or, the Hydromel of Hippocrates, (see
page 178.) omitting the mace; for these are diluent, assist in quenching
thirst, preventing the blood from becoming too acrimonious, help to dissolve
its tenacity, consequently weaken the force of the vascular system, abate the
power of the circulation, take off spasmodic constriction, and promote
perspiration; -- and these liquids may be varied according to the pleasure of
the patient.

Abstinence, as long as the strength will permit, should be advised; but if
that becomes defective, it should be supported only by the most light liquid
food. If solids be required, which is seldom the case, not any thing should be
allowed except thin panada -- water or barley-gruel -- roasted apple, or boiled
turnip. The sweet acescent fruits, when fully ripe, may be taken freely for, as
they abound with watery particles, are also diluting; and as those of the
vegetable class afford less nutrition, consequently are less stimulant than
such other things as approach nearer to animal nature.

So long as the symptoms continue strong, we must chiefly adhere to the saline
medicines -- antimonials and nitrous powders, (No. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9.) giving
the nitre as freely as the stomach will bear it, and varying the form as may be
judged convenient; for these medicines are thought to correct acrimony, take
off vascular constriction, and promote perspiration.

The room in which the patient lies should be spacious, and well ventilated
with cool fresh air, impregnated with vinegar, the effluvia of fresh flowers,
and a free circulation constantly permitted; taking care so to dispose the
patient, that strong currents may be avoided.

The bed-cloaths should only, as in health, be moderate, the curtains not close
drawn; and, in fine, every thing heating, and which can increase the force and
quickness of the pulse, must be prohibited.

The patient should now and then be got up, he will be rendered less restless,
preserve his strength more, and not so subject to increase of headache and
delirium; for, by sitting up in an erect posture, the blood will circulate with
less force toward the brain, than in an horizontal situation; and obstructions
will not be so liable to be formed there, nor will the brain be so likely to
suffer depression from a load of fluids.

After proper evacuations having been premised, some advise the application of
blisters; because, they dissolve the viscid blood, open internal obstructions,
and soften the pulse.

Others are of opinion, that they never can be right though a delirium should
come on, if the pulse keeps full, hard, and quick; but think the head is better
relieved by bathing the feet in warm water, or applying cloths squeezed out of
it to them, and the inside of the thigh just above the knee -- for the nervous
system must be disturbed and agitated too freely where the heat continues
great, the skin dry, with the pulse as represented -- hence blisters, while
such symptoms appear, and the fibers are too tense, will increase the mischief,
from the additional stimulus they occasion.

In delicate constitutions, where there is great proneness to nervous
incitability, and muscular irritability rather defective, blisters may be
useful, by regulating the motion of the nervous power, and not being capable of
producing any great effect on the muscular fibers -- but, in strong athletic
habits, I should think the practice dangerous; but yet, where the pulse in any
constitution grows soft, and begins to flag, either from evacuations, or
weakness of the system, brought on in the course of the fever, particularly if
attended with drowsiness, or disposition to constant slumbering, toward the
height or turn of the lever, at that time they will be found extremely
beneficial -- by rousing the nervous system, and assisting nature in producing
a separation and ejection of the morbid cause.

Should what we have before advised prove ineffectual in preventing
costiveness, as more powerful purgatives would be apt to raise too great a
commotion, and impede nature in her salutatary efforts, we must have recourse
to glyst^rs. (No. 25, 26.)

Toward the evening, in almost all acute complaints, every symptom increases
much with respect to violence, and toward the morning abates; but when the
turn of the fever is at hand, the violence continues more uniform throughout,
nature appearing to exert her utmost efforts to conquer the disease, by
throwing off the offending matter -- hence the agitation of the whole machine
is extremely severe.

If now the skin grows soft and moist, the tongue loses its dryness, the urine
begins to deposit a whitish sediment, and becomes less high colored, and soon
after a more profuse sweat breaks out, the other symptoms abating of their
violence, we may expect a happy termination, should these occur upon a critical
day, particularly if a sound sleep comes on, followed by refreshment, loss of
thirst, the tongue clearing away its foulness, and the head alleviated from its
pain and uneasiness.

From these appearances we may conclude a crisis is begun; and in its progress,
(...) the pulse grow gradually slower, falling some strokes in a ^^nute below
its healthful standard, we may be assured that things have taken a favorable
turn, and that the patient is secure from danger.

But during this contest in the critical period, which will be for some days
from the beginning to its termination, cordials may be thought necessary, the
best of which is wine, given alone or in whey. If medicines to answer the
purpose are thought more agreeable, to what we have delivered from No. 13 to
18, may be added other cordials.

But if I find nature in her critical intention points more to the kidneys than
to the skin I prefer joining the cordials to the solution of prepared kali and
lemon juice, (No. 1.) if to the skin, to that of prepared ammonia. (No. 27.)

But sometimes, from all our efforts, we are not even flattered with a
favorable issue -- however we must not despair -- nature often relieves
herself at the moment we least expect it.

Therefore, when the constitution seems drooping, and nature appears almost
exhausted, when general tremors come on, twitching of the tendons, delirium,
and the patient parts with both faeces and urine involuntarily -- which
appearances are always considered to be the result of strong nervous
affections, giving the disease the most unhappy aspect -- in the deplorable
state we depend upon the repetition of blisters, applied in the following
succession: 1st, to the back -- 2d, under the arms -- 3d, above the wrists --
4th, above the knees on the inside of the thighs -- and, 5th, upon the head, if
violent pain and much disturbance there, points out the rectitude of such an
application -- and likewise mustard poultices, called finapisms, to the feet,
(No. 30.) and give volatile salts -- camphor -- musk, (No. 31 to 35.) in order
to allay some of those convulsive affections which present themselves at this
period -- for which musk mixed with valerian is esteemed highly useful.

In cases of extreme languor, snake-root is a very valuable medicine, which may
be given in infusion or powder. (No. 36, 37.)

As nature, under the violence of these oppressions, being relieved in one
point, may have power probably to exert herself more generally from such
relief, a VAPOR BATH, as it can be applied in a bedchamber, and has in
dangerous cases been known to s^ceed, may be tried, as it seems calculated to
take off, by its relaxing power, spasmodic constriction.

Sometimes in this disease, at an early period, people will be much afflicted
with the headache, delirium, watching, or drowsiness, bleeding at the temples
with leeches -- applying blisters there -- having the head shaved and rubbed
with vinegar -- or portions of the lungs of a lamb applied warm to the head --
blistering and fomenting the legs, and applying mustard poultices to the soles
of the feet, are useful auxliaries to the general mode of cure above specified
-- as is also blistering the head: -- or should they have any pains similar to
those of pleuritic people, applying a blister over the part affected is
beneficial.

Sometimes rheumatic affections will be a concomitant -- in this case, large
doses of nitre will be useful -- and should any dysenteric appearances, such as
uneasy pains in the bowels, propensity to go to stool, without producing any
evacuation; a grain or two or ipecacuanha, given now and then, may act as
gentle aperient, solicit the discharge of the irritating matter, and carry it
out of the bowels. To me it obviously appears, that these applications are only
to alleviate the symptoms arising from the local affection of a part, from a
more general cause; whilst, at the same time, we must persist in the general
mode of cure; -- why we endeavor at their particular alleviation, is to
prevent nature from being disturbed in her operations by these distressing or
anamalous symptoms; as by inattention to them the danger might be increased,
and the malady prolonged; for these symptoms, for the most part, are subdued by
time alone, and the fever being kept within proper limits.

3. NERVOUS FEVER.
This is so named because the nervous system appears to be the part most
affected. It differs from the inflammatory fever in the part of the
constitution attacked, and occurs in such as are dissimilar. Here the nervous
system is defective, attended with little or no intenseness of vascular motion;
blood also poor and thin, and the nerves extremely incitable. This is also
called the slow fever, because it is slow in its progress compared with other
fevers, paticularly the foregoing.

DESCRIPTION. This fever makes its attack with dejection of spirits -- loss of
appetite -- oppression -- disturbed sleep, or restlessness -- the patient often
sighs and groans involuntarily -- is frequently terrified, and affected with
uncommon lassitude after exercise, though that should be slight, and at the same
time has cold and hot sits succeed, and alternate with each other -- he is
troubled with nausea, and a vomiting of insipid phlegm, which come on in a few
days after the attack, with giddiness and pain of the head -- extreme
prostration of strength -- no remarkable heat -- no thirst -- the pulse is
frequent, weak, and sometimes intermits -- the tongue continues moist, white
and is covered over with a viscid mucus -- there is an oppression at the pit of
the stomach, and the breathing difficult -- the urine is pale, watery, and
sometimes like milk whey -- the face red, and flushes, at the same time that
the feet are cold -- the mind is slightly disturbed by ridiculous imaginations,
which continues, but without any violent delirium sometimes immoderate sweats
break out, or colliquative, dissolving looseness comes on -- the senses lose
their quickness, and become dull and heavy -- with anxiety and fainting
attending.

Toward the close, when nature appears almost worn out by the continuance of
the disease; the tongue trembles -- the extremities grow cold -- the nails
livid -- they lose the power of sight and hearing -- the delirium is converted
into stupor, and a lethargic disposition -- the faeces and urine pass away
involuntarily -- twitching of the tendons comes on -- and generally convulsions
close the scene, in death.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing causes are said to be relaxed fibers, and a
weak nervous system -- too powerful evacuations -- salivations from taking
mercury too frequently repeated -- immoderate venery -- mental affliction --
watching, and nocturnal study -- moist and stagnant air of subterraneous jails
and confined places; a crude and too thin diet, particularly of cold and watery
fruit -- watery and viscid drinks -- rainy seasons -- a moist and loft winter
-- and, in fine, all those things which by slow degrees debilitate the nervous
system.

The proximate or immediate, great apparent incitability in the nervous system
-- a lentor, and viscidity of the serum, lymph -- and thin humors with
acrimony from contagion or obstruction -- and a torpor, or defect of
intenseness of motion in the vascular system; which are obvious from the blood
taken away -- phlegm thrown up from the stomach -- and appearances agreeing
with diseases arising from corrupted and contaminated serum. Hence it is
supposed to exert its influence upon the most minute, serous, lymphatic, and
nervous vessels; but rather upon the whole brain, as the pale wan color,
paleness and dryness of ulcers, a deprivation of the senses, extreme debility,
and suppurations in the brain upon dissection, point out.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. In defining this disease, I should say, it was an
affection of the nervous system, in which there was apparent incitability, with
a thickness of the serum, lymph, and thin humors -- a torpor, or defect of
intenseness of motion in the vascular system, independent of nervous
incitability, discoverable by slight chills -- shivering -- and uncertain
flushings of heat -- sinking and dejection of spirits -- frequent involuntary
sighing -- general weakness -- quick irregular pulse -- pale colored urine --
remarkable propensity to spasmodic affections -- no distressing thirst --
sometimes retching, though nothing but simple phlegm evacuated.

CURE. As affections of this kind will arise from different kinds of foulness
in the first passages, if we are called in early, its progress is easily
prevented, by gentle emetic, (No. 11, 12.) and small doses of rhubarb, manna,
castor oil, and some such gentle aperients, (see Emollient, and astringent
Aperients, under Cathartics, page, 172.) -- but if in too advanced a state,
when the fever is completely formed, which is almost always the case, it will
pursue its course in spite of all our endeavors.

The indications of cure, are to guard the habit so far, that the worst effects
may be prevented; and, as in inflammatory fevers, we endeavor to weaken the
system, we must in this attempt to invigorate the constitution, and support it
by mild and proper cordial stimulants, not given at first of too powerful a
nature.

Bleeding, apt to be applied on slight occasions, is here almost always
injurious, no disease bearing that operation so badly. At the attack, we should
wait for nature pointing out the precise disposition of the malady. Sometimes,
indeed, in some epidemic constitutions of the air, when at the commencement it
attacks habits which are full of blood, putting on the appearance of
inflammatory affection, a few ounces may be taken away, but not repeated.

Where there seems to be a determination of blood to the head, discovered by
pain, heaviness, and giddiness there, as sometimes happens, leeches may be
applied to the temples; or cupping at the back part of the head may be had
recourse to; but not on trivial occasions.

There are some symptoms which show themselves, such as difficult and oppressed
breathing, and are called perip^eumonic; but these arise not from an
inflammatory cause; as the breath is nor hot, nor is there any cough, nor
different degrees of pain; but the pulse is small and contracted, and the
extremities cold -- these show the affections to be nervous, not vascular; --
bleeding would therefore be highly injurious. From their local, as well as
general effects, mild emetics are certainly useful, from unloading the stomach
of any viscid materials, and giving an opportunity for medicines to communicate
their effects to the habit and nervous system more freely, by having the
internal coat of that organ more openly exposed to their action -- and here
ipecacuanha is preferable to tartarized antimony, as it weakens less the
influence of the nervous system. (No. 38.)

The body should be kept open by gentle aperients (172) only, as common purges
at the onset have produced sinking of the spirits, faintings, and other
distressing symptoms -- or domestic glyssters, (No. 25.) may be administered,
in case of costiveness, every second or third day.

Blisters applied through the whole course of the disease, succeeding one
another, with moderately cordial and diaphoretic medicines, (No. 27 to 29.) and
a well-regulated diet, are what must be chiefly depended upon; for these
dissolve the viscidity of the serum, invigorate the system, and render the
nerves more uniform and powerful in their action -- hence promote insensible
perspiration, or a gentle moisture on the surface of the body; but they should
not be pushed so far as to induce profuse sweating, for a continued sweat
exasperates the fever.

To the diet we should be particularly attentive, in order to support the
strength of the patient; for these fevers are apt to be of long duration; and
this should be of the stimulant, cordial, and nutritious kind -- of which the
sick should be solicited, to take frequently in moderate quantity.

White wine whey, thin gruel with wine in it, may be used freely, or wine and
water -- and particularly toward the termination, chicken broth, beef-tea,
thin jellies of hartshorn, sago, and panada with wine. Indeed wine alone may be
liberally administered, especially if the pulse grows soft upon its use, if
there should be lowness, with a softness of the pulse, and a low drowsy
delirium; for under these circumstances it produces sleep. I have known
patients, particularly one lady, take three pints in 24 hours with advantage;
but it has been affirmed, some quarts have been given in the same space of time.

All the liquids, if desired, may be drank cold, as they are only necessary to
be prohibited in cases of local inflammation.

There is little doubt but a judicious and well-regulated diet, with the use of
blisters, well-timed and well-applied, will perform a cure -- taking care to
keep the patient as quiet as possible both in body and mind -- He should be
kept only of a moderate warmth, neither exposed to too great heat or cold; and
his spirits exhilirated as much as possible, by consolatory conversation of his
medical attendants, and certain promises of recovery, dissipating all gloomy or
unpleasant ideas.

With regard to the application of blisters, so great appears to be their use,
that some necessary rules should be pointed out. -- They should certainly, in
order to reap the greatest benefit, be applied at first, as soon as we know the
precise nature of the malady; but if neglected till the system manifests high
degrees of incitability, discoverable from acuteness of sight, touch, and
hearing; they must be omitted till some degree of insensibility makes its
approach -- for, in the first instance, they may prevent the accession, or
alleviate the violence of the symptoms -- in the second, they would increase
them before the period stated.

As the blisters are only applied to promote stimulus, not any evacuation,
because that would tend to debilitate the system, and be of disservice;
therefore, as soon as the blister is fully raised, it should be cut, the
aqueous fluid let out, and nothing applied to the part to increase the
discharge. In the first instance, some have advised them to be put upon the
legs; but, in case of drowsiness and stupor, upon the head, and sinapisms to
the feet; to which should the last give too great pain, they may be changed for
poultices of milk and bread.

In order to relieve the peripneumonic symptoms, (217) blisters to the arms,
thighs, or legs are proper, with gentle cordial medicines, (No. 13 to 15.) with
the addition of acetated ammonia, or the cordial saline draught, (No. 27.) may
be administered, cordial mixtures, or julep occasionally, (No. 13, to 15. 28,
29) or sal volatile, from 20 to 40 drops in mustard whey.

After the continuation of this fever for ten or twelve days, or longer, should
a remission come on; that is, should it at times appear to abate much of its
violence, and then come on again -- or should sweats too much exhaust the
patient, Peruvian bark, administered with cordials, is highly proper, in such
forms as the stomach will best bear, either infused in wine, in decoction, or
infused only in hot or cold water, (No. 39 to 49.) -- though the first form is
esteemed the best, sometimes it is more agreeable to the stomach in some other
mode.

In the declension of this fever, where the remission or intermission was very
distinct, Huxham gave the bark conjunctively with the saline draught, and found
it more efficacious.

Bark also tends to prevent or check mortifications, which sometimes come on
from pressure by long lying, blisters, or sinapisms.

In cases of tremblings, twitching of the tendons, and convulsions, musk, in
doses, according to the violence of the symptoms, and mixing it with valerian,
as adding to its efficacy, (No. 31 to 35.) are beneficial.

In cases of looseness during the course of the complaint, if moderate, they
may not be dangerous; still if profuse, they should be checked, though not
entirely stopped -- they may be moderated by slight doses of rhubarb and
opiates, or absorbent or stringent juleps. (No. 42, 43) The white decoction and
red wine will be a proper drink.

Or, we may endeavor to promote gentle sweat, in order to divert the fluids to
the skin, by mild opiates, as camphorated tincture of opium, from twenty to
forty drops, or the opiated confection, from one scruple to half a dram to a
dose, may be added to any of the cordial mixtures, (No. 13 to 15. 28, 29.) and
given as directed in the absorbent juleps.

And, lastly, if aphthae, or thrush, should come on, attended with ulcerations
of the throat, here detergent gargles are useful, (No. 44 to 47.) and gentle
emetics, (No. 11, 12, 38.) But if swallowing is nearly obstructed by a quantity
of viscid phlegm, stronger may be administered, which will be formed by
increasing the dose of ipecacuanha, or tartarized antimony in each.

Though, should a salivation come on without aphthae, and that pretty freely,
Dr. HUXHAM considers it, as it really is, a favorable sign -- for, says he,
when this happens, with a kindly moisture of the skin, I never despair of my
patient, however weak or stupid he may seem.

As there seems to be so much danger in this fever, from the very beginning to
the termination, it may afford some benefit to be acquainted with those
symptoms which may give us flattering hopes; and to know those from whose
appearance we may be enabled to prepare ourselves for the fatal catastrophe.

If the delirium should be slight, no great debility -- if the pulse should,
upon the administration of cordials, become more full; and about the
termination of the disease, a gentle sweat or looseness, but particularly a
salivation without aphthae, come on -- if any tumors appear about the ears --
and a miliary eruption shows itself, without any profuse sweat having preceded,
we may have reason to expect a favorable conclusion -- but if a strong
delirium should continue above four days -- if there should be copious
evacuations -- a profuse unseasonable sweat from the chest, head, and neck --
the feet and legs only more dry and cold -- twitching of the tendons --
trembling of the hands and tongue -- a colliquative or dissolving looseness --
with a weak pulse -- loss of light -- and impeded deglutition, accompanied with
an hiccough -- should the hands grow cold -- the sauces livid -- blood flow
from the vessels -- and spots like flea-bites appear -- there can remain little
hope of escaping the most fatal consequences.

With respect to a deafness coming on, it has been considered by some as a
favorable omen, by others the reverse; at best it is but of dubious import,
and not to be depended upon; for from experience I can speak, that I have seen
it an attendant symptom on both death and a recovery.

. 4. PUTRID, OR SANGUINEO-PUTRESCENT FEVER.
Which term I think applicable, because the mass of blood appears to be
materially and principally concerned in this fever -- for in those of which we
have before treated, the chief disturbance has been created primarily in the
vascular and nervous system.

But it may be asked, how comes it that this fever sometimes begins its attack
with strong symptoms of an inflammatory, at others of a nervous, fever? This
variation happens most likely in its different degrees, adequate to the ^^^mer
or looser cohesion of the particles of blood.

For if putrid matter was to be generated in, or absorbed into the habit, whose
blood was of a firm texture, and vascular system had proper tension, it would
be longer before indications of absolute putridity having taken place in that
constitution would present themselves, than if the nervous system had been in a
state of relaxation, and the blood thin and poor. There can be little doubt of
this fact -- and that this deviation is owing entirely to the nature of one
constitution being able to resist the effects of the putrid cause longer than
the other. And, indeed, if we consider that those whom experience has pointed
out to us most subject to this disease are, the infirm; such as labor
severely, and live in a state of poverty; the luxurious and indolent; the
pensive and melancholic; those who sit up late; those of cold phlegmatic
constitutions; we shall need little other confirmation of our assertion.

DESCRIPTION. Here we shall enumerate the general catalogue of symptoms, and
then specify such as bespeak its commencement; in order, as early as we can, to
be enabled to distinguish this fever from the two foregoing, as success greatly
depends upon this knowledge; they requiring essential deviations in some
respects in our modes of cure -- for the accomplishing of which much depends on
the method of treatment at the onset.

In this fever the heat of the body is intense, remittent, and gives a smarting
sensation to the fingers of those who apply the hand to the skin of the sick,
though at first not so great as in inflammatory fevers, still daily increasing
-- the pulse intense, small, and unequal -- there is a pulsation of the
arteries, which run up into the head through the neck into the brain, and those
of the temples -- extreme weakness and prostration of strength, and that very
often sudden -- the patients are dejected, and forebode the worst consequences
-- they are oppressed with nausea, and vomiting of dark-colored bile -- pain
of the head and temples -- have their eyes inflamed, full, heavy, -- and a
fixed pain, often severe, over both eyebrows and at the bottom of the socket,
or orbit -- their complexion of a dingy (...) ringing in the ears -- their
breathing is difficult, interrupted by sighing -- and the breath strong, or
foetid -- they are troubled with pains in the stomach, back, and limbs -- they
lie down with uneasiness -- tremble -- are delirious -- the tongue at first is
white, afterward black and dry -- the lips and teeth covered with a thick foul
sordes -- the blood livid, much broken, or very weak in its texture, and
quickly runs into a putrid state -- their thirst insatiable, attended with a
bitterness of the mouth -- the urine in the beginning is of a pale color, but
in progress of the disease very red, nay sometimes black, dropping down a
dark-colored sediment like foot -- the sweats are foetid, and frequently
appear tinged with blood -- the stools smell offensively, are sometimes livid,
black, or bloody -- small livid spots, like flea-bites, called petechiae, and,
if broader, vibices, make their appearances -- also haemorrhages, aphthae,
ulcerations of the fauces, and hiccough, and foetid, sanguinary, dysenteric
affections, probably from internal ulceration and mortification, determine
hastily the fate of the patient.

CAUSES. Those which are remote or inducing are said to be, feeding too much on
animal food, particularly fish -- eating constantly, as the sailors do, salted,
and half corrupted flesh, and drinking putrid water -- being in habits of
taking alkaline, fixed, and volatile salts, and aloes -- corrupted fruit --
moist southerly winds, attended, or rather preceded by great heat -- vapor of
stinking waters -- or from fens nearly dried -- or from putrid animal or
vegetable substances -- the stagnant and foul air of hospitals, ships, prisons,
and workhouses -- feeding on corrupted grain -- contagion -- or any kind of
putrid effluvia -- for these dispose the fluids to become putrescent.

Those which are fixed to be the proximate or immediate causes are, a putrid
dissolution of the humors, particularly of the red particles, as we have a
right to conclude from the effect of putrid ferments dissolving and breaking
down the texture and tenacity of solid and fluid substances wherein it takes
place.

Not only from the symptomatic appearances of this disease have we reason to be
apprehensive of the most fatal consequences in general, but we shall be further
confirmed, on the dissection of those who die of it, which show the brain and
viscera, particularly, the stomach and intestines, in an inflamed, and often in
(...) mortified state.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. In order to distinguish the putrid fever in its earliest
attack, or very soon after, we must observe, that the degrees of debility,
oppression, and nausea are more considerable than in any other fever: the
postration of strength sudden and violent has for its associates extreme
despondency, or insensibility, and want of apprehension to an uncommon degree,
which bespeaks great danger.

The loss of appetite, or loathing of food, sickness, languor, and dull pain,
of the head, similar to what happens in the two former fevers before described,
which attend, when it comes on, as it sometimes does gradually, are in the
beginning always more severe and sudden than in the inflammatory, though seldom
so much so as in the nervous fever. Besides, the smallness of the pulse, the
dejection of spirits, the broken texture of the blood, the purple spots, and
putrid state of the excrements, distinguish it from the inflammatory fever. The
degree of heat, the very high-colored urine, the thirst, the spots, and
putrescency, from the nervous fever: And its formation is rendered perceptible
by coldness and shivering, which has for its associates nausea, vomiting,
giddiness, confusion of the head, extreme and sudden prostration of strength.

CURE; The indications of which are, to endeavor to support the strength,
counteract the putrescent acrimony, and regulate the action of the nervous
system, by giving strength and activity to the debilitated fibers, correcting
the putrid state of the fluids, and promoting the discharge of morbid matter.

And under some circumstances, bleeding in this fever at the beginning has been
advised, where it has attacked robust constitutions full of blood, and here,
perhaps, once it may be right; but not without the symptoms run to an alarming
height, would I advise the operation; and then only in order to prevent the
fatal effects which might be induced by the violence of some of them: for,
though the pulse should be at first full and strong, on taking away blood it
soon sinks, and sometimes so much, that we labor in vain afterward to get it
raised. Without, therefore, we have evident signs of an inflammatory state of
the blood, and that the brain, lungs, or some other of the vital parts are
threatened with inflammation, we should never bleed -- and, under the above
circumstances, then only in the beginning should a few ounces be taken away,
merely as an alleviator of a dangerous symptom.

Afterward the first passages are to be cleared from their contents by gentle
emetics, (No. 11.) giving small doses of antimonials, and these repeated every
second hour, (No. 6 to 9.) For wherever the symptoms, which seem to indicate
the use of the lancet, are violently urgent, they alone are the safest
applications. But we should be careful not to occasion profuse discharges,
which may produce too great lowness. If the antimonials cause not too or three
stools, a gentle aperient may be given, (No. 22 to 24 -- 49 to 51.) or
glysters, (No. 25, 26.) which may be repeated every third day.

These things being premised, our chief d^pedence is on such medicines as give
strength and power to the system, and some of those called antiseptics, or
correctors of putrescent acrimony, (Page 193, 194, 195) (No. 39 to 41, and 5^
to 54.) particularly those fruits which have sweetness coupled with acidity.
(Page 193.) -- the antiseptic whey, (No. 48.) -- fermented, or mineral acids,
(Page 194.) -- camphor, (Page 149.) (No. 15. 54.) -- and bark, (No. 39 to 41.
5^. Page 194.) particularly, which has been known to produce a stonishing
effects in a highly-dissolving state of the blood, where haemorrhages have from
that cause been produced. With these medicines we should begin, as soon as ever
we perceive the dissolution of the blood has taken place, from the appearance
of purple spots or haemorrhages; not waiting as in other malignant fevers, for
any remission; for it is on bark, camphor, and wine we must chiefly depend for
success in these cases, coupled in some of haemorrhages with astringents; to
which we shall soon advert.

I would not advise, a^ in the cases of nervous fever, the use of stimulants in
conjunction with bark, (No. 40, 41.) but where the nervous system appears to be
extremely torpid; then, I think they give great power to that, and render it
more active; for I am fully persuaded, that it produces its good effects, by
giving firmness to the solids, equability of action to the moving powers,
preventing the effects of putrid dissolution, and enabling them to separate and
throw off the morbid materials, rather than correcting the acrimony, or
preserving the texture of the blood by any other means. And this seems in a
great degree to be corroborated by the opinion of HUXHAM, when speaking of
these fevers, whose practice in these complaints was very considerable, says,
Though nature very frequently affects to discharge the morbific matter in
putrid malignant fevers by vomits and stools, yet her more constant efforts are
through the pores of the skin; -- and I solemly assert, I never saw these
fevers completely carried off till more or less of a sweat ensued; if it proves
moderately warm, and equally diffused over the whole body; if it comes on about
the state of the disease, and the pulse grows open, soft and calm a little
before, and during its continuance; but if very profuse, cold, clammy, or
partial about the head or breast only, we have much more reason to fear than to
hope from it. If profuse sweats break out in the beginning, they are generally
pernicious, should a fever supervene.

Under the circumstances recited above, though blisters are said not to be
useful in the beginning, because the nervous system shows no signs of torpor;
yet are they often succeeded with happy effects, when people become stupid,
drowsy, and insensible; and, indeed, at any time, if the pulse is very low, the
urine and excrement pass off involuntarily, which I have observed in an early
stage.

Wine, as it is an universal cordial, so it is the best, which may be given
liberally; amongst the most eligible of which are claret, red port, and old
rh^nish; or, where they cannot be had, from their dearness, ale or porter may
be used. As for food, gruel, panada, sharpened with orange or lemon juice,
roasted apples, fruit of all kinds -- for drink, the wines above mentioned
mixed with water, lemonade, orangeade, wine wheys of different sorts, apple
water mixed with wine, vinegar whey, old sound cider, and all those liquids of
an acescent nature, or which correct putrescency, should be indulged in.

The room in which the sick is confined should be well ventilated, vinegar
sprinkled on the beds, and round the room, fresh flowers and aromatic herbs
strewed about; the patient should have clean linen often renewed, and the
stools be removed as early as possible, whether they pass voluntarily or
otherwise; for nothing refreshes the sick more than cool air and cleanliness.

By the means here generally described we shall commonly so assist and
invigorate the constitution, as to enable it to throw off the more morbid
matter, which is done by various ways, but most frequently by sweat, to assist
in which operation, CAMPHORATED VINEGAR is strongly recommended, (No. 55.) but,
if joined with an opiate, HUXHAM says, it is the most certain sudorific in
nature -- the solution though, by itself, promotes perspiration and gentle
sweat more certainly than any other medicine; besides where mild stimulants are
necessary, it heats less than volatiles, or ardent spirits.

Nature sometimes contrives the mode of expulsion for the morbid matter by the
bowels, hence a diarrhoea, which, if attended with breathing sweats, or (...)
warm moisture upon the skin, is always serviceable, and we may ^^atter
ourselves that this is a successful effort.

At others, she relieves the habit by abscesses, formation of matter in
different glands, (Page 25.) such as those under the ear, the armpits, or
groin; or, by throwing down highly acrimonious and corrosive humors into the
legs, about the hips, or mostly the lower part of the back, assisted in this
effort by continually lying -- hence is mortification of the integuments
induced, forming thick sloughs, which have deep, spreading ulcers, from a
supply of a corrosive fluid called ichor. Here we must rely chiefly on Peruvian
bark, to produce, by its invigorating power, a separation of the parts
mortified.

But sometimes, whilst we are exerting ourselves to promote every good purpose,
by a plan judiciously conceived, and well selected applications, some
accidental occurrences will arise in different parts, which, if neglected, or
judiciously managed, will frustrate our intent, and every effort of nature.
Whatever, therefore, threatens to fink the patient, or disturb nature's general
operations, must be, if possible, checked, or totally subdued.

Should a haemorrhage, as sometimes happens, come on, vitriolic acid may be
added to the bark decoction. (No. 53.) or it may be given with any other
vehicle, or the common drink may be acidulated with it, and given pretty
freely. Should not these succeed, alum, or alum-whey may be added, (Page 189.)
or given in powder. (No. 56.)

Should a profuse diarrhoea make its appearance, and give us leave to suppose
that the constitution by this means would be enfeebled, it must be restrained
only gradually; for if we look up the matter suddenly, without supplying some
other more gentle mode of passage out of the machine for the corruped fluid,
internal mischief might be occasioned in the intestines, by the irritation it
would there produce.

We must therefore endeavor to determine the fluids to the skin, by some
well-adapted diaphoretics, (No. 57, 58.) and, at the same time, should the
stools continue copious, and extremely foetid, glysters of fixable air, with
which some mild watery antiputrescent liquid is impregnated, or fixable air may
be thrown up alone, for this is a powerful corrector of putrescent acrimony,
and would take off the stimulus of those vessels which pour out their contents
into the bowels, called exhalent, and render the medicines given more effectual
in pushing forwards, or soliciting the humors to the skin.

Sometimes there will occur violent vomiting, which in this fever is not
unusual.

This ought to be restrained, and generally our success in the attempt will be
pretty certain, by giving the saline draught in a state of fermentation. (No.
59.)

By the means of this the offensive and foul matters in the stomach, and
flexure of the duodenum, (42.) are supposed to be corrected, and thus, by
removing part of the fomes, (that is, matter which created the uneasy
sensations of the stomach, and was a means of supporting the febrile
affections) of consequence lessen the nausea, and other symptoms indicative of
its presence, as well as, in all probability, shorten the duration of the fever.

Another peculiar accident may happen, though perhaps very rarely, which we
ought by all means to be guarded against. Bark, upon which we in this fever
place such dependence, will not agree with all constitutions, decoction of
pomegranate bark, and chamomile flowers, may supply its place, and is said to
answer every purpose, (No. 60.)

Though it may be sometimes the case that bark will not agree with our patients
in the common modes of administration, still I have never found but in some of
its forms it may be made to answer every purpose.

By beginning with the cold infusion, and gradually increasing its power, I
have been enabled to administer it in all its complicated forms, and produced
its desired effects.

Eruptions of different colors, red, purple, black, dun, or greeninsh, called
petechiae, strike out sometimes toward the close, or earlier, of different
sizes; but these seldom bring any relief from oppression, sickness, or other
distressing symptoms -- the redder they are the better -- and it is a
favorable sign where those which are of a black or violet color become of a
brighter color; for these colored spots bespeak a high degree of putrescent
acrimony, and activity, bringing on a dangerous state of sanguinary dissolution
-- so the change of color to that which is most favorable, shows the degree
of mischief lessening, and their causes growing weaker.

About the eleventh or fourteenth day, miliary eruptions with a white
appearance break forth; sometimes succeeding profuse sweats, which not
unfreque^tly happen at this time. These seldom relieve; but if there appears a
red, smarting, itching rash, or large, fretting watery bladders, they are
serviceable. But we may have hopes of recovery from the breaking out of a
scabby eruption about the nose, lips, and corners of the mouth -- the more
angry and hot it is, the more favorable the omen. To these we may add, if the
symptoms are mild -- if a looseness or foetid sweat should break out at the
decline of the disease, there is considerably less danger, than where there is
no thirst -- the sauces inflamed -- a large crop of black eruptions, which
suddenly recede -- a laborious respiration after their eruption -- a swelling
of the belly with looseness -- foetid and ichorous stools -- coldness of the
extremities -- and convulsions -- for these afford most calamitous portents.

Indeed, with regard to the aphthae or thrush, of whatever color, they carry
along with them no pleasing omen, when they break out on the inside of the
mouth -- for they are soon succeeded by putrid ulcerations of the throat, etc.
bringing along with them difficulty of swallowing, and hiccough, in the first
instance -- afterward, foetid, bloody, and dysenteric evacuations, probably
from ulceration and mortification of the intestines.

But when patients have fortunately passed the stage of fatality, they often
become dropsical, or have watery swellings in their legs, we must not, under
these circumstances, depend on purgatives to evacuate the watery-fluid, as in
other dropsies -- but bark, (Page 194.) steel, and the natural chalybeate
waters. (Page 139.) to strengthen and invigorate the vascular system, and
promote absorption. (No. 61, 62.)

But, in order to prevent a relapse when the crisis is perfected, from
putrescent or offensive matters accumulating in the first passages, a gentle
purgative of two, (No; 3. 19, 20, 21.) is absolutely requisite -- and a course
of aromatic bitters, joined with chalybeates. (No. 63, 64, 65.) or some of the
chalybeate waters, (Page 139.) with light, nutritious, easily digestible food.
(Page 209.)

And here we must observe, that where we find any prevailing acid upon the
stomach, we would advise steel to be given in substance -- where not, some of
the chalybeate salts, of which the tartarized iron, (Page 139.) is supposed by
some to be the best, and may be given instead of vitriolated iron -- and it is
said to have proved efficacious where all the others have failed; and it more
soluble in the animal fluids.

The medicines above prescribed, or some others of the same kind, are thought
necessary, in order to recover the tone of the viscera, and enable the
digestive powers to assume their wonted power -- which being neglected, a
foundation may be laid for chronic complaints, by the constitution's being
loaded with acrimonious and ill-conditioned humors, and subjecting the patient
to jaundice, dropsies, consumptions, or some such similar mischief.

We have now finished our account of simple fevers: and as we consider all the
others, whatever their appellation, to belong to one of the foregoing, simply,
or conjointly, we shall be under the necessity of having recourse to some of
the modes of cure, here specified, in all; and have therefore chosen here to
add the forms of medicines made use of in these fevers, referring in the body
of the work occasionally to the more general catalogue, that our reader may be
supplied with a larger number of materials, from whence he may make his own
selection.

Besides, he will, by closely studying these, be enabled to see the nature of
medicinal combination; and will pave the way for his more readily understanding
the management of fevers in a more complicated state.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding we think the remedies here supplied are
sufficient for enabling the practitioner to be as useful as possible in all
febrile affections, we shall make occasional additions in each, where any
circumstances of advantage present themselves, either from their peculiarity,
or any local affections with which they may be combined.

THE FORMS OF MEDICINE PRESCRIBED AND REFERRED TO IN THE SIMPLE CONTINUED,
INFLAMMATORY, NERVOUS, AND PUTRID FEVERS.
No. 1. SALINE MIXTURE.
Take kali prepared, 1 dram. Lemon juice, 2 ounces 2 drams. Distilled or boiled
Water, 5 ounces. Sugar, 2 drams. Mix. -- DOSE. Four table spoonfuls every two
or three hours.
2. NITROUS POWDER.
Take Nitre powdered, 6 or 10 grains. Crabs Claws prepared, 20 grains. Sugar,
30 grains. Mix -- and take it in the manner above recited.
3. COOLING SALINE PURGE.
Take milk of Almonds, or Decoction of Barley, 10 ounces. in which dissolve
Vitriolated Natron, 1 ounce. or Tartarized Natron, 1 ounce. or Vitriolated
Kali, ounce. Manna, 1 ounce.
DOSE. Four table spoonfuls every third hour, till the desired effect is
produced.

No. 4. ANODYNE, OR QUIETING DRAUGHT.
Take Distilled Water, 1 ounce. Spirit of vitriolic Ether, 30 drops. Tincture
of Opium, 15 drops. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 3 drams. Mix. --
or, -- 5. SALINE ANODYNE DRAUGHT.
Take Kali prepared, 10 grains. Lemon Juice, 2 drams. Distilled Water, 1 ounce.
Tincture of Opium, 15 drops. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 2 drams. Mix. --
6. ANTIMONIAL MIXTURE.
Take of tartarized Antimony, 3 grains. Rose Water, 6 ounces. Syrup of Sugar, 3
ounces.
Mix. -- DOSE. One or two spoonfuls every six or eight hours.

or -- 7. ANTIMONIAL POWDER.
Take Tartarized Antimony, 3 grains. Prepared Crabs Claws, 5 drams. Sugar, 1
dram. DOSE. Twenty or thirty grains.
8. ANTIMONIAL SALINE MIXTURE.
Take Saline Mixture, (No. 1.) 8 ounces. Tartarized Antimony, 1 grain. DOSE.
Four table spoonfuls every fourth or fifth hour.
or -- 9. ANTIMONIAL BOLUS.
Take Antimonial Powder, 3 grains. Conserve of Roses, 1-2 a scruple.
Syrup of Sugar, sufficient to form a bolus, which may be repeated every sixth
hour -- or the Antimonial Powder may be given with some of the absorbent
Earths, as in No. 7. and the dose of Antimonials may be augmented or decreased
as the stomach will bear them.

No. 10. NEUTRAL VOLATILE SALINE MIXTURE.
Take Acetated Ammonia, 2 ounces. Peppermint Water, 6 ounces. Tartarized
Antimony, 1 grain. Syrup of Saffron, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE, etc. similar to No. 1.

11. EMETIC MIXTURE.
Take Tartarized Antimony, 6 grains. Distilled Water, 6 ounces. Syrup of
Saffron, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Two table spoonfuls, repeated every half hour, till the desired
effect is produced.

or -- 12. EMETIC DRAUGHT.
Take Ipecacuanha Powder, 20 grains. Tartarized Antimony, 1 grain. Pennyroyal
Water, 1 ounce. Syrup of Saffron, 1 dram.
Mix. -- Let this be administered in the evening, and the stomach well washed
with chamomile-flower tea, thin gruel, or any other simple aqueous fluid drank
warm.

13. CORDIAL MIXTURE.
Take Peppermint Water, 6 ounces. Spirit of Nutmeg, 1 ounce. Aromatic
Confection, 1 1-2 dram. Compound Spirit of Ammonia, 40 drops. Syrup of Saffron,
1-2 an ounce.
Mix. --

or -- 14.
Take Cinnamon Water, 6 ounces. Spirit of Cinnamon, 1 ounce. Ammonia prepared,
30 grains. Aromatic Confection, 1 dram. Compound Spirit of Lavender, Syrup of
Saffron, of each 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. --

15. CORDIAL CAMPHORATED JULEP.
Take Camphorated Mixture, Peppermint Water, of each 3 ounces. Tincture of
Cinnamon, 1 ounce. Syrup of Saffron, 1 1-2 ounce.
Mix. -- DOSES. Four table spoonfuls every fourth or fifth hour; and three at
any time, when low, faint, or sick.

No. 16. CORDIAL STIMULANT BOLUS.
Take Prepared Ammonia, Camphor, of each 5 grains. Aromatic Confection, 10
grains
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus.

or -- 17.
Take Snake-root, Contrayerva, powdered, of each 5 grains. Aromatic Confection,
10 grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus, to be administered every four
hours, washing it down with two or three table spoonfuls of the following julep.

18. CORDIAL JULEP.
Take Cinnamon Water, 6 ounces. Tincture of Cinnamon, 1 ounce. Syrup of
Saffron, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. --

19. PURGING DRAUGHT.
Take infusion of Senna, 2 ounces. Manna, Tincture of Senna, of each 1-2 ounce.
Rhubarb in powder, 8 or 10 grams. Compound Spirit of Lavender, 2 drams.
Mix. --

or -- 20.
Take Rhubarb, in powder, 25 grains. Jalap, in powder, 6 grains. Cinnamon
Water, 1 ounce. Syrup of Orange-peel, 1 dram.
Mix. --

21. PURGING PILLS.
Take Rhubarb in powder, 30 grains.
Mucilage of Gum Arabic, sufficient to form it into pills -- or syrup may be
added to make it into a bolus.

And of these forms may be taken in the morning early; and when they begin to
operate, worked off with weak broth, or thin gruel.

22. CASSIA DRAUGHT.
Take Distilled Water, 1 1-2 ounce, Acetated Ammonia, 2 drams, Tartarized
Antimony, 1.6 or of a grain. Cassia Electuary, from 10 to 20 grains. Syrup of
Roses, 2 drams.
Mix. -- and let it be repeated once in four hours, till it produces the effect
required.

No. 23. CRYSTALS OF TARTAR WHEY.
Take Crystals of Tartar, 1-2 an ounce. dissolve them in Milk, 1-2 a pint. and
add Manna, 2 ounces.
24. INFUSION OF TAMARINDS.
Take Tamarinds, 1 ounce. boil them in Milk Whey, 8 ounces. then add Manna, 2
ounces.
Of each of these a tea-cupful, or more may be taken occasionally

25. DOMESTIC GLYSTER.
Take Milk, Water, of each 4 ounces. Brown coarse Sugar, 1 1-2 ounce. Common
Salt, 1-2 an ounce. Linseed, or Olive Oil, 2 ounces. Mix. --
26. COMMON GLYSTER.
Take the Glyster Decoction, 8 ounces. Epsom Salt, Syrup of Buckthorn, of each
1 ounce. Linseed Oil, 2 ounces. Mix. --
27. CORDIAL SALINE DRAUGHT.
Take acetated Ammonia, 1-2 an ounce. Peppermint Water, 1 ounce. Ammonia
prepared, 5 grains. LEWIS's Dispensatory improved. Page 363. Edinburgh; 1786.
Confection of Alkerms, 20 grains. Syrup of Saffron, 2 drams. Mix. --
28. CORDIAL AROMATIC DRAUGHT.
Take Oil of Nutmegs; 4 drops. rub them well with Sugar, 2 scruples. to which
add gradually Peppermint Water, 2 ounces. Mix. --
No. 29. CORDIAL AROMATIC MIXTURE.
Take of Oil of Cinnamon, 40 drops. Fine Sugar, 3 drams. rub these well
together, then add Cinnamon Water, 6 ounces. Spirit of Cinnamon, 1 ounce.
Mix. -- The Draught, or four spoonfuls of the Mixture, should be given as
directed No. 15.

30. MUSTARD POULTICE.
Take Mustard Seed Powder, Crumbs of Bread, of each equal parts.
Strong Vinegar, sufficient to form a poultice; but when wished to be stronger,
half an ounce of bruised Garlic; and one ounce of black Soap added.

31. MUSK BOLUS.
Take Musk, from 8 to 30 drops. rub them well with Fine Sugar, 40 grains. to
which add Ammonia prepared, 5 grains. Aromatic Confection, 10 grains.
Syrup of Saffron sufficient to form a bolus, to be administered every four or
five hours, with three table spoonfuls of the subsequent Infusion.

32. VALERIAN JULEP.
Take Valerian Root bruised, 1 1-2 ounce. Boiling Water, 1 pint.
Infuse in an earthen vessel well closed, and let it stand till cold; to six
ounces of which add Syrup of Saffron, half an ounce.

Mix. --

33. CAMPHORATED BOLUS.
Take Camphor, Ammonia prepared, of each 5 grains. Aromatic Confection, 20
grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus, to be taken every fourth hour.

34. MUSK JULEP.
Take Musk Mixture, 6 ounces. Camphor, 30 grains. Myrrh, 20 grains. Syrup of
Saffron, 1-2 an ounce.
Let the Camphor and Myrrh be well rubbed together, and then add gradually the
Musk mixture -- DOSE. Four table spoonfuls every three or four hours, or
oftener in cases of great languor.

No. 35. MUSK BOLUS.
Take Musk, 10 grains. Camphor, Ammonia prepared, of each 6 grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus, to be taken every third or
fourth hour.

36. SNAKE-ROOT BOLUS.
Take Snake-root powdered, 20 grains. Ammonia prepared, 8 grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus, to be taken every six hours.

37. SNAKE-ROOT DRAUGHT.
Take Snake-root bruised, 6 drams. Boiling Water, 12 ounces. Infuse in a close
vessel till cold; to one ounce and a half of which add Ammonia prepared, 5
grains. Aromatic Confection, 10 grains. Syrup of Saffron, 2 drams.
Mix. -- or from one to two drams of the Tincture of Snake-root may be added to
any other of the cordial Draughts, and administered every fourth, fifth, or
sixth hour.

38. IPECACUANHA EMETIC.
Take Ipecuanha in powder, from 15 to 20 grains. Pennyroyal Water, 1 ounce.
Syrup of Sugar, 2 drams.
Mix. --

39. VINOUS INFUSION OF PERUVIAN BARK.
Take of Peruvian Bark, 1 ounce. Infuse it in White Wine, 12 ounces.
DOSE. Three spoonfuls every fourth or fifth hour.

40. CORDIAL MIXTURE, WITH BARK DECOCTION.
Take Peruvian Bark, 1 ounce. boil it in one pint of water till it is reduced
to 12 ounces, then let it be strained, and add Tincture of Snake-root, 1 ounce.
Aromatic Confection, 2 drams.
Mix. -- DOSE. Four table spoonfuls every fourth hour.

No. 41. CORDIAL MIXTURE, WITH HOT OR COLD INFUSION OF BARK.
Take Peruvian Bark, 6 drams.
Infuse it in ten ounces of boiling water for (...), in cold for eight hours,
then let it be strained, and add Tincture of Snake-root, 1 ounce. Compound
Spirit of Lavender, 4 drams.


Mix. -- DOSE. The same as (40.) or volatile substances may be added to any of
these particles, as Salt. or Liquor of Hartshorn, Ammonia prepared. see Doses,
P. 150.

If Bark should be disagreeable in every other form, it may be given in
glysters, though in large proportion. Should the Powder, Tincture, or Extract,
be more eligible, see the Doses, P. 193, 194.

42. ABSORBENT JULEP.
Take Crabs Claws prepared, 2 drams. Gum Arabic powdered, 3 drams. Cinnamon
Water, 6 ounces. Syrup of Saffron, 4 drams.
Mix. --

or -- 43.
Take Chalk Mixture. 6 ounces.
of each 4 drams. Spirit of Nutmegs, Syrup of Orange Peel,

Mix. -- DOSE. Three spoonfuls of either often in the day, particularly after
every loose stool.

44. DETERGENT GARGLES.
Take Infusion of Roses, 1 pint. Honey of Roses, 2 ounces.
Mix. --

or -- 45.
Take Lime Water, 4 ounces. Honey of Roses, 1 ounce.
Mix. --

or -- 46.
Take Decoction of Barley, 10 ounces. Honey of Roses, 2 ounces. Muriatic Acid,
20 drops.
Mix. --

or -- 47.
Take Decoction of Barley, 1 pint. Simple Oxymel, 1 ounce. Tincture of Myrrh,
(...) ounce.
Mix. --

No. 48. ANTISEPTIC WHEY.
Take Cow's Milk, 1 pint. Water, a pint.
Let these be boiled together, and mixed with one ounce and an half of Seville
Orange, or Lemon Juice; or mix only one ounce of Lemon Juice, and two of good
old Rhenish, and strain for use.

49. ANTISEPTIC DRINK.
Take Crystals of Tartar, 2 ounces.
Dissolve these in one gallon of Water, and sweeten with Syrup of Orange Peel.

50. ANTISEPTIC PURGING APOZEM.
Take Tamarinds, 1 ounce. Boil them in Water from nine to seven ounces, then
strain, dissolve Manna, 2 ounces. Tartarized Kali, 1-2 ounce.
Mix. --

51. ANTISEPTIC APERIENT DRAUGHT.
Take Tartarized Kali, 40 grains. Manna picked, 1 1-2 dram. Lemon Juice, 2
drams. Distilled Water, 1 1-2 ounce.
Mix. -- Any of these may be taken, (No. 49 and 50. in proper doses,) and
repeated agreeable to the effect wanted to be produced.

52. ANTIPUTRESCENT DRAUGHT.
Take Tincture of Roses, 2 ounces. Muriatic Acid, 5 drops. Syrup of Quinces, 2
drams.
Mix. --

or -- 53.
Take decoction of Bark, 2 ounces. Muriatic Acid, 5 drops. Syrup of Quinces, 2
drams.
Mix. --

or -- 54.
Take Camphor, 6 grains. Myrrh powdered, 10 grains.
Let these be rubbed well together, and add gradually Decoction of Bark, 2
ounces. Syrup of Lemon, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- Any of these may be taken every third or fourth hour, or oftener, if
the exigencies of the case require.

No. 55. CAMPHORATED VINEGAR.
Take Camphor, 2 drams. Let this be rubbed down with a few drops of Spirit of
Wine, then add Sugar, 1 ounce. Distilled Vinegar made hot, 2 pints.
Mix. -- DOSE. Two or three table spoonfuls, or more, every fourth or sixth
hour.

56. ASTRINGENT POWDER.
Take Styptic Powder, of the Edinburgh Dispensatory, from 8 to 15 grains. Gum
Tragacanth in powder, 15 grains. Nutmeg powdered, 3 grains.
Mix. -- To be given every third or fourth hour, with the Draught No. 53, as
ordered above.

57. IPECACUANHA DRAUGHT.
Take Cinnamon Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Gum Arabic, 2 scruples. Chalk prepared, 1
scruple, Ipecacuanha, 2 grains. Syrup of White Poppy, 1 dram. Mix. --
58. SALINE VOLATILE DRAUGHT.
Take Water of acetated Ammonia, 2 drams. Cinnamon Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Opiated
Confection, 1-2 a dram. Syrup of Saffron, 2 drams.
Mix. -- Either of these, or three or four table-spoonfuls of camphorated
Vinegar, (No. 55.) may be administered every fourth hour.

59. SALINE FERMENTATIVE DRAUGHT.
Take Kali prepared, 20 grains. Peppermint Water, 1 ounce. Syrup of Quinces, 2
drams. to which add Lemon Juice, 1-2 an ounce.
and let the Draught be drank off whilst in a state of fermentation.

No. 60. POMEGRANATE BARK, AND CHAMOMILE DECOCTION.
Take Bark of the Pomegranate Fruit, 1 ounce. Chamomile Flowers, 1-2 an ounce.
Let these be boiled in Water, 24 ounces to 16. then in this Decoction, whilst
hot, infuse Orange-peel, 3 drams. This must stand in a vessel covered close
till it is cold, then strained off for use. To one ounce of this add
Camphorated Vinegar, 2 drams. Muriatic Acid, 5 drops.
Mix -- And let it be given every fourth hour.

61. STEEL PILLS.
Take Iron filings, or the Rust prepared, Extract of Gentian, of each 1 dram.
Form these into 24 pills. DOSE. Four.

or -- 62.
Take Vitriolated Iron, Extract of Bark, of each 1 dram.
Form 24 pills. DOSE. Two. A dose of each of these may be taken, three or four
times a day -- or, one spoonful of Chalybeate Wine -- or the Decoction of Bark,
in the same mode as before prescribed.

63. AROMATIC BITTER DRAUGHT.
Take Quassia Wood, 2 drams. Infuse in one pint of boiling water, and, when
cold, to one ounce and an half add Vitriolated Iron, 4 grains. Aromatic
Tincture, 30 drops.
Mix. -- and administer twice a day; as may be also the following bolus.

64. AROMATIC BITTER BOLUS.
Take Chamomile Powder, from 10 to 20 grains. Myrrh in powder, 6 grains.
Vitriolated Iron, 5 grains. Aromatic Powder, 6 grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus. or, the Steel Pills. (No. 61,
62.) may be administered in the same manner, with four spoonfuls of the
following infusion:

No. 65. AROMATIC BITTER INFUSION.
Take Compound infusion of Gentian, 6 ounces. Tincture of Bark, 6 drams.
Aromatic Confection, 1 1-2 dram.
Mix. --

66. OIL OF CASTOR EMULSION.
Take Oil of Castor, 2 ounces. Mucilage of Gum Arabic, or Yolk of Egg,
sufficient quantity to make it mix uniformly with Decoction of Barley, 10
ounces. Syrup of Roses, 1 ounce.
Mix -- DOSE. Four table-spoonfuls every second or third hour, till the desired
effect is obtained.

67. ANTIMONIAL APERIENT MIXTURE.
Take Distilled Water, 6 ounces. in which dissolve Manna, 1 1-2 ounce.
Tartarized Kali, 3 drams. Antimonial Wine, 40 drops. Tincture of Senna, 1
ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Four spoonfuls every second or third hour till the desired
effect takes place.

68. ASA FOETIDA MIXTURE.
Take Asa foetida, 1 dram. Peppermint Water, 4 ounces. Tincture of Opium, 12
drops. Syrup of Sugar, 3 drams.
Mix. -- DOSE. One spoonful every fourth, fifth, or sixth hour.

69. CAMPHORATED EMULSION.
Take Camphor, 1-2 a dram. Mucilage of Gum Arabic, 2 drams. Let them be rubbed
together, and add gradually Peppermint Water, 6 ounces. Tincture of Opium, 10
drops. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 1 ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Three or four spoonfuls every fourth hour.

5. MIXED FEVERS.
On treating on the different kinds of simple fevers, in the four former
sections, we found, that according to their differences, we could discover
which part of the system was in them particularly affected, and constituted the
disease.

In the simple continued, the vascular system, with respect only to its motions
being quickened.

In the inflammatory, besides the increase of motion, we perceive tenacity in
the blood, and the strength and activity of the vessels augmented beyond what
is natural.

In the slow nervous, the nerves seem to be primarily and chiefly affected,
without any increase of vascular action, but rather a degree of torpor, and
defect in their natural motion, with a lentor, or viscidity of the serum,
lymph, and thin humors.

In the putrid, this nervous affection was accompanied at first, or soon after,
with a putrescency of the fluids.

Now these peculiarities produce particular symptoms, which enable us to
discover their nature. But the class of fevers ranked under this head have some
of the immediate causes of these simple fevers so blended together, as the
inflammatory and malignant, the malignant and nervous, the nervous and
inflammatory -- or so instantaneously and imperceptibly follow each other,
according to the indications to be deduced from the symptoms, that we are at a
loss where to refer them -- as the distinguishing signs of the two different
kinds will present themselves at the same time; for in some we find great
nausea and extreme debility -- great heat, with a quick, strong, and hard pulse
-- here are the characteristic symptoms of the inflammatory and putrid united,
and form truly the MIXED FEVER. We will, however, now endeavor to explain how
these arise.

When speaking of the brain, (Page 26, 27.) it was there said, that vascular
irritability might be independent of nervous influence, though, for the
continuance of that irritability, nervous influence is absolutely necessary. We
must now farther observe, that vascular irritation always requires local
stimulus for its support, and that the vessels may be affected without any
strong indisposition of the nerves -- and so on the contrary -- and also that
they may be conjointly affected from the same cause.

We likewise farther affirm, that morbid particles creating disease produce
different effects, from their elective power upon the solids as well as fluids
-- hence from this source arises the different natures of specific fevers --
and hence it is from the different combinations of the causes that the mixed
fevers deduce their origin.

It seems to be an extremely difficult task to draw our ideas of these fevers
into a small compass; or so to simplify them, that all which occur can be
brought within the bounds of a concise definition; for every cause which can
produce any of the foregoing febrile complaints; every part which can also be
affected in them, may conjunctively appear so in these; and in such very
different degrees, that we are puzzled to discriminate to which they can
properly belong.

I can by no means agree with the idea of Dr. CULLEN, that the account he has
given of the fever he terms SYNOCHUS, which obviously is his mixed fever, is at
all adequate to comprehend the whole of those fevers, which come certainly
under this term -- for he says, it is a contagious fever for the most part,
composed of the inflammatory fever at the beginning, in its progress, and
toward its termination, running into a nervous or putrid fever, -- which he
names typhus -- In all which there is no practical utility; for it may be only
an inflammatory fever simply, thus terminating; which often happens to be the
case -- induced frequently by the violence of the disease, some accidental
circumstances, or mismanagement. The continued, or vasculo-plethoric fever,
which is simple, may, from the same causes, have the same termination.

Though we will not say that fevers of the above description may not sometimes
occur still we think that the complicated affections may always be in a great
degree observed, and should be particularly pointed out.

From what has been advanced on this subject, the great difficulty of forming a
definition to comprehend the whole of these fevers which may often meet our
observation, is sufficiently obvious.

However, in defining these fevers in general, I should say, that the
ANOMALOUS, OR MIXED FEVERS, were an affection of the nervous and vascular
system, and sometimes conjoined with that of the mass of circulating fluids,
producing febrile appearances; but, from the beginning, very often so
indistinctly marked, having the inflammatory, nervous, and putrid symptoms so
blended, that it is difficult to say to what kind they most peculiarly belong;
and if we add to this Dr. CULLEN'S opinion, (Page 241.) the idea of mixed
fevers will be tolerably complete; -- and as we have given the whole of the
symptoms separately under each of our former divisions, by considering some of
them here in a conjunctive state; and marking those which are most prevalent;
we shall be enabled to point out what is necessary to be done -- to alleviate
that species which is the most powerful in its action, consequently the most
dangerous, and not altogether neglect the other -- but this to execute properly
requires profound medical knowledge, quick perception, nice discrimination, and
experienced sagacity.

SYDENHAM, to whom I shall refer my reader, has given us some histories of
these kinds of fevers, under different names, either according to SOME
PREVALENT SYMPTOM -- as the sudatory, or sweating, the comatous or drowsy -- or
to THE INTENT OF NATURE, as the depuratory, or cleansing -- the IMITATIVE, as
the variolous fever, or that similar to the small pox fever -- or to THE
SEASON, as the hyemal, or wintery. We shall content ourselves with presenting,
as a specimen, The PUERPERAL, or CHILDBED FEVER, one of the most dangerous and
fatal with which medicine is at present acquainted.

DESCRIPTION. This fever generally begins on the first, second, or third day,
sometimes later, after delivery, with coldness or shivering preceding any pains
of the belly, which are violent, and has a soreness attending over the whole
region below the stomach, scarce capable of hearing the gentlest touch -- the
belly is sometimes soft -- sometimes greatly swelled. The pains, though
general, will affect some one part more particularly than another, and shoot
from the loins to the groins and thighs, and sometimes affect the anus and neck
of the bladder.

The pulse is quick and weak, though now and then, especially a little after
the attack, strong and full -- the skin is, for the most part, hot and dry,
though sometimes cool and temperate; and, not unfrequently, intermediate sweats
come on all over the body, and usually afford some alleviation -- there is a
constant pain of the head, chiefly the forehead, and above the eyebrows,
attended often with a giddiness and restlessness.

The tongue has very different appearances, commonly white, soft, and moist,
and will thus continue till near death -- then it becomes dry, rough, and of a
yellowish brown color -- a red line will sometimes run up its middle, with a
whiteness on each side; the first is dry, the last moist -- along with these
there is also a great thirst.

The face is often flushed, sometimes of a deep red, or livid color fixed in
the cheeks. There appears in the countenance and eyes strong marks of anxiety
and dejection of spirits. From the very beginning of this distemper, the
patients seem afraid of taking a full inspiration, hence is the breathing quick
and short, appearing not to proceed from any affection of the lungs very often;
and as the disease increases, so do, the shortness of breathing.

There is most commonly a cough as a concomitant; -- load of the stomach --
nausea -- and vomiting of yellow, greenish, or black materials, frequently
attend; but not invariably, though they sometimes come on from the time of
delivery, nay, now and then indeed precede it; -- and, at the approach of
death, what is vomited up is either green or black.

If blood should be taken away, it is in general sizy, with a quantity of
yellow serum. The pain of the head, though very troublesome, is seldom
attended, till a few hours before death, with delirium.

The urine at first is made with difficulty, and small in quantity, though
removed by two or three stools; and, as the disease abates, it is declared by a
deposition of the color of brick dust, or whitish sediment.

At the commencement the habit is, for the most part, costive -- sometimes
regular -- at others loose, discharging very foetid and brown colored faeces
-- and in both states flatulence attends -- and the general omens of
approaching dissolution are, involuntarily evacuations from the bowels.

In high degrees of this disease, the patient, for the most part, lies on her
back, seldom turns on either side, and never on her belly.

These are the general symptoms, by which the fever may be discovered, and
which appear when the uterus is not affected -- but if we perceive any of the
symptoms which are declaratory of uterine inflammation, we may suspect the
affection of that organ a participating cause.

CAUSES. Those which are considered as the remote or inducing, are,

Intemperance during pregnancy -- too great fatigue, or total want of exercise
-- too high or too low living -- costiveness, or the reverse -- excess of joy
or grief -- moist and warm atmosphere, impregnated with putrid effluvia. In
lying in, an overheated air -- too warm a regimen -- sudden frights --
costiveness after delivery -- and every accident which can obstruct
perspiration -- violence, and too great haste in separating the placenta -- and
binding up the trunk of the body with too tight bandages.

Those which are said to be the proximate or immediate, are,

Impeded circulation, or stagnation of the blood, generally in the vessels of
the omentum, (37.) and intestines, chiefly the external coat of the small ones,
(42.) sometimes of the womb, (51.) inducing in those parts inflammation, from
the debilitated state of the vascular system there situated, brought on by the
pressure of the pregnant womb; if causes (243.) occur which are capable of
producing febrile affections in the habit -- which affections are first most
commonly of the inflammatory; afterward, if the fever in this state is not
cured, of the putrescent kind.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Common febrile symptoms, attended with violent acute
pains of the belly below the stomach, with soreness of the parts so great as
scarce to bear the gentlest touch -- dread in taking a full inspiration --
breathing quick and short, nor appearing to proceed from affections of the
lungs -- and increasing with the disease -- and in costiveness, or the reverse,
flatulence.

CURE. The indications are to take off in the first instance, the inflammation,
and prevent the humors from running into a state of putrescent acrimony --
both which are effected by bleeding, if necessary, at the onset -- purging --
promoting the urinary discharge -- or sweating -- for in some of these ways
this fever generally goes off, or is conquered, particularly by purging. If the
termination is favorable, it occurs in three, four, or five days; if
otherwise, from the fifth to the twelfth.

Hence, therefore, from what has been above delivered, our medical conduct is
plainly pointed out.

If, at an early period of the disease, the habit is found abounding with
blood, the febrile heat great, and the pulse full and strong, blood must be
immediately drawn from the arm; and, should the body be costive, an emollient
aperient glyster, (No. 25, 26.) should be, as soon as possible, administered;
but should not this relieve by producing evacuation, some mild or emollient
aperient medicine (Page 171, 172.) must be given, till a free discharge from
the bowels is procured -- for stools must at all events be had; on these, at
first, are founded our greatest hopes of success; as by emptying the first
passages, all distension from the contained faeces is taken off -- flatulence
lessened -- irritation from the faeces avoided -- and some degree of freedom
given to the circulating powers of the parts affected.

But this should be done by the gentlest means -- by such medicines as will not
create sickness, as the cooling saline purge, (No. 3, 23, 24.) or oil of castor
emulsion. (No. 66.)

Tartarized antimony, (No. 6, 7.) or antimonial wine in small doses, (Page
180.) are recommended to be given with this intent every second or third hour;
but in their purgative effects, they are too uncertain -- I therefore mix small
portions of them with other purgatives, which I think quicken, their effects.
(No. 3, 22 to 24.) or the antimonial aperient mixture. No. 67.)

The first evacuations are generally foetid; but if they become afterward less
offensive, and the patient feels herself generally relieved, the most commonly
falls into a sleep, and a gentle perspiration succeed; which must be encouraged
by such medicine, as cool at the same time that they contribute to promote this
purpose, such as tartarized antimony, antimonial powder, No. 6. 7, 8, 9.) and
wine, (Page 180.) ipecacuanha, (No. 57.) nitre, (No. 2,) saline mixture, (No.
1.) to which may be added some slight opiate, (Page 152.) -- for these
alleviate pain -- determine the fluids externally -- and prevent their effects
from internal distension, irritation, or acrimony, acquired from local
solicitude of them internally, and accumulation; besides, they are diuretic,
(Page 173.) and antiseptic, (Page 192.) without astringency, or being
productive of heat.

Though, in order to keep up these effects, so essentially necessary for
recovery, physicians in general have ordered mild cooling liquids to be drank
cold, if the skin was dry and hot, the fever and thirst considerable -- and
lukewarm, whilst the patient was in a state of perspiration; and very
judiciously forbid the use of cordial stimulants, caudles, wines, and heating
medicines of every kind: -- yet some prescribe a cup of chamomile tea to be
drank every hour; but as this, like other bitters, is a stimulant, in the
inflammatory stage of this disease it does not appear proper. But when symptoms
of putrescency are approaching, or commenced, it may be productive of good
effects, as it possesses antiseptic (Page 192.) powers. Small and repeated
doses of lukewarm diluents, or watery liquids, as rennet, vinegar whey,
lemonade, toast and water, slight infusion of malt, hydromel of Hippocrates,
(Page 178.) or things of a similar nature, answer the purposes more safely, and
full as effectually.

Though the greatest benefit is expected to be derived from clearing the first
passages, attention should also be paid to the stomach; -- and hence, if
nausea, sickness, or vomiting, be one of the concomitant symptoms, that organ
must be attended to, and unloaded of its contents; which will contribute also
to promote the effects before mentioned; but as the womb is suspended by the
broad ligaments, (51.) and those called round, (which are formed of a number of
blood vessels folded together, running from the corners of the womb in the
duplicature of the broad ligaments, pass through a round aperture on each side
the lower part of the belly, and are lost in the fat of each groin) vomiting
should be promoted by the easiest means, by drinking (...) of chamomile tea, or
warm water -- for by filling the stomach sufficiently with fluid, its coats
will act with ease, and the diaphragm (23.) and muscles of the belly not be
thrown into continued and too powerful contraction, which would at this period
be dangerous; because the ligaments are now in a relaxed state, and have not
yet recovered their natural and healthful tone; hence would the womb be liable
to be protruded too much downwards by strong exertions of vomiting.

The case here drawn up respects only the most simple appearances of this
fever; but it is frequently observed to be attended with several untoward
circumstances.

1st. VIOLENT STITCHES IN THE SIDE, and PAIN AT THE PIT OF THE STOMACH will
accompany those more constant ones of the belly, with a full, hard pulse,
symptoms of inflammation, and that severe in proportion to the degree of
violence.

2d. FLATULENCES in the stomach and colon (43.) will produce pains in the
sides, shooting about the short ribs, which fluctuate; and occasion shortness
of breathing, being only attended with a slight degree of fever.

3d. A COUGH not unfrequently is an attendant symptom -- but seldom of much
consequence.

4th. A LOOSENESS will sometimes appear at the very commencement of the fever,
arising from acrimonious foulness in the first passages.

These we must endeavor to alleviate by well-adapted applications. Under the
first circumstances bleeding must be had recourse to, and that repeatedly, if
the violence of the symptoms continues, paying proper attention to the strength
of the patient; taking care not to be too lavish in the quantity of blood
drawn; for it is safer to bleed twice than once too copiously. Should the pains
be violent, and the breathing much oppressed, blisters must be applied
immediately, and repeated in proportion to the cause, first on the side
affected, afterward on the opposite side.

But should the pulse grow weak, and other symptoms of debility come on,
declaratory of putrescency taking place, cordials with tonics, the most
powerful of which are, volatiles united with bark -- camphor -- spirit of
vitriolic or nitrous aethermust be brought to our aid and mineral acids. See
Putrid Fever, 221, 4. from whence we shall be referred to a variety of
prescriptions capable of answering our purposes.

And here we must observe, that the seneka root, (Page 179.) has been highly
recommended in this, as well as other pleuritic affections; and is in this
place considered as exceedingly applicable, as it is said to promote stools,
urine, and sweat.

Under the second, we must apply to aperients, (No. 3. 23 or 24. 66, 67.) if
these fail of success, by their operations, antispasmodics and sedatives may be
tried, chiefly asa foetida, camphor, (No. 68, 69.) or musk, (No. 31. 34, 35.)
with opium.

Under the third, in slight cases, oily emulsions may be administered, as in
common coughs; but should there be at the same time a severe pain in the head,
a blister should be applied between the shoulders -- steams of vinegar and
water inhaled into the lungs -- gentle opiates, (152.) or spirit of vitriolic
ether, (150.) administered.

Under the fourth, we are not to attempt to check the discharge by the use of
astringents; for from this every good is to be expected -- we must here rather
ch^se to assist nature by the free use of those drinks we have in common
recommended; -- but should it not come on till the close of the disease, and be
apparently critical, we must endeavor to support the patient under it, and aim
at correcting the putrescent state of the habit, by antiseptics and cordials,
both in glysters and by the mouth, and proper nourishment. The glysters should
be emollient, diluting, and nutritious, composed of broths, beef-tea, chamomile
infusion, with oil, and impregnated with fixable air; -- wine, wine and water,
may be given -- also cordial mixtures with cinnamon, (No. 13, 14, 15, 18, 28,
29.) omitting the volatile substances, except in cases of faintness, when they
may be occasionally added -- the aromatic confection may be also changed for
the extract of logwood, or the infusion may form the vehicle, (140.) -- and
after the diarrhoea has been checked by proper remedies, we must not forget the
bark joined with aromatics, (No. 39 to 41.) and opiates. Besides, beef-tea,
chocolate, hartshorn jelly, and such like, should be given by the way of
nourishment -- limewater with milk; and, in fine, all such things as have the
power of correcting putrescency, and preserving as much as possible the vigor
of the constitution -- hence rest of body, quietude of mind, cleanliness, and
cool air, are essentially auxiliaries, and should be attended to with the
greatest exactitude: and as lying-in women all have a greater or less degree of
the predisposing cause in their habits, from the very nature, and unavoidable
consequences of pregnancy, arising from the distension of the womb, producing
impeded circulation, and vascular debility, the remote or inducing causes
(244.) should be avoided -- and from thence the accession of the fever
prevented: and as there is no disease, when perfectly formed, more dangerous in
itself, so difficult to cure, still so easy to be produced by indiscretion and
ignorance, I would on every consideration recommend the preventive mode to be
closely studied, and assiduously pursued.

We have now gone through that series of fevers, of the four first of which,
all, either in their separate or conjunct state, whatever they be denominated,
consist; and it clearly appears, that the parts of the constitution which are
affected, are those which form the moving powers, (56.) and that it is by the
morbid alteration of their action alone that fevers are produced; consequently,
that it is from regulating their motions, and reducing them to a proper
standard, that we can derive benefit in our curative, as well as preventive
attempts; for instance:

IN THE SIMPLE CONTINUED FEVER we find a superabundance of blood, and irritable
state of the vascular system put into motion by some remote cause, occasioning
increase of action -- in order to cure, we lessen the former, and decrease the
latter -- for here we suppose not any contamination of the circulating fluids
to have taken place.

IN THE INFLAMMATORY FEVER we find to the superabundance of blood is added a
morbid tenacity, and to the irritability a morbid augmentation of vascular
strength and firmness -- in order to cure, our efforts are the same as in the
former case, only more powerfully, copiously, and quickly exerted, with intent
to thin the fluids, and debilitate the force of vascular action, as well as
lessen the quantity of blood, and decrease the quickness of vascular motion.

IN THE NERVOUS we find a different constitutional state of the moving powers
-- a torpor of the vascular system -- ropy vicidity of the serous or lymphatic
fluids -- with a morbid activity of the nervous system -- in order to cure, we
endeavor to rouse the nerves to the performance of their due action, and
increase the irritability of the sanguinary vessels through the habit.

IN THE PUTRID we find, added to one or other of the states of the vascular or
nervous system, a putrescent state of the fluids, either from the absorption of
putrid particles, or the generation of them in the habit -- in order to cure,
we attempt to support the vigor of the system, and correct the putrescent
acrimony of the fluids, according to the affection of the moving powers -- if
of the inflammatory kind, by mitigating their too violent action -- if of the
nervous, by rousing their active powers, so that in due time the offensive
matter may be separated from, and thrown out of the mass of fluids, by some of
the outlets of the machine; which is the case in all other fevers that deduce
their origin from any peccant matter in the habit.

And we may venture to assert, that any practitioner who closely studies, and
perfectly understands the nature and management of the four kinds of fevers
specified above, will be fully competent to conduct his patient, in the best
manner, through every kind of fever, be its nature ever so apparently
complicated.

But, besides the fevers we have particularized, there are others, denominated
according to their form or mode of progress REMITTENT or INTERMITTENT, though
they really are of the nature of those of which we have before treated, either
in their separate or conjunct state; and which we must now proceed to explain.

SECTION IX. CHAP. I. REMITTENT FEVER.
FEVERS of this kind receive their name from the mode which they preserve
through their progress, steering betwixt those of the continued and the
intermittent class; for though the fever does not preserve throughout an equal
degree of violence as in the former, there is never a total cessation of
febrile affection before its termination, as in the latter. These fevers,
therefore move betwixt the two extremes; having, instead of fresh accessions,
as they are called in intermittents, only repeated increase of action,
denominated exacerbations; between which a degree of vascular contraction and
prostration of strength are continued, indicative of the presence of the
febrile cause still in action; and from hence they take their name.

But, indeed, the remissions are sometimes so slight, that they are with
difficulty distinguished by the closest attention from continued fevers --
though this discrimination is highly necessary, as they yield more in their
mode of cure to that we shall find employed in intermittents, being subdued
with more certainty by the bark, judiciously administered, than by any other
application. Indeed, they seem to have so great affinity with the continued and
intermittent fever, that they sometimes run into one, sometimes into the other
-- and the continued, before it becomes intermittent perfectly, will assume the
remittent type, so will the intermittent before it changes into a continued.

From some appearances occurring in the course of these fevers, they have been
divided into quotidian -- tertian -- or quarta^ -- according as the remission
has happened on the second, third, or fourth day; but in this division there
appears to be no practical utility -- as it leads not to any particular mode of
cure, nor assists in distinguishing the nature of them, whether they verge most
to the inflammatory class, which knowledge alone must determine our operations.

DESCRIPTION. They, like other fevers, generally begin with alternate chills
and heat, stretching and yawning; and these are succeeded by nausea, vomiting
of bile, giddiness, and oppression -- then commences the fever, and the heat
continues; after these follow pain of the head, back, and limbs -- heart-burn
-- and thirst -- difficult breathing -- anxiety -- inquietude -- and, sometimes
from the first attack, delirium -- the stomach swells now and then -- the eyes
are generally tinged with a yellow color, and that diffused over the whole
body not unfrequently -- the tongue is white and moist -- the pulse sometimes
hard, seldom full -- the bowels are at one time obstructed, at another the
reverse.

Thus situated are some periods betwixt the second and eighth day; which time a
remission very rarely exceeds; for the most part a gentle sweat will come on,
and brings an alleviation of all the febrile symptoms; and this continues for
some hours; after which, generally in the evening, the violence of the fever is
renewed, sometimes preceded by chillness, sometimes not.

This repetition has no fixed time for its continuance, in some remaining a
longer, in others a shorter space; but at last gives way in its degree of
violence, and remits a second time; and thus continues fluctuating till either
totally subdued by nature or art -- or death closes the scene.

When this last is the case, the patient often dies in the paroxysm, or renewal
of the attack -- the brain is immediately affected -- he loses his senses, and
the power of speech -- his breathing becomes quick -- deglutition is impeded --
a looseness comes on -- the pulse in the beginning soft, not to be called weak,
nor indicative of danger, in a few hours is small and depressed, then cold
sweats break out, and the unhappy victim expires.

These fevers have, by some, been styled bilious, from the vomiting of bile, so
common in their commencement, and the yellow suffusion on the skin and whites
of the eyes; supposing these symptoms to arise from the superabundance of
bilious excretion, and the activity of the bile resorbed into the habit,
occasioning such febrile commotions -- But it is obvious this change of color
is owing to another cause, and that, the breaking down of the texture of the
blood from the putrescent tendency of the fluids; and thus may the color more
properly be accounted for; because the bile may be returned into the blood, as
in the jaundice, without producing these febrile attacks.

In hot countries that are marshy, where the atmosphere is filled from thence
with putrid exhalations, they are endemial, that is, nalive and resident --
with us, and other parts of Europe, they have been observed to become
epidemical, that is, occasionally general, toward the latter end of autumn.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are said by some, as well as the proximate, to
be such as bring on a continued, or inflammatory, or a putrid fever, (209,
221.) whilst others attribute the first to too great moisture in the air, the
last to insensible perspiration impeded, and a relaxed state of fibers.
However, from the history of these fevers, it is obvious, that they, at
different periods, and in different constitutions, put on appearances which are
very different, and according to which we are to regulate our conduct. Hence we
say, the

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS are, a remission or abatement, not a total cessation of
febrile affections, succeeded by perceptible exacerbation, or increase of
febrile violence; which increase is sometimes ushered in with chillness; -- and
if there are strong symptoms of vascular contraction, and great increase of
circulatory motion, which are declared by extreme heat -- thirst -- and pain --
having a dry skin, strong, hard, and full pulse, for their associates, we shall
not hesitate to pronounce it INFLAMMATORY; -- but if attended with great
debility -- lowness of spirits -- nausea -- oppression -- vomiting -- coupled
with discolouration of the skin, and languid pulse, its belonging to the putrid
class is indisputable.

This fever is never free from danger; though the nearer it approaches to an
intermittent, or the less degree of fever continues during the remission, so
much more favorable the omen; but, on the contrary, the more it puts on the
appearance of a continued fever, the shorter the remission, and more violent
the fever fit, so much the more dangerous. If the urine, which was before of a
deep color, becomes pale, we have great reason for fear -- If it changes its
remittent for a continued type, the event is doubtful -- and when the brain is
affected, and the rest of the symptoms, as described (Page 251. line 19, etc.)
death is near at hand.

CURE. The indications are similar to what we have delivered on the
inflammatory (209) and putrid (221) fevers, adapted to peculiar states agreeing
with them, by which this fever may be changed into an intermittent, or totally
taken off -- consequently, where the inflammatory symptoms are prevalent,
bleeding, cooling purges and glysters -- vomits -- and small doses of
antimonials -- watery diluting liquids drank plentifully -- cooling acescent
vegetables -- will be the most eligible at the commencement, and will so far
answer the purpose in some cases, that nature afterward may be almost left to
herself.

Still, in others, she requires the most immediate and powerful assistance --
hence it is necessary to point out the different progressive appearances, by
which may be discovered the situation of safety, or danger, and the mode of
proper management under each, as, from imprudent conduct, this fever, from its
mildest state may be converted into that of extreme peril, and from this last
into certain death.

If, therefore, the increase of the febrile affections, a third time, should
not be more violent, nor of longer continuance than that which preceded, but
nearly similar. If the urine should let fall a laudable sediment, without any
visible decrease of strength, or increased dejection of spirits, matters will
wear a favorable aspect: and about the fourth or fifth return of the fever,
the powers of the constitution will commonly relieve themselves by some
critical evacuation, either by the KIDNEYS, SKIN, INTESTINES, SALIVARY SYSTEM,
or LUNGS, manifested in turpid urine, profuse sweat, bilious stools, copious
spitting, or expectoration of matter of a yellow cast -- for the fever
generally resolves itself in one or more of these ways.

But, on the fifth return, should there appear to be an increase in degrees of
severity, in the symptoms becoming more acute and dangerous -- if the sit
continues longer, and is more violent than before, and there are obviously a
sinking and lowness of spirits, with great debility of the powers of the
system, we must have recourse to blisters, which some indeed advise at an
earlier period, as calculated in a remarkable manner to bring on the
intermittent type -- and bark as soon as possible in the remission; forty or
sixty grains of the powder may be administered every second or third hour --
or, if the stomach will not bear this quantity, a smaller dose be given at
shorter periods, or the decoction, (193.) hot or cold infusion, (No. 41.) with
or without the volatiles or aromatics, as seem necessary; to which also may be
occasionally added, the other preparations of this medicine, (193, 194.) by
these means many endeavor to stop, or at least retard the progress of the next
febrile fit, by throwing into the habit a sufficient quantity -- and thus must
we proceed till we shall be empowered within twelve or fourteen hours to
administer six or eight drams.

If we are not active at this period, and attempt not with all our power to
mitigate or conquer the febrile affections, we run the risque of protracting
the disease, and rendering it more replete with danger; for now the fits become
so quick, and following each other so rapidly, that we are deprived of the
opportunity of throwing in the bark in proper quantity, and permitting a
continued fever to be the consequence.

But though bark in some states of this fever is so extremely useful, still, in
every stage it is not necessary -- nay, indeed, in the inflammatory remittents
(251.) it is dangerous to administer it, whilst the action of the vessels are
too powerful; for from this we might produce the inflammatory continued fever;
therefore we must endeavor to lower the system, by those means advised, (252,
line 33.) -- that done, the bark may then be advantageously thrown in.

Before we close the account of this fever, we must observe, that though
bleeding, and that repeatedly, has been advised in some of these fevers, and
with considerable advantage; yet under some circumstances there requires the
nicest caution, with respect to the quantity to be taken away, notwithstanding
the commencement being ushered in with such symptoms, as might authorize the
operation; for bleeding has been allowed to do mischief, especially in hot
countries, for there these fevers are generally of the putrid kind -- therefore
in our first bleedings the quantity should be moderate, seldom exceeding eight
ounces -- which may be repeated in case the inflammatory symptoms continue
violent -- but should these only be slight at first, and evacuations are
necessary to be promoted, we can only depend upon the gentlest cathartics, such
as oil of castor, manna, tartarized kali, Polychrest salt, and tartarized
antimony -- (See Cathartics, Simple continued, and Inflammatory fevers, where
different formulae will be found) and also the saline mixture -- which last
often repeated, is said to be the most certain alleviator of the violent nausea
and vomiting, which generally attend these cases -- or it may be given in its
state of fermentation, (No. 59.) and is greatly assistant in correcting the
putrid disposition, and those foulnesses which are collected in the stomach and
flexure of the duodenum -- (42.) afterward the bark must be freely applied. By
these means thousands have been saved; and if they are begun with before the
strength of the patient is exhausted, and will properly pursue the advice
given, seldom any die of this disease.

However in the West Indies in this fever there is something very singular, for
it has been observed, that if the bark was not given on the first remission, it
was apt to run into the continued species.

There are innumerable varieties of these fevers mentioned by authors, who have
given them different names, according to some peculiar circumstances which
attended -- but all yield to the mode of treatment here pointed out -- only in
some paying particular attention to any uncommon symptom which occurred -- two
of which we shall point out.

BILIOUS REMITTENT FEVER.
This attacks generally in the middle of August, and is attended, besides the
common symptoms, with violent pain of the head, and often with delirium, which
symptoms continue in the night, vanish in the daytime, after sweating, a
haemorrhage or looseness. In the beginning there is frequent nausea, bilious
putrid vomiting, and in the end oppression.

In extreme cold weather, and at the approach of winter, a cough, rheumatic
affections, and tenacity of the blood, accompanies these fevers -- but it is
from the bilious purging and vomiting that it derives its name. If evacuations
are not directed, a continued fever with yellowness comes on. The cure is
performed by vomits cathartics, acids, and bark; but we must first persist in
the use of evacuants before we give the bark, and then it is admirably
conducive to promote the cure. This remittent is esteemed of the inflammatory
class.

The other we shall mention is of the putrid class.

MARSH REMITTENT FEVER.
This is the bilious, or putrid fever of the low marshy countries described by
Sir JOHN PRINGLE.

This fever not only happens in moist, but also in warm countries, according to
the season, as they come on in the months of July and August, from putrid
vapors arising from corrupted plants or fish.

This bears bleeding very indifferently, and should rather be treated in the
evacuating and strengthening method; at the beginning clearing the first
passages with gentle emetics and cathartics, and continuing small doses of
antimonials -- which not succeeding to our wish; bark must be called in to our
aid to perform the cure.

In order to prevent the attacks of the remittent fevers, as they are chiefly
the children of moist seasons, and low marshy countries, we should keep good
fires, with intent to correct the atmospheric humidity -- make use of aromatics
-- avoid the evening and morning air -- drink red wine -- use exercise and the
cold bath -- take bark once or twice a day, mixed with bitters -- and smoke
tobacco -- for people who have observed these rules have, many of them, escaped
in countries where this fever has raged epidemically, and afflicted numbers who
have despised these cautions.

SECTION X. INTERMITTENT FEVER.
THESE fevers receive their name from the nature of their progress, having a
perfect cessation of febrile affections from the termination of one fit to the
beginning of another, and may be considered as continued fevers of short
duration, consisting of many febrile fits, the fever returning at stated
periods; for in every fit the course of a continued fever is run through -- the
coldness and shivering is the beginning -- the hot sit the height -- and the
sweating generally attendant, or at least a gentle perspiration the crisis or
termination. What happens in these different stages is thus properly described:

DESCRIPTION. IN THE FIRST STAGE it begins with yawning and stretching, and a
certain indescribable sensation in the back and the ends of the fingers; after
these succeed excessive coldness, insomuch, that it occasions violent shaking
of the whole body, and chattering of the teeth; still, in fact, the blood is in
a state of increased, rather than diminished heat -- there are also nausea, and
sometimes vomiting attendant, with pains of the back, head, and limbs -- the
ends of the nose, ears, lips, and cheeks grow pale -- the nails livid -- the
breathing is difficult -- the urine pale and limpid -- the pulse weak, and
extremely quick -- and this cold fit continues for one, two, three, four, or
five hours sometimes, at others only half an hour before the hot fit commences
-- which forms the

SECOND STAGE, in which there is extreme degree of heat immediately succeeding
the cold, which goes off gradually: in this the pulse becomes full, quick, and
strong -- the head is painful -- and sometimes the patients are delirious --
their breathing is forcible and free -- the tongue white, attended with great
thirst -- at the pit of the stomach they complain of much heat, have pain
there, and sometimes swelling -- the urine is high colored -- and when blood
is taken from the arm it is more dense than usual, particularly in spring --
sometimes in unwholesome situations and seasons the superior part is red, the
inferior black, with a small portion of serum, and that less cohesive than when
in health. At the commencement of the

THIRD STAGE there breaks out a general and copious sweat, which alleviates the
extreme heat, and mitigates all the symptoms, which, on the sweat continuing
for some hours, totally vanishes -- the urine deposits a sediment like
brick-dust -- the patient falls into a sound sleep -- and thus the fit closes
with a cessation of all the febrile symptoms; and this, called the
intermission, in which the patient feels some degree of debility, has much
propensity to sweat, and little or no appetite.

It has been thought that we could prognosticate the violence of the hot, by
the degrees of the duration of the cold fit, for the longer the latter
continued, the more severe would be the former -- -- but this is erroneous, for
the sensation of cold grows weaker in long continued intermittents.

In some countries these fevers are peculiar, as the fens of Cambridgeshire,
Lincolnshire, the low parts of Kent, the marshes of Essex, and in places where
there is much moisture, and the situation low; and here they generally appear
in spring or autumn. They seldom visit other places, except in seasons adapted
to their propagation, and then they become epidemic.

They have been divided into vernal and autumnal, endemical and epidemical, and
into quotidian, where from the termination of one fit to the beginning of
another the space of 24 hours is consumed -- tertian, where that of 48 --
quartan, where of 72 -- and when longer, erratic. They have also been divided
farther; but they seem to be of no practical use, as the modes of cure in all
are very similar.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, immoderate evacuations -- cold moist
atmosphere -- irregular or improper diet of crude watery vegetables -- lowness
of spirits -- crudities in the first passages -- and, in fine, every thing
which contributes to produce a relaxed state of the solids, and poverty of the
blood.

The proximate or immediate, effluvia from moist, marshy places called marsh
miasma -- impeded perspiration, and relaxation of the solids.

Hence are the poor more subject to this disease than the rich and affluent,
those who inhabit the country more than those who live in large towns and
populous cities; for generous diet and warmth are preservatives against the
disease as well by purifying the air, as invigorating the habit.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Affections of both the nervous and vascular systems,
from marsh effluvia running through the course of a continued fever, of short
duration, beginning with cold and shivering, succeeded by great heat, and
terminating, for the most part, in profuse sweats, in one fit, which leaves the
habit perfectly free from fever for some time, and returns at stated periods.

CURE. The indications are, to prevent the return of the febrile affections, by
taking off the too great incitability of the nervous, and irritability of the
vascular system, by giving tone or strength to the nerves and vessels, and
rendering them incapable of feeling the effect of morbid particles in the
habits, called marsh miasmata, and ejecting them out of the constitution.

But at the commencement of fevers we cannot immediately discover of what
particular nature they are, and one the least dangerous may be converted into
others which are more hazardous, by injudicious treatment, as an intermittent
into a remittent, and this into a continued; we should at the first onset be
careful, till we are convinced of its specific nature; therefore to general
means we should only have recourse, which may in all fevers be proper, be they
of what sort they may, and this will depend on placing the constitution under
such circumstances as approach nearer to a state of health.

Therefore, in the beginning, if the pulse give evident signs of fullness, with
other concomitant symptoms, which indicate evacuations to be proper, as we have
before specified in the remittent and other fevers, blood may be taken from the
arm. Should there be nausea or sickness, indicative of foulness of the stomach,
an emetic, (No. 11, 12. 38.) should be administered, and the bowels cleared by
some gentle aperient medicine. (No. 3. 22 to 24.)

Where these are thought necessary, bleeding and cathartics should precede the
administration of the emetic, that no mischief may arise from its operation,
which might be the case, should there be any local congestion, or too great
general fullness, by rupturing, or distending the vessels too much, or pushing
the blood too powerfully into the small capillary tubes, particularly of the
head.

If these prove insufficient, we must proceed to the use of antimonials in
small doses, united with the saline mixture, or alone, (No. 6 to 9.) as has
been before directed -- and, as soon as the fever shows what it is, take such
steps as its nature demands -- if an intermittent, the most powerful medicine,
with which observation and experience has furnished us, is the Peruvian bark,
(193, 194.) -- the quantity given should be generally so much in the interval
between the fits as will prevent their return, that is, in adults, from fix to
eight drams.

The most efficacious mode of administration that has been recommended, is in
powder mixed with red wine.

Where the intermission is short, it is given at shorter intervals and vice
versa. I always consider what is most agreeable to the patient respecting the
form, and give a dose every one, two, three, or four hours, as occasion
requires -- the nearer the approach of the usual time of accession, the quicker
it should be repeated, in order that it may at that time exert its fullest
action with its greatest power.

Should the febrile fits be by these means conquered, we must not totally
desist from its use, but for a few days repeat it at proper intervals, every
fifth or sixth hour; then for a week, twice in the twenty-four hours;
afterward, once for the same, space.

In winter, after desisting for a week, or ten days, it will be prudent to
return to it again occasionally for two or three days, and so persist for a few
times, which will effectually secure the patient from a relapse. Add to this,
the patient should avoid exposing himself to the remote or inducing causes,
(257.) use gentle exercise, particularly riding -- light nutritious diet --
animal food -- red port, claret, or any generous wine, in proper quantities --
such as are easily digested, will serve to strengthen the solids, and promote a
free and regular circulation.

Large draughts of any kind of liquids, however thirsty the patient may be,
should not be allowed in the cold fit, as they will load the stomach too much,
and increase internal oppression and uneasiness; but in the hot fit, watery
fluids, such as sage, rosemary, balm-tea, small white wind whey, and such like,
may be liberally administered.

The forms in which the bark is administered, are either in bolus, pills,
electuary, decoction, infusion with cold or hot water, simple powder, tincture,
or extract. (See the doses, 193, 194.)

When we want to throw in as much as possible in a given time, (see No. 70.)
and let it be administered every second, third, or fourth hour, according to
the times of the febrile accessions. (258.)

Where bark has disagreed, equal portions of quassia wood and snake-root,
infused in boiling water, or oak bark in powder, or extract alone, joined with
alum, or chamomile flowers, have been efficacious, given during the
intermissions every three or four hours, (No. 71, 72.) -- the virtues also of
cupulae, or scaly cup, which embraces the bottom of the acorn, are similar, in
a considerable degree, to the oak bark.

The method above laid down will generally be successful in the quotidian and
tertian intermittents, (257.) particularly if we couple such medicines along
with the bark as the nature of the constitution of the patient, and the
apparent febrile symptoms indicate, viz. if the habit appears robust, the
pulse, in the febrile fit, full, hard, and quick, with other inflammatory
symptoms, bleeding has been greatly beneficial; and in these cases, joining the
bark with saline substances, as tartarized kali neutralized with lemon juice,
(No. 1.) and the decoction of bark, or fixed sal ammoniac, (176.) -- if
contrary appearances, cordials and volatiles have supplied their places, as
volatile salt of hartshorn, (150.) tincture of snake-root. (179.)

Notwithstanding which, they will sometimes prove very obstinate -- in these
cases vomits (No. 11, 12. 38.) given a small space of time before the return of
the fit, and antimonials in small doses, (230.) pursued through the course of
the hot fit, have been found beneficial -- or, where the habit has been in a
highly irritable state, opium, (152.) administered before the fit, or in the
hot stage, seemed of use.

It is only though in the quartan (257.) intermittent that they are often
required, seldom in the others preceding, notwithstanding the hot and cold fits
continue a shorter time than the two former, the whole fit seldom lasting above
five hours.

Bark seldom fails of completing a cure, if judiciously administered, and the
concomitant circumstances which sometimes appear, are properly attended to --
when it does, the failure is owing to some of the following particulars --
either it has been given in too small doses -- not persisted in long enough --
given in an improper form -- or such medicines may not have been added to it,
nor such a regimen observed, as the peculiar nature of the case required.

Sometimes the bark has a tendency to pass off through the bowels, then it is
necessary to add a few drops of tincture of opium to each dose, which will
prevent that effect -- at others the habit will be too costive, eight or ten
grains of rhubarb may be given soon after the cessation of the fit, to obviate
that inconvenience -- sometimes the stomach will not bear it, it may then be
administered in form of glyster, (No. 73.)

It is sometimes extremely difficult, and very often impossible, to get
children to take a sufficient quantity of this medicine to answer the desired
purpose -- for the best form to which they will adhere the longest, (See No.
74.)

But they have been cured by baths, in which half their body has been immersed,
of bark decoction, rubbing the spine with equal parts of soap liniment and
tincture of opium -- or wearing a waistcoat made of callico doubled, within
which bark has been quilted.

With respect to our prognostics in this disease, when eruptions appear upon
the lips, they afford a good omen; and the more regularly the fever passes
through its stages, so much the better. Epidemic fevers of this kind are worse
than those which occur accidentally to a few -- quartans than quotidians or
tertians -- autumnal, than vernal -- Inflammation of the tonsils is considered
as mortal -- sometimes it carries off those who are very infirm in the first
stage -- they frequently leave the constitution extremely weak, so that it
requires a long time for the re-establishment of perfect health; which must be
assisted by proper regimen, and exercise, as has before been specified, after
the termination of other severe fevers -- sometimes they terminate in jaundice,
consumptions, and dropsies, which, if they arise from scirrhosities, or hard
irresoluble tumors of the viscera, are fatal.

But, notwithstanding what may be thought, with respect to the necessity of an
early cure, it is not always proper to take off this fever immediately -- for
by their continuance, they have been known to cure epilepsy, severe coughs from
affections of the liver; also hypochondriac and gouty affections have
disappeared, by this fever bringing about, from its continuance, some salutary
constitutional changes -- the bleeding piles, smallpox, and other acute
fevers, as well as strong mental affections, have been known, on the other
hand, to subdue the ague.

SECTION XI. HECTIC FEVER, OR CHRONIC REMITTENT FEVER WITHOUT CRISIS.
THUS would I wish to denominate this fever, because the word HECTIC, except
from long continued custom alone, gives us no determinate idea respecting it;
and where any complaint is peculiarly marked by any known cause or symptoms, by
which it deviates from all others of the same class, and by which from them it
may be distinguished, can be confined in a very short compass, by terms
expressive of that peculiarity would I have it marked down. As, therefore,
hectic fever is of longer duration than any other remittent fever, goes off,
when curable, by no known crisis, and, during the whole course, has various
exacerbations and remissions, I have ventured to alter its appellation.

Authors have been much divided with respect to this fever, some considering it
always symptomatic, deriving its source from some local complaint, and
depending entirely on that -- others, that it may also be a primary disease,
neither arising from, nor dependent on any other -- for the latter opinion I
confess myself an advocate; for, though hectic symptoms certainly do derive
their source from scirrhous obstructions and ulcerations of all the viscera,
more particularly of the lungs (28.) and mesentery, (46.) because it is said
the former are exposed to injuries from the external air, and the force of the
blood circulating through their substance; the latter is subject to the same
from compression of the aliments in the first passages, from viscid chyle,
(43.) and the slower circulation of the blood through the intestines; still may
they arise immediately from some acrimony of the blood, because they have
occurred certainly where no one viscus, through the whole course of the
disease, was affected more than the rest; nor do the visceral obstructions,
which are always found on dissection, destroy the validity of this opinion; for
they are the effects, as well as causes, of hectic fevers -- of which we shall
be convinced, if we will only examine the remote or inducing causes, which we
shall shortly specify.

DESCRIPTION. The symptoms are very similar to what appear in consumption of
the lungs -- the patients laboring under this complaint have a continued, dry,
unnatural heat; they lose their appetite, and their pulse is small, weak, and
frequent, though fuller and stronger after eating; they have no sensation of
sickness; after meals a flushing of the cheeks comes on; and their urine is in
general red, and covered with an oily pellicle; their sleep by no means
refreshes them; they become hollow-eyed; their skin grows harsh, the belly
sinks inwards; a colliquative looseness comes on, the body grows t^bid, and
death makes its approach by slow degrees.

On this fever the sagacious Dr. Heberden has made several useful remarks in
the London Medical Transactions, Vol. II. page 1, etc. amongst which he says,
the most certain mark of this fever is, when the sweat, which usually attends
this fever, is over; the fever will sometimes continue, and in the middle the
chillness will return.

This is very readily distinguished from all other fevers by the slowness of
its progress -- but from the first stage of the watery head, with great
difficulty, and not without the most assiduous attention to the symptoms
peculiar to each.

CAUSES. Remote or inducing are, immoderate and long continued mental
affections -- long watchings -- too great evacuations, whether of blood, milk,
semen, saliva, pus, sweat, or the alvine fluids -- too acrid medicines, as
mercurial preparations, strong purges, too often repeated -- debility of the
first passages, by which the chyle, either crude or corrupted, is conveyed into
the circulating mass of fluids -- preceding diseases, as intermittents,
smallpox, measles, dropsy, scurvy, king's evil so called -- suppressed
evacuations -- frequent intoxication -- old people and infants are also subject
to it, from their age alone, dependent upon constitutional debility.

The proximate or immediate, both from the preceding causes, and the modes of
cure, are said to be, a saline and alcalescent state of the fluids -- whether
this may be the precise case, perhaps it may be difficult to determine --
though mucilaginous materials and acids are said to be beneficial, yet it is
highly probable some species of acrimony takes place in the habit, as the
fundamental principle of this disease.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Febrile affections long continued, having frequent
increase of violence, no perceptible intermission, and not terminating in
crisis, attended with irregular vascular action increasing often in the day,
more so in the evening; and generally at the beginning with tenacity, toward
the termination, with putrescency of the blood.

CURE. The indications are, to mitigate febrile affections, and correct the
acrimony of the fluids.

If care is taken of this complaint at an early period, and proper advice
administered, a cure may be effected -- but, under these circumstances,
patients often delay too long, and confide either in their own imaginary
knowledge, or the family receipts of some humane old woman, till little chance
remains for the skill of the more judicious; for when the powers of the
constitution become to be greatly debilitated -- the hair falls off -- a
colliquative dissolving looseness, night sweats, and swellings of the legs come
on -- the urine begins to have an oily appearance, and the countenance assumes
a cadaverous aspect, becoming thin and ghastly, all prospect of warding off the
fatal blow is irrecoverably gone, the patient is got beyond the reach of our
art, and death quickly closes the fatal scene.

In the beginning, where we can be of service, we must first of all clear the
stomach and bowels by gentle emetics, (No. 11, 12.) and mild aperients, chiefly
rhubarb -- abate the febrile heat by small doses of Polychrest salt, (171.) and
nitre, (177.) and giving such doses of oil of castor, manna, or some such like
cooling and gently opening medicines, as will keep the body free from
costiveness, (171, 172.) -- in order to sheath the acrimony of the fluids, we
must have recourse to demulcents, (187.) emollients, (137.) and particularly,
which will be more effectual, to a well-regulated diet and regimen.

The food should consist of chicken broth, jellies, and if the stomach will
bear them, oysters -- milk, particularly women's or ass' -- goat's whey --
buttermilk, with Bristol or Seltzer water. The patient should live in a clear
country air, on a dry soil; keep cheerful company; ride constantly on
horseback, or travel from place to place -- or he should take a voyage to sea,
or sail every day, for that has been known to save numbers in the beginning of
this disease, and some who were rather advanced; but to all it affords great
relief. And at the same time, with intent to keep up the tone of the system,
mild astringents, slight infusions of bark, one ounce and an half, with ten
drops of dilute vitriolic acid may be given twice a day, or two or three ounces
of tincture of roses also; three or four drams of the conserve may be mixed
with six or eight ounces of milk, and taken two or three times, or oftener, in
the day; -- as for common drink, they should use barley-water, decoction of
marshmallows, linseed-tea, or that of coltsfoot. Bristol water has been
esteemed highly serviceable; but it is often deferred too late. In the earliest
stages of this disease it should be applied to, for in them it promises to be
of the most essential service, little, as we have before remarked, being
capable of being done in the more advanced or latter periods.

SECTION XII. ERUPTIVE FEVERS.
SO called from the Latin word erumpo, to break out, and also in medical
language EXANTHEMATOUS, from the Greek word exanthema, pustula, a pustule,
because these eruptions make their appearance on the surface of the skin -- and
this is done by the effort of nature to throw out some matter offensive to the
constitution, which was creative of disease.

Now though these partake of the nature of some of those we have mentioned in
Section 8th, still they derive their names from the eruptions with which they
are constantly accompanied, and of these there are several (...) and varieties
-- of which we shall treat separately, because they require different modes of
management, according to the different effects they produce upon the
constitution.

And these effects will be assisted or alleviated, by attending more to the
habit of the patient than to the specific nature of the morbid particles which
produce them; for we know nothing of the materials, or the parts of which they
are formed, consequently cannot be able to find out any specific remedy which
can correct them, so that the disease, of which they are the source, may be
subdued, by weakening or destroying the power inherent in themselves.

Therefore, in all our medical exertions, we attempt only to prevent the ill
consequences they are likely to produce, by so guarding the constitution, that
nature may be empowered to separate and throw out what would, if suffered to
remain, prove fatal to the human machine, either producing immediate death, or
bringing on other maladies which would in time have a similar termination.

Now all these fevers of which we are going to treat are esteemed infectious,
consequently contagious; for these two terms are used synonymously by the most
learned authorities. Notwithstanding which, I would endeavor to make some
discrimination between them, and am warranted in the attempt, if any the least
benefit can be derived to society by the observance of such a distinction; to
prove which, I assert, that there are some diseases which are acquired by the
particles of morbid matter floating in the circumambient atmosphere, either
from that matter being inhaled by the lungs, impregnating what we eat or drink;
or absorbed by the inhaling vessels of the skin, nose, or fauces, whilst others
are communicated from contact alone -- hence the former of these I would term
infectious, the latter contagious; and for this reason the modes of prevention
would be different -- for in a country or town where the first was rife,
quitting those places is absolutely necessary; but where the last, cautious
residence in the same is sufficient, avoiding commerce with persons so
contaminated; or touching any materials, which are capable of retaining the
contagious matter, that have by them been used or handled. Besides, in this
county, it shows, in cases of the plague, the security in drawing lines of
circumvallation to prevent its progress; indeed other modes, from this idea,
might be found out of great utility under these unhappy circumstances.
Supported by these reasons, I shall beg leave to preserve the difference
between the two terms, and proceed to treat on eruptive fevers from infection;
and, first, on the

1. SMALLPOX, or POCKS.
Because we call a single pustule pock -- this seems to be derived from the
Saxon word pocca, pocket, or the French poche, a small bag. The Latins gave the
disease the term variolae, because from the eruptions it altered the appearance
of the skin.

This complaint is occasioned by morbid matter of a peculiar nature absorbed
into the habit from the external air, from contact of a person infected, or
from inoculation, either by the inhaling vessels of the skin, lungs, membranes
of the nose and mouth, or first passages -- and has been divided agreeable to
the cuticular appearances, into distinct, confluent, coherent -- or into
common, crystalline eruptions full of thin serous matter -- verrucous,
resembling warts -- or bloody, filled with red fluid, or blood in a broken
state.

However generally now we adhere to the terms distinct and confluent; but this
seems of little use in practice; for they may be distinct, yet of a very bad
kind; and confluent, yet very good; therefore the more eligible division
appears to be into simple and malignant -- the first comprehending those which
are the least, the last, those which are the most dangerous.

This disease has four stages: the first, the febrile, which continues three
days -- 2d, the eruptive, two days -- 3d, the suppurative, five or seven --
4th, the exs^ccative, or stage in which the pustules dry, two or four days --
or sometimes another fever comes on, called the secondary.

DESCRIPTION. It generally commences with symptoms of an inflammatory fever,
from whence the particles of the morbid virus are considered not only highly
subtilized, but inflammatory and stimulant, attended with nausea or vomiting --
pain in the head and back -- tightness about the pit of the stomach -- the
patients are very drowsy, sometimes delirious -- in grown people often sweats
break out on the first days, and infants are apt to be seized with convulsions
-- the skin though, in general, is rather moist and soft -- the upper orifice
of the stomach sometimes acutely painful, and also the sides.

These symptoms continue three or four days, on which appear small red specks
like flea-bites; which, when pressed with the finger, may be felt hard in the
skin, and thus may be distinguished from other eruptions, particularly the
measles, which, on their first appearance, are very seldom so hard, or can be
felt in this manner, as not elevating the cuticle so much; first on the face,
and scattered on the hands, neck, and breast; and with these commences the
second stage; from which period the pustules keep continually increasing, and
diffusing themselves over every part of the body; at which time the fever goes
off when the eruption is completed; after this they inflame, begin to be
prominent above the skin, are painful, hot, and fill about the fifth day; and
have round their basis a circular florid redness -- the throat also is painful,
and inflamed commonly -- the face begins to swell and puff up, for the most
part, on the seventh day, so much, that they generally close the eyes, and
occasion blindness.

At this period, the commencement of the third stage, as if from external
irritation, soliciting the perfect and complete discharge of morbid matter,
fresh febrile symptoms arise, which continue to the ninth, tenth, or eleventh
day, according to the severity of the disease, or quantity of the eruption. The
pustules having acquired their full size, most of them as big as pease, are
filled with a whitish or yellowish matter; this concludes the third stage; and
then the matter ^^zes out at the top of the eruptions, dries, turns of a dark
color, and forms hard scabs, and this is in the same order in which they made
their appearance -- and, as the face subsides, the feet and hands swell, and
subside not totally till the fourteenth day, at which period the disease is
considered to have completely finished its course, which forms the conclusion
of the fourth stage.

This is in general the progress of the simple or mild species -- though
sometimes another fever, called SECONDARY, will come on, when the eruptions
have run so together, that they form one uniform crust, and by that means
obstruct perspiration; so that, instead of the quantity of variolous matter
passing out of the habit, it is again re-absorbed, and the intestines are
loaded with an offensive collection of acrid materials, which create a fever of
the remittent class that often proves fatal.

But in the confluent sort there are some peculiarities which ought to be
specified; and, therefore, we must observe, that in these the pustules break
out sooner, on the second or third day; the febrile symptoms run on with a
greater degree of violence -- and on the appearance of the eruptions, or a day
or two after, which happens now and then in the distinct sort a spitting will
come on, gradually increasing to a salivation in grown people -- in infants a
looseness supplies the place -- though in common the attendant fever of the
smallpox is of the inflammatory kind, yet, in the more complicated sort, the
fever assumes a different type, and puts on the appearance either of -- 1st, an
inflammatory remittent -- 2dly, nervous -- 3dly, putrid fever -- or is
associated, 4thly, with symptoms of aysentery.

IN THE FIRST, the febrile affections run very high, with excessive heat, and
great prostration of strength -- the skin is dry and hot -- the arteries,
called carotids, running through the neck into the superior parts, throb -- the
tendons, (22.) grow stiff -- the eyes are bright, vivid, and full of blood --
the head and loins are painful, often without any delirium or drowsy
disposition -- when the eruption is finished, if the patient dies not before
the completion, which, from the violence of the fever, is sometimes the case,
the headache, pain in the loins, vomiting, and other symptoms, are relieved;
but the fever revives its former force, or continues, and has increase of
febrile affections every thirty-six hours -- hence termed tertian; -- at this
period there arise want of sleep, delirium, anxiety -- there also come on
bleeding of the nose, copious sweats -- then heat, and dryness of the skin --
very often miliary eruptions break out in spaces between the pustules, or small
purple spots like flea-bit -- sometimes an erysipclatous inflammation will
occupy the head and face, and occasion a large inflammatory swelling -- the
febrile and other symptoms increase in the suppurating state, with tossing and
delirium -- the pustules subdue not, nor seem to be of a very bad sort --
sometimes though they grow black and mortify -- then the patients lie in a
state of aparent sleep, and convulsions close the scene.

IN THE SECOND, at the commencment, there is great prostration of strength,
lowness of spirits, obscure febrile symptoms, extreme nausea, sickness, and
oppression.

The pustules never push forth perfectly, nor maturate kindly, but many lurk in
the skin; and those which elevate themselves a little above it, are flat and
depressed, containing a thin aqueous fluid, and have a small black spot in the
middle -- the face, when the eruption is copious and runs together, never
swells, but looks as if covered with a yellowish skin, something like a
macerated, bladder of that color.

A thin serous looseness generally comes on -- if not, convulsions put a period
to the unfortunate patient's existence.

IN THE THIRD, the symptoms preceding the eruptions are nearly similar to the
former; but the pustules are black; the bottoms of which are in a mortified
state; indeed, the texture of the blood is so broken by the putrescent
acrimony, that it runs off by urine, and various other haemorrhages; the spaces
between the pustules are black, and large broad spots, called vibices, or small
ones, like flea-bites, are formed on the skin; besides, the red portion of the
blood not only mixes with the serum, and fills the eruption, but it raises
large blisters elsewhere.

These pustules, which are only a little elevated, beginning to appear upon the
second day, are black; the urine, for the most part, is bloody; as are also the
stools, spittings, vomitings, and in some even the tears; the fever is violent,
and the febrile fits almost insupportable.

IN THE FOURTH, which was called DYSENTERIC, because it happened in the year
1670, at the time of the epidemic dysentery, and partook, in some degree, of
its nature; or, because the matter of the smallpox was often thrown out of the
constitution by intestinal evacuation, when treated by the warm regimen, not
uncommon in those days.

In this the eruption does not occur, as in the mild sort, on the fourth, but
on the third day; the pustules are of a less size always, and are sharper, or
more pointed at the top, and grow blackish toward the conclusion -- besides, a
copious discharge of saliva, as in the confluent kind, is often a concomitant.
Should the acrimony of the putrid, which produces the alvine flux, that forms
the characteristic sign of this species of smallpox, be very copious and
active, occasioning the discharge to be violent, it almost always proves mortal.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing of this, as well as of every other species of
infectious or contagious fever, is a predisposition, or peculiarity of the
constitution to feel the impressions made by the morbid matter, productive of
distress in the moving solids, and alteration of the fluids of the machine.

The proximate or immediate, contaminating particles, peculiar to the
smallpox, absorbed into the habits, and these producing febrile effects, which
vary according to the nature, or particular state of the constitution at that
time.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. The only certain ones are the eruptions themselves, with
their progressive concomitant symptoms, the appearance of which may be
suspected in the first stage, it the attack should be sudden -- if the
smallpox should be the reigning epidemic, or the patient so situated, that he
has been thrown in the way of this specific infection -- if pain should affect
the back part of the head, sauces, loins, particularly the pit of the stomach,
attended with vomiting, and that pain increased on pressure.

CURE. The indications are, to diminish the assimilating or contaminating power
of the morbid matter, and keep the fever within such bounds, that nature shall
be enabled to separate from and throw out of the habit the offensive materials
that cause the distress, which is done by so regulating the motions of the
nervous and vascular systems, that the constitution may be put into a state to
mitigate and support the succeeding contest with the greatest ease, and freedom
from danger.

And this knowledge we shall acquire, by considering the situation of the
habit, the mode of living, and season of the year, with respect to the weather
or constitution of the air, as these will dispose more or less to the
production of inflammatory, nervous, or putrescent febrile affections; for I am
certain, that, according to the nature of the fever, so are we to regulate our
conduct, and hence observe those rules which have been previously laid down in
the management of those different fevers specified in our eighth and ninth
sections.

Sometimes the disease is so extremely mild, that there is no need of medical
assistance, though at the close, in order to clear the first passages from any
foulness or offensive matter which may have been collected there during the
progress of the complaint, it would be right to give two or three purges. (No.
3. 19 to 24.)

At others, it is of a very dangerous nature, and requires the assistance and
sagacity of no small share of medical knowledge, as it is accompanied with such
a variety of threatening symptoms.

Should the smallpox attack strong, hale, robust habits, where inflammatory
symptoms run high, which they sometimes do to such a degree, as to affect the
brain, throat, or lungs, so as to produce delirium, suffocation, and extreme
difficulty of breathing; according to the violence of the symptoms we must have
recourse to bleeding, and that repeated, if they give not way to the first
operation -- indeed, if the pulse is hard and full; the heat considerably above
the natural standard; the urine high-colored; the pain in the head, back, and
loins acute; the bleeding at the beginning should be copious -- and, under
these circumstances, blood may be taken even at the height, or any intermediate
stage -- we may also give antimonials, nitrous and cooling medicines, and such
other things as have been advised in cure of inflammatory fevers, (210, etc.)
for the same reasons.

If the head should be violently affected, the feet may be bathed in warm
water, and warm fomentations, or poultices, applied to them; for these will
solicit a freer circulation downwards, a more copious eruption into the
extremities, and diminish the quantity of variolous matter, which otherwise
would appear in the more superior parts.

After once or twice bleeding, a gentle emetic, (No. 11, 12. 38.) would be
useful, and clearing the first passages with some mild aperient, (No. 3. 22 to
24.) or at least repeated glysters every, or every other day, (No. 25, 26.)

By the means above directed, we reduce the active power of the system, that it
may not be hindered from throwing off the matter of the smallpox, by the too
great disturbance and distress occasioned by the rapidity and violence of
febrile action.

But should the train of symptoms be such as indicate the presence of a nervous
fever, (325.) we must endeavor to rouse the vascular motions, and increase the
activity of the nervous system, in the manner we have directed in nervous
fever, (216.) for, without this, there will only be a partial separation of the
variolous matter thrown out upon the surface of the body; and the internal
parts, such as the brain, stomach, lungs, and bowels, be more loaded, and the
fluids not perfectly free from morbid particles. To obviate these
inconveniences, we must not do any thing that is likely to turn the humors
upon the bowels, nor take away any blood; for these would weaken the system,
already in too debilitated a state, and render the fluids too acrimonious; we
must try to invigorate the constitution, in order that the blood may circulate
with proper freedom externally, by wine, wine-whey, volatiles, and cordials,
(218.)

The load, nausea, anxiety, and oppression, which are almost always constant
concomitants in this species of febrile affection, might be relieved by an
emetic. (247.) for the shock would tend in some degree to rouse the system, and
promote the eruption by that means.

Should the fever attendant be of the putrid kind, and betray symptoms of
prevalent putrescency in the humors, we must not have recourse to the lancet;
for bleeding would hurry the constitution rapidly into all those mischiefs
which arise from extreme debilitated nervous action, and broken texture of the
blood, as before explained when treating on putrid fever, (223.) -- here we
must depend upon bark, and such things as were specified when treating on that
malady.

In order to promote success in treating this complaint, in the best manner we
can, by procuring a separation and expulsion of the morbid matter, we must,
indisputably, pay attention to the precise nature of the fever; for it is by
properly regulating that from whence we can hope for perfect and lasting relief.

Particular occurrences present themselves frequently, which call for our
attention in an especial manner, added to the general plans we have
specifically pointed out, in which we must attempt to imitate nature in her
operations.

When insensible perspiration is too much impeded by the pustules crowding so
close together, and obstructing the pores of the skin, she produces either a
copious spitting, free discharge of urine, or looseness, to make up that
defect, or lodges the aqueous fluid in some part of the cellular membrane (26.)
of the hands and feet, which at that time put on dropsical appearances -- hence
is pointed out to us the necessity of serous evacuations.

It is therefore incumbent upon us to endeavor to promote the slow of urine
from the completion of the eruption to the turn, by the use of diuretics; the
safest of which is ethereal spirits of nitre, (176.) and taking the patients
now and then out of bed, and exposing them to the cool air.

Small doses of calomel, under these circumstances, have been attended with
some success, as they often promote a spitting, or increase the discharge of
urine; or, should we be afraid of determining the humors too much to the
bowels, it may be thrown into the habit in form of ointment, rubbed in above
the knee, or on the inside of the thighs.

But if these discharges are defective, or cease altogether, and there is no
swelling in the extremities sufficient to counterbalance the decreased or
obstructed evacuations, the ankles or wrists must be blistered, by insinuating
some blistering ointment into the spaces between the pustules -- and if this
succeeds, by creating a free discharge, the danger which before threatened may
be happily prevented -- if not, we shall have reason to fear a fatal conclusion.

Sometimes restlessness will be occasioned, and the febrile symptoms increased,
by irritation on the surface of the body, creating pain, as the pustules
proceed to perfect maturation and dryness -- here opiates (151.) (No. 4, 5.)
procure ease and sleep, forward suppuration, expedite separation and expulsion,
by preventing internal disturbance in the system from the causes above
specified. But, perhaps, by their use the body may be rendered costive; or if
so, at this period, from any other cause, gentle aperient medicines have been
recommended; but glysters, (No. 25, 26.) every day till the dryness of the
pocks takes place, are more eligible, as from them there can be no danger of
creating the smallest disturbance in the habit, nor of determining the fluids
too much to the intestines, so as to run the least risque of inducing a
looseness; and they will also effectually assist in preventing an increase of
febrile distress, which might arise from collections of acrimonious matters in
the first passages.

Sometimes after the incrustation is perfectly formed, from the resorption of
pus, offensive acrid matters in the first passages, or the absorption of
acrimonious or foetid particles from foul linen, the secondary fever is apt to
arise. In order to prevent which, the patient should have his linen changed, be
put into fresh sheets well aired, every thing be removed from him which can be
supposed to harbor offensive matter, and a purge, (169, etc.) (No. 19 to 22.)
given as soon as the crust is actually formed.

Though some conjectured, with equal if not with more probability, that this
fever arises from the imperfect separation or expulsion of the variolous
matter, and that it becomes the instrument of nature to free the habit from
what remains.

However, be the case which it may, if it runs high, and is attended with
violent headache, great oppression, and difficulty of breathing, bleeding may
be necessary, and so long as the pulse can support the operation well, it may
be repeated -- blisters should afterward be applied -- and purgatives
administered, if the pulse does not flag -- and vegetable acids should be mixed
with common drinks -- but should the strength fail, we must have recourse to
cordials.

If it goes not off by these means, it will, in all probability, put on the
appearance of a remittent fever, and as such must be considered -- for the
subduction of which, we must, as in cases of those fevers before specified,
(252.) apply to the bark, (253) and with respect to the quantity to be applied,
the age of the patient, and violence of the disease, must regulate our judgment.

Some, in order to mitigate or prevent this fever, have advised the pustules,
as soon as they are fully matured, where they are of the confluent kind, to be
opened as they ripen, in the order they make their appearance. I am, however,
far at present from recommending the adoption of such a plan, as I should be
fearful of the most dangerous consequences ensuing from such a practice,
particularly where the fever, after the eruption, still continued with any
degree of force; for it is very probable that, from thence, there is not a due
separation of the morbid materials, and that the secondary fever is very often,
at least, an effort of nature to throw what remains out of the habit -- and
that by the irritation on the skin this purpose might better be effected, than
by its being taken off; for from such attempts, there has been reason to
believe death the consequence. Much mischief has accrued from applications made
to gouty limbs, from the impetuosity of the sufferers to take off the pain
arising from that cause, before the whole of the gouty matter had been
deposited; and in these two cases the reasoning is nearly similar, as well as
some others; and it is well known, that nature frequently makes pain arising
from some irritating power the sole cause of constitutional relief. I would
therefore advise great circumspection on the present point, which only can be
warranted by practical certainty, not whimsical, though ingenious, conjecture.

Sometimes the smallpox will be attended with a remittent fever, (250, etc.)
verging to the inflammatory class; then the disease must be treated in the same
manner as we have delivered when treating on that fever. (210.) (See 252.)

Sometimes the eruptions will put on different appearances, (265.) which from
thence are called CRYSTALLINE, and be attended with a nervous fever; in this
case therefore, we chiefly depend on blisters and vinous cordials, with such
other aids as we have specified in the treatment of the slow nervous fever.
(216.) Or SANGUINEOUS or BLOODY, and have for their concomitant a putrid fever;
in which case, without some service can be done in the beginning, not one ray
of hope remains for our success -- for which purpose we must depend upon bark,
and such other antiseptics, (192.) as are supposed to have the most powerful
and immediate action, the principal of which is alum, (137, etc.) (No. 56.) and
pursue the mode of management throughout, as recommended in the putrid fever.
(223.)

Or, they are attended with extreme pain, and violent flux from the bowels,
putting on the appearance of dysentery, (268.) -- in this case we must
endeavor to retard the flux, by some gentle cordial antacids, of the shell or
earthy kind, (19^.) called absorbents, (No. 42, 43.) or the white decoction,
with red port or claret, or astringent draughts. (No. 75, 76.)

But in this complaint much nicety is required -- for alvine fluxes are not
always to be considered morbid, they are sometimes critical, and the means of
which nature makes use to carry morbid virus out of the habit -- if, therefore,
the pulse does not sink, but continues to move with strength and greater
freedom, and the oppressive symptoms are all alleviated, the use of astringents
should be cautiously administered. It would be more advisable, to support the
patient by mild cordials, and exhibit such medicines as would sheath the
bowels, and suffer the matter to pass through them with the least uneasiness --
small doses of ipecacuanha (No. 57.) will be beneficial, and preparations from
the class of the demulcents, as mixtures of gum tragaoanth, Arabic, starch, and
such like; and, toward the conclusion, (...), joined with some of the mild
astringents, might be used. (No. 77, 78.)

With regard to the diet, it is always to be adapted to the nature of the
fever, during its continuance, which may be collected from what has been said
on this head, when treating of the inflammatory, nervous, and putrid fevers.
The apartments must be kept cool, and the patients fit up some hours every day,
if the circumstances of their case will permit -- and after the complaint has
finished its course, purgatives should, at proper intervals, be repeated, to
clear the habit of any remains of morbid particles; and the same course pursued
for the recovery of the strength, as after the conclusion of other fevers,
where the constitution has been much harrassed.

Long experience have enabled practitioners to make the following observations
respecting the good and bad omens in this disease:

The later the smallpox make their appearance in winter the less dangerous
they will be -- they are also more mild in the young subject than the strong
adult -- the longer the first, or febrile stage, continues before the eruption,
so much more mild; the shorter, so much the more violent may we expect the
disease to be -- should there be an acute pain in the side, or in the upper
orifice of the stomach, they are bad signs -- the more the pustules crowd
together, the more numerous they are in the face and trunk of the body; the
more flat or depressed, the slighter the remission in the second, or eruptive
stage, so much greater will be the danger -- a delirium succeeding the eruption
imports no little mischief -- deficiency of the salivary discharge, in the
depressed or confluent sort, is one of the worst symptoms -- the more florid
the spaces between the pustules are, the greater may be our hope; p^leness
there affords us no flattering prospect.

If the matter in the pustules be white, viscid, and full, it is a fortunate
appearance; but if, on the contrary, it should be brown and thin, and the
pustules grow yellow, or have their tops indented, it is the reverse -- if the
spaces between the pustules, and they themselves, are livid, death is at hand.

It is also a bad omen if the secondary fever appears before the retrocession
of the pustules -- if the face subsides, and the salivation or spitting ceases,
and the hands and arms swell not in the same proportion, in the confluent sort,
it is a sign of death.

If, on account of being too heated, the patient cannot bear the bed-cloaths
upon him, it portends a delirium -- great inflammation of the sauces, quickness
in breathing, clear urine, with little cloudiness floating in it, grinding of
the teeth, picking of the flocks from the bed clothes, threaten dissolution --
nor are we to build any hopes on the remission of delirium, if the fever
continues in the same state.

Before we close this part of our subject, we must beg leave to make one
general observation respecting all eruptive fevers, as well as the smallpox --
that as many, though their eruptions arise from the consequence of their
peculiar action on the constitution, and produce specific cuticular
appearances, are ushered in by some fever, either of the inflammatory, nervous,
or putrid kind, in general; yet, should they he attended, as sometimes they
are, with those of the mixed class, where we cannot perfectly distinguish to
which of the more simple sort they belong, we must treat them according to the
ideas given in the mixed fevers. (240, etc.)

2. INOCULATED SMALLPOX.
It is rather singular, that after so many years experience of the advantages
accruing from inoculation, that there remain any so blinded to their own
interest and happiness, as to be desirous still of abrogating the practice --
which is the preserver of life, beauty, and health, so perfectly clear to
common observation.

The mere recital of the benefits annexed to it are so conspicuous, that
reasoning is unnecessary.

It supplies us with the opportunity of having the body properly prepared for
the reception of the morbid matter; so that it may be freed from such materials
as would supply an active cause to increase and prolong febrile affections; and
thus prevent the fever, which always attends in the smallpox, from running too
high, or producing otherwise dangerous effects, according to the nature of the
constitution -- it occasions a smaller quantity of eruptions, and the pustules
to be more superficial -- hence not leaving those deep pit., and often unseemly
scars as in the natural smallpox -- it supplies us with a knowledge of the
disease at the first onset, and enables us to provide against its consequences
-- it empowers us to throw in the matter into the constitution from places far
distant from the vital parts, and prevents the lungs being primarily affected
-- and, what is of great consequence, it enables patients to escape the
secondary fever, so fatal to numbers; for in this artificial sort it rarely
attends -- add to this, the operation is so extremely trifling, that it is
performed almost without the slightest pain, in the following manner:

The scarf-skin, of one or both arms, is elevated by a lancet, upon which some
of the infectious matter, taken from a patient laboring under the smallpox,
remains, then pressing the scarf-skin upon the lancet, and with drawing it from
under that pressure, the variolous matter is left upon the true skin, and taken
into the habit by the absorbent inhaling vessels, which open upon its surface.

Subjects of every age may be inoculated, even such as are at the breast; by
some esteemed the best time of life; but it should be before they begin to cut
their teeth -- certainly their constitutions are at that time in the most
proper state -- and, could we be assured that no accident would occur that
might need the aid of medicine, there could not be a moment's hesitation
respecting the preference; but, on this account, I shall rather recommend
inoculating at two years old, when complaints could not arise from teething
when the constitution was not in so irritable a state as to be inconvenienced
by slight causes -- and, in cases of necessity, should they arise, the
application of medicines would be less resisted.

With regard to the season, practitioners have differed in that point -- the
hot months in summer I consider as the most exceptionable, and give the
preference to those which are the most temperate -- the spring, or latter part
of autumn, taking care, during these periods, to avoid performing the operation
when inflammatory or putrid fevers or other acute complaints were epidemic, for
very obvious reasons.

The modes of preparation should be adapted to the constitution of the patient.

Generally living cool and temperate for three weeks, feeding on acescent food,
with now and then a gentle mercurial purgative, for those of healthful habits,
will in common be sufficient -- but those of puny constitutions, whose system
is relaxed, should live more freely, and be allowed animal food once every day,
of the light and easily digestible kind, and in moderate quantity, mixed with
acescent vegetables.

In fine, preserving the constitution in a moderate degree of strength,
clearing the first passages, removing glandular obstructions, making that
system act with freedom, and loading the machine, as much as may be, with
acescent fluids, seems the most rational mode of putting the body into the best
state.

By these means, the nervous and vascular system will be enabled to perform
their functions properly, and the humors not become prone to run into an
acrimonious or putrescent state -- hence nature will not meet with any
impediment to prevent her from separating and throwing out the offensive
matter, after it has produced its effects on the mass of circulating fluids.

It has been thought, and I am of opinion, rightly, that it is immaterial from
what sort of smallpox the inoculating matter is taken, as the different kinds
produced depend not upon the nature of the morbid particles, but the
constitution into which it is thrown -- for there will be a bad sort arise from
matter that has every mark of mildness, and a good sort from such as appears
more of a malignant nature; nay, indeed, different people inoculated with the
same matter taken from the same pustule, have been known, and that commonly, to
have different sorts of the smallpox.

However, I would always advise it to be taken from such subjects as labor
under the disease in its mildest state, and have the most favorable appearing
pus -- for it is our business to take matter from those constitutions which, by
the appearance of the pocks, bespeak the greatest purity, and freedom from any
morbid taint -- for all people are not agreed upon what the malignity of this
complaint depends; and many conclude that other disorders may be inoculated
with the smallpox -- these, therefore, furnish arguments sufficient for great
cautions in our election.

DESCRIPTION. After the punctures are made in the arms, on the second day, if
the parts are examined by a good magnifying glass, there appears commonly about
the puncture an orange-coloured stain, whilst the skin around it seems to
contract; but sometimes an inflammation takes place on the second day, then
disappears totally -- this, though, may arise from irritation from the
puncture, trifling as it is; we remain, therefore, doubtful whether or not
infection has taken place -- but if it has succeeded, on the fourth or fifth
day from the operation, a hardness and itching, with an apparent inflammation
of the part, is perceptible; and a kind of blister, filled with a transparent
liquid, is observable.

On the sixth day, a pain and stiffness affects the armpits.

On the seventh, but more frequently upon the eighth, symptoms which precede
the eruption make their appearance; and these are commonly such as show
themselves in general at the commencement of fevers -- cold chills and heat
alternate with each other, a slight degree of languor, heaviness of the eyes,
and slight pains in the head and back, are, now and then, perceptible; and
these remain pretty constant till the smallpox manifest themselves.

The inflammation now begins to spread very fast, and, round the punctured
part, a great number of small eruptions may be seen crowding together, which
increase during the course of the disease.

Surrounding the incision, and extending itself half way round the arm, but
more commonly describing the breadth of a shilling, a circular, or oval,
efflorescence is observable. The larger this inflammatory appearance is, which
is smooth to the touch, and not painful, the fewer are the general pustular
eruptions -- and, indeed, I have observed, when the thread was made use of,
this was the case, if the discharge from the incision was very copious -- now
all the symptoms cease, and the business seems to be perfectly finished.

UNFAVOURABLE SYMPTOMS. Though this is the progress of the disease in general,
yet it sometimes happens that there are deviations, and that we have not
inflammatory appearances on the wounded arm till the eighth day, then it will
suddenly show itself, with the other concomitant symptoms -- this is not
recorded as a favorable omen -- still it sometimes is in this point deceptive.

But if the color around the puncture continues pale, though it is barely
perceptible that inoculation has succeeded, instead of becoming red or inflamed
-- if the edges of the wound spread but little, and remain flat, unattended
with itching, or any kind of uneasiness -- if, instead of a red inflammation
about the incision, it should have a purplish cast; if red, and the circle
round the puncture should be narrow and deep, and the incrustation around it
should be depressed and concave in the center, they are considered us
unfavourable signs.

FAVORABLE SIGNS. On the other hand, if on the second day there should be an
orange-coloured stain round the incision -- an itching there in two or three
days -- a kind of elevation of the scarf-skin, resembling a blister, without
much inflammation, on the third or fourth day -- a pain or stiffness in the pit
of the arm, a large efflorescence round the puncture, on the tenth or eleventh
day, or sooner -- a hardness spreading circularly from the puncture, the
inflamed part of the arm elevating itself, and forming a point, terminating in
a dry seal; these are said to form very pleasing prognostics, and flatter us
with the most agreeable expectations of a happy conclusion.

CAUSES. These are similar to what we have before recited in the smallpox --
for if the constitution is not possessed of the predisposing cause, no effect
will be produced, though the variolous matter should be thrown into the habit.

CURE. In the evening after the puncture is made, it has been thought
advisable to give a few grains of the calomel powder, as much as will procure
two or three evacuations, purging it off in the morning with some gentle
cathartic. (No. 79, 80.)

Or, instead of the last, a dose of Glauber's or Polychrest salt, proportioned
to the age and constiution of the patient -- these are advised to be given
every second morning and evening, till the appearance of the eruption. This is
superfluous, two doses will be in all common cases sufficient, immediately
after the operation, and a day or two before the attack. If the inflammation is
slight at the puncture, the dose of calomel must be increased.

Afterward we have nothing to do but to guard against the febrile symptoms,
which are in general so mild, that there is little occasion for medicine.

At the commencement, if necessary, what has been just above prescribed are
advised; and repeated two or three times, if the disease appears to be of a
late or unfavourable sort.

In the intermediate days, should the fever run high, Clutton's febrifuge
spirit, or the ethereal spirit of vitriol dropped into any aqueous fluid, so as
to make it agreeable, may be taken often in the day.

As soon as the symptoms of the eruptive fever come on, the patients should
continue to be exposed to the cool air as much as possible; for it is the best
cordial and corrector of febrile affection in this case, as I have repeatedly
experienced. Indeed, when the febrile symptoms appear to be violent at the
onset, great good has occured from the administration of an antimonial emetic
and purgative.

Where the fever appears to be languid, and the patients are of weak and
delicate constitutions, some caution is here necessary; for these, perhaps, it
will be sufficient to be kept in a large well ventilated room, especially if
the weather should be very cold; and they should be supported on something of a
more cordial and stimulating, nature, than if things were otherwise, and the
patients more robust, who should be kept, during the eruption, on a mere
acescent diet.

After the eruptive state is over, and the pustules begin to maturate, small
broths, jellies, white wine whey, or such like materials, may be allowed.

In this state of the disease, the weakly and more delicate may require to be
kept in bed, and supplied with more cordial applications, in order to perfect
the suppuration of the pustules, and totally free the constitution from any
remains of the variolous matter.

If we proceed in this prudent manner, adapting our mode to the particular
constitution of our patient, we shall very seldom have much trouble; but should
there arise uncommon complaints now and then in the inoculated smallpox, it
will be necessary for us to proceed as directed in the natural disease, (265,
etc.) observing whether it verges to the nature of inflammatory nervous,
putrid, or mixed fever, and conduct ourselves consistent with what the symptoms
point out to our judgment.

3. MEAZLES.
Called by the Latins morbilli, as being a disease of less consequence than the
smallpox; as by morbillus, we understand morbus parvus, a trifling disease --
they have also been named rubeolae and roseolae, from the redness attending the
eruption, or putting on a color similar to roses -- like the smallpox, this
disease appears to be a native of the East, and has certainly a great affinity
with that complaint, as they are both generally of an inflammatory nature,
equally infectious, and never affect the constitution twice -- some authors
say, except very rarely indeed -- because the habit cannot be brought a second
time into such a state, as to feel the effects of either of these infectious
particles, so as to reproduce the disease, should they circulate ever so
plentifully in the fluids a second time.

They generally make their appearance in the month of January, rage most
violently about the vernal equinox, and disappear in July.

They commonly attack children; but all constitutions, which have never before
felt their influence, are the objects of this infection -- hence, in the more
advanced stages of life, many with them are afflicted -- they are propagated by
the particular constitution of the air, and become highly epidemic.

Some have considered the attendant fever of the simple inflammatory sort;
others as a catarrhal, or inflammatory remittent; some say it is of the
peripneumonic kind, and conceive the eruption, not as critical, but
symptomatic, as the cough and affections of the lungs will remain after that is
over.

According to my conception, it is in general a febrile disease of the
inflammatory kind, always infectious, electively affecting that membrane,
called scheiderian, which lines the inside of the nose, throat, and lungs, and,
in its progression, the skin -- though I have seen the affection of the lungs
so extremely slight, as not to call forth the least attention, where there was
a diarrhoea attended through the whole course of the disease.

DESCRIPTION. Its progress is divided into three stages -- the first precedes,
the second attends, and the last succeeds the completion of the eruption.

At the commencement there are chillness and heat alternately succeeding each
other -- soon after, on the second day, the fever increases, attended with
considerable sickness, great heat, thirst, languor, and loss of appetite -- the
tongue is white -- there is a heaviness of the head, and drowsiness -- sneezing
-- brightness of the eyes, from whence flow a thin humor -- the eyelids
swell, and, most commonly, there is a dry and very troublesome cough --
sometimes vomiting and looseness are associates with these, the last of a green
color, when children are getting their teeth -- and all these symptoms
gradually increase till the ERUPTIVE, or SECONDARY STAGE begins, which occurs
generally on the fourth day; about which time small red spots, like flea-bites,
make their appearance in the face, which run into clusters, forming larger
spots, rising above the skin, perceptible only to the touch, not the sight;
afterward broad spots spread over the body downwards; not quite so prominent,
though of a higher color than those of the face -- when the eruption is
finished, the vomiting ceases, but the fever increases; and the cough, with the
difficulty of breathing, become more violent -- a sweat and diarrhoea now and
then supervene.

On the sixth day, or thereabout, the THIRD STAGE commences, on which the spots
on the face grow dry, and give it a rough appearance; and in three days more
they totally disappear from the whole body; for on the ninth day nothing is to
be seen, except a dark colored fine farina, or appearance like bran all over
the surface of the skin -- at this period, the fever and cough are sometimes
alleviated; sometimes increased, and terminate in a dangerous peripneumony --
and not unfrequently a looseness succeeds the disease.

After this we are not to conclude the patient free from danger, unless, during
its course, some considerable evacuation has taken place, either by sweating,
vomiting, urine, or looseness; for without something of this kind occurs, the
cough will continue, the fever will return with additional violence, and the
strength not be recovered except with great commotion in the system, and,
consequently, extreme danger.

Though what we have described is the most frequent mode of the meazles
appearance and progress to their termination, yet sometimes they differ so
much, that authors have denominated them ANOMALOUS, or IRREGULAR, as deviating
from the common course, or as in the eruption putting on the appearance of the
smallpox -- both which we shall describe before we proceed to the cure.

The anomalous differ from the mild sort, because the eruption happens not on
the fourth day, but sometimes before, and sometimes after -- the symptoms
preceding, as well as accompanying the eruption, are more severe -- the
eruption does not begin so much on the face as on the shoulders and trunk of
the body -- and because it is attended by more dangerous consequences.

Besides the symptoms which are common in severe fevers, there are some which
are more peculiar to eruptive ones of this sort; for here the pulse is small
and frequent -- respiration is short and quick -- there is an oppression of the
hypochondres -- (33. 38.) -- the urine pale -- a great drowsiness -- twitching
of the tendons -- spasms -- delirium, with redness and watery appearance of the
eyes -- load on the eyelids -- and pricking pain in the skin -- soreness of
the throat comes on, with a shrill hoarseness, and violent cough, in which
children appear almost suffocated, vomit up their food, and grow black in the
face -- when, after so severe a struggle, the eruption appears, the fever in
part deposits its malignity, the disease is at its height; and the fever
persists in the same manner to the drying of the spots, which yet, according to
SYDENHAM, did not seem to put on that branny appearance as before described.

The event of this fever is often dreadful and deadly; for, on the eruption
receding, the fever and difficulty of breathing are augmented -- a peripneumony
and diarrhoea, occasioned by the striking in of meazly particles, comes on;
which last is not without danger, as happens often in the milder sort, because
here it is acrid, dysenteric, and excruciating -- sometimes a cough, difficulty
of breathing, and hectic fever succeed -- at other times, a general dropsy, but
oftener obstinate inflammatory affections of the eyes.

The OTHER is said to be common at PARIS, wherein the eruption is different
from that of the common regular meazles; for they are more prominent, suppurate
perceptibly like the smallpox, and occasion the face to swell considerably;
but then they are attended with the cough, watery eye, and other affections,
arising from defluxions, which chiefly distinguish them from the smallpox.

CAUSES, whether inducing or proximate, are similar to those of the smallpox,
(269.) the peculiar particles only creative of the disease being altered.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. An infections inflammatory fever for the most part, with
which are associated, a defluxion of a thin watery humor from the eyes,
tickling in the nose, sneezing, dry cough, more or less violent -- on the
fourth day, sometimes sooner, sometimes later though rarely, small spots
running together, perceptible to the touch on the face, but broader on the body
not perceptibly elevated above the skin, break forth, which in three days after
are converted into branny scales in part, and totally disappear upon the ninth
day.

CURE. In so mild a manner will the measles sometimes affect patients, that
little is necessary to be done, except abstinence from all animal food, or
heating applications; and drinking freely of thin watery acescent liquids, such
as common fig drink, made agreeably acid with lemon-juice, apple water, or some
such like fluids.

But should the febrile symptoms run high, we must proceed as directed in the
smallpox, (26.) -- but great attention must be paid to the affection of the
lungs -- oily emulsions and linctures, (No. 81 to 83.) may therefore be
prescribed occasionally, in conjunction with the other remedies, calculated to
keep the febrile affections within proper limits.

Should oily medicines disagree with the stomach, as is sometimes the case, we
must have recourse to the class of demulcents, (187.) (No. 84) using the
pectoral decoction, or that of linseed as common drink.

After the eruption is completed, slight opiates are serviceable -- but as
nature generally performs her crisis either by sweats, looseness, or urine, we
must observe what way she directs her efforts, and proceed as we have before
directed in cures of this kind, where they occur in fevers not eruptive.

As soon as the redness of the skin goes off, and the spots begin to die away,
gentle purgatives must be administered, at proper intervals, and the patient
return to his usual mode of life gradually, (209.) -- care also should be
taken, that patients expose not themselves too early to the cold air, for these
are apt to bring on a very disagreeable cough, asthma, and consumption, from
affections of the lungs, o^ of some other parts.

Some perplexing symptoms, notwithstanding all our attention, will now and then
present themselves, which ask for our utmost exertions.

Should a delirium come on the fourth day, wherein the pulse is small, it is an
unfavourable omen; still by the application of leeches to the temples, it may
be mitigated or subdued.

It is also a bad sign if the fever should increase and become violent,
accompanied with intense thirst, about the termination of the disease -- and
should there appear great danger of suffocation, as will sometimes happen from
too great an afflux of serous humors on the lungs on the ninth day, we must
fly to bleeding, according to the strength of the patient, and apply blisters,
to prevent an inflammation coming on from that cause -- which, if it cannot be
done, suffocation may be the immediate consequence -- or, escaping that abscess
will probably succeed, a hectic fever and consumption.

A diarrhoea, or dysentery, is apt to come after vomitings of green materials;
and continue, though the meazles have finished their course -- these complaints
yield only to bleeding.

The meazles which put on the appearance of the smallpox, require the same
mode of treatment as the mild sort.

But in cases of the anamolous species, we must be directed by the nature of
the fever, and proceed in our modes of cure, as pointed out in our treatment of
the different kinds of the smallpox.

A moderate looseness, with a softness and gentle moisture of the skin,
alleviate all the febrile symptoms -- but the flower the eruption, so much
greater will be the danger -- of which also we may have strong suspicion if
they make their appearance on the second, or the fifth and sixth day from the
attack -- if they should retrocede, and be associated with delirium, or become
livid, the worst is to be dreaded -- too high a degree of redness or paleness
of the pustules, great prostration of strength, vomiting, great restlessness,
difficulty of swallowing; or other spots, purple-coloured, like flea-bites, are
also dangerous appearances -- the contrary of all which will flatter us with
most pleasing expectations.

Few people have thought the meazles to be a disease of sufficient consequence,
to avail themselves of those assistances which, as in the smallpox, might be
derived from inoculation in this complaint. As for my own part, practically I
cannot say any thing on the subject; but if we may believe the authority of
some who have made the experiment, or be allowed to depend on reasoning from
analogy, our labors might be happily rewarded -- for it is asserted, and
appears probable, that from inoculation from infected blood, on the sixth day a
slight fever manifests itself most commonly, though it is very moderate,
unattended with loss of sleep and inflammatory symptoms; and it is neither
succeeded by a hectic fever, cough, nor inflamed eyes; so that we find we
should be freed from a train of the most dangerous symptoms, and consequently
relieved, in many cases, from the most distressing apprehensions.

3. WATER-POX.
This obviously takes its name from the fluid with which the pustules are
filled.

DESCRIPTION. This is a disease which attacks children about two or three years
old, without any remarkable febrile symptom or indisposition; it chiefly
appears on the face, in small red pustules full of a clear or whitish watery
fluid, about the size of a lentile; some of which dry off in two days, whilst
others increase; and all fall off in a dry state within the space of four,
generally leaving no pits in the skin, as they are commonly attended with no
inconvenience.

There is another variety which frequently affects infants a week old, and push
forth similar watery pustules, about the navel, armpits, and singers, which
grow dry within three or four days, and fall off in a scab.

The cure left totally to nature is always sufficient; and nothing more
necessary, than, if it is cold weather, keeping in bed, living upon gruels,
weak broths, and warm liquids.

4. CHICKEN, OR SWINE-POX.
Having had in the course of practice so little opportunity of attending the
complaint throughout, and when called, there being so little to be done, I
confess it scarce ever awakened my observation, as nature, after the stomach
and bowels were cleared, if such attempts appeared necessary, always performed
the cure. I am happy to have it in my power to supply my readers with an
account drawn by the pen of so accurate an observer as Dr. HEBERDEN, who says,
in enumerating the

SYMPTOMS, that the pocks in many break out without any previous signs or
illness; in others they are preceded by a slight degree of chillness,
lassitude, cough, broken sleep, wandering pains, loss of appetite, and feverish
for three days -- the pustules in most of them are the common size of
smallpox; but some are less -- they are never confluent or numerous.

On the first day of the eruption they are reddish -- on the second there is at
the top of most of the pustules a very small bladder, about the size of a
millet-seed; this is sometimes full of a watery and colorless liquor,
sometimes it is yellowish, contained between the cuticle and skin -- on the
second, or at the farthest, on the third day from the beginning of the
eruption, is many of these pocks as are not ruptured seem arrived at their full
maturity, and those which are fullest of that yellow liquor very much resemble
what the genuine smallpox are on the fifth day.

A thin scab is formed at the top of the pustule from the cuticle being burst,
on the first or second day, which contains this thin fluid, by accident, or,
perhaps, from rubbing to allay the itching; the swelling of the other parts
abates without its being ever turned into pus -- those which escape being
burst, have the little liquor turn yellow and thick, and dries into a scab --
on the fifth day of the eruption they are almost all dried and covered with a
crust.

The patients suffer little, except some languor of spirits, strength, and
appetite.

This disease wants no remedies.

It is distinguishable from the smallpox by the appearance on the second or
third day, from the eruption full of serum upon the top of the pock.

From the crust also, which covers the pock upon the fifth day, at which time
the smallpox is not at the height of its suppuration.

But of this disorder there appears a more malignant sort.

For three or four days all the symptoms which precede the eruption run much
higher -- on the fourth or fifth day the eruption appears, with very little
abatement of the fever -- the pains, likewise, of the limbs and back continue
-- to which are joined pains of the gums -- the pocks are redder than the
common chickenpox, spread wider, and hardly rise so high, at least not in
proportion to their size -- instead of one little head, or vecsile of a serous
matter, there have been from four to twelve -- they go off just like the
chicken-pox, and are distinguishable from the smallpox by the same marks.

Besides, the continuance of the pains and fever after the eruption, and the
degree of both these, though there be not above twenty pocks, are not
observable in the smallpox.

From the similarity of the chicken, or swine, and smallpox, we may be able to
account for the tales we have had of people being affected with the smallpox
twice, or having them after being inoculated, and succeeding -- for some may
have been inoculated from the chicken, instead of the smallpox -- and this is
one of the strongest reasons that has induced me to insert this account, that
the error may be avoided -- as very little is necessary in this case to be done
by medicine more than what has been before recited -- taking care, that if the
febrile symptoms run high, to treat it in the same manner as the smallpox
under similar circumstances.

It is also worthy of observation, that those who have had the smallpox may
have the chicken-pox; but those who have had the chicken-pox cannot be infected
again by it; though, to such as never had the distemper, it is as infectious as
the smallpox.

5. SCARLET FEVER.
This takes its name from the scarlet colored efflorescence upon the skin.

This fever is inflammatory, and attended with different kinds of eruptions;
whence it has been divided into two species -- one called SIMPLE SCARLET FEVER
-- the other, SCARLET NETTLE RASH FEVER, from its eruptions being similar in
appearance to those marks left by the stinging of nettles.

DESCRIPTION. At the commencement the symptoms attend which we find in
continued fevers, among which there is no great degree of sickness; but on the
fourth day the face swells, the eruption manifests itself externally, which are
red, more copious, broader, and of a much more florid color, but not at the
same time so uniform as those which attend the meazles; but they arise without
any cough or watery eye, which distinguishes them from the meazles; they appear
and recede two or three times during the disease; besides, the redness shows
itself to be uniform, as if the skin was suffused with red wine, not breaking
in clusters of pustules upon the breast as the meazles do -- in three or four
days it entirely ceases -- the scarf-skin soon after peels off, and there
continues on the surface of the body fine bran-like scales, which are
successively supplied for two or three times.

Sometimes eruptions break out on the face and rest of the body like the
stinging of nettles, with much itching, which are elevated above the skin, soon
increase, of a pale rose color; sometimes with protuberances almost
erysipelatous, and roughness like te^ters -- sometimes, on the fever remitting,
they disappear; but about the evening show themselves, with fever, and a
troublesome hot itching -- and, in three or four days, like the former,
entirely cease, when extremely small scales separate from the skin.

CAUSES. The same may be advanced here as in the meazles. (283.)

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. This is an infectious inflammatory or remittent fever,
of short duration, with a swelling of the face on the fourth day, attended with
a florid redness all over the skin, with broad spots, running at last together,
not elevated above the skin; or with spots like the stinging of nettles, which
in three, four, or five days disappear, occasioning the scarf-skin to peel off,
and covering the surface of the body with fine branny scales.

CURE. This is of the most simple nature -- abstinence from animal food,
keeping out of the cold air, free use of watery liquids, thin gruels, and
moderate warmth whilst in bed; but should the symptoms run very high, and the
pulse be very quick, full, and strong, bleeding may be necessary, once,
perhaps, and the use of saline mixture, (No. 1.) or small doses of antimonials,
(180.) or nitrous powders, (No. 2.) keeping the body gently open, by the use of
the mildest aperients, if costive, (171, 172.) (No. 3. 22 to 24.) and, after
the whole is over, and the scarf-skin begins to peel off, two or three doses of
gentle physic should be given. (172.) (No. 19 to 22.)

But sometimes convulsions, or great drowsiness may come on in the beginning,
particularly with infants, a large blister may be applied between the
shoulders, and a quieting draught, similar to No. 4, given every night,
agreeable to the age and constitution of the patient -- using, for common
drink, milk and water, balm tea, in which may be dissolved some gum arabic, and
small portions of nitre.

Doubts have arisen about the existence of this fever, Dr. CULLEN having never
seen it in its simple state -- however, it certainly does exist, and as
described by SYDENHAM, of which repeated experience has convinced me; nay,
indeed, I have known it seize several children in the same family, and most
generally at the end of summer.

There is another species arranged here by some authors, styled the MALIGNANT
SCARLET FEVER -- but of that we shall take the opportunity of speaking under
the head of Sore Throat, as that is one of its peculiar and distinguishing
symptoms, and may probably be derived from that source.

6. MILIARY FEVER.
This receives its name from being attended with eruptions in size and
appearance like millet seed, which are sometimes red, at others white -- the
first filled with a colored serum; the last with a transparent fluid, called
lymph, accompanied with scarce any redness at all.

Though the existence of this fever has been doubted by many, still, it is
generally now allowed, that there is a fever of this peculiar kind, originating
from specific infectious particles getting into the blood, and producing its
effects upon the machine -- yet it may, and often does arise from the
injudicious management of other fevers, by treating them with too heating a
regimen -- hence it is considered also symptomatic, and often joined with the
smallpox, meazles, and other fevers.

Like some other of the eruptive class, this is simple and complicated.

DESCRIPTION. At the commencement there is a chillness succeeded by no
extraordinary heat -- the fever is mild, attended by an uneasy and copious
sweating -- there is no general pain, but the head appears slightly affected --
no thirst -- the appetite continues -- the pulse depressed, and rather hard --
and the urine appears healthful.

The patient soon after, on the second day, begins to be fearful and
apprehensive, constantly sighing, from a sense of weight and tightness at the
pit of the stomach -- has uneasy dreams -- dejection of spirits -- the head
confused -- his sweats perpetually smell sour -- there are a variety of sudden
and involuntary motions, and constant restlessness -- the pulse is smaller, and
increased in quickness -- and there is a certain sensation of tingling numbness
in the fingers -- and the urine pale and limpid.

On the third or fourth day, seldom later, red or white eruptions break out on
the neck, breast, and back, seldom on the face, preceded by pricking pains,
sometimes itching -- at this period chillness and heat succeed each other
repeatedly, and the sweating becomes profuse -- from thence, for about the
space of thirty hours, eruptions continue to come out, which are filled with a
thin serous fluid, having round their base an inflammatory appearance. The
symptoms now begin to be alleviated -- the sweating continues, though not so
profusely -- the mind begins to be less oppressed -- the urine puts on a higher
color -- the pulse becomes more soft and regular -- and about the seventh day
the pustules for the most part grow dry, the scarf-skin peeling off in scales.

This is a pretty accurate description of the mild species of this fever, in
which we may expect the eruptions will very soon make their appearance, when
there are an uncommon dejection of spirits, watchings, confusion of the head,
much oppression on the breast, with a weak quick pulse; for these are
considered as the certain symptoms of their near approach.

CAUSES. Both the inducing and immediate are similar to what we have delivered
when speaking of the meazles. (283.)

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A mixed fever, attended with anxiety -- dejection of
spirits -- frequent involuntary sighing -- strong smelling sweats -- and
pricking of the skin -- small distinct spots, for the most part of a red
color, breaking out most frequently on the third or fourth day on the neck,
breast, and back, seldom on the face, whose tops resemble, after one or two
days, very minute pustules, which continue only for a short space of time.

CURE. The indications of cure are the same as in other eruptive fevers.

Now this fever must in this place be considered of a mixed nature, (240.)
verging rather more to the nervous than inflammatory class -- however, if they
attack those of strong, robust, full habits, and there should be a great degree
of vascular action, bleeding may, perhaps, be necessary, but that rarely -- we
should rather proceed as we have directed when speaking of the simple continued
fever, to the use of saline mixtures, with small doses of antimonials, (181.)
(No. 6 to 9.) from whence, if the stomach should be soul, a vomiting will
ensue; this will abate the sickness, take off the oppression, produce a gentle
perspiration, determine the morbid matter to the skin, moderate the febrile
symptoms, and occasion, though not a less copious, a more expeditious eruption
-- and before that, cooling purgatives are beneficial, though not afterward.
(171, 172.) (No. 3. 22 to 24.)

Bleeding, it must be observed, is only admissible in the first stage of this
disease -- afterward it is so far from being of any use, that convulsions and
death itself are often the fatal consequences.

Cooling acids may be also allowed in the beginning; but when the eruption has
appeared they are prejudicial -- diluting, emollient, and acescent liquids may
be used -- and from fomenting the feet and legs with tepid fomentations, great
advantages have been derived.

But should the constitution be different from what we have specified, that is,
rather debilitated than languid, and the nervous system appear to be in too
inactive a state, we must apply to such things as are of more cordial nature,
to support and invigorate the constitution; but out of them we must select
those of the milder species; for, by stimulating the habit too violently, we
should prevent the separation and expulsion of the morbid matter, and be
instrumental in occasioning it to fall upon some of the nobler parts internally.

Hence, then, such cordial volatile medicines as we have described in the
nervous fever, or some things similar, should be administered -- and wine and
water, or white wine whey may be allowed to be drank occasionally.

Blisters should also be applied; and as soon as one has ceased to discharge,
another must be laid on, because it is observable that the evacuation produced
by them, as well as keeping up the stimulus, affords great relief; for, on the
evacuation ceasing, all things wear a more favorable aspect, which are always
altered for the better, on the reproduction of the discharge.

But sometimes, instead of the convulsive symptoms being mitigated after the
eruption, they increase, attended with such a train of symptoms as are
indicative of greater degree of danger.

For the febrile affections grow more violent, increasing about midday and at
night -- the sleep is disturbed with dreadful dreams -- the sweating decreases
-- the skin is hot and inflamed -- the head is affected with pain, producing
the sensation of inward distension -- the face appears fuller -- the tongue is
dry and white -- the pulse small and quick -- and the urine copious, thin, and
watery.

On the third day of the eruption there appears a great augmentation of
violence throughout -- the heat is burning -- the pustules subside -- the sweat
ceases -- the skin becomes rough -- the tendons start -- the patients are
extremely restless, forward, and loquacious -- they grow delirious, and are
convulsed -- they become thirsty -- the pulse is hard and quick -- and the
urine copious, and like water.

The belly, which before was costive, is now the reverse, evacuating foetid
bilious stools -- should any sweat return, this violence on the pustules
breaking out again is mitigated -- and on the succeeding day the eruptions
become more copious and larger, the former beginning now to dry --
notwithstanding which, about the third day the second crop creates new and
similar distress, though in a milder degree than the former -- a third and
fourth crop will succeed, until the last stage of declension, similar to what
occurs in the milder species. -- Still in this state of the disease there is a
bilious foetid looseness, with rolling of wind in the bowels, which continues
-- the urine sometimes feels hot, and appears like milk whey without any
sediment.

Patients afflicted with this fever seldom recover before the fifteenth or
twenty-first day.

This fever has been by some considered of the inflammatory class; by others it
has been called the acute malignant -- but it appears to be truly of the mixed
kind, and might properly be looked upon as a malignant miliary mixed fever.

Sometimes the progress of this fever is slower, and longer continued, the
pustules not striking out with a proper redness, but sinking down in the skin
or retroceding inwardly, liable to return at some other time, and occasioning a
slow recovery; and sometimes death; but its progress is different in some
degree.

This fever is apt to seize the delicate and relaxed, who have a thin and
acrimonious state of fluids.

In addition to the pustular appearance above specified, the tendons start
continually -- a delirium and convulsions come on -- the headache, though
considerable, is not very acute -- the tongue trembles -- the velocity of the
pulse is not so great in the eruptive stage; but the freedom and quickness are
irregular; sometimes it almost intermits -- the urine is various, sometimes
thin or higher colored, but oftener turbid and small in quantity -- but a
viscid sweat breaking out which is foetid, having for its associate some larger
vesicular eruptions, and pustules of size more considerable, putting on an
appearance almost similar to the smallpox, alleviate these symptoms.

After this stage, now and then the patients become extremely drowsy, and have
continual twitchings of the tendons, and convulsive eructations, then become
stupid, forgetful, and fall into a state of lethargy; to which succeed
convulsions, which are followed slowly by snoring and death.

This fever, should the patient recover, is apt to return about the same time
in the succeeding year, and often seizes women during their lying-in -- whence
there is a suppression both of their milk and those discharges after
childbirth, called lochia.

The mildest sort of the miliary fever generally terminates in seven, the
malignant mixed in fourteen, and this in about twenty-one days.

There can be little doubt of the nature of this fever, if we pay attention to
the symptoms, for they bespeak it truly nervous -- hence, for the cure, we must
refer to what we have said on the nervous fever, (216.) making, perhaps, a
freer use of blisters, and observing a quicker succession, for the reasons
advanced; (290.)

Sometimes, added to the miliary eruptions, such a train of symptoms will
attend, as clearly to show its disposition to be of the putrid kind; little
deviating from what we have recited when speaking of putrid fever, (221, etc.)
and consequently will require similar applications -- but still, though much
cannot be expected from blisters in symptoms simply putrescent; yet such is the
alleviation they bring in miliary eruption, that to neglect them would be an
error of no trifling consequence -- and, if to these we add the use of bark,
mineral acids, and wine, little more can be expected to be done in this fever,
as these are the principal materials from whence we can expect any considerable
success.

Should a looseness come on under any of the circumstances of this fever, we
must proceed in the same manner as we have before directed, taking care not to
be too busy in putting a total stop to it by the use of astringents; for if
that happens, we may expect a great increase of febrile affections, which is
invariably the ca^e; we should rather attempt to solicit a slow of humors to
the skin, by small doses of ipecacuanha, (181.) (No. 57.) and support the
strength of the patient by wi^^^, and other generous antiputrescent cordials.

Those signs which portend a favorable conclusion are,

If convulsions begin with, or precede the eruption, and, upon ceasing, the
pulse becomes soft and full, the pustules filled with serum grow large -- if
they are of the red kind, and manifest themselves with a gentle perspiration,
free and easy respiration, and the pulse as above specified, the fever having
remissions.

But if the sweat should be violent and premature, particularly if the pulse at
the same time should be small, they indicate mischief.

A tingling stupor or numbness in many places, shows that the morbid matter is
copious; but if it is slight, attended with watery urine, sweats, and a small
pulse, it not only indicates the same, but shows the virus not easily
determined to the skin; hence dangerous.

Should there be great dejection of spirits, the patient become very fearful,
lose all hope, rise up terrified, these are bad omens -- nor is it a promising
appearance if the skin does not swell from the eruption, nor be affected from
the application of blisters or cupping-glasses.

If the headache goes off before the fourth day, in those of full habits
particularly, it is an unfavourable sign; and a small pulse, growing more so
after the eruption, with tension, and quickness increasing, denotes
convulsions, and dissolution, or extreme danger.

If the urine is constantly watery, or changes to that from a reddish color;
this affords no good sign; but it bespeaks a long continuation of the disease
if it is like milk-whey.

Drops of blood from the nose at any time bespeak great danger; and, when
drawn, if it should be of a scarlet color continually without serum, it is a
bad sign.

If, at the conclusion of the disease, the scarf-skin peels not off at all, or
only sparingly, the convulsive symptoms still continuing, we may expect a
relapse.

WITH REGARD TO THE ERUPTION, the red are more favorable than the white; and
the sooner they make their appearance, so much the worse; for those which
appear upon the third or fourth day often prove mortal on the seventh or
eighth; they are less dangerous if they break out on the sixth; the later the
safer; for the sooner they appear, the disease proportionably of longer
continuance, and more apt to return.

After the eruption all oppressive convulsive symptoms are ominous, and those
which follow the subsiding destructive.

If the pustules are small, and very numerous, they bespeak danger -- nor is it
a favorable sort which do not prick, but itch when they are pushing out of the
skin -- but if they recede, and afterward the patient vomits, sees badly, has
a rattling noise in swallowing, hiccoughs, and stammers in talking, these
import extreme danger.

By how much more copious and prominent are the pustules, by so much sooner
will death make its approach, if they subside -- and those which sometimes
subside, and sometimes appear, indicate a long continuance of the disease.

7. ERYSIPELAS, or SEROUS INFLAMMATORY FEVER, commonly called SAINT ANTHONY'S
FIRE.
This is considered as an inflammation of the skin, and subjacent fat, attended
with an inflammatory fever, originating from an acrimonious humor and inflamed
state of the thinner part of the blood, from which nature endeavors to free
herself by expelling the morbid portion from the habit, and depositing it on
some external part, chiefly the skin, in broad red spots, which creep from
place to place -- hence its name, from the Greek words ^ruo, to draw, and
p^las, into the vicinity.

DESCRIPTION. It generally commences with chillness and shivering, which in a
day or two are succeeded by a violent sudden redness, and pain, attacking some
part or other, chiefly the face; and has for its associates an acrid heat,
rosy-coloured efflorescences, with great tightness of the skin, slightly
swelled, which is broad and diffused, not circumscribed -- the febrile
affections increase, with heat, anxiety, thirst, often also a white tongue and
strong breath.

But it is often attended with greater degrees of violence -- then it begins
with great shiverings, succeeded by a burning heat, acute headache, retching
and vomiting, till the erysipelas appears, which is sometimes deferred to the
second or third day; when the febrile symptoms are alleviated, and the sickness
ceases, though, not unfrequently, they continue in a slighter degree to the
height -- sometimes, when the disease runs high, the fever continues, the brain
is oppressed, delirium comes on, and matters wear an unpromising aspect.

Upon the tumid part vesicles arise, and run along the forehead hairy scalp,
eyelids, neck, forming a circle round them, which, if injudiciously treated,
become gangrenous, and creates delirium -- sometimes the humor filling the
pustules, and issuing from thence, instead of being thin and serous, is thick
and gluey, and forms a thick scurf or crust, continuing fixed before they fall
off, for many days.

The disease frequently terminates in seven days; but sometimes it will proceed
in a similar manner for eight, ten, or twelve days, and at last go off by a
copious sweat, of which restlessness, with concomitant shivering, and some
anxiety, though not much, for a small space of time, will be sometimes the
forerunners; and from thence may the critical effort be prognosticated. During
the progress of this complaint, the whole skin and inside of the mouth is very
dry.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are said to be, violent mental affection,
particularly anger and fear -- a sudden cooling of the body, heated before by
the strong power of the sun -- drinking of, or bathing in, too cold water -- a
suppression of the natural or artificial evacuations -- moist and rainy seasons
-- and, in fine, whatever occasions the obstruction of perspiration.

The proximate or immediate, acrimonious and heating particles derived from
humors that are contaminated and retained, which ought to be thrown out of the
habit.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. An inflammatory fever, for the most part, of a few days
continuance, with a superficial, solitary, diffusive swelling, of a red rose
color, going off upon pressure, and returning; of an uniform smoothness,
unless made rough by eruptions; and is attended with an acrid burning, or
itching heat.

CURE. As this disease, though neither infections nor contagious, evidently
arises from some acrid humors ejected out of the mass of fluids, and collected
in the cuticular vessels, through which it ought to escape out of the habit, we
must be very cautious not to lower the fever too much by excessive evacuations;
nor hinder the exit, or cause the retrocession when discharged upon the skin by
the injudicious administration of cold or astringent applications; for the
indications of cure are, so to regulate the moving powers, as to enable them to
throw the offensive matter out of the constitution, and prevent any
retrocession on the internal and vital parts.

Hence, therefore, must we proceed, as in other cases, consistently with the
strength of the habit. If it attacks those of strong full constitutions, we
bleed in proportion to the strength, and give the cooling cathartics, such as
purge off the serous humors in the most certain and easiest mode, as
vitriolated natron, acetated tartar, Polychrest salt, Epsom salt, manna,
tamarinds, crystals of tartar, jalap, etc. (171, 172.) (No. 1. 22 to 24.) and,
on the intermediate days, we should give at intervals antimonials joined with
nitre, acetated tartar, or the saline mixture; to which gentle aperients may be
added, if necessary.

Emetics in this case have been found efficacious -- mustard poultices applied
to the feet, and bathing the legs and feet in warm water are very beneficial,
where the head and face are affected -- and, under this circumstance, bleeding
and purging may be repeated, till an alleviation of the symptoms are produced.

In all our endeavous we should attempt to promote gentle evacuation by the
skin with cooling diaphoretics.

There have been different opinions with respect to local applications to the
part affected; some advise mild and softening applications to the part
affected, as fresh cream, the ointment of elder leaves, tepid watery
fomentations, or the use of the water of acetated litharge -- however, the fine
powder of fenugreek, or wheat flour, sprinkled upon the part, and lying in bed
-- or, if a fluid begins to ooze out of the vesicles, chalk or starch may be
sprinkled on a soft cloth, and thus applied; for all repellents, whether of an
aqueous or oily nature, are hurtful.

Should the swelling be suddenly depressed, from a retrocession of the
offensive matter, attended with internal oppression and anxiety, and at the
same time the pulse becomes weak and sinks, we must immediately apply blisters,
and have recourse to vinous and other cordials; wine may be exhibited freely,
volatile and other stimulants, which have more permanent action, such as the
nature of the circumstances require.

Sometimes this disease attacks the trunk, chest, shoulder-blades, or sides,
and frequently makes its appearance lower, encircling the middle of the body,
like a belt -- hence called by the Greeks ZOSTER and ZONA, a belt; and by the
English SHINGLES, from the Latin word cingulum, a girdle.

In this complaint little yellowish pimples, but more frequently of a livid
hue, arise which are went to corrode, like a tetter, which species they
resemble.

The fever which is the associate of this eruption is only slight; but, should
the pimples be pushed back, symptoms of greater consequence present themselves.

There have been instances where the erysipelas has begun with shivering, heat,
delirium, violent pain of the back, head, and other parts of the body, where
there was no inflammation; but upon the third or fourth day, the hot burning
humor was deposited in the glands under the arms, or in the groin, and there
formed abscesses; or descended into the feet, and brought on mortification; and
from a retrocession of the morbid matter, life was in the most extreme danger.

For if this matter cannot be made to re-appear, the peccant humor is
deposited upon the brain or breast, and death is shortly the consequence -- if
the deposition happens upon the brain, delirium immediately succeeds, the
visage is flushed, the eyes sparkle very quick, then follows madness,
terminating fatally in lethargy; but should it be upon the lungs, the heat and
anxiety is intolerable, of which no words are adequate to convey a perfect idea.

Notwithstanding these appearances, our modes of cure vary not from that which
we have before described.

Though, in general, the erysipelas very seldom comes to suppuration, still,
when that is the case, it does not maturate kindly, and frequently forms
disagreeable and ill-conditioned ulcers.

Sometimes a mortification will threaten, then must we apply such things as are
calculated to stop its progress, as decoction of bark, limewater mixed with
camphor and spirits of wine, or camphorated spirits of wine, with tincture of
myrrh.

In the slighter kinds of erysipelas there is no great danger; but if a violent
inflammation, attended with stupor, drowsiness, or delirium, should seize
patients with an acrimonious state of fluids, much are the consequences to be
dreaded.

Should the inflammation recede or be repelled, it brings on delirium, internal
inflammations, asthma, convulsions and mortification; or should the tumid part
grow livid, we may conclude the latter of these affections at hand. With
respect to the pustules, the thicker and whiter the matter, the less will be
the degree of danger; but should it be thin and pale, so much more in
proportion will it be increased.

The PLAGUE, and that fever called PEMPHIGUS, from the Greek word p^mphix,
bulla, a bubble or vesicle, or BULLOUS OR VESICULARY FEVER, should be next
treated on; but as I have had no experience in the former, I shall proceed to
speak on the latter only as far as it has fallen under my observation, as the
disease itself seems not to be perfectly settled by authors.

8. PEMPHIGUS, BULLOUS OR VESICULARY FEVER.
This takes its name from the blisters with which it is accompanied breaking
out on the surface of the body, of the size of hazle nuts.

In three instances they were attended with a fever of the continued kind,
purely inflammatory; and in one it appeared to be contagious, attacking the
wife of one man laboring under the disease a few days after the eruption, who
would not sleep from him during his illness. It was in these cases treated as
an inflammatory fever, free use being made of the saline diuretics,
particularly the acetated kali.

The other two had scarce any febrile symptoms, but copious eruptions filled
with yellow serum, which went off, and returned at different periods --
diuretics in these two cases were used in the beginning, and, at the
conclusion, bark was joined along with them, and cordials, there appearing
obvious remissions of the febrile affections, which were slight, and seemed to
point out the nervous system to be the seat of the disease, from the languor
and lowness with which the complaint was attended, and the pulse at the same
time being weak, small, irregular, and quick.

SECTION XIII. INFLAMMATORY DISEASES.
CHAP. I. ON INFLAMMATION.
IN a former section we have spoken of inflammatory fever, (201.) which we have
said depended upon a peculiar state of the vascular system and blood, the
moving powers, or part of them, put into too strong motion, and supported in
the violence of their action by the peculiarity of that state: here the
affections were general, produced not by, or dependent upon, any other disease.

But in this place we are to treat of local affections, having a fever for
their associate; hence it is to be considered, not as a primary, but as a
secondary disease, produced by, o^ dependent on, some other; consequently only
a sign that some other malady reigns in the habit -- the first of these fevers
is called IDIOPATHIC, the second SYMPTOMATIC.

Now, in inflammation there are some particulars observable, which, on
examination, will lead us to the cause, and enable us to lay down certain rules
for the cure.

In a part under a state of inflammation there are more than natural heat,
redness, tension, pain, and swelling.

The FIRST is produced by the blood circulating to the part with more than
usual force, and being there collected in too great quantity; and wherever that
is the case, there is a proportionate increase of warmth -- the SECOND is owing
to the blood being pushed into those vessels, which, in an healthful state, are
only permitted to carry the serous or thinner fluids strained from the
sanguinary mass -- the THIRD arises from a too great quantity of fluids
crowding into the containing vessels, by which they are distended, and their
fibers distracted, which produces the FOURTH, or PAIN -- and the FIFTH deduces
its origin from the distension, and the fluids being too freely pushed into the
cellular membrane; or exuding through the coats of the vessel, by their natural
parts being too permeable, from the superabundant quantity of liquids they
contain.

Now all these effects may be produced by stimulus of some nature applied to
the parts affected, increasing the action of the vessels, which solicits the
fluids to these parts too rapidly, and produces distension.

Hence it appears obvious, that these two causes are adequate to create these
effects -- one of which acting will occasion only a slight degree of
inflammation, of no long continuance -- but if they both are conjoined, then
arises an inflammatory disease of greater violence and duration; inasmuch as,
from these two causes cooperating, the effects produced will be more vehement.

But in the parts which are most solid, or in which the vessels continue their
course in a straight direction, should any inflammation arise, there will
consequently be greater degree of pain, than if it happens in the softer
viscera, or glandular parts; because there is always a higher degree of tension
in the vessels -- hence in firm membranous parts, the skin, ligaments, tendons,
cartilages, and bones, (21, 22. 24.) inflammations are found more acutely
painful, whilst in the softer parts beforementioned, the pain is sometimes
slight, and always inferior to that of the other.

But external accidents will, by producing the two causes assigned, (298.)
create local inflammatory symptoms, whilst the vascular system in general shall
perceive no disturbance, which will not at all be indicated by the pulse, or
other febrile affections; so that if a fever should arise, as it generally does
in all considerable inflammations, it is to be considered as owing its origin
to this cause, and is a consequence, therefore only esteemed a symptoms; for
excessive heat, thirst, and restlessness, are concomitants of vascular
affection, and generally attend inflammatory diseases, independent of any
fever, except what they themselves create; whilst weakness and loss of
appetite, essential symptoms attendant on primary or idiopathic (298.) fevers
of any continuance, are wanting, and seem to belong to affections of the
nervous system.

But some inflammations owe their origin to fever, and may be occasioned by
peculiar causes; either from the elective power of morbid matter thrown into
the habit, that is, a predeliction for fixing on some peculiar part or parts in
preference to others, as in the smallpox, meazles, gout, rheumatism, etc. or
from local constitutional imperfection -- hence we find, different parts may
become the seat of inflammation from general causes also; for if the resistance
of any part is supernaturally increased, and a stimulus should be applied to
them from acrid humors circulating in the mass of fluids, and fixing there, an
inflammation will be the unavoidable consequence -- and these very often
terminate fatally, should it in fevers fix in some of the nobler parts; and to
these is often to be attributed in many fevers the death of the patient.

If we reflect on the cause of inflammation, we shall find, that every part of
the human machine, which is plentifully supplied with blood vessels interwoven
in their texture, is subject to this affection -- and mostly so are those parts
which are liable to be exposed to external injuries; or to stimulating
materials, which circulate and are buoyed up in the atmosphere; though some of
the very thin membranes, the scarf-skin, hair, and nails, may be considered as
exceptions.

Hence, according to the consequence of the part affected, will be the
disturbance of the constitution, and the degree of danger; and these will
manifest themselves according as the use of those parts is most immediately
connected with those actions of the constitution on which life is immediately
dependent, by which the machine is nourished, and its parts kept in proper
order, and from whence it has its power of motion, distinguished by the terms
vital, natural, and animal -- upon all which, acting in unison, is constituted
the welfare of that machine.

With respect to the termination of inflammation, there are five modes,
RESOLUTION, EXUDATION, SUPPURATION, MORTIFICATION, and SCIRRHUS.

Inflammation is considered to terminate in RESOLUTION when, in the first
instance, the flow of blood is diverted from the part affected, the violence of
vascular action allayed, and strength given to the coats of the vessels, so
that they may be properly supported, and the dissipation of the load of fluids
which have been collected be procured; or they may be resorbed into the habit
-- by EXUDATION, which occurs only in superficial inflammations on the skin,
and membranes lining internal cavities or passages, or covering the different
viscera, when distension of the arteries, and an enlargement of the pores of
their sides takes place, by the rapidity of motion producing more than usual
force on the vessels in an inflammatory state, occasioning great increase of
heat, and expansion of the contained fluids.

In this manner frequently ends erysipelas, by pushing forth little pustules or
blisters, and freeing the vessels which are inflamed -- so also in burns and
wounds matter exudes, which is termed digestion; and as this comes on and
continues, so are the parts affected alleviated, and totally cured. Nature also
makes use of this expedient in catarrhal and other slightly inflammatory
complaints of the lungs, as well as in the gonorrhoea virulenta, or clap; for
all these are superficial inflammations -- by ABSCESS, or SUPPURATION, when
neither of these processes takes place, but the violence of motion continues or
increases, and the weakness of the vessels still remains; then the fluids which
have been collected in the cellular membrane are either too copious, or become
so thick and viscid, that they cannot be absorbed and received back into the
circulating fluids, nor pushed out, and thus evacuated through the pores of the
skin -- amongst these another process takes place, termed FERMENTATION, wherein
the vessels, cellular membrane, and muscular fibers are melted down, and a
white thick matter is formed, called pus; but this happens chiefly in more deep
seated inflammations in some viscous, fleshy, or glandular parts -- by
MORTIFICATION, when the force of circulation is so violent against the sides of
the inflamed vessels, that the coats are ruptured; or when the arterial coats
are so very weak, that the blood bursting into the cavities of the cellular
membrane there stagnates, and quickly corrupts, forming what is called in
medical language GANGRENE, or SPHACELUS; the first considered by some as
mortification in its incipient state, the last when it is perfectly formed; but
others, when the skin and cellular membranes are the parts affected, give it
the former name; when the muscular, the latter; when the bones, it is called
CARIES; so, in fact, they are all truly mortifications, though only of
different parts.

When mortification takes place, there is a cessation in the part of all pain,
from the destruction of the living solids; hence the protrusion of blood, which
becomes of a darker color than before, or has a livid appearance, hence its
stagnation and corruption and deprivation of its natural color -- after this,
a spontaneous separation of the parts which compose it takes place, the thinner
part is driven forwards toward the surface, and elevates the cuticle into
blisters.

From what has been said, we may form a judgment why mortifications are most
likely to occur in those whose fluids are in an acrid state, old people, and
those of dropsical habit; because the solids are soon broken down, and many
slight accidents are sufficient to produce these dangerous, and often fatal
effects, which we at first observe with an unsuspicious eye, when they are
attacked by inflammations of some force; for, indeed, in constitutions not
laboring under these defects they rarely happen.

The last termination we shall mention is, SCIRRHUS, here considered as a hard
indolent tumor only, and chiefly presents itself in the spongy viscera, as the
lungs, mesentery, womb, and particularly the glands in various parts of the
machine.

And this generally arises from the circulation in the glands, generally being
too languid -- hence are obstructions formed from the fluids inspissating
within the small capillary, or hair like tubes, and only producing vascular
distension so gradually, that there is no great excess of pain, nor any violent
increase of heat, so that proper power is wanting to create that process which
induces suppuration, and also force sufficient to break down the vessels, and
produce mortification, which in these parts are said seldom to take place,
except from acrimony of the sharpest nature pouring down on the vessels of any
particular gland, and being there deposited.

Inflammation then may be considered only as one cause of scirrhus, which
induce these tumors by imperceptible degrees, and very slow beginnings, which
are attributed to some peculiar indescribable defect of the humors,
terminating frequently in cancerous affections.

They are, besides, productive of great mischief from the compression of the
neighboring parts, as palsy, impeded deglutition, barrenness, and many other
complaints.

From what has been said on this subject of inflammation, we shall be readily
and forcibly struck with the most eligible modes of termination.

The first is by resolution, the second by exudation, if the matter exuded can
have a free exit out of the habit; but in those inflammatory affections which
make the membrane that lines the cavity of the breast, and abdomen, or belly;
or which cover the different viscera contained in them -- the objects of their
attack; and if the matter which from that cause exudes from their surface
should remain there, a hectic fever will be the consequence, though the
original pain ceases, and a fresh concourse of symptoms will then succeed. But
suppose neither of these terminations can be brought about, we then wish for
ABSCESS, because only the inert solids suffer chiefly, and seldom have any
permanent bad effects, if they can only be permitted to clear themselves; for
then the parts heal up; nor have the nerves or blood vessels suffered any
material destruction, though the last may have been distended, and suffered
greatly from such distension; yet, once freed from the impelling cause, soon
recover their tone, sufficiently to perform properly their constitutional
action; and as for the inert solids, they are again soon supplied, by the
digestive powers of the machine forming fresh materials from nutriment, in
order to renew the substance lost, by the application of homogeneous particles
poured into the interstices of the celullar membrane.

In all our attempts to cure inflammatory complaints, our first aim is
resolution, whether the part affected be external or internal; the former of
which is obvious to ocular demonstration; the latter, by heat and pain
affecting some inward part, accompanied with general febrile affections; of
which we shall speak more particularly when we come to treat on parts laboring
under this complaint^ at present we shall show how we attempt to bring about
resolution, when any considerable inflammation calls for our assistance.

If it occurs in habits which are plethoric and strong, the pulse full and
quick, and much increase of heat, we pursue the same course as was delivered
when treating on inflammatory fever, 2. Section VIII. attempting to allay the
intenseness of motion in the vascular system, and abating the excess of heat,
which is the natural concomitant.

But here sometimes the complaint yields not to general bleeding, we then
should have recourse to local, by the application of leeches or cupping-glasses
near the part affected, which will very often succeed; and as there is too
great a flow of fluids to the part, we endeavor to lessen that by smart
cooling purges, (No. 3. 22 to 24.) giving freely in the intermediate times
between the purges, nitrous powder, (No. 2.) mixed with small doses of
antimonials, (180.) gentle aperients, (171, 172.) and other cooling saline
diuretics, (176.) applying to the parts themselves fomentations, (No. 85.) with
which let the part affected be fomented three or four times a day, and
continued at each time for half an hour, or longer, taking care not to apply it
too hot, but only moderately warm.

Afterward the inflamed part should be covered with a white bread poultice, in
which a sufficient quantity of ointment of marshmallows has been used -- some
advise a poultice of bread boiled in litharge water, called vegeto-mineral
water; others of winelees thickened with bran; and several prefer that of
bean-meal and simple oxymel, softened with oil of roses -- and should the tumor
and inflammation be by these means dissipated, the poultices should be changed
for st^pes moistened with the camphorated lotion, (No. 86.) and occasionally
applied to the parts.

By these means commonly resolution will take place, the humors collected in
the part being dissipated, and the remainder absorbed back into the habit, by
the lymphatic system being freed sufficiently, and stimulated to a reproduction
of its action in the part affected.

But, notwithstanding our efforts, if the common symptoms should gradually
increase, such as great heat, throbbing in the part affected, suppuration will
take place, and an abscess be formed -- here, then, our mode of cure must be
altered, and we must aim at soliciting the matter externally, and freeing the
habit in a proper time, by the application of those things which promote
suppuration, thin the external skin, and determine the contained matter toward
the surface.

Hence poultices made of mallow leaves, boiled in milk with linseed, or linseed
itself -- boiled lily roots, or onions -- the maturating cataplasm -- or the
gum plaster, will answer the purpose; for these, by clogging the pores of the
skin, prevent the dissipation of the humors, increase the heat of the
contained fluids, promote the process of fermentation, and render the humors
more active in dissolving, or melting down the solid parts, as well as soften
the integuments, and, by their stimulus, solicit the fluids to push outward.

From these applications, then, the abscess will soon he in a proper state for
opening; which must be performed in the most dependent part, if the swelling is
equally soft throughout, and the skin of a similar thinness; if not, where the
part is softest, and the fluctuation of the matter most perceptible; and the
aperture should be made of sufficient width, in proportion to the size of the
tumor, that a free egress may be allowed for the matter.

After this, the healing of the wound in good constitutions is seldom attended
with any difficulty -- dry lint placed gently in the part, and that covered
with the ointment of yellow resin, spread thin upon lint or tow, are the
general dressings at first; and from these fresh granulations will appear; and
in time fill up the cavity occasioned by the loss of substance; but should the
sore appear soul, covered at the bottom with a white or brown appearance,
instead of red granulated flesh, we must apply some of those things considered
detergent, or cleansing; as the ointment of gum elemi, of yellow resin, mixed
with a proper proportion of red precipitate, or green basilicon; these will
cleanse the ulcer; and then dry lint as before, and proper bandages, will in
common perform a perfect cure.

But sometimes, instead of a thick well-colored laudable matter, there will be
a thin ichorous discharge, occasioned by an acrimonious state of humors,
while, at the same time, there will be febrile hectic symptoms.

Under these circumstances, in order to produce a laudable suppuration, and
take off the hectic affections, in relaxed habits, joined with an acrid state
of the fluids, bark is the most efficacious remedy; but where the discharge
depends more upon the state of the fluids, in order to correct or evacuate the
acrimony, a course of mercurial medicines, as the alternative mercurial pills,
two of which may be taken twice a day, with one or two pints of the decoction
of the woods, (No. 87, 88.) bid fairest for success.

There is a species of complaint very common belonging to this place, which
here calls for our attention, and that is, a

BOIL, or BILE, though this seldom terminates by resolution, but commonly
maturates -- it is a hard circumscribed tumor, rising to a point, hot, red,
and very painful, which, maturating, may be let out, or left to burst, from
whence a small portion of matter only will issue forth, in proportion to the
swelling, leaving a slough behind, which is called a CORE, and must be cast off
before the wound can be healed.

In its hard and painful state, we can have no expectations of discussions; our
endeavors, therefore, are to be confined to hastening the suppuration, as we
have before directed, (304.) or apply bean-meal and honey, which is a favorite
remedy with some -- when it is opened or burst, we must proceed as before under
the same circumstances in abscess (304.)

But these eruptions very often originate from a depraved state of the fluids,
which occasion their frequent returns, and are extremely trouble some -- here
we must have reference to the alterative course before recommended, (305.)
which must be persisted in for some time, now and then interposing gentle
cooling purgatives.

Thus far we have spoken of those inflammations which lie superficially, and
are alleviated by appeasing applications; but sometimes the seat of the
complaint will be too internal for them to become effectual, we then apply over
the part stimulants, which have been found highly efficacious in producing
resolution -- indeed, where complaints have been slight, applications of hot
sand or salt, stimulating cataplasms, as of mustard, pellitory, horseradish,
Burgundy pitch, volatile liniments rubbed well upon the part, have been found
serviceable auxiliaries; but when the symptoms have been more severe, blisters
applied over the part contribute the most readily to promote resolution.

These remedies, and the sedatives and emollients we have before spoken of,
where the cause has been excess of the vibratory motion of the vessels
dependent on some stimulus, and external remedies can be applied, have been
thought necessary -- or when inflammation proceeds from fractures, wounds,
contusions, or such like causes, discutient fomentations, (No. 85.) are most of
all to be relied on -- when it depends on local relaxation, or a decrease of
vascular resistance, as it sometimes does, particularly in inflammations of
long standing -- bleeding and purging should be cautiously advised, and all
emollient poultices and fomentations omitted; for these, by their relaxing
properties, will add to the cause a contrary plan must be adopted, calculated
to give strength and activity to the vessels, that the offending cause may be
repelled.

For local applications, alum, white vitriol, acetated litharge, lapis
calaminaris, and turty prepared, mixed with rose water, are occasionally used;
as are also tincture of roses, and slight decoctions of bark, and eye-waters;
gargles made of these well adapted to relieve inflammatory complaints arising
from a debilitated and relaxed state of the vessels -- and where the general
state of the habit is so relaxed, as to demand the use of tonics, or such
things as invigorate the system, bark and cold bathing are highly useful.

By the modes we have laid down, we shall almost always be able to conquer any
common inflammation; or conduct our patient through with the greatest ease and
safety, if abscess should take place -- but there are some niceties to be
observed, which we shall particularize.

Fomentations should never be pushed too far; for, after taking off the
violence of vascular motion, if continued, they induce a state of relaxation in
the fibers, from which succeed debility, and obstinate tumors -- instead,
therefore, in persevering in their use, when excess of vibratory motion is
subdued totally, and it many cases when it is allayed, corroborants then become
necessary, (No. 86.) or something of a similar nature.

With regard to abscesses, we must observe, that they all point, and the
contained matter endeavors to make its way to the parts where it finds the
least resistance -- hence those formed in the lungs rupture internally; those
in the viscera of the belly move externally -- those which are deep seated, and
formed under strong tendinous expansions, run along the spaces between the
muscles, and appear at a considerable distance from whence they first
originated.

Besides, they do not all originate from inflammation preserving its regular
course; they are sometimes critical, the effect of nature freeing the
constitution from some morbid matter, by throwing it out of the circulation,
and depositing it in some local situation, which is attended with the most
happy consequences, admit the vital organs, or the parts of high importance in
the habit escape, from its being deposited in them. Abscesses of this kind are
generally preceded by some fever; and this depotion of matter is called
metastasis, or translation, which occurs chiefly in parts where the vessels
labor under some uncommon weakness, from some cause which has left them in
that state.

Under this circumstance, as soon as ever the skin is in a proper state of
thinness, the matter must be let out by incision, if it can be come at, else
would it, by too long continuance, dissolve too much of the solid parts,
destroy the texture of the nerves and blood vessels, produce a caries, or
mortification of the bones, by penetrating through the membrane which covers
them, and lay the foundation for a hectic fever, from the matter being taken up
by the absorbent vessels, and carried into the habit.

In cases of EXUDATION, (300.) where the surface appears only excoriated, not
ulcerated, we can give the happiest assistance, when it shows itself externally
by internally exhibiting such things as tend to promote resolution; and having
recourse externally to such as are calculated to cleanse, heal up, and (...)
then.

And when such is the circumstance on the membranes of the breast, of the
belly, or the external surface of the viscera, as it sometimes is, we are
assured, from the appearances on dissection, where there has been no
perceptible ulcerations or destruction of the solids, though matter has been
found in these cavities; by early advice judiciously given, many might be saved
from some of our most fatal complaints, pulmonary, and some other consumptions;
for many of these arise not, in the first instance, from ulcerations or little
glandular tumors in the lungs, called tubercles, but from matter exuded from
membranous surfaces, which acquire a degree of acrimony, and then, by melting
down the solids, cause ulcerations: and I have no doubt but by a very early
application tosuch modes as we have specified for resolution, these mischiefs
might be often prevented -- but here the great misfortune is delay; patients,
in the infancy of this complaint, by dabs, nostrums, and old family
prescriptions, losing the favorable opportunity which ought to be given to the
well-informed physician, applying for such aid only when some of the internal
parts have suffered irrecoverable injury.

Though we have before spoken of the erysipelas, or Saint Anthony's fire, which
arises from a febrile cause, there is another sort which sometimes succeeds
external injury; and in this, if the inflammation runs high, bleeding and
purging are highly efficacious; and in the intermediate times, betwixt the
administrating of purgatives, I depend upon saline diuretics, (176.) and even
those purgatives which I prefer, are such as most powerfully evacuate the
serous humors, such as vitriolated natron, Rochelle salt, regenerated tartar,
jalap, syrup of buck thorn, etc.

The external applications in these cases should be such as will expel the
obstructed fluids through the pores of the skin; hence diluent fomentations are
recommended, decoction of linseed, and white poppy heads, with elder and
chamomile flowers, and a proper proportion of soap liniment, one ounce and a
half to two ounces to a quart, whilst there is no break upon the skin -- chalk,
or fine flour, spread upon the part, and confined with a fine rag -- and
lotions of the vegeto-mineral water are thought by some highly serviceable,
where resolution is the aim.

But when pimples or painful blisters make their appearance, equal parts of
limewater, oil, vinegar, and comphorated spirit of wine, form an efficacious
composition to lay on the inflamed part, by means of a rag dipped into, and
well loaded with it -- or the ointment called unguentum tripharmacum, or that
of acetated ceruss, have been considered as proper applications.

We must now proceed to speak on MORTIFICATION, another termination of
inflammation, (301.) which generally proceeds in the following manner. At first
the swelled part begins at the point to grow yellow, the pain is mitigated, and
a dingy color comes on; the skin is flabby and soft, retaining the impression
made by a finger upon it, it loses almost all sensation, and grows livid -- a
tumid elevation of the part is perceived, which diffuses itself around -- there
appears pustules of a thin yellowish acrimonious liquid, which are black at
their basis -- then the skin and parts underneath corrupt, become dead, black,
losing all sensation, and dissolve into a foetid stinking sanies -- the
mortification creeps onwards, and seizes the neighboring parts -- at length
shivering, fever, cold sweats, small and weak pulse, and fainting, bespeak the
approach of death.

In the beginning, when the source of this mischief has been external injury,
and there is much strength of constitution, indicated by a full, hard, quick
pulse, high degrees of heat, pain, and dryness, the cooling method is to be
pursued, as if resolution was to be brought about; and though in this we cannot
hope to succeed, we are warranted in this mode of procedure, by the extreme
violence of the symptoms, with intent to bring on a state of suppuration, by
checking the vehemence of the circulation, and preventing the vessels from
being ruptured -- besides, exudation would be favored from the continuance of
relaxing and emollient fomentations.

But mortifications arise from very different sources, and affect different
constitutions -- should they happen to patients, therefore, whose blood is in a
thin, acrid, putrescent state, which will be indicated by debility of the
pulse, loss of strength, lowness of spirits, foetid thin acrimonious
discharges, and, should blood be taken, by its texture being very weak, we must
have recourse to invigorating and cordial remedies; as bark, wine, mineral
acids, and such like, in order to prevent the access of gangrene, and produce a
separation of the part affected; and, in cases of great pain, opiates have been
advised with very fortunate effects; indeed, whether the cause is internal or
external, the free use of opium is directed, and considered as the greatest
internal cordial known -- as an external application, the antiputrescent
lotion, (No. 90.) is recommended to be applied frequently, warm, as it is also
stimulant and digestive -- cataplasms of cummin-seed, and the carrot poultice,
are much approved; but if emollients are mixed with antiseptics, (192.) they
are said to assist in the separation of the putrid parts, and stopping
mortification.

The last termination of inflammation is SCIRRHUS, (302.) or indolent tumor,
which arises from obstructions forming in some of the glandular parts, as
before described, where either no suppuration takes place, or if it does, it is
in no small a degree, that it has not power to melt down the solids
sufficiently to remove the induration -- or it may be brought on by the too
long use of warm fomentations, soliciting too free and long continued flux of
humors, relaxing the vessels of the parts, hence occasioning haro swellings,
which are not easily removed.

Now these swellings which we here consider are totally free from all acrimony
of any peculiar nature, and, as the fluids are in a sound state, it is often
the most eligible practice not to interfere by any applications -- because in
young subjects they will very often gradually wear away; in older ones continue
generally without creating any uneasiness or inconvenience -- but should the
hardness be so considerable as to require particular attention, warm vapor or
steam directed to, and confined to act upon the part affected, is one of the
most efficacious applications in this case.

Sometimes these tumors are soft and flabby, then frictions, and well adapted
bandages, where they can be applied, are useful; or letting cold water fall
from some height upon the part, or pumping upon it, seems best calculated to
succeed.

Thus far has it been necessary to premise, before we enter on the inflammation
of the different parts, wherein the treatment of the inflammatory symptoms will
be nearly similar; but there will be some deviation necessary on account of the
parts affected -- for the INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN will require a different
treatment from that of the eye -- OF THE EYE from that of the lungs -- OF THE
LUNGS from that of the intestines, etc. to which we shall new proceed.

CHAP. II. INFLAMMATIONS OF THE HEAD AND NECK.
1. PHRENITIS, INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN.
THIS is so called from the Greek word phren, men's the mind; because the brain
is supposed to be its seat.

DESCRIPTION. The symptoms at the onset are, with respect to the general
affections, similar to what occur in the beginning of the inflammatory fever,
only the head seems to be more violently affected; for in this there is pain
and pulsation of the head, with a sounding noise, a ringing in the ears, and
disturbed sleep -- the eyes are painful and inflamed, almost always shunning
the light -- the countenance is puffed, the hearing acute, and the patient is
irritated from the slightest noise -- the pulse, for the most part, is weak,
sometimes hard, always low and depressed -- the urine looks pale like water --
and continued watchings are protracted to the eighth day -- the pulsation of
the carotid arteries is perceptible -- sometimes blood flows from the nose --
there is great debility, anxiety, and frequent sighing -- the tongue is
sometimes white and moist, sometimes black and dry -- the patients are
uncommonly irascible, laboring under a ferocious delirium and convulsions.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing, severe drinking of inebriating liquids,
particularly ardent spirits -- watchings, long exposure to the scorching rays
of the sun, particularly if the head is uncovered -- violent rage -- too deep
and long continued thinking -- excessive grief -- violent love -- a suppression
of the piles, and those discharges in women after childbirth, called lochia.

The proximate or immediate CAUSES, a true inflammation of the membranes of the
brain, or a congestion of blood in the body of the brain, or both conjointly.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. An acute febrile affection, attended with pain of the
head -- redness of the face and eyes -- incapability of bearing the light or
sound -- perpetual watching -- a violent delirium, or delirium attended with
some degree of apparent drowsiness.

This disease terminates between the seventh and fourteenth day, by resolution
-- haemorrhage from the nose; in wom^n, by a flow of the menses -- looseness,
or deposition of a copious sediment in the urine; -- but should not some of
these occur, suppuration or mortification is the consequence: it often, though,
degenerates into other diseases, as mania, i. e. delirium or madness without
fever, lethargy, melancholy, or idiotism -- when people recover, they will be
affected a long time with giddiness, weakness and pain of the eyes, quickness
of hearing, and a heaviness of the head.

We should be particularly careful in distinguishing this disease from the
delirium, that common attendant in many fevers: and this knowledge may be
acquired by observing, that in this species the delirium comes on first, and is
perceptible and violent before there is any great degree of fever -- in other
cases it is consequent to fever which has continued for some days before the
delirium is manifest; and the degree of phrenzy is correspondent to the degree
of fever; but in the true inflammation of the brain the degree of fever is
nearly adequate to the delirium, which is equal to what we meet with in real
madness, from which the inflammation of the brain is scarcely to be
distinguished, but by the shortness of the continuance; as in the space of a
few days it must either inevitably terminate in recovery or death.

This disease is either idiopathic, (299.) or symptomatic, (299.) -- the first,
wherein the head is primarily affected, rarely appears in temperate climates --
but the second very often occurs, and most frequently about the crisis of
fevers; and is generally attended with chillness, tremor of the joints,
distension about the pit of the stomach, coldness of the extremities, thin
urine discharged too copiously, or too sparingly; and most commonly, if
violent, proves mortal, from the constitution being reduced to a state of great
weakness from the preceding disease.

From the great consequence of which the brain is to the life of man, this
becomes a most dangerous disease, from that part being affected -- men
experience greater degrees of violence in this disease, and recover with more
difficulty than women -- the more the patients are, and the more they recede,
from their natural state and disposition, the greater is the danger -- bleeding
at the nose is a good omen; but if the phrenzy changes into a lethargy, it is
bad; and total loss of, or a trembling voice, convulsions, hiccough, may be
looked on as extremely unfavourable symptoms.

CURE. In a case so desperate as this, without we can diminish the violent
force of the circulating fluids against the sides of the vessels, remove the
obstruction, and take off the congestion, and that soon, from the delicate
texture of the brain, it must end fatally -- our applications, therefore, must
not only be powerful in themselves, but most expeditiously administered, with
intent to divert the flow of blood from the head, at the same time attempting
to allay the violence of vascular action, and strengthen the vessels of the
part affected.

For these purposes, therefore, we should have recourse to bleeding -- some
advise in an erect posture, copiously, and from a large orifice, till the
patient faints, giving preference to the large vein of the neck, called
jugular, or the temporal artery; or, (...) the menses are obstructed, to the
veins of the feet; and this (...) be repeated according as the strength of the
patient will permit -- if the pulse, as sometimes happens, will not allow this,
particularly after the third day, then cupping-glasses or leeches (...) be
applied to the temples, or the internal part of the nostrils must be scarified,
and blood taken away in one of these modes -- and immediately after smart
purges of the cooling kind, (171, 172.) must be administered, or glysters --
the lower extremities should be bathed in warm water, or the feet and legs
wrapped up in warm moist cloths or flannels -- the head should be shaved, and
washed with cold vinegar, or cold water poured upon it; (...) some advise even
the application of ice; and after proper ^^^^ations, when there appears a
reduction of strength, a blister (...) be applied to the head -- large doses of
nitre, mixed with a little camphor, may be given every four or five hours, or
fixed (...) ammoniac, (176.) or CLUTTON's febrifuge spirit, so called, may be
mixed freely with the patient's drink, which should be of the diluting and
watery kind -- mustard poultices may be applied, to the soles of the feet; and,
in fine, every thing which can (...) the blood from the head, and abate the
violent motion of the fluids.

The bedchambers should be large, dark, and cool -- every thing should be kept
extremely quiet; the posture should be as (...) as possible, or, at least, the
patient should lie with his head ^^vated.

If matters, by the means here made use of, take not a favorable turn within
the first four or seven days, there comes on a drowsiness, and propensity to
sleep, which soon puts a period to the unhappy patient's existence.

Sometimes we find it goes off by the efforts of nature producing some
evacuation, (311.) which, should they come on before the vessels of the brain
suffer much from being over distended, the termination of the disease may be
very fortunate -- if not till the vessels have been much injured, the senses
seldom return perfectly to their original standard -- nay, some affirm, it ends
in stupidity, and madness, which are rarely curable.

2. OTITIS, or OTALGIA -- from the Greek words, (...), auris, the ear; and
algos, dolor, pain; --

INFLAMMATION OF THE EAR.
By this is meant ^n inflammatory state of the internal parts of the ear, whose
membranes, from their being well stored with nerves, are extremely sensible;
and from being attached to bones, feel pain very acutely.

DESCRIPTION. An inflammation of the more internal parts, attended in common
with great pain, and that pulsatile, or throbbing headache, and some slight
feverishness; sometimes when it affects in a more severe degree, the fever is
stronger -- the head more painful, accompanied with delirium.

CAUSES, remote and inducing. Any extraneous body insinuating itself into the
ear, that has the power of exerting any stimulus -- acrid humors falling upon
the membranes of the ear -- obstructed perspiration -- currents of cold air
pouring forcibly into the ear, through narrow crevices, or cracks in doors or
windows.

The proximate, or immediate, are similar to what we have before specified, and
which occurs in all inflammation, where the parts are in a state of
predisposition; sufficient to feel the effects of those acting causes which are
more remote -- indeed the proximate and immediate causes of these complaints
are so exactly similar, that we shall have no occasion to specify them.

CURE. When the affections are slight, a little warm oil, with a few drops of
the tincture of opium, may be dropped into the ear -- or a decoction of poppy
heads may be injected -- these will sometimes take off the complaint when
trifling: -- but should it be more severe, bleeding and purging may be
requisite -- applying also cupping-glasses, or leeches behind the ears, and
blisters -- bathing the feet also in warm water -- and when the pain is
violent, an opiate, No. 4, may be administered at bedtime.

But should the throbbing pain, notwithstanding our efforts, still conti^ue,
suppuration will be the consequence; which we must endeavor to promote by warm
poultices applied externally; and wait for the bursting of the abscess --
which, when it happens, we must endeavor to keep the ulcerated part clean, by
injections of warm water in which is dissolved a little soap -- or of barley
water, to four ounces of which add -- one ounce and a half of honey of roses,
and half an ounce of tincture of myrrh -- this will assist the discharge of
matter, keep the ulcerated parts clean, and expedite their healing.

3. OPHTHALMI^ -- from the Greek word ophthalmos, oculus, the eye; --

INFLAMMATION OF THE EYE.
This disease is so very obvious to every common observer, that there seems
(...) a necessity for putting down the appearances, in order to distinguish it;
however, to preserve the regularity we have adop^^^ in other complaints, we
shall give of it a concise view.

DESCRIPTION. This complaint at the beginning is attended with heat, redness,
and swelling, or fullness of the eye -- and often feels as if a particle of
sand, or a small fly, had got into it, and there fixed -- the eye is painful,
tears flow, which appear hot and scalding -- the angles of the eye are often
filled with a viscid, yellowish matter, particularly after sleeping -- the
sight is weak, and all light is offensive -- in the more severe species, the
pain is very acute -- the pulse quick and rather hard -- the light intolerable
-- there is a perceptible pulsation of the arteries -- and the eyelids, with
the (...) parts, swell; but when it is still more severe, the membrane covering
the white of the eye elevates itself above the darker colored part, called
cornea, from its horny appearance -- and the patients complain of flies flying
before them, and feel other unpleasant sensations of this kind, the effect of
imagination. -- Afterward succeed suppurations, spissitude, of the humors --
spots upon, and thickness of the cornea itself.

From this account there appears to arise three material considerations: FIRST,
whether it is slight, affecting only the vessels of the outward membrane of the
eye; -- SECOND, whether it is very severe, extending itself to the eyelids, and
their edges, called tarsi; -- THIRD, whether it is extremely violent, fixing
its feat in the internal vessels of the eye itself, and in those of the
membrane called retina, at the bottom of the eye, which is considered the seat
of vision; in which case it is attended with high degree of fever, intolerable
pain, and often delirium. For these distinctions will make some alterations in
our modes of cure.

CAUSES. The remote, or inducing, are -- external injuries occasioned by blows
-- dust getting into the eye, or other stimulating bodies -- a free admission
of cold wind -- sweats suddenly suppressed -- looking frequently or long at the
fire, the sun, or other strong glaring colors -- exposure to the cold air of
the morning and evening, which succeeds hot and sun-shiny weather -- acrid and
metalline fumes -- couching, or extracting a cataract. It also may proceed from
internal causes -- such as the suppression of salutary evacuations -- humors
repelled -- drying up of issues -- setons -- fistulas -- or ulcers --
indigestion -- too long watchings -- night studies -- other diseases of the
eyes -- smallpox -- and meazles.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Redness, and pain in the eye -- with incapability of
bearing the light.

CURE. With regard to this we are to take into our account the immediate cause
-- whether it is an increased irritability in the vessels; or a want of proper
resistance in their coats; or they both cooperate together -- for, according
to the acting cause, so should our applications differ; as what would in one
case produce a good effect, would in the other be attended with dangerous, or
at least disagreeable effects.

In the slighter degrees of this complaint, the cure is perfectly easy, as
little more is requisite than external applications -- washing the eyes with
warm milk and water, mixed with a little brandy -- conserve of roses -- roasted
apples, and some such remedies.

But in more severe affections, if the habit is full, general bleeding and
purgatives are necessary, with a cooling regimen -- to which, if the disorder
does not soon give way, not less than three leeches should be applied, as near
each other as possible, in the hollow of the temple nearest the eye affected --
opening the jugular vein is often serviceable; -- bleeding in the eye itself
has by some been strongly recommended; but the operation is apt to irritate,
and is only necessary when the inflammation is kept up by a speck in the eye,
which is fed by one or more blood vessels, then they may be divided.

In obstinate cases, keeping the head shaved is highly proper, and applying
blisters about the size of half a crown over the orifices made by the leeches,
is useful; -- bathing the feet in warm water should not be neglected.

With respect to the local applications, the chief, and most useful, is the
tinctura Thebaica of the London Pharmacopaeia as an opiate, joined with some
stimulant, for without, it will not answer; -- at first the anodyne eye-water
(No. 91.) may be applied to the eye two or three times a day. In slight cases,
this is often sufficient; and, indeed, in the more obstinate, two or three
drops of the tincture may be dropped into the eye two or three times a day. --
The body should be kept cool by proper diet and medicines, and the eyes free
from any thing that can irritate them.

In some cases, though, where the inflammation has been long continued, its
duration will be apparently owing to want of proper resistance in the vessels
-- hence must recourse be had to such medicines as give strength and activity
to them; still some caution is here necessary -- they should only be applied
when the eye is in the weakest state of inflammation, which generally happens
in the morning, after the eye has been kept some time free from any irritating
cause. -- In these cases the coagulum aluminosum of the old London Dispensatory
may be mixed with a common poultice, and applied to the eye affected for three
or four hours in a morning -- and in the remainder of the day, tincture of
opium -- afterward as the eye gets strength the vitriolic solution, No. 92,
may be used.

By this method I have seen inflammations of the eyes of long standing, cured,
which had resisted every other mode -- the quantity of the vitriol may be
gradually increased to 10 or 12 grains.

In all inflammations of the eyes arising from common causes, one of the modes
above specified will generally succeed -- only we should be careful not to use
any of the more stimulant applications, till the inflammation begins to relax
of its violence, for if they are used too soon, they will rather increase, than
subdue the malady.

But sometimes this disease will be occasioned, and supported by some morbid
humor in the habit -- as that called scrophulous -- venereal -- or some other
which we are incapable of discovering. -- In the two former cases, we must make
use of those remedies pointed out in the treatment of those complaints -- in
the latter, a course of alteratives in which mercury has the greatest share,
will be most efficacious. Under these circumstances I have known small doses of
calomel, with antimonial powder and rhubarb, or jalap, given twice a day, and
washed down with the decoction of the woods, interposing proper purgatives once
in a week or ten days, be very successful -- and greatly assist the application
of external remedies.

In obstinate cases, where blisters have been ineffectual -- issues, and setons
in the neck, have been recommended; -- or having the lobes of the ears pierced,
and exciting a discharge by skains of silk being passed through them in the
manner of setons.

The gluing of the eyelids together, should be prevented by insinuating a
little mild unctuous medicine between them, before the patient goes to rest.

Notwithstanding what has been said respecting inflammation of the eyes
resulting from a relaxation, or attended by that state of the vessels, it is
sometimes owing to intenseness of motion -- which is discoverable from the
great heat, -- dryness, and very severe pain, -- which are concomitants; --
then bathing the eye with warm milk and water, in which poppy heads have been
boiled, afterward applying a poultice of this decoction thickened with crumbs
of bread, enclosed in thin (...), will be necessary. But in order to prevent
the accession of these complaints in those who are subject to the returns,
besides guarding against the remote causes (315.) issues have been recommended
-- taking away blood about the equinoxes -- purging occasionally -- a cooling
diet -- avoiding reading in the night, particularly small print -- or, in fine,
doing any thing, that can too much fatigue the eyes.

4. QUINSY.
An abbreviation of the word from the French squinancie, sore throat -- the
Greeks term it, CYNANCHE, from kuon, canis, a dog, and anko, strangulo,
strangulate -- because patients afflicted with this complaint were supposed, in
the difficulty of perspiration, to use their tongues like a dog -- and by the
Latins ANGINA, from the Greek word anko.

This is an acute affection of the throat, divided into two species -- the
inflammatory, and malignant -- of the first of these some authors form
varieties, according to the different parts they affect.

1. TONSILLARY QUINSY.
Because it affects the membrane on the superior parts of the throat,
particularly the tonsils, with tumor and redness.

2. TRACHEAL.
In Scotland called CROUP, because it affects the muscles of the trachea, or
membrane covering its upper part, the windpipe; in which disease in inspiration
the voice is rattling and hoarse, there is a shrill cough, with no apparent
tumor, and a little difficulty of swallowing.

3. PHARYNGAEAL.
Because the pharynx, in the lower part particularly of the fauces, is affected
with redness, the swallowing is very difficult and painful, though perspiration
is sufficiently easy.

4. PAROTODAEAL.
In England called MUMPS, in Scotland, BRANKS, because there is a considerable
swelling of the parotid and maxi^lary glands, respiration and deglutition
slightly disturbed.

All these are attended with an inflammatory fever; though the last, or the
parotidaeal, is of a very mild sort.

The second species is called the TONSILLARY MALIGNANT, OR ULCEROUS QUINSY,
because it affects the same parts as the inflammatory tonsillary, (see above.)
with tumor, redness, and with white or gray colored sloughs, spreading and
covering ulcers, attended with a nervous or putrid fever, and red
efflorescences -- hence styled by some the malignant scarlet fever. (288.)

Of all these we shall proceed to treat in the order they are set down -- and,
first.

THE TONSILLARY INFLAMMATORY QUINSY, OR COMMON SORE THROAT.
DESCRIPTION. In this the tonsils and superior part of the fauces are affected
-- in general the inflammation begins in one tonsil, then spreads across the
palate, seizes the uvula, and other tonsil.

Though considerable pain attends the action of swallowing if only one side of
the fauces is affected, yet can that action be performed tolerably well; but
the pain becomes intolerably severe when both sides are affected, and
swallowing is performed with extreme difficulty; indeed, the pain is sometimes
so great as, in delicate and irritable habits, to occasion convulsions.

It may, however, appear singular, that more pain should be felt in swallowing
liquids than solids; but this is the fact, because a greater portion of
muscular fibers are employed in the deglutition of the former than the latter.

So long as the inflammation confines itself to the parts above described there
is little danger, more particularly if the neck appears puffed up, for this
seems to indicate less danger of suffocation, and is therefore considered a
favorable omen.

But if the inflammation extends itself to the muscles of the larynx, in that
degree as to impede the opening of the glottis, or superior part of the
windpipe, the complaint becomes extremely precarious, because then there will
be great apprehension of suffocation.

Or should the brain or lungs be affected by a translation of the morbid
matter, from the one occasioning violent headache and strong delirium; and from
the other oppression of the chest and difficulty of breathing. If to what we
have here said we add the febrile symptoms which commonly attend inflammation,
and the apppearances in the throat, (315.) we cannot avoid distinguishing the
complaints.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, perspiration obstructed, particularly in
the neck -- the admission of cold air into the fauces, especially if it rushes
rapidly into the mouth, and strikes them forcibly -- violent and long continued
singing -- shouting, or too severe exercise of the part -- any acrid
stimulating particles, or hard pungent bodies adhering to the parts -- drinking
too cold water -- suppressed or impeded evacuations -- or a peculiar state of
the air rendering this complaint epidemical.

The proximate or immediate, similar to those of other inflammatory complaints.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Redness, tumor, heat, of the tonsils, rendering
deglutition painful, attended with febrile inflammatory symptoms.

CURE. The same rules are to be observed as in other inflammations, respecting
the general treatment, such as bleeding, purging, cooling, diluting medicines,
and regimen. With regard to local application, it is of use to apply stupes of
flannel dipped in spirits of sal ammoniac, or hartshorn, mixed with a little
oil, and applied to the throat in the slighter cases -- in the more severe,
blisters; for these solicit the matter from the internal to the external parts.

Gargles also of sage tea and vinegar, or infusions of elder and chamomile
flowers, in equal parts of water and vinegar, applying the steams of this to
the throat; they are of infinite use, and give great relief, favoring the
exudation and dissipation of the obstructing fluids.

After the imflammation is abated, gargles more astringent should be used, made
of tincture of roses, or red port, with the vitriolic or muriatic acid,
sweetened with honey -- also to them may be added a small portion of alum, or
weak decoctions of bark, with the acids abovementioned, or alum; for these
will give strength to the fibers, which, from over distension, have been
weakened and relaxed -- and, for gargling the throat, perhaps, syringes had
better be made use of, both on account of ease and certainty in reaching the
part affected.

By this mode the cure in common will be completed within the course of four or
five days; but if within this time the inflammatory symptoms should not become
(...), and the inflammation itself subside, then will little doubt remain of
suppuration taking place; discoverable by the following SYMPTOMS OF ABSCESS
forming; the febrile symptoms continue though in a slighter degree, the pulse
grows softer, the florid color of the inflamed part abates, the pain becomes
more bearable, and slight shiverings (...) on frequently.

Here we must endeavor to promote suppuration as fast as possible, by applying
maturating poultice to the throat externally; and internally, decoction of
figs; or infusion of li^s^^^ should be drank very warm, and swallowed
gradually; carefully, at the same time, watching for the appearance of abscess,
which generally discovers itself in a few days, by a whitish tumor, and
fluctuation of a fluid to the touch -- should not this (...) of itself in a few
days, which, though, is generally the case, it should be opened as early as may
be, and detergent gargles of barley-water, honey of roses, vinegar, and
tincture of myrrh, may be had recourse to. (No. 93.)

When the abscess is perceptible to the sight, and within the reach of external
remedies, this method must be pursued; but sometimes it forms itself so low
down as not to be within the reach of instruments; we must therefore wait for
its bursting; and should, before this happens, the tumor be so large as to
prevent swallowing, the patient must be supported by broth or milk glysters;
and blisters and stimulant poultices should be applied to the throat
externally, in order to solicit the morbid matter outwardly.

The consequences in these cases is very rarely fatal, when there is a
suppuration; however alarming may be the appearances, or tedious the process.

But, now and then, this complaint arises from the want of proper resistance in
the vessels of those parts, discoverable by the relaxed state of the solids,
manifested by weaker degrees of (...) and pain, and more slight inflammatory
appearances respecting the color of the parts as they are less red, than in
the former.

In these cases copious bleeding is rarely necessary; purgatives are more to be
depended upon, and the application of stimulants and blisters locally and
externally -- gargles should be of the pungent kind, made of the infusion of
horse radish, or mustard seed, or some other of the pungent stimulants, (145,
146.) for these attenuate the viscid mucus which clogs the follicles or cells
of the tonsils, and other contiguous glandular parts, that crowd the fauces, by
stimulating the vessels to an increase of proper action on their stagnating
mucus; for these sore throats are considered as pituitous.

In habits like these of the phlegmatic kind, (60.) abscesses seldom arise; but
should that be the case, they require the same mode of treatment as above
specified; to which must be added tonic and corroborant medicines internally,
as well as externally, in order to give tone and firmness to the vessels after
proper detergents, and add strength to the constitution, as bark, steel, with
it generous and nutritious diet.

The same mode must be pursued in the SECOND and THIRD SPECIES, in their
inflammatory state; to which if the disease does not yield, and there is reason
to be afraid of suffocation, from the high degree of inflammation of the
muscles of the larynx, preventing proper respiration, recourse must be had to
bronchotomy, or opening the windpipe, though not without extreme necessity, and
then it must be performed by the hands of the most skilful surgeon, for it is
attended with the utmost danger.

But sometimes the inflammation not only attacks the membrane lining the upper
part of the trachea, but extends itself down on the interior surface into the
lungs, which surface is found, on dissection, to be covered over, and the
passage for the air almost filled up with a thick slough, having a fibrous
membrane-like appearance, which is concluded to be the viscid remains of mucus
thrown off by exudation from the inflamed surfaces -- and is discoverable by a
peculiar shrillness of the voice, like the crowing of the cock, with a cough,
but no sickness, nor at first much difficulty of breathing.

This disease is at certain times epidemic, and seizes chiefly children, and
runs to its fatal termination so extremely rapid, that little chance is given
to any medical applications, from the want of time -- immediate vomiting, and
blistering the throat, are the whole we can, perhaps, depend upon for any the
least prospect of success. This variety of the trachel quinsy is called the
CROUP, and is more frequent in Scotland than elsewhere.

The FOURTH SPECIES, or the PAROTIDEAL QUINSY, or M^MPS, called also MAXILLARY,
from its affecting the maxillary as well as the parotid glands, and also the
muscles and ligaments which raise up and connect the upper with the lower jaw,
from which is necessarily felt severe pain in opening the mouth.

In this the swelling is generally external, increasing so much in a few days,
particularly in the lower part of the face, and under the chin, as almost to
obliterate the features, though the attendant fever is but slight.

Saline purgatives, with nitrous medicines, moderate bleeding, and external
stimulants, chiefly volatile liniments, are all that are required, keeping at
the same time the head and face warm, and free from external cold.

But there is a singular peculiarity now and then attending this complaint; for
sometimes on the swelling of the glands subsiding, a similar affection of the
testicles of men takes place, and of the breasts in women -- however, no
alteration in the cure is required; for it has been observed, that to the same
it yielded, nor were the parts, particularly the testes, ever known to
suppurate.

Sometimes a hardness will remain in the parotid and maxillary glands; these
yield to small doses of calomel, and gentle purging; sometimes the application
of the quicksilver ointment has been necessary.

5. TONSILLARY MALIGNANT ULCEROUS SORE THROAT, (318.) OR MALIGNANT SCARLET
FEVER.
This has often raged in England, and appears to be a quinsy, or sore throat,
of a more malignant nature, attended with a remittent fever, verging more to
the putrescent than inflammatory sort; or running very rapidly from the former
into the latter.

This disease oftener attacks, and with a greater degree of violence, infants
and young children than adults; girls than boys; the infirm than those in the
vigor of health; those of a pale, wan complexion, and relaxed habit, with an
acrimonious state of fluids, than the robust and sanguineous; and appears
particularly in autumn, preceded by a hot summer.

DESCRIPTION. In its commencement, it first seizes the patient with chillness,
languor, sickness, and extreme oppression at the pit of the stomach -- great
dejection of spirits -- very sudden weakness -- great heaviness on the breast
-- and faintness -- these are succeeded by extreme heat, nausea, vomiting, with
soreness of the throat -- sometimes the affection of the throat makes the first
appearance -- in general the pulse is frequent, small, and fluttering, though
sometimes depressed, and undulating -- the tongue moist, especially toward the
root -- the eyes heavy, reddish, and watery -- the countenance frequently full,
flushed, and bloated, though now and then pale and sunk -- the breathing quick
and laborious -- the skin, though extremely hot, not perfectly dry -- the urine
commonly pale, thin, and crude; in many adults, however, it will be made in
small quantities, high colored, or turbid like whey -- the throat sore and
inflamed, exhibiting a shining redness, of a deeper color than in common
inflammatory sore throats, and having a puffy appearance which covered the
tonsils, and spread over the fauces, the tonsils at the same time ulcerated,
and in some degree, though not greatly, enlarged -- a delirium sometimes comes
on in the daytime, the symptoms appearing slight; yet is there in the night a
considerable increase of violence, and that through the whole course of the
disease -- the swallowing is difficult, and more so on swallowing the saliva
only, than of any liquid or soft diet.

On the third day, or thereabouts, an efflorescence on the skin generally
appears, but without any alleviation of the distressing symptoms; indeed, they
frequently increase, and, added to them there is often a purging -- at this
time the patient begins to throw about his arms and legs, lying in a state of
great inquietude; or he becomes drowsy -- there now comes on great prostration
of strength -- the constitutional powers fail -- swallowing grows more
difficult -- the breathing more laborious -- and before the sixth day the
patient expires in a state of suffocation.

CAUSES. The remote and inducing, as in all diseases arising from any specific
infection, or contagion, is a predisposition in the habit to receive and feel
the effects of the morbid matter, which we conceive to be of a peculiar nature
capable of creating the disease, communicated from the air, or bodies before
affected, which constitutes the proximate or immediate cause; for frequently
the disease, either from the breath, or contaminated matter spit up, will
attack the attendants, and a whole family -- a strong proof that the disease is
infectious and contagious.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. (See page 319.) And here it is of the utmost consequence
to distinguish this from the simply inflammatory sore throat, which may be done
by the looseness and vomiting -- the puffy and dark-colored redness attending
the swelling (...) the foetid ulcers of the throat, covered with a white slough
-- from the hoarseness of the voice -- the slight delirium coming on so soon --
and from the sudden and great prostration of strength -- because much depends
upon the mode of cure first adopted -- for what will be the means of laying a
foundation of a cure in the simple inflammatory, would be the cause of death in
the malignant quinsy.

The redness of the tumefied parts, brightness of the eyes, no great degrees of
debility and fainting, the slough being white, and the florid appearance of the
eruption on the skin, are favorable omens.

But if the debility should be violent; if the ulcers are ash-colored, black,
or livid; if there should be a diarrhoea, rigor, weak and small pulse; the body
put on a cadaverous appearance; the eyes lose their splendor; the eruptions
disappear, or become livid; and particularly if the nose bleeds -- the worst
must be expected.

CURE. The indications of cure are similar to those of putrid fever, (223,
etc.) to which we must add, the healing of the ulcers.

In the most malignant kind, little can be expected from our endeavors, the
progress to dissolution is so rapid.

In the more mild sort, whatever may have been said by men whose medical
characters entitle them to attention, with respect to bleeding, nothing except
the most distressing inflammatory symptoms, which rarely occur but at the
commencement, can authorize the practice; for I have generally observed, that
those who have undergone the operation in this species of fever, ran (...)
quickly into extreme danger, or died.

If, then, at the onset, there appears to be strong vascular action, saline
mixtures, with slight antimonials, and acid gargles, slightly astringent, with
occasional gentle aperients, or emollient glysters, if necessary, after the
administration of a vomit, may be persisted in, till symptoms of putrescency
make their appearance, which will soon be the case -- then we must rely on
blistering under the throat, and antiseptics, as bark, mineral acids, acescent
drinks, and vinous cordials, for relief. SEE PUTRID FEVER, (223.) where we have
treated on these remedies, except gargles, which may be made as directed No. 94.

Or the vehicle to the other ingredients may be pectoral decoction; the more
antiseptic ones may be made of decoctions of bark, with tincture of myrrh, red
port, and the mineral acid -- some advise a gargle made of honey, barley-water,
and spirit of sea salt -- and after the fever has remitted, drying the ulcer
with quicklime ley mixed with honey.

CHAP. II. INFLAMMATIONS OF THE BREAST.
1. PLEURISY, OR INFLAMMATION OF THE PLEURA.
THIS is an affection of that membrane called PLEURA from the Greek word pleos,
plenus, full, which lines the inside of the chest, covering the ribs
internally, and intercostal muscles (33.) and lungs, (28.) and forming the
mediastinum and pericardium, (28.) attended with an acute fever, great pain,
and difficulty of breathing.

It is divided into the TRUE PLEURISY, when the membrane itself is affected --
into the SPURIOUS, when the intercostal muscles; and also into MOIST, when
expectoration is an associate; and DRY, when there is no such appearance --
indeed, at the onset it puts on generally the appearance of the latter, and of
the former in its progress, if not conquered by resolution; for then most
commonly expectoration takes place.

DESCRIPTION. At the commencement, the patient is generally attacked with
chillness and shivering, which are succeeded by heat, restlessness, pain in the
head and side, the last very acute and pungent, running to the back and
collar-bone -- difficulty of lying on the side affected, with a dry cough,
increasing the pain, which, after the third day, is attended with an
expectoration of a thin, sanious, and sometimes bloody matter -- the breathing
is also very difficult and painful -- the pulse hard and tense -- the blood,
when drawn, firm in its texture, and covered with a coriaceous, or substance
like buff-leather -- the urine very high colored -- and all the symptoms of a
peripneumony, which we shall hereafter describe.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, obstructed or impeded perspiration --
strong exercise, cold, thick, heavy air admitted into the lungs, cold northerly
winds -- drinking of ardent spirits -- cold water drank when the body is
overheated. Sometimes it succeeds a quinsy, colic, and spasmodic pains --
suppressed evacuations -- eruptions repelled, as the meazles and smallpox,
etc. -- external injuries of the chest -- and, in fine, whatever will create a
stimulus on the lungs possessed of an inflammatory disposition.

The proximate or immediate, an inflammation of the pleura running along the
exterior surface of the lungs, or that part covering the ribs; but most
frequently of both affected at the same time.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A pungent pain of the side, attended with febrile
affections, pain also in inspiration particularly increased; a difficulty of
lying down, for the most part on the side affected; and very painful cough --
in the beginning dry, afterward moist, and often bloody.

CURE. The indications are similar to those of inflammation of other parts --
at the onset, we must have recourse to copious bleeding, and that repeated, if
the symptoms continue urgent, according to the strength of the patient -- the
blood should be taken from a large orifice; and in strong full habits, and
young up-grown subjects, not less than fourteen or sixteen ounces -- above the
part in pain cupping-glasses may be applied, and blood taken away by those
means -- if the pain should be relieved by the first bleeding for some hours;
and, notwithstanding that, the pain and oppression return, the operation must
be repeated, and about twelve ounces more blood taken away; and, indeed, should
the symptoms prove obstinate; and return in the course of ten or twelve hours,
we must have recourse to the operation again, and apply a blister over the part
affected, especially if the inflammation appears to extend itself outwardly, or
the pain has any great degree of severity; for, indeed, our chief dependence
rests on bleeding and local blistering, to weaken the tone of the vascular
system, and subdue the violence of the action of the vessels -- after the first
bleeding, and in the intermediate times, such things should be administered as
will cooperate to promote these intentions -- we must, therefore, have
recourse to such things as are diluting, relaxing, and emollient, with cooling
and aperient diuretics -- hence may the patient drink copiously of pectoral
decoction, bran or linseed tea, almond milk, apple-water, lemonade; in all
which portions of nitre may be dissolved; and the body should be kept open with
cooling and relaxing glysters, (No. 25, 26.) -- a large sponge dipped in warm
vinegar applied to the mouth and nostrils is useful, as well as diluting
drinks, that the vapors may be received with the air into the lungs, relax the
pores of the pulmonary vesicles, promote exudation, and bring on expectoration,
by unloading the distended blood vessels, and making them permeable -- or, for
this purpose, the steams of warm water, or some emollient decoction, might be
received into the lungs by inhaling them from the spout of a large tea-pot; or
by MUDGE's inhaler, contrived for that purpose.

Emollient fomentations, or hags filled with boiled herbs, might be applied
over the parts -- oily medicines, forming emulsions or linctus's, (No. 81 to
84.) might be taken internally occasionally -- and nitre, mixed with a little
camphor, or antimonials -- and saline mixtures given every two, three, or four
hours.

In the beginning of this disease, there is little doubt but this, like other
inflammations, may be carried off by resolution; but if the power and strength
of the vessels have been so weakened, or there has been a plentiful deposition
of morbid matter upon the lungs, which has changed the nature of the pulmonary
fluids, we must then endeavor to promote, by all means, expectoration, as the
only remaining means of saving the patient from extreme distress, or death.

For this purpose, added to what we have above delivered, as an attenuant,
seneka, or-rattlesnake-root, (159.) is esteemed (...) powerful one, and has in
these cases been attended with success given three or four times a day; it
promotes perspiration (...) expectoration; but when we find the latter is
remiss, expectorants must be had recourse to, (No. 95.) four spoonfuls of which
must be taken every third or fourth hour.

When people begin to expectorate, some authors forbid any farther use of the
lancet; but so long as the violence of the symptoms go on to increase, we may
pursue it to a fourth or fifth time; nay, indeed, farther, according to the
strength, till we find these alleviated, and the patient perceives himself
considerably relieved.

This alleviation will be perceptible on the fourth or fifth (...) by the head
being freer from uneasiness, the tongue more moist the cough will be less
troublesome; the breathing not so difficult; the expectoration more easy; the
matter less tinged with blood; and by some alleviation and freedom in the
pulse, which will beat more regularly, and with more quietude.

Under these circumstances, we should persist in the use of diluents and
expectorants, keeping the body open with gentle cathartics, such as the
electarium e cassia, oil of castor, manna, Rochelle salt, etc. (169 to 171.) or
by the use of emollient glysters -- desisting now from farther bleeding.

Though the disease in a few days generally terminates favorably, if the
expectoration continues free and copious, yet sometimes it stops suddenly, and
no other discharge succeeding, the breathing becomes difficult and laborious;
we must then endeavor to renew the discharge, lest the patient should die
suffocated, by bleeding, inhaling warm steams into the lungs, the application
of blisters, and antimonials, sufficient to promote gentle vomiting.

As the mode of treatment must be similar in the simple inflammation of the
lungs, heart, mediastinum, pericardium, and diaphragm, (28, 29. 33.) we shall
now only describe them, to show how they may be discovered -- and, first,

2. PERIPNEUMONY, so called from the Greek words peri, circum, about, and
pneumo, pulmo, the lungs.

INFLAMMATION OF THE LUNGS.
DESCRIPTION. This begins with shivering or chillness, succeeded by heat --
after which there comes on anxiety, debility, and restlessness, watchings, and
delirium -- the blood drawn is similar to that in a pleurisy -- besides, there
is a redness of the countenance and in the eyes -- the tongue is white and dry
-- the respiration laborious, quick, and hot, attended with a dull, not an
acute pain -- the patient cannot lie on the side affected -- there is a pain in
the shoulder -- dry cough at first, afterward moist, and vomiting -- the pulse
is full and soft -- the urine high colored, which, after standing, sometimes
becomes turbid -- at length the mind is disordered -- the sight fails -- a kind
of hissing noise attends the breathing -- the pulse rather creeps than beats --
the extremities grow cold -- partial sweats breaks out in the superior parts --
and death closes the scene.

Now this complaint is obviously distinguished from a pleurisy, by the breath
being hot, the pain dull, not acute, and the pulse also full and soft.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing, (see page 325.) Proximate or immediate,
inflammatory obstructions of the terminations of those arteries of lungs, (30.)
called pulmonary and bronchial, either separately or conjointly.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Febrile affections, attended with an obtuse pain under
the breastbone, or betwixt the shoulders -- anxiety, and difficulty of
breathing -- a cough, generally, though not always, moist -- the face swelled,
and of a purplish color.

CURE. (See Pleurisy, page 326.) But here it may not be useless to observe,
that there seems to be a material alteration between the termination of an
inflammation of the pleura and that of the lungs -- the solution of the first
often happens by a plentiful sweat, or a copious discharge of loaded urine --
of the last, more frequently by expectoration -- and in both cases, when these
evacuations of sweat, urine, or expectoration have been perfect, a full and
salutary crisis is formed, all the oppressive symptoms vanish gradually, and
the re-establishment of health happily succeeds.

The inflammation of the mediastinum, which is only a duplicature of the
pleura, manifests itself by an acute pain in the middle of the breast, between
the breast bone and the spine, or clavicles or collar-bones, attended with
frequent and quick breathing, and the rest of the pleuritic symptoms.

The inflammation of the heart, and the membrane surrounding the heart, is
accompanied with a deep-seated pain -- weight, anxiety -- very quick, and
frequent respiration -- great thirst -- a heat in the chest -- palpitation of
the heart -- with a hard and unequal pulse, and frequent fainting.

The same affection making the diaphragm, or that part of the pleura which
covers it, (27.) the seat, has for its attendant symptoms, an acute fever --
restlessness -- anxiety -- and delirium -- an acute pain between the spurious
or short ribs, and the vertebrae of the back places opposite to them, agreeable
to its situation -- the breathing is quick and short, accompanied with
convulsive catchings in inspiration -- a dry cough and hiccough -- the
hypochondrium, or part below the short ribs is drawn in toward the back, and
the abdomen, or lower belly, has little or no motion during the action of
breathing.

The three complaints we have now mentioned are called by systematic writers,
CARDITIS, from cardia, cor, the heart -- PERICARDITIS, from peri, circum,
about, and cardia, -- and PARAPHRENITIS, in contradistinction to phrenitis, or
the inflammation of the brain, because, though a delirium always attends it,
the brain is only sympathetically affected in this case, whilst in the
PHRENITIS it is the seat of the disease.

With respect to the cure, we must pursue the same plan as advised in pleurisy,
exerting our strongest efforts to produce resolution, the only salutary
termination; for all the other either bring on immediate death, or lay the
foundation for some irremediable complaint, of which we shall treat, as soon as
we have taken notice of another species of the peripneumony; for in this place
we have confined ourselves to such as were purely inflammatory.

MALIGNANT PERIPNEUMONY.
This complaint is by far more dangerous than that we have before described --
as it generally attacks those where humors are in an highly acrimonious state,
scorbutic habits, and sailors after long voyages.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint, the blood is in a dissolved state, livid, and
when drawn has no coriaceous, or leather-like appearance upon its surface, as
in the inflammatory species -- there is also great restlessness with extreme
debility; -- pains all over the body; -- profuse sweats, and red, or livid
eruptions, like flea-bites; -- the patients are apt to faint on the least
motion, have a difficulty of breathing, and cough or spit up a thin, sanious,
bloody matter, which smells offensively -- the pulse is soft, and depressed,
and the urine very high colored.

CURE. The fever attendant on this seems clearly to be of the putrid kind, and
as such must be treated -- Bleeding, therefore, must be avoided, without at the
beginning the pulse should be strong, for otherwise it does great injury,
particularly if it should be repeated. Blisters also are mischievous. -- Our
chief dependence rests upon vegetable or mineral acids -- camphorated vinegar,
(No. 55.) with a nourishing and acescent diet -- vinous liquids, particularly
such as are astringent, the best of which are rhenish, claret, and red port --
Opiates also have been found serviceable in thickening and rendering more mild
the thin, acrimonious humors deposited upon the lungs; but then they should be
given with great caution, taking care not to increase the difficulty of
breathing by their use.

Of the spurious peripneumony we shall take notice, when we come to treat on
asthma; and now proceed to treat on some of the consequences of pleuritie and
other inflammatory affections of the breast, forming different diseases.

For when the pleurisy, or peripneumony is not cured by resolution, or
expectoration, matter is generally formed within the chest, which, according to
its situation, has received different appellations; when in the body of the
lungs, though no more than an abscess, it is called VOMICA -- from vomo, to
vomit, because they vomit forth, as it were, matter -- when between the pleura,
EMPYEMA, from en and puon, pus, matter.

1. VOMICA.
DESCRIPTION. Upon the formation of matter, which, occurs, if the inflammation
goes not off within fourteen days, there is an abatement of the severity of the
symptoms -- the pain ceases -- and the pulse, still quick, is weaker and
softer; yet the cough, difficulty of breathing, and oppression still continue
-- and if in this situation the patient feels a slight shivering, succeeded by
heat, little doubt remains of an abscess taking place; -- add to this, if the
cough increases upon the least motion, the patient cannot lie but on the side
affected, and the symptoms grow daily more severe, accompanied with debility,
and emaciation, these appearances make it more certain -- And should the vomica
burst suddenly, a suffocation may be dreaded -- or should the matter not find
its way into the branches of the windpipe, so that it may be coughed up, and
make its exit out of the habit, all hopes of success are at an end.

2. EMPYEMA.
DESCRIPTION. An increased difficulty of breathing upon the re^lension of the
breast, preceded by an unresolved inflammation -- inability to lie on the side
unaffected; a sense of weight above the diaphragm, and many symptoms common to
a dropsy of the chest -- because the immediate cause is a quantity of matter
lodged in the cavity of the thorax, or the matter may form a sac in any of the
membranes of the breast; though they commonly burst, pour out their contents
into the cavity of the chest, and by pressing upon the diaphragm, or other
parts, according to the position of the body, occasion the symptoms before
specified.

CURE. In both these cases every prospect of success depends upon freeing the
habit from the offensive matter, which, should we not be able to accomplish,
either the patient will die suffocated -- or consumptive. In an EMPYEMA there
are no hopes, except making an aperture between the ribs into the chest, as low
as possible, to avoid wounding the diaphragm.

In a VOMICA, if from the expectoration of matter we have reason to believe
that it has burst into the branches of the windpipe, and the matter be white,
smooth, and free from any offensive smell, and continue to be freely
discharged; if all the oppressive symptoms from day to day abate, particularly
the cough and laborious breathing, we must not despair of a recovery, which we
must endeavor to promote by the use of expectorant balsamics conveying the
steams of the aetherial spirit of vitriol -- or STERNE's ether dropped into hot
water, and inhaled into the lungs, in order to cleanse and heal the ulcer.

Ground ivy, hyssop, chervil tea, whey, sweetened with honey, are proper drinks
-- all animal food and broths should be avoided, and their place supplied with
milk -- rice, spinach, turnips, or any other diluent, cooling vegetables,
properly prepared: these will keep the body cool, and dispose the humors to be
mild and soft -- and proceed farther in the manner we have laid down in
pulmonary consumption.

Sometimes matter will be so situated by being locked up in a sac, whose sides
are formed so thick, that the matter cannot be absorbed into the habit, but
communicating with the branches of the windpipe, be from time to time
expectorated -- under this circumstance men will live a long time, as I have in
two instances known, where nothing was ever attempted but putting the patients
on a milk diet.

Sometimes an adhesion will be formed between the membrane covering the outer
surface of the lungs and the pleura which covers the inside of the ribs,
forming a cavity, and points itself outwardly; or manifests itself by a
constant fixed pain in some particular part -- under these circumstances, when
all hopes of a cure by expectoration are past the vomicae and ulcers have been
conquered effectually by an aperture being made into the cyst in which the
matter was lodged. Cases attending the success of this practice, with the mode
of management, may be found in Dr. BARRY's treatise on the three different
digestions, and discharges of the human body, to which our reader is referred.

3. PULMONARY CONSUMPTION,
called PHTHISIS PULMONALIS, from the Greek word pthino or pthuo, corrumpo, to
corrupt.

This disease is a wasting away of the whole body, attended with a hectic
fever, cough, and spitting up of matter, from an ulcer on the lungs.

Authors have divided them into different species; THE DRY, or TUBERCULOUS
CONSUMPTION; -- THE MOIST, or CATARRHAL -- and THE SANGUINARY, from their
attendant symptoms and causes; but by dividing this disease into two stages,
and adverting to the cause, we shall, by a concise view, render it less
perplexing; the FIRST, comprising its state of inflammation; the SECOND, of
suppuration.

DESCRIPTION. The inflammatory stage begins with chillness, succeeded by heat,
low spiritedness, and pain -- shrillness of the voice, salt taste in the mouth,
and dry cough -- there is generally an oppression in the breast, especially
after motion -- thirst -- a weight in that part of the lungs affected -- loss
of appetite, and vomiting up sometimes of the food soon after taking it -- the
pulse is quick, soft, and small; sometimes full, and rather hard -- and
frequently a spitting and coughing up of frothy and florid blood -- this forms
the first species -- and when blood is coughed up, the third, or sanguinary;
and this by some is considered as a consumption in its incipient state.

After some time, matter is expectorated of different colors, white, yellow,
green, bloody, either without smell, or offensive -- the body begins to fall
away, and grows cold even in summer -- the hectic fever increases in the
evening, and in the morning abates by dissolving sweats -- there is a burning
heat frequently in the palms of the hands -- and in the day loosenesses come
on, or the patient makes a larger quantity of water -- sometimee the tongue
will be beset with small ulcers -- and, after eating, the patient will have a
fixed red color in his cheeks -- the fingers grow thin, though the ends are
bulbous, and nails curve inwardly -- the feet swell -- the hair falls off --
and pit of the stomach seems to be pulled inwards and upwards -- all the
functions grow languid -- the body dry -- and the eyes sink deep within their
cavities -- at length, from debility, the patient pays the debt of nature, at
the time when he is flattering himself with the hopes of a recovery.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, acrid matters separated by the lungs, and,
by their stimulus, exciting a cough -- small glandular tumors, called tubercles
-- fumes of arsenic, or other noxious materials, getting upon the lungs --
moist air -- spitting of blood -- a diminution or suppression of evacuations to
which the constitution is accustomed -- inordinate passion -- sedentary mode of
life -- too luxurious living -- extraneous bodies getting into the lungs --
wounds -- retropulsion of acrimonious humors -- besides, it is occasioned very
often by a variety of other diseases; as scrophula, pox, smallpox, meazles,
scurvy, asthma, pleurisy, and peripneumonic diseases; scarlet fever, and other
continued and remittent fevers; besides, it may by contagion be acquired; and
is also hereditary.

The proximate or immediate is, in the first stage, an inflammatory state of
some portions of the lungs, particularly the glandular; in the second, almost
always ulcerations, which the opening of dead bodies who have died of this
complaint verify; though sometimes the cause has been found to be, an
induration and swelling of the bronchial glands, which are dispersed through
the lungs, hard and black, not suppurated in the center, but running together,
and firm, of the size of hazle-nuts or nutmegs, and oozing out a purulent mucus
into the terminations and branches of the windpipe, not observable in the spits
-- some of them form earthy concretions, do not suppurate kindly, but remain in
a state of hardness, and, when cut, ooze out a thick purulent mucus, and thick
black blood.

CURE. Now, whether we consider them as different species, or as different
stages of the same complaint, we must adapt our mode of cure accordingly --
hence, then, IN THE FIRST STAGE, we must endeavor to conquer the inflammation,
by gentle bleeding, renewed at proper intervals, and the applications of
blisters to the back and sides, frequently repeated; we should also give
oleaginous and incrassating demulcents, to sheath the humors, and prevent the
coughing -- gentle vomits should be, after proper evacuations, repeatedly had
recourse to, at least every morning, by giving a few grains of ipecacuanha,
white or blue vitriol; though the first is preferable -- a course of goat's
whey would be useful -- living upon vegetable diet, and being extremely
temperate -- when the inflammation abates, gentle doses of some deobstr^ents;
such as ammoniacum, millipedes, myrrh, ammoniacal iron, etc. would be
serviceable to some; to others Seltzer water; those of Mossat, Harrowgate,
Kilburn, Islington, to others; using at the same time riding exercise.

Small doses of mercury have been thought efficacious in resolving the
tubercles after the inflammatory stage is over, of which quicksilver with
chalk, by some, has been preferred to every other composition of that class;
but, whatever of them are administered, should be given in small doses, in
proportion to their activity.

IN THE SECOND STAGE, the indications are, to discharge the offensive matter
from the constitution by expectoration, or any other mode agreeable to nature,
permitting her always to point the way; heal the ulcerations, strengthen the
lungs, and give tone and firmness to the habit in general; for which purposes
chalybeate waters, mineral acids, particularly elixir of vitriol, have been
recommended; gentle exercise, especially riding on horseback; a clear, dry,
warm air, and such amusements and company as will moderately exhilirate, not
fatigue the spirits -- venery, all painful mental affections, or too great
solicitude about business, should be avoided.

In order to clear the lungs, and produce freedom of expectoration, we advise
gentle emetics, (see above.) and failing, for these are greatly conducive
toward giving strength to the part affected -- the myrrh mixture, (No. 96.)
has been in many cases highly serviceable -- and, in order to prevent the
absorption of matter from having any bad effect upon the blood, antiseptics,
not of the stimulating kind; and demulcents, with vegetable and mineral acids,
should be used, if the patient has no looseness to forbid their administration
-- bark also in this point is beneficial -- at the same time the patient should
be kept on all such things as are cooling and nutritious, and what we
comprehend under the term milk diet -- and if neither riding exercise or
failing can be procured, swinging in the open air must be substituted in their
places.

Nothing is more necessary than an exact observance of regimen in point of diet
in these consumptive cases; but of this, and other particulars, we have before
spoken when on hectic fever, to the cure of which we shall refer our reader,
(261, etc.) and proceed to treat on some other species of consumptions, which
arise not from affections of the lungs, but from matter formed in some other of
the viscera, and these are called

TABES,
from the Latin word tabeo, to pine away.

DESCRIPTION. Emaciation of the whole body, attended with an hectic fever, loss
of strength, without much cough or spitting of matter; and these are generally
owing to formation of matter in some of the interior parts of the machine.

If it happens in the LIVER, it is known by pain extending itself up to the
shoulders -- a swelling, and pain on touching the region of the part affected
-- nausea, vomiting, and looseness -- there is frequently a cough -- the skin
has a sallow or yellowish look -- and the sediment in the urine is either brown
or yellow.

If in the STOMACH, it manifests itself by foetid offensive belchings -- a
cough without expectoration -- a vomiting of purulent matter -- fainting
frequently -- sweats -- and pain, either during the time of swallowing, or just
after.

If in the INTESTINES, it is discoverable from the situation of the parts, and
the separation of matter by stool.

If in the MESENTERY, the signs are nearly similar to those which occur when in
the liver, (see above) though a hectic fever, joined to a tense swelling of the
belly, and a frequent diarrhoea, are distinguishing marks of this disease.

If in the KIDNEYS, there is a weight in the part affected, the patient lies on
his belly, the urine has matter mixed with it, and there is a difficulty and
pain in making water.

If of the WOMB, it is known by a pain of the loins, and a flow of matter
externally through the vagina. (51.)

A tabes may also be occasioned by matter being lodged in some parts more
external, where an evacuation of pus may be procured by opening the abscess;
which done, and the ulcer healed, the cure will be completed; but where this
cannot be accomplished, as is generally the case in almost all of the
imposthumations we have specified, we must attempt to correct the acrimonious
state of fluids brought on by the absorption of matter, and guard the
constitution against its effects, by the use of Peruvian bark, and such a
regimen as we have before laid down in cases of consumptions from ulcers of the
lungs.

Sometimes, though there will be a scirrhosity, or hardness of the parts,
particularly the liver and mesentery, arising from the vessels being
obstructed; to the latter of which children about seven years old, without any
signs of a scrophulous taint in the habit, born of common prostitutes, are said
to be the most subject -- they grow pale, spiritless; have a voracious
appetite, sometimes depraved one, longing for things uncommon and improper to
eat; with a relaxed state of the intestines, and a looseness, in which the food
taken passes away almost in an unaltered state, soon after eating; they fall
away, are consumed by a low lurking fever, and often fall into a dropsy of the
belly, or a local inflammatory affection comes on, and closes the scene in
death.

CURE; This, in all cases of their kind, is to be attempted, by steel
medicines, or waters, goat's whey, fossile alkali, or soda, (Page 185.) or such
of the mineral waters as abound with them, joined to ass' milk -- deobstruent
gums, particularly myrrh, ammoniacum, with soap, and preparations of steel,
rhubarb, and tartarized kali, may, when opening medicines are necessary, be
given; and, with the use of these, a milk diet should be persisted in, with
great regularity.

Though we have said that most of these consumptions, not of the pulmonary
kind, arise from formation of matter, or obstructions, there is one which
deduces its origin from another cause; and this is called

TABES DORSALIS, OR THE DORSAL CONSUMPTION.
from the Latin word dorsum, the back; which, besides the common symptoms of a
tabes, is to be distinguished by others, as a constant discharge of mucus, or
seed so called, through the urethra, with frequent nocturnal emissions --
difficulty of making water -- costiveness -- pain and weakness in the small of
the back -- violent and acute headache -- with an uneasy creeping sensation
down the spine from the neck to the loins -- difficulty of breathing, and
weariness, with an heaviness of the head, and ringing of the ears.

The general CAUSE of this complaint is, excess in libidinons indulgencies,
which often ends fatally, as the unhappy victims are generally so weak as to
persist in them; and, without total abstinence, the most judicious advice will
be inefficacious.

CURE. This depends upon our attempts to invigorate the system and increase the
strength and activity of the solids by a course of ass' milk, steel waters, the
cold bath, with bark, and elixir of vitriol -- the patient living in a pure
air, using gentle exercise, light, and moderately cordial diet, given in small
quantities, such as will not be too great for the strength of the digestive
powers -- these applied in time -- and no disease requires more early
application -- before the hectic fever, and violent night sweats come on, may
give relief; but, after that period, there is little hope for success.

4. INFLAMMATION OF THE STOMACH, or GASTRITIS. from the Greek word gaster,
ventriculus, the stomach; in which case the stomach is said to be inflamed
wholly, or only in part.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint the GENERAL SYMPTOMS are, extreme anxiety --
watchings -- restlessness -- tossing about of the body -- fainting -- with a
most acute fever, soon accompanied with nervous and putrid febrile affections
-- the LOCAL; great thirst -- difficulty of breathing -- pain in the region of
the stomach -- excessive heat, and a sense of burning -- continued painful
vomiting -- hiccough, and extreme pain from throwing up of wind, and
particularly after taking any sharp acrid medicines -- fullness and tension of
the stomach -- the pulse rather hard, contracted, and frequent -- with coldness
of the extremities.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, a prevalent predisposition in the stomach
being present -- bruises on the region of that organ, or wounds in the stomach
itself -- drinking of cold water, fermented liquors, strong acrid emetics or
purgatives, or other acrid medicines thrown into the stomach -- corrosive
poisons -- acrimonious humors generated in the blood, or repelled from the
exterior parts of the machine, and thrown upon the coats of the stomach, such
as that of the smallpox, miliary eruptions, gout, acrid bile, or any hard
substances swallowed, and lodging in the stomach; or, in sine, any thing fixed
there capable of producing strong irritation -- which naturally bring on the
proximate or immediate cause, inflammation.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. These may be known from the Italics in the description.

CURE. This will in many cases depend upon adverting to the causes acting upon
the stomach, and taking off that action; but if it arises only from those which
commonly induce inflammation, our chief dependence must be upon copious
bleeding, fomentations, cupping upon the parts, and local blistering, and
keeping the body open with emollient glysters -- very little can be expected
from internal remedies, from the propensity the stomach has to reject whatever
is taken down -- hence all we dare venture upon are demulcents, only moderately
warm, such as solutions of gum arabic, tragacanth, or spermaceti, with nitre;
to which may be added, a very small portion of camphor, and three or four
drops, now and then, of the tincture of opium -- nitre may also be added to the
glysters, and thrown up freely into the bowels -- flannels also, soaked in warm
solution of nitre, may be applied as a fomentation.

But what we must most insist upon must be bleeding -- nor must we be directed
by the pulse, as in this case it is apt to deceive us, for it is generally
small, quick, and irregular; sometimes intermittent; the operation should
therefore be repeated till the pulse rises, and beats with some degree of
freedom.

Indeed, if resolution is not accomplished in the very beginning, mortification
will very rapidly succeed.

Suppose POISON should be the cause, at a very early period a quickly acting
emetic should be given, such as white or blue vitriol, instantaneously, and
afterward large draughts of new milk, or fresh butter melted, and oil; these
are extremely salutary; or any other sheathing liquids, drank in such quantity
as to fill the whole alimentary canal, in order to guard the coats of the
stomach and intestines from receiving any injury from the acrimony of the
poisonous stimulus -- when even arsenic has been taken, these have been found
efficacious.

Should the poisons be compounded of any metalline substance joined with an
acid, suppose corrosive sublimate, before the inflammation comes on, alkaline
salt dissolved in water should be freely administered; this will disunite the
compound, and render it inactive.

Admit it should be occasioned by any eruptions receding from, and thrown back
into the habit from the surface, and fixing on the stomach, we should apply
blisters, in order to recall to the skin the offending matter, by soliciting a
more copious flow of humors there.

5. INFLAMMATION OF THE INTESTINES.
called ENTERITIS, from the Greek enteron, intestinum, intestine.

Perhaps there is not any complaint so commonly talked of as this; yet it
certainly does not occur any thing like so often as is imagined -- some species
of the colic is frequently, I am persuaded, mistaken for it -- practice
warrants me in saying thus much.

DESCRIPTION. It generally proceeds in the following manner: after the body has
been costive, there comes on acute pain, and distension of the body,
particularly near the navel, the costiveness then becomes more obstinate -- the
patient complains of sickness, and throws wind upwards -- then succeeds
vomiting of the contents of the stomach, afterward of (...) phlegm and bile --
should this continue, the faeces come up, ^ay, even the glysters, by the mouth
-- there is much difficulty of breathing -- an obstruction of urine -- the
pulse quick and (...) -- thirst -- and great debility -- the pain at length
ceasing, faintings, hiccough, delirium, and convulsions, close the scene in
death, occasioned by a mortification having taken place.

CAUSES. Those which are remote or inducing are said to be, ruptures in the
groin -- worms -- stimulating medicines -- poisons -- or too acrimonious bile
-- too long retention of faeces -- ^^ripe fruit -- or any hard substances
lodged in the intestines -- (...) introsusception, or running in of one of the
bowels into the other, and there confined by some stricture -- tumors or hard
swellings in the intestines or neighboring parts.

The proximate or immediate, what occurs in other local inflammations, attended
with the natural motion of the bowels, called peristaltic, inverted and turned
upwards, arising from the bowels being obstructed.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Great internal pain, and soreness about the navel, so
that it can scarcely bear the touch with a distension of the belly, accompanied
with thirst, heat, great prostration of strength, and a quick small pulse.

CURE. Whatever may be the cause, we must labor (...) bring about, as quick as
possible, resolution, lest mortification should be the consequence, which may
in a very short space of time succeed.

The treatment recommended in the inflammation of the stomach will be here
proper; though more reliance may be placed on internal remedies, which must be
calculated to gain a passage through the bowels, check the vomiting, and subdue
the inflammation.

To answer the first purpose, the mildest aperients should be tried; if they
avail not, those which are stronger; and should they be rejected, we may couple
them with opiates; the (...) should be small, and often repeated. (See No. 97
to 99.) -- If liquids will not succeed, solids may supply their place, (No.
100, 101.) -- or should these not answer, in conjunction with them, (...), (No.
102.) and irritating glysters, (No. 108.) or the (...) of tobacco, (155.) may
be tried; or crude mercury may be taken, an ounce at a time, three or four
times a day.

Should some acrimony be suspected to be the cause, the purging antimonial
mixture is recommended, (No. 104.) of which let three or four spoonfuls be
taken every second hour, till the patient vomits, and has a free passage
downwards. Indeed, when every thing has been tried in vain, cold water thrown
suddenly upon the feet, legs, thighs, and belly, laid bare, has succeeded.

If these remedies, added to the applications we have advised in inflammations
of the stomach, do not answer our purpose, mortification will take place -- and
here we must be careful that we are not deceived; for people, for ten or twelve
hours before their death, being freed from pain, flatter themselves with the
hopes of recovery, even when the fatal scene has commenced, and they die in a
few hours -- but if the pulse should be low, the countenance become pale and
ghastly, and cold clammy sweats come on, we may be certain of the dreadful
event.

But, should our efforts prove successful, great care should be taken to avoid
a relapse; for, unless the bowels have acquired proper strength, the malady is
apt to return.

The diet therefore should be, for some time, of the lightest kind, and not
flatulent -- the patients should be kept quiet, free from cold, and unruffled
by mental inquietude -- nothing crude and difficult of digestion should be
taken; nor should they use much walking exercise, or any severe motion of the
body.

6. INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER,
called HEPATITIS, from the Greek hepar, jecur, the liver.

The liver itself may be inflamed, still manifest itself by different symptoms,
which authors have thought necessary to specify, in order to avoid any errors
which might occur for want of such proper distinction.

DESCRIPTION. If the inflammation happens on the interior (...) part of the
liver, it is discoverable by a fixed obtuse pain, and weight in the right side
under the short ribs, attended with heat, uneasiness about the pit of the
stomach -- the pulse on the attack being almost in the natural state; though
afterward much quickened -- there is in the right side also a distension --
the patients lose their appetite, are sick, and troubled with vomiting -- the
tongue becomes rough and black -- they complain of pain in the stomach, have a
very troublesome hiccough, and their countenance is either pale, of a citron
color, or yellow like those in the jaundice.

If it is on the superior or unequal part, they feel an acute pain in breathing,
extending either toward the throat or shoulder -- the pulse is quicker -- they
have a dry cough -- lie down with difficulty on the left side -- are troubled
with hiccough and vomiting, and grow extremely weak.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, too violent and repeated shocks from
vomits -- hard tumors of the liver -- extremely tenacious blood -- too great a
load of sat in the omentum or caul, (37.) -- cold air, or cold liquids suddenly
affecting the liver, at a time when it experiences too great a degree of heat.

Though some do not consider the complaint as originating in the liver itself,
but communicated from the parts which lie contiguous to it, being thus
primarily affected -- to all which we may add, amongst the number of inducing
causes, all such as are common to other fevers of this kind.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A tension and pain in the right side under the spurious
ribs, sometimes pungent, like that of a pleurisy; sometimes more obtuse, with a
sense of heat and weight -- a pain at the collar-bone and top of the right
shoulder -- an uneasiness on lying down on the left side -- a difficulty of
breathing -- dry cough -- vomiting and hiccough -- the face of a yellowish
color, accompanied with thirst and a loathing of food.

CURE. This disease in our climate is considered as rather uncommon, though, if
properly treated, it rarely becomes dangerous.

In this, as in other cases of visceral inflammation, we must have recourse
first to copious bleeding, nor wait to be led till it is indicated by the
pulse; after this, a blister should be immediately applied over the part
affected, where the pain is felt; the belly should be fomented, the legs bathed
in warm water, and emollient and attenuating glysters frequently administered,
(No. 25, 26.) -- saline neutral mixtures, with antimonials, should be given, to
which should be added as much rhubarb as will keep the body constantly soluble,
(No. 8.) and when the pain and other inflammatory symptoms are perceptibly
abated, mercurial purgative^^ joined with antimonials, will be of the greatest
advantage. (See No. 105, 106.)

These means, if early and judiciously applied, will generally conquer the
inflammation -- if not, an abscess of scirrhus is formed -- the consequences of
which are very frequently incurable tabes, jaundice, and dropsy -- though there
are sometimes peculiar circumstances by which the patient in cases of abscess
is preserved -- should the inflamed part of the liver form an adhesion with the
membrane covering the inside of the right hypochondrium, or part under the
spurious ribs, so that the matter confined in a sac is prevented from falling
within the cavity of the belly, and pushes outwardly, occasioning a swelling
which points to the scat of the abscess, an incision made into it, sufficiently
large to evacuate the whole matter, may save the life of the patient, (see page
83^, etc.) -- sometimes the matter formed will be thrown out of the habit by
the kidneys, sometimes by the intestines; but from whatever cause matter is
formed in that organ, we must wait for the operation of nature, and have
recourse to such remedies as the circumstances of the case will admit,
laboring chiefly to support the constitution in the manner we have before
specified, when treating of consumptions from internal abscesses.

7. INFLAMMATION OF THE SPLEEN.
called SPLENITIS, from the Latin word splen, the spleen.

This, though a case which very rarely occurs, still, in consequence of certain
fevers of the remittent and intermittent class, the spleen will frequently be
loaded, and remain in a hardened and indolent state -- however, when it does
make its attack, it puts on the following appearances:

DESCRIPTION. There is a pain, generally dull, and fixed in the left
hypochondrium -- also a weight attended with a remittent fever -- there is
generally a protuberance on that side externally, attended with a throbbing
pulsatile pain -- the fever, for the must part, increases every fourth day --
the feet and knees grow red -- the nose and ears sometimes pale, attended with
a difficulty of breathing.

CAUSES. These are similar to those which induce the same affection of the
liver, if we except the morbid defect of the omentum or caul.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Distension and pain of the left hypochondrium, increased
on pressures, without any symptoms of an inflammatory state of the kidneys,
attended with a remittent fever.

CURE. Similar to what we have delivered in cases of inflammation of the liver.

But, without much previous distress or disorder, an abscess will here
sometimes be formed; which, bursting suddenly, pours its contents amongst the
viscera of the belly, and in a few days destroys the unhappy patient.

8. INFLAMMATION OF THE KIDNEYS, or NEPHRITIS.
so called from the Greek nephron, ren, the kidneys.

DESCRIPTION. Those who are seized with this complaint feel a heat and pain,
and sometimes have a redness in the region of the kidneys, attended with
febrile affections -- they complain of a numbness of the thigh and leg of that
side in which the affected kidney is situated; they make water with difficulty,
which is at first pale, afterward high colored -- and complain of a painful
uneasiness in sitting down or standing -- they lie down with most case on the
side affected -- they complain of coldness of the extremities -- are sick, and
vomit, and breathe with difficulty; at length, if resolution takes not place, a
suppuration or mortification succeeds.

This has not unfrequently been mistaken for in inflammatory lumbago, or pain
of the loins; but from which it is distinguishable; first, from the patient's
being able to raise himself into an erect posture; from being bent forwards
without any remarkaable pain, which in the lumbago is very severe; from the
pain following the course of the ureters (50.); from the difficulty of making
water, and the urine being more changed, which is not the case in the lumbago.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, whatever causes an irritation in the
kidneys, so that the blood is determined too freely and obstructed there, such
as wounds and bruises -- calculous concretions -- food which generate
flatulencies in the bowel, called colon, (43.) -- heating diuretics -- shaking
in a carriage, or on horseback -- suppressed evacuations -- fullness of blood,
or any strong spasmodic contractions of the kidneys themselves.

The proximate or immediate are similar to what induce other local
inflammations.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Pain in the region of the kidney, often pursuing the
course of the ureters -- frequently making water -- the urine being either
pale, thin, or of a very red color -- numbness of the thigh -- retraction or
pain of the testicle of the same side, and vomiting.

CURE. If it proceeds from common causes, such as induce other local
inflammations, the same mode must be pursued as has been repeatedly advised in
the foregoing part of this work.

But suppurations are often formed here, which are discoverable,
notwithstanding the abatement of the pain, by a sense of weight perceptible
about the region of the loins, with hot and cold fits succeeding each other,
and the urine, from being high colored, without sediment, becoming whitish and
turbid -- under this circumstance people will live many years, from there being
so free an exit for the matter out of the machine by the ureters -- however, in
ulcerated kidneys, goat's whey, balsam of co^^^iva, (P. 165.) Canada balsam,
(P. 175.) and also fossile alkaline waters are recommended -- solutions of kali
impregnated with fixable air, (P. 199,) -- demulcents, (P. 187.) -- the leaves
of the bear's wortle berry, (P. 139.) in powder, have been highly recommended
in these cases; and, from experience I speak, much may be done by its use.

But those calculous concretions, called stone, or gravel, are the most
frequent source of inflammation in the kidneys -- this cause is discoverable by
the pain increasing, and being more acute from exercise, or riding in a
carriage -- being more violent at intervals -- from the urine being sometimes
gravelly, bloody, or mucous -- the numbness of the the thigh -- retraction of
the testicle on the side affected -- pain following the course of the ureters
-- as well as nausea and vomiting being more violent. -- The indication of cure
in this case is, not only to take off the inflammation, but to procure a
passage for the offending materials, whether gravel or calculus, by relaxing
the parts, that it may slip away, and be evacuated.

Here then, besides bleeding, warm bathing is essentially necessary;
fomentations copious use of demulcents, (P. 187.) particularly the internal
emollients, (P. 142.) only emulsions and draughts, (No. 81, 98, 99.) emollient
glysters, with turpentine and opium, (No. 116. 121.) diluent mucilaginous
liquids sweetened with honey, as bran tea, linseed tea, decoction of
marshmallows, or that of barley, in which last is dissolved gum arabic, or gum
tragacanth.

Nitrous medicines joined with the same gums may be administered, and opiates
in small doses.

By these means the ureters will be relaxed, and sheathed, for the easy and
quick passage of the calculus, or gravel, into the bladder -- besides, the
irritation on the parts will be lessened, as they will become less susceptible
of the stimulus.

Should the stone be small enough to pass into the bladder, and be evacuated,
the complaint ceases -- if not, a different one commences, which we shall treat
of hereafter.

9. INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER, OR CYSTITIS.
from the Greek word kustis, vesica, the bladder.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint, the patient experiences a pain and tumor of
the lower part of the belly -- a frequent desire, and difficulty in making
water -- sometimes a suppression of urine -- and frequent efforts to go to
stool, attended with febrile affections -- to which we may add, the pain on
touching is intolerable -- watchings, thirst, and delirium, with coldness of
the extremities come on -- and, by retention of the urine, an increased
hardness of the tumor.

CAUSES. The remote and inducing are, urinous acrimony concurring with fullness
of blood -- an acrid state of fluids-inflammation of the urethra, from venereal
ulcers or acrid injections -- inflammation of the rectum -- suppressed piles --
taking Spanish flies in too large quantities -- in which, besides the
difficulty of making water, or severe strangury, bloody urine will be voided,
and a priapism occasioned, sometimes bringing on convulsions -- or it easy
originate from blows, bruises, compression, hard riding, or, indeed, from the
stimulus of a stone in the bladder.

CURE. From whatever cause it proceeds, it must be cured, consistently with the
plan laid down in inflammation of the kidneys; only, in this case, greater
benefit may be derived from fomentations and vapor applied to the parts
affected.

There are also inflammations of some other parts of the lower belly as the
peritoneum, that membrane lining the lower belly as the pleura does the chest
-- omentum, or caul, (P. 37.) mesentery, (P. 46.) which, as they all of them
require the same mode of treatment, we shall particularize only those symptoms
by which they are said to be distinguishable.

THE INFLAMMATION OF THE PERITONEUM, OR PERITONITIS.
so called from peritoneum -- is discoverable by a pain of the lower belly,
which is increased by the body being in an erect posture, attended with fever;
though not accompanied with signs peculiar to other abdominal inflammations.

INFLAMMATION OF THE OMENTUM, OR CAUL, NAMED OMETITIS.
This is distinguished by an acute darting pain, perceptible, through the
superior and middle part of the lower belly, below the skin, muscles, and
membrane of the abdomen, increased upon pressure, with swelling and tension,
accompanied by an inflammatory fever.

IFLAMMATION OF THE MESENTERY, OR MESENTERITIS.
In this there is a tumor and deep-seated pain in the region of the navel, or
thereabouts -- the habit is altogether costive, or nearly so -- from the
administration of glysters, after the first, not any thing is evacuated -- the
fever is sometimes slight, sometimes remittent, at others violent -- the urine
high colored -- there is a bitter taste in the mouth -- loss of appetite,
thirst, and watchings come on -- afterward a thin, red, foetid, or white
matter passes off by stool.

THE MUSCLES OF THE LOWER BELLY WILL BE SOMETIMES INFLAMED, and from thence the
liver compressed -- which physicians have sometimes mistaken for an
inflammation of the liver -- but which is easily discoverable, from touching
the skin, pulsation of the tumor, and circumscribed figure, extending itself
beyond the limits of the liver, and above the ribs -- from the absence of
cough, difficulty of breathing, vomiting, and hiccough -- matter here forming
between the muscle of the abdomen and the membrane which lines the inside of
that cavity, has been mistaken for an affection of the liver itself --
therefore necessary to be specified.

CURE. In all these cases we must have recourse to the same methods as have
been repeatedly pointed out in local inflammations, to prevent suppuration --
which, if we cannot effect, a tabes will be the consequence, particularly in
the three first mentioned -- but we must here observe, that in cases of
INFLAMMATION OF THE PERITONEUM, or THAT OF THE MUSCLES OF THE ABDOMEN, we must
depend much on fomentations -- applying after each operation, volatile
liniment, with tincture of opium, (No. 107.) -- and should not these succeed,
blisters -- which in the others may be useful -- and in all, repeated glysters;
for these act also as fomentations, and in most apply closer to the part
affected.

SECTION XIV. ON DISEASES WHERE PAIN IS THE CHARACTERISTIC SYMPTOM.
WE consider pain as arising from four different causes, either from nervous
incitability, (P. 27.) vascular or muscular irritability, (P. 27.) distension,
or spasm, creating stimulus; and when it is so oppressive as to become the most
violent symptom, being of long duration, or frequently returning, it
constitutes diseases of this class -- which take their names either from the
cause known, or supposed to be the agent, or from the seat of the affection. --
Yet we mean not here to include all diseases which have pain for their
associate, because it is attendant on all inflammations, settled fevers,
remarkable evacuations, and evident spasms; but confine ourselves to those
diseases where pain is the predominant symptom, unaccompanied primarily with
any of the abovementioned disorders.

CHAP. I.
1. HEADACHE.
IN this complaint, it will be sufficient to enumerate the causes; because it
requires not any particular description; and, according to the cause, to that
is the cure adapted -- but first we must observe, that it has been divided into
three species, the two first agreeable to the nature of the affection; the last
to its seat.

If there is a heaviness and uneasy dull sensation, occasioning a pain in the
head, as if it was too full, internally distended, and overloaded, it is
denominated CEPHALALGIA, from kephalos, caput, the head, and algos, dolor,
pain; -- and, by way of distinction, CEPHALAEA, if the whole head should not
only be affected, but the pain be acute and violent, having severe
exacerbations, or increase of severity on slight occasions, with spasmodic
tension, and soreness of the integuments.

And should the pain attack either side of the head, chiefly at the temples,
forehead near the eyes, and that should be violent, and often periodical, it is
called HEMICRANIA, from emisus, dimidium, half, and kranon, caput the head.

CAUSES. 1st, A too great fullness of blood -- 2d, suppression or retrocession
of the menses or piles -- 3d, morbid particles occasioning intermittents --
4th, from a load on the stomach, and indigestion -- 5th, different species of
acrimony; as that of the pox, gout, rheumatism -- 6th, hysteric spasms -- and,
7th, from latent causes undiscoverable, or irremediable when known -- to each
of which in our mode of cure we must particularly advert.

If it deduces its origin from the FIRST -- a full slow pulse -- florid
countenance; though oftener pale -- load and heaviness of the head,
particularly of the fore part, immediately after rising in the morning, or
stooping to the ground -- a difficulty of thinking, of distinctly reasoning,
and defect of memory, distinguish this.

Bleeding and purgatives will generally afford relief; if not, cupping at the
nape of the neck, or back part of the head, may be had recourse to.

If from the SECOND, bleeding during the fit will be necessary, and attempting
to reproduce the periodic discharge, and solicit the renewal of the piles --
bleeding in the feet in the former, and at the anus with leeches in the latter,
may be attended with agreeable consequences.

If from the THIRD, and it puts on intermittent appearances, bark alone, or
coupled with valerian, (150. 193, 194.) (No. 32.) becomes efficacious, and
giving emetics, (No. 11. 12, 38.) at proper intervals.

If from the FOURTH, it will be attended with throwing up of wind -- nausea --
load and pain in the stomach -- a bad taste in the mouth -- and vomiting;
though this last will also attend both cephalalgia and hemicrania, (346.)
without the origin of these diseases being in the stomach, but in the head
only; hence we should be careful in making this proper distinction.

Therefore, if it is owing to the stomach, we must apply to emetics, (No. 11,
12, 38.) should not any thing in the constitution prohibit their use; and
afterward to purgatives; taking care previously, if necessary, to empty the
vessels of the head by bleeding; afterward bitters and chalybeates, (No. 61 to
65.) to strengthen the stomach -- we must also assiduously prevent costiveness,
with proper aperients taken occasionally. (No. 66, 108. 109.)

If from the FIFTH, we must proceed to attack the diseases from whence they
originate, as under these circumstances they are only considered symptomatic.

If from the SIXTH, or those called nervous headachs, penetrating, volatile,
antispasmodic substances externally and locally applied, such as WARD's
essence, ether, compound spirit of ammonia, camphor, will sometimes give
immediate relief -- plasters also made of opium, applied to the part affected,
in periodical partial affections of the head, I have known efficacious.

If from the SEVENTH, we shall be convinced how impossible the causes are to be
discovered, and how little is to be done, if we only mention what has appeared
on dissection of those who have labored under this complaint.

In some the sutures of the scull were so closely and firmly conjoined, that no
traces of the junction of the bones of the cranium were to be found -- in some
the dura matter (26.) was thickened and indurated, and in others it held earthy
concretions -- the scull, in some, sent out little processes, like thorns,
running through the membranes into the brain -- and, in others, crude
quicksilver was found in the ventricles of the brain, (27.) at the basis of the
scull.

Some periodic headachs, from such latent causes, will continue for a long
series of years, without any fatal effects; whilst others, if they are constant
and violent, terminate in apoplexies, some kinds of bad ^evers, or spasmodic
diseases.

Some general rules, however, are necessary to be observed, whatever may be the
precise nature of the affection.

Patients subject to these complaints should always keep their hands, arms,
legs, and feet warm, particularly their legs, and have them well rubbed at
bedtime -- avoid costiveness -- eat very light suppers -- lie with their heads
high, and in thin night-caps -- their food should be always light, and easy of
digestion -- their exercise moderate -- and their minds kept in a state of
cheerful case.

2. EAR-ACH, OR OTALGIA.
from ous, auris, the ear, and algos, dolor, pain.

We have before spoken of the inflammation of the ear, 2. in inflammatory
complaints; but there are other causes which induce this complaint; as, 1st,
worms, supposed to arise from the eggs of the flesh-fly deposited in the wax,
which form for them a nest -- 2d, a defluxion of humors -- 3d, from hard
bodies pushed into the ear.

In the first instance, smoke of tobacco poured into the ear, and afterward
warm oil, prove efficacious.

In the second, the symptoms are not violent -- there are pain and swelling in
the vicinity of the ear -- running at the nose -- cough -- but oftener a
soreness of the throat -- frequent sounds and ringing of the ears -- with
painful sensations from those which come externally.

This complaint is apt to be occasioned by cold itself, or moist cold winds
striking the ears and head, exposed to them without covering.

Local bleeding behind the ears with leeches, and blistering there, or the back
part of the head, and, at the same time, the liniment, (No. 110.) may be dropped
into the ear; sedative fomentations, (No. 111.) are useful, with sedatives and
diaphoretics, (No. 4 to 10.) given internally.

In the THIRD, the bodies must be extracted in the gentlest manner. We have an
account of acute pains, attended with other melancholy circumstances, by
FABRICIUS HILDANUS, occasioned by a ball of glass falling into the ear, and
continuing for eight years, cured by extraction.

And we are also told, that some surgeons, mistaking a swelling of the bony
part of the ear for some extraneous body, destroyed the patient, by the
violence exerted for its extraction.

These cases show the necessity of caution and circumspection, even in cases
considered in themselves as trivial.

3. TOOTHACHE, OR ODONTALGIA,
from odous, dens, a tooth, and algos, dolor, pain.

This complaint is known by a throbbing, gnawing, darting, or some other
species of pain in the teeth, attended with watchings; sometimes with a
swelling of the cheek, great discharges of saliva from the mouth, etc.

Its seat is supposed to be the nerve creeping over the internal, sometimes the
external, membranous covering of the tooth.

CAUSES. 1st, Caries, or decay of the tooth or teeth affected -- 2d, an acrid
defluxion, or flux of acrimonious humors, as of the scurvy, rheumatism, gout,
from the obstructed perspiration -- 3d. nervous or hysteric affections -- and,
4th, pregnancy.

If it arises from the FIRST cause, it is generally perceptible to the sight --
the caries though sometimes lurks between the teeth -- sometimes begins
internally, sometimes externally -- however, when it is not perceptible to the
eye, it may be discovered by the tooth being almost pellucid like pearl -- or
by the shock of some metallic instrument, which increases, or renews the pain
-- by a foetid breath -- a sharp darting pain from cold water, or cold air
received into the mouth -- from a gnawing pain -- from the obstinacy of the
disease, without any considerable tumor of the gums -- from sistulous ulcerous
gums, having a small circular tumor round the orifice, and a purulent
discharge -- from rotten teeth, ulcerations have been formed, and swelling on
the chin, and a^^^^ the cheeks, which are never cured without drawing the tooth.

CURE. Drawing is the first remedy -- though, if at the beginning a small speck
or portion should be perceived discolored, that should be immediately taken
off, by which its progress would be stopped -- applying oil of vitriol to the
part affected, or muriatic acid, and neutralizing it with kali prepared, and
then filling the hollow tooth with lead, or gum mastich, has been successful --
a pill of opium and camphor, or of opium and calcined quicksilver -- burning
the part affected with a hot iron -- cauterizing the ear -- applying oil of
cloves or cinnamon with lint to the rotten cavity, have been recommended; if
this disease returns from slight causes, and many of the teeth are in a state
of decay, experience approves of washing the mouth every morning with warm
urine -- though indelicate, this remedy has it advocates -- perhaps, using in
the same manner lavender-water, spirits of wine, or brandy, properly diluted,
may be considered as good a preservative.

If from the SECOND, it may be discovered by the teeth being in a sound state
-- by the pain not confined to one or two teeth, but the whole jaw of that side
being affected; and by the swelling of the gums, attended most commonly with a
copious discharge of saliva.

CURE. The gums in the beginning should be scarified, or leeches applied; also
mustard plasters behind the ears, long enough to occasion a redness -- or, in
more obstinate cases, blisters -- the mouth should be washed with warm milk and
water -- and internally, diaphoretics, coupled with sedatives, (No. 4 to 10.)
should be given; smoking tobacco, chewing pellitory of Spain, ginger, sweet
reed, pepper, etc. to cause a flux of saliva; applications of warm resinous
plasters, (No. 112.) with opium to the temples should be administered;
flannels impregnated with the fumes of frankincense, amber, sugar, etc. applied
warm to the cheek, and the mouth washed with spirits of wine and camphor.

If by these means the disease is not conquered, which generally happens to be
the case, but the pains persist, and the gums increase to swell, an abscess
will be most likely the consequence; under these circumstances a roasted fig
should be kept upon the part to promote suppuration, which once accomplished,
must at a proper time be opened, cleansed, and healed, by the applications of
pledgets, dipped in a mixture of honey of roses and tincture of myrrh.

If from a defluxion of any specific humor, we must proceed as in the ear-ach
(348.) from similar causes, making use of those applications calculated to
alleviate the local affections.

If from the THIRD, it generally yields to a course of antispasmodic and
sedative medicines, such as we find advised in hysteric affections.

If from the FOURTH, there is no remedy, particularly in habits full of blood,
so efficacious as bleeding.

4. PAINS IN THE SIDE, OR PLEURODYNES,
from the Greek words pleuron, pleura, and odune, dolor, pain.

DESCRIPTION. This disease consists of pungent pain affecting the chest on one
side, attended with difficulty of breathing, but without any acute fever, by
which it is distinguished from pleurisy.

CAUSES. 1st, Too great fullness -- 2d, worms -- 3d, spasms -- 4th, adhesions
-- and 5th, flatulence; to the cure of which must our remedies be adapted.

If it arises from the FIRST, it may be discovered by the pain not being deeply
seated, but affecting only the intercostal muscles, (P. 33.) the difficulty of
breathing unattended with oppression; though accompanied with a cough, still
the pulse is unaltered, nor is there any febrile heat; it generally originates
from catching cold, or an obstruction of the menses.

CURE. This Nature often performs by a return of the menses, and indeed it will
in healthful habits precede their appearance.

If from the FIRST, thin spare diet, gentle diaphoretics, (No. 1. 6 to 10.) and
bleeding, are highly serviceable; volatile liniments, (No. 107.) mustard
plasters; warm flannels impregnated with aromatics, or warm water; bags of hot
salt, or bladders, applied to the side, will expedite the cure -- but should
they fail, local bleeding, by cupping, and blisters to the part affected, we
must call in aid.

If from the SECOND, there generally attends an erratic fever, but not of the
inflammatory class -- with a dry cough, pleuritic pain of the side; and worms
are sometimes evacuated -- in the breath there is a particular offensive smell
-- but these happen chiefly in infants.

CURE. Though one bleeding may be sometimes necessary, if the fever runs high,
to abate its violence, yet the chief dependence is on cathartics, (P. 171, 172,
173.) emetics, (No. 11, 12, 38.) and vermifuges, (197.) -- the purgatives
though should be of the milder class.

If from the THIRD, it generally proceeds from severe exercise, or strains; and
is muscular -- for pains in the breast from such causes are attended with such
sensibility of the part affected, that it cannot bear the touch, and feels as
if the part had been bruised. -- This though is seldom attended with a cough.

CURE. Bleeding -- with emollient fomentations, (No. 111.) oily liniments, (No.
107.) and gentle purging, (No. 3. 19 to ^4.)

If from the FOURTH, as it proceeds from the lungs adhering to the pleura,
occasioned by preceding inflammation, it is often attended with a dry cough;
sometimes with bloody spits; febrile affections coming on after eating, without
sweating; but with difficulty and shortness of breathing; great uneasiness in
lying on the side affected, and pleuritic blood.

CURE. The cause is irremediable, alleviation of the oppressive symptoms is all
for which we can hope, -- and this must be attended by bleeding, diluent
drinks, oily emulsions, or linct uses, (No. 81 to 84.) emollient decoctions,
(142.) gentle sedatives and diaphoretics, (No. 4 to 10.) nitrous medicines,
(No. 2.) and a thin, spare diet -- and all such remedies as take off fullness
from the vessels, and render the circulating fluids thin.

If from the FIFTH, the pain in the side is sudden, and acute, (...) and
resembles the cramp; though sometimes it will be so (...) for some minutes as
to become intolerable, the pulse is small and slow; there is no cough; but the
pain (...) so troublesome that it impedes the breathing. This most commonly
arises from cold, and chiefly affects the melancholy, hypochondriacal and those
who devote themselves to study.

CURE. Warm flannels, bladders filled with warm water, or bags of hot salt
generally remove the complaint; and it will now and then be necessary to give
some nervous tincture, (149, 150.)

But these pains, or stitches, have generally indigestion for their cause;
therefore, to prevent their return, we must proceed in the same manner as we
advise for assisting the digestive organs in preserving their functions, see
Dyspepsy, and increasing their power; in order to prevent an accumulation of
offensive matter in the first passages; or crude chyle from being thrown into
the mass of circulating fluids.

If pains of the side should arise from the action of any specific acrimony --
we must proceed as before directed, (556.)

5. PAINS OF THE STOMACH, CALLED GASTRODYNIA,
from goste^, ventriculus, the stomach, and onune, dolor, pain.

These, according to the peculiarity of the affections, have been differently
denominated.

When there is an acute and constant pain in the region of the stomach,
unattended with fainting, as in the CARDIALGIA, (...) fever as in the
GASTRITIS, (336.) often attended with a swelling in the stomach, it is called
GASTRODYNIA.

When there is an uneasy sensation belonging to the stomach, or epigastric
region, attended with a degree of faintness, as (...) swooning would come on,
CARDIALGIA, from cardia, ^s ventriculi, the mouth of the stomach, and algos,
dolor, pain -- for this is supposed to be an affection of the upper orifice of
the stomach.

When the principal symptom is a sense of heat in the stomach and gullet, which
sometimes arises into the fauces, unattended with any acute fever, PYROSIS,
heart-burn, from pur, ignis, fire or its effect, heat.

However, we think in a practical view, they may all co^^ under one head,
particularly as the modes of treatment depe^^ upon the specific causes from
whence they proceed -- we sho^^^ say therefore,

PAIN OF THE STOMACH, OR GASTRODYNIA, is discove^^ble by an acute and constant
pain, unattended with any (...) affections -- sometimes associated with a
propensity to faint^^^^ at others with a sense of heat there, and in the gullet
arising now and then to the fauces -- then called heart-burn, and not
unfrequently with a considerable discharge of saliva from the month -- then
styled WATER BRASH, or BLACK WATER.

CAUSES. 1st, Foulness from indigestion -- 2d, flatulence -- 3d, bile -- 4th,
poisons -- 5th, hard substances taken into the stomach -- 6th, inflexion of the
lower part of the breast bone, (called xyphoid, or ensiform cartilage, from its
being pointed like a sword) -- 7th, gout, worms -- 8th, debility, ulcers, or
excoriations.

CURE. From considering the causes in the first five, the indications are very
nearly similar, except in the flatulent, to evacuate the contents, and so to
invigorate the stomach and intestines, that digestion not only may be properly
promoted, but the remains, or what is indigestible, may be carried out of the
machine regularly by the increased power of the intestines.

If, therefore, it arises from foulness of the stomach occasioned by
indigestion, which passes not off soon by vomiting; or purging, but continues,
the orifices of the stomach will be contracted, and pressing upon its contents,
occasion severe pain, with a sense of weight, restraining free respiration;
sometimes the pulse will be hard and quick; at others depressed, and slow --
this will be the case where the complaint is recent, and proceeds merely from
indigestion, and matter which the stomach contains being in a crude state only;
but if it is viscid, acrid, bilious, putrid, or rancid, there will be a
disagreeable taste on the palate -- foul tongue -- unpleasant eructations,
added to the uneasiness at the stomach, nausea, and load in the region above
the navel, with a loss of appetite; besides, if the matter is acrid, there will
be a heat in the stomach, the nature of which will be denoted by a taste in the
mouth if any thing is thrown up, whether acid, salt, bitter, rancid, or oily;
-- in cases where the matter is merely viscid, there is a kind of watery
insipid taste in the mouth only.

Which ever of these causes are prevalent, if the habit is costive, I clear the
first passages with some opening medicine, (No. 108, 109.)

Afterward wash the stomach well with warm water and oil -- chamomile flower
tea drank plentifully -- or stimulate the top of the gullet with a feather, or
prescribe an emetic, (No. 11, 12. 38.) -- if great expedition is requisite, a
few grains of white or blue vitriol, (No. 259.) should the cause be mere load
from indigestion; these will be sufficient, giving for a little time a few
drops of elixir of vitriol in cinnamon tea twice a day; but should this
circumstance often occur, from the debility of the coats of the stomach, I have
recourse to bitter stimulants and chalybeates, (No. 61 to 65.) and recommend
riding exercise, or sailing -- also the use of some chalybeate water,
particularly those of Bath, which contribute much to invigorate the tone of the
stomach -- but should the offending cause consist in the quality of the
offending matter, such things must be prescribed as counteract their properties.

If it is of an acid nature, magnesia, absorbent earths, alkalines, or those
medicines termed antacids, may be applied to (191) -- if acrid, the stomach
should be well washed with weak chicken broth, or warm water alone; then gentle
aperients should be given, (No. 3. 22 to 24.) and occasionally persisted in.

If merely viscid, saponaceous medicines, (No. 109.) are useful.

If rancid, or putrid, the antalkalines; particularly the mineral acids, (190.)

And in all these cases the stomach should be invigorated with stimulant
bitters, etc. advised (353.) and such mode of living prescribed as will prevent
the generation of these offensive materials; avoiding such viands as are apt to
turn acid, alkaline, viscid, or rancid; and perhaps the only thing we can
depend upon for completing the cure, is a course of such mineral waters as upon
trial best suit the constitution, which can only from experiment be ascertained.

If the complaints arise from flatulence, it is caused by wind distending the
stomach, and throwing its orifices into a contracted state, hence there is a
violent tensive pain at the pit of the stomach, with difficulty of breathing;
-- the pulse grows small and depressed -- the extremities are cold, with great
anxiety -- and the body is often solicited to bend forwards, to promote the
emission of wind; which always brings some alleviation -- in this case the
region above the navel can bear pressure with the hand, which it cannot do in
inflammation of the stomach, nor pain from some other causes.

CURE. In full sanguinary habits bleeding is advisable; -- and to remove
costiveness glysters, (No. 25. 26.) which is very often an attendant;
notwithstanding which, should it continue, opiates (No. 113.) are requisite;
though, in slight cases, peppermint water will be sufficient -- till the pain
has totally ceased for a day or two, cathartics, even the milder ones, should
be avoided. In order to prevent its return, the patient should abstain from all
food difficult of digestion; all crude, flatulent, or leguminous vegetables; --
the body should be kept open, and a course of bitters and chalybeates be
persisted in for some time.

If from acrid bile the pain is extremely acute, accompanied with vomiting of
green materials like a leak, or verdigrease -- sometimes yellow, with such
tenderness above the navel, that the part cannot bear the least pressure --
there is extreme debility, with great dejection of spirits; indeed the pain is
sometimes so acute as to bring on convulsions.

We must proceed as recommended (353.) where acrid materials were the cause;
afterward, when the stomach is perfectly cleansed, opiates must be taken
internally, (152.) or by way of glyster; and perhaps it may first be necessary
to premise bleeding, if the pain is extremely acute, to prevent inflammation.
-- The bilious colic seems to have the same origin, the seat of the affection
only differing -- to that, therefore, we must refer.

In case of poison being the cause, we must proceed in the same manner as in
inflammation of the stomach from the same sources -- in gout or worms -- such
remedies are serviceable as are advised in those particular diseases.

If from debility, we must proceed as directed (353:)

If from extraneous bodies, which are small, and blunt, we must have recourse
to emetics -- if long and pointed, the stomach should be kept distended with
materials of the demulcent class, so that an opportunity may be given for them
to pass through the lower orifice of the stomach, and along the course of the
intestines; for if emetics are had recourse to, there is great danger of their
getting across the upper orifice, or sticking in the passage, and most probably
terminating fatally.

If from the inflexion of the lower part of the breast bone, there is a
constant pain of the stomach, attended with vomiting, loss of appetite; and
from a continuance of the disease, a consumption, called ATROPHY -- the food
and liquids are immediately rejected as soon as taken, and the pain continues
to torment the unhappy patient for years.

Cupping-glasses applied to the region above the navel, and afterward an
astringent plaster, have been advised.

A reduction of it, by the manual operation of a skilful surgeon, has been
asserted by BONETUS -- as for my own part, palliative remedies I think the only
things to be depended upon -- the utility of which I have experienced. Keeping
the stomach as empty as possible, eating small portions of the most easily
digestible food, often in the day -- refraining from all which are flatulent --
taking very moderate exercise -- avoiding costiveness, and, in fine, so
conducting the patient, that the stomach shall be but slightly distended, is
all that can be done in this case.

If from excoriations, or ulcerations of the stomach, or its lower orifice, it
is the most obstinate and dreadful, for this may continue for many years --
this is known by extreme increase of heat and pain on taking any thing acrid or
hot -- vomits here may become detrimental, and dangerous in the extreme -- in
this case nothing can be done but giving all those things which are soft, mild,
and sheathing; and what bids fairest for relief is living solely upon a milk
diet.

Besides what we have here enumerated, the heart-burn will be attended
sometimes with an efflux of clear lymph like saliva, sometimes tasteless,
sometimes acrid like the taste of lime, and comes up at intervals in
considerable quantity. This arises from a spasmodic contraction of the stomach,
and increased action of vessels which secret the thin fluids of the stomach
and salivary glands, (20)

In this case, the rough acerb fruits and warming vegetables may be useful, as
horseradish, mustard, quince, sloes, medlars, etc. -- watery fruits and
vegetables should be particularly avoided, as cherries, cucumbers, melons, and
such like; and astringents slightly cordial, (No. 61 to 65.) exhibited.

6. COLIC -- COLICA,
so called from the colon, (43.) one of the intestines, being considered as the
seat of this complaint.

DESCRIPTION IN GENERAL. This is a painful complaint of the intestines,
originating from a constriction, or obstruction in some part, or parts of them,
brought on by some internal stimulus, attended with an acute burning pain of
the abdomen, particularly running round the navel, difficulty of breathing,
heart-burn, nausea, or vomiting of a bilious or viscid matter, costiveness, the
appetite and digestion weakened -- a distension and inflation of the lower
belly -- thirst -- high-colored, or yellow urine, often an obstruction in
making water -- hiccough -- fainting -- delirium -- convulsions, a rupture of
the intestines, or mortification.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, spasmodic affections, or biliary
concretions, stopping the ductus communis choledochus, (36.) -- acrid bile --
different kinds of soul offensive materials in the bowels -- hardened faeces --
worms -- ruptures -- remains of solid food -- earthy or stony concretions
lodged in the intestines -- compression of them formed in any of the contiguous
viscera -- introsusception, or the running of one intestine into another, and
there confined by some stricture -- a thickening of the coats by scirrhus,
cancer, etc. -- particles of lead -- unripe acid wines -- or drinking too
freely of things acerbly acid -- or, in fine, whatever is possessed of the
power of inducing the

CAUSE, proximate or immediate; which is a constriction or obstruction in some
part or parts of the alimentary canal, commonly the upper or lower orifice of
the stomach, the lower portion of the duodenum, (42.) at the valve of the
colon, (4^.) and at its flexure which it turns up under the short ribs on the
left side, (43.)

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Pain of the abdomen, or lower belly, running round the
navel, attended with vomiting and costiveness:

CURE. The indications are, a removal of the constricting or obstructing cause,
by taking off the spasms, and evacuating the irritating matter, from whence
they deduce their origin.

We have before treated of the inflammation of the bowels, between which, and
the colic attended with local inflammatory symptoms, some make a distinction;
this may be systematically right, but cannot be of any practical utility; for
the mode of cure must obviously be the same -- though we must observe, that the
colic with any acute fever, or quick pulse, heat of the whole body, sweat, etc.
appears only to be a slight inflammation of the intestines from some local
cause, not producing general inflammatory symptoms.

But the colic pain will sometimes be attended with great degree of flatulence,
from the air in the bowels being rarefied, and expanding itself -- hence pain,
distension, costiveness, and rolling of wind in the lower belly -- if the
constriction of the bowels continue long, their motion downwards, called
peristaltic, will be inverted, and vomiting the consequence.

That it is from wind which occasions the strongest symptom, is very obvious,
by the alleviation from pain by the discharge of it downwards; from the pain
pursuing the whole tract of the colon, (43.) or running round the lower belly,
appearing also to affect the stomach; but that affection subsiding by the
passing down of wind, or its change of situation; on pressure by being
mitigated rather than increased; and by not being attended by any remarkable
thirst, or alteration of the pulse.

At other times, it will have for its associate bilious vomiting, which is
difficult to restrain; the patient will also have sometimes a number of bilious
stools -- when vomiting of green-coloured matter is the leading symptom, these
attend heart-burn, loathing of food, hoarseness, hiccough, heat, thirst, and
bitterness of the mouth -- the urine is high-colored, and made in small
quantity.

When bilious stools, the pain attendant generally affects the whole
intestines, particularly the duodenum, (42.) -- the lower belly is neither
tense nor hot, as in inflammation of the bowels -- the patient is affected with
giddiness -- the pulse is quick, though neither hard nor tense -- and this
disease is often succeeded by the jaundice.

In all these complaints, where the pain is very acute, bleeding should be had
recourse to, though no inflammation should actually exist, in full habits
particularly, very early to prevent that symptom supervening. -- Emollient oily
glysters, (No. 25, 26.) warm fomentations, friction, and chamomile tea, in
slight and common cases, will subdue the complaint -- but when more obstinate,
chicken water should be drank plentifully; then glysters thrown up
occasionally, and repeated -- if the first does not answer, a second stronger,
(No. 114.) -- should these be inefficacious, oily purgatives may be tried
alone, (No. 66, 99.) or mixed with Rochelle salt, and continued till a free
evacuation is produced -- castor oil is the most efficacious, as it often
alleviates pain before it procures any evacuation, which it also does very
quickly.

Sometimes liquids will be rejected, purgatives then in a solid form must be
tried, (No. 115.) and continued every hour till the wished-for effect occurs --
but should the attendant pain be extremely severe, with cathartics we may
couple opiates; or sedative medicines may be given first, and a small time
afterward, purgatives -- by these means sometimes the gentler purgatives will
answer every purpose -- bags filled with salt, oats, boiled bran, or water made
hot, may be applied to the belly.

But should there be any suspicion of inflammation, the stronger stimulant
cathartics must be avoided -- the Epsom salt solution, (No. 97.) is preferable
to other purgatives; for, diffused in that way, it is always pleasant, and
gentle in its operation.

We should always inquire in these cases, whether there be any rupture; for,
from the strangulation of the intestines pushed out into the sac externally,
this complaint sometimes arises.

In order to stop the vomiting, the saline draught in a state of fermentation
(No. 59.) should be tried -- sedative glysters, (No. 116.) and plasters of
mithridate, may be applied to the stomach -- leaves of common garden mint,
boiled in port, and laid on the pit of the stomach and wrists, have been found
sometimes superior to every other application.

Should there be any appearance of bile copiously discharged, softening
glysters, such as decoction of linseed and marshmallows, with oil, should be
(...) recourse to -- acidulated drinks also, with lemon or orange juice,
vinegar, apple-water, etc. chicken-water, sedative emulsions, (No. 81. 83.) to
which may be added thirty or forty drops of the tincture of opium, if the pain
is violent -- and the patient should be put into a warm bath, and remain in it
so long as he can bear it without distress.

If this complaint, from a bilious cause, should return, which it is apt to do,
a course of saponaceous and deobstruent medicines, (No. 117.) with Seltzer
waters, or the water of Bath, or Aix la Chapelle, should be had recourse to, in
hopes of performing a radical cure.

So difficult is it sometimes to procure a passage through the intestines, that
when the gentler cathartics fail, the most powerful ought to be tried, (No.
108. 115.) to which may be added from half a grain to a grain of opium; or
opia^es may be given with liquid purges, No. 97. to 99) tobacco glysters, two
drams of the leaves in decoction, or smoke, or things which act by their
weight, have been recommended, quicksilver, two or three ounces, swallowed in a
little broth every two or three hours, or leaden bullets; or taking the patient
out of bed, and dashing cold water on his legs and feet, while he stands
barefooted on a cold flag, has been attended with success.

A purging once procured, it should be continued some days by the use of
cathartics, giving opiates at night, until the soreness and distension of the
belly go off, and no hardened faeces appear in the stools.

7. NERVOUS COLIC.
In this complaint, contrary to the other, the vascular system seems but
slightly, if at all affected; for the pain will continue extremely severe for
five or six days; sometimes for fourteen or fifteen; yet the pulse will not be
quicker, or more disturbed than in health; nay, indeed, it has been sometimes
slower.

It is called RACHIALGIA, from the Greek words raxis, spina (...) the spine of
the back, and algos, dolor, pain; because the origin of the complaint has been
attributed to an affection of the (...) marrow -- also the COLIC or POICTIERS,
because there it is ^^demial, or peculiar to the country -- DEVONSHIRE and WEST
INDIAN COLIC, from its being common in those countries -- PAINTERS, PLUMBERS,
POTTERS, MINERS, from their being most subject to it, and SATURNINE COLIC, from
its frequently affecting the makers of white lead, or the reception of the
particles of lead into the habit.

DESCRIPTION. This complaint is attended with very severe pains in the back and
loins, as if it was in the center of the mesentery, (46.) which do not increase
on pressure -- the navel is very often drawn inwards, and the intestines
sometimes also to the spine; so much so, indeed, that the forcing up of
glysters has been impracticable -- the body is costive, and the complaint
extremely obstinate; sometimes terminating in torpor, or numbness of the hands,
and palsy; (...) in chronical fixed contractions of the limbs.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, particles of lead received into the habit
-- or the smoke from lead -- or drinking water which runs over its ore --
unripe acid wine -- cider -- punch -- and white wine not sufficiently fermented
-- eating or drinking too freely, or too frequently of things acerbly acid. The
proximate or immediate, similar to that of the colic, (356.) and the
characteristic signs also, if we add, the pain creeping more particularly to
the loins and back, with a retraction of the navel, and sometimes of the
intestines, inwards.

CURE. Before the complaint is confirmed, in the beginning, success may be
expected from the application of such glysters as were before prescribed, (No.
25. 26.) adding to them castor oil, and keeping the body open with emulsions of
the same oil, (No. 66.) with which two or three ounces of tincture of senna may
be mixed.

Cold must be avoided, and a very light easily digestible diet strictly adhered
to.

But in the more advanced stage, where there is generally a vomiting of green
bile, the discharge is to be encouraged by drinking freely of thin weak broth
-- the hardened excrements evacuated by repeated glysters -- an alleviation of
pain procured by more than common doses of opium, (152.) and these repeated --
the belly must be fomented with warm fomentations, (No. 85. 111.) -- warm
bathing partially used -- and the umbilical region blistered.

I have sometimes found great benefit by opiated emulsions, (No. 118.) given
till stools were procured freely; afterward opiated antimonials, (No 119.)
occasionally giving the emulsion.

In Charlestown they adopt the following scheme:

First, they bleed, then give the glyster, (No. 114.) and repeat it two or
three times, till a stool or more are procured -- (...) this does not alleviate
the pain, then an opiated glyster, (No. 116.) and the following morning exhibit
the vitriolic mixture, (No. 120.) -- the effects produced are generally a
discharge of a great quantity of acrid bile, for the first four or five days,
upwards and downwards, which by degrees grows less, leaving gradually only a
slight nausea, a few yellow stools daily, and sometimes not any.

Broth, gruel, and panada, are allowed as diet -- if such (...) is loathed,
about the eighth day, bread and boiled chicken are allowed, with rum
plentifully diluted as beverage -- all fermented liquids and acids are
prohibited, and so is four punch, for some months; and the patients return to
their common mode of living by slow degrees.

If a pain in the stomach continues, which is sometimes the case, rhubarb is
advised, and a plaster of galbanum applied to the stomach.

Though death, by these means should be avoided, not unfrequently (...) pasy
succeeds. This complaint has been relieved, sometimes cured, by rubbing the
limbs and down the back along the spine, with Barbados tar and rum, or rock
oil. (150.) -- the Barbados tar, or balsam of Peru, taken internally, has been
thought serviceable. (No. 121.)

But should these not succeed, change of climate, sea voyage, or the natural
hot baths, are the only remedies from whence success is to be expected.

8. PAIN OF THE LIVER, OR HEPATALGIA,
from epar, jecur, the liver, and algos, dolor, pain.

When pain affects the liver, as well as spleen, it is very often impossible to
distinguish them from some of the species of colic, during the life of the
patient; nay, indeed, some practitioners think it unnecessary, since they
require the same mode of cure as the colic from a bilious cause, (358, etc.)

But as these arise from different causes, it may not be useless to describe
some of them, viz. those which arise from schirrhosity, or bard, tumefaction of
the liver, (33.) -- obstructions of the gall ducts, (35) from very viscid bile
-- the gall bladder (35.) being also full of bile -- and g^ll stones, so called.

When pain of the liver owes its origin to SCHIRRHOSITY, it is attended with
the following symptoms:

DESCRIPTION, There is a tumor and hardness on the right side below the short
ribs -- sense of weight, with a dull (...) tensive pain, which is constant --
the patient breathes with (...), and has a dry cough -- and, after eating
moderately, (...) comes on a loathing, and sense of pressure on the stomach,
(...) an increase of the difficulty of breathing -- besides, he cannot lie with
ease (...) his left side -- the countenance is yellowish, (...) and sallow --
the urine often of an orange color, and (...) a thick mucus sediment -- these
are generally the first ap^^^^ances, which, if the complaint continues, as is
too frequent^^ case, the feet are seized with a ^^lt pasty swelling -- the
(...) parts fall away -- and the conclusion is, a dropsy of the (...) with a
remittent fever.

(...) the cause is OBSTRUCTION OF THE GALL DUCTS, from (...) or viscid
obstructions, the symptoms of a schirrhous liver, which come on in the
beginning, attend but in a much slighter degree -- besides, there is a flushing
heat of the face, with redness and heat coming on now and then in the palms of
the hands -- an irregular thirst -- dryness, and bitter taste in the mouth -- a
dry cough -- viscid saliva -- loss of appetite -- heart-burn -- weariness and
heaviness of the limbs -- increase of pain on touching and pressing the left
side -- and the habit most commonly costive -- in this case the hardness on the
right side is not so firm as in the former, nor are there any pasty swellings,
or hectic symptoms.

When it arises from GALL STONES, there is a deep-seated and excruciating pain
on the right side of the stomach, extending to the back, about the place where
the ductus communis choledochus, or duct of the gallbladder, (30.) is inserted
into the duodenum, (42.) which remits and increases; the patient complains of
sickness, and vomits much -- the right side is distended with flatulence -- the
belly costive -- the excrements pale-coloured, sometimes white -- the pulse is
weaker, but scarce at all quickened, unless the pains are very violent, and
continue long -- indeed, the violence of the pain being unattended with fever,
and quickness of the pulse, is considered as the certain symptom of this
disease -- the patient, either in an erect posture, or lying on the left side,
feels much uneasiness -- hence becomes restless -- there attend also difficulty
of breathing -- heart-burn, and sometimes convulsions -- at first the urine is
pale, afterward yellow -- and the skin and white of the eyes have a
jaundice-like appearance -- the pain at last vanishes suddenly, which is
sometimes succeeded by a looseness, by which the gall stones are thrown out of
the habit -- and the yellowness wears gradually away.

CURE. Pain in the liver from schirrhosity, (361.) is apt to attack gluttons --
hard drinkers -- those who lead indolent sluggish lives -- and also arises from
suppression of some haemorrhages -- bruises upon the right side -- and very
often in those afflicted with long-continued intermittent fevers -- and
generally proves fatal, when once completely formed -- though, it attacked in
the beginning, it may be sometimes prevented.

Decoctions of vegetable aperients, with the more powerful attenuating gums,
(No. 117.) joined with mercurials and cathartics, (160. 172. to 173.) are
serviceable; also grass-roots, dandelion, endive, ammoniacum, myrrh, rhubarb,
aloes, calomel, small doses, not to salivate; hemlock, (152. 154.) in all
curable cases is very useful.

In CONSTITUTIONS considered as dry and bilious, (60.) decoctions of the mild
opening roots, goat's whey, and tartarized iron. (139.)

In the cold and phlegmatic (60.) the mode here recommended will be proper when
the complaint arises from obstructions of the biliary pores; but, in delicate
and irritable habits, spasmodic affections will sometimes be the cause,
sedatives and antispasmodics may then be joined with the aperients, asafoetida,
camphor, (149, 150.) or with opium, (152.) -- and when, by these means, the
bile has passed into the bowels, a course of bitters and steel may be necessary
to complete the cure, (No. 61 to 64.) -- taking care always to keep the body
open with such medicines as are best adapted to move the bile. (No. 108. 117.)

Bath water, and chalybeate springs in general, are beneficial and proper to
prevent a relapse.

When it arises from GALL STONES, we must endeavor to promote the expulsion by
long perseverance in the use of emollients, (142.) and gentle cathartics, (170,
171, 172.) (No. 66. 98, 99.) -- warm baths afterward, occasionally repeated,
in which a cathartic may be given -- this mode has proved successful -- vomits,
and strong expiration, with glysters of fresh urine, and sage infusion, have
fortunately succeeded -- opiates should be administered to alleviate the pain,
joined with aperients; because they promote at the same time a relaxation of
the duct -- aetherial spirit of turpentine, (No. 122.) has been recommended as
a solvent.

In habits full of blood, in any of these complaints, bleeding may be had
recourse to, lest inflammation should be the consequence of the violence or
long continuance of the pain.

Old people and women are most subject to this complaint -- those who lead
sedentary lives, drink much of strong ardent spirits, feed on viscid, coarse,
and dry aliment, or are subject to the stone and gout.

In order to prevent a return of these complaints, gentle exercise,
particularly riding on horseback, should be persevered in; light easily
digestible food taken, avoiding all that is viscid.

9. PAIN OF THE SPLEEN, OR SPLENALGIA.
from splen, the spleen, and algos, dolor, pain.

Here, as in the liver, the disease arises from schirrhosity and obstruction.

DESCRIPTION. When from the FIRST, it is discoverable by a hard tumor occupying
the seat of the spleen, (38) and resembling its figure, attended with a sense
of weight -- the tumor is sometimes wonderfully large -- succeeds a quartan
intermittent, and often runs into a dropsy of the belly -- the complexion of
those laboring under this complaint is of a lead color -- they grow very thin
-- are oppressed with difficulty of breathing -- and have a sense of weight,
drawing the throat downwards toward the left side -- they complain of
oppression at the stomach after eating -- at last their feet become pasty, and
they sometimes have ulcers of the legs.

When from the SECOND, it does by no means resemble the figure of the spleen,
neither is it hard or circumscribed -- the pain is more acute; which, on the
scirrhus being formed, becomes dull -- attended with a sense of greater weight.

In this there is perceived a load on the left side, afterward some acute
pain, particularly raised in running and walking -- the color of the face
changes to one more livid -- there is an universal (...) -- difficulty of
breathing from exercise -- sometimes a (...) -- now and then a palpitation of
the heart -- eruptions break out -- the patients become hypochondriac -- have
ravenous appetites, etc. -- and the disease is extremely obstinate.

CURE. The mode is similar to what has been delivered on the pain of the liver
from obstruction. (362.)

CHARACTERISTIC GENERAL SIGNS. Those of the specific causes must be recollected
from the particular descriptions -- the general ones are, an uneasy, dull,
tensive sensation, on the right or left, according whether the liver or spleen
is affected; being free from that species of fever which attends inflammations
of those organs.

10. PAIN IN THE KIDNEYS AND URETERS, OR NEPHRALGIA.
from nephron, ren, kidneys, and algos, dolor, pain.

This disease proceeds either from small sand-like appearances, or from a stony
substance affecting the kidneys or ureters, (48, 50.) -- in the first case it
is called GRAVEL, in the last STONE IN THE KIDNEYS; both which we shall treat
under one head, as the mode of treatment of the former is similar to the more
gentle method used in the latter.

DESCRIPTION. The gravel is most common to old men, the studious and sedentary,
and those whose trades oblige them to fit long confined in one posture, as
cobblers, weavers, watchmakers, etc. -- seldom affects the kidneys, but much
more commonly the ureters and urethra, (54.) occasioning oftentimes very great
pain which abating, small stones like lentil-seed, but rough, red, and very
hard, are passed at that time with the urine -- these seldom stick in their
passage, and are scarcely dissolvable by any known lithontriptic. (198.)

When there is a stone in the kidney, there is generally an excruciating pain
in the loins, fixed and permanent, on that side where the stone lodges -- the
patients complain of heat -- the body is costive -- and the symptoms are
aggravated after eating -- when it falls into the ureters, the pain is
increased, and extends along their course obliquely in the belly over the hip
toward the bladder -- men have at this time a painful affection, or drawing up
of testicle, women a numbness of the thigh and leg -- nausea and vomiting
frequently occur -- the urine is in part suppressed, and puts on various
appearances; at first it is watery, afterward more copious and turpid;
frequently hot, and often bloody, or purulent -- a difficulty of making water,
or rather a total suppression, comes on -- great drowsiness -- inflammation --
ulceration -- and consumption.

But it must be observed, that a stone may be lodged in the kidney without
producing any uneasy sensation, unless moved by a hot regimen, or mode of
living, violent passions, strong exercise, or jolting in a carriage over rough
stony pavements.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, luxurious living, with weak digestive
powers -- gout and rheumatism -- old age -- sedentary life -- keeping much in
bed, or in an horizontal position -- drinking wine loaded with tartar, or water
full of earthy or sandy matter -- peculiarity in the constitution to form this
stony substance -- or an hereditary taint. The proximate or immediate need no
specification

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A fixed pain in the region of the kidneys and ureters,
unattended with any acute fever, such as accompanies the inflammation of these
parts.

CURE. The indications are, to abate the uneasy symptoms, by taking off the
spasmodic affection of, sheathing and relaxing the parts, and facilitating the
progress of the offending cause, that it may be evacuated -- which purposes
will be promoted by bleeding, emollient and demulcent decoctions drank
plentifully, sedatives, chiefly opiates, oily emulsions, and mild aperients,
etc. (See Inflammation of the Kidneys. ^43.)

All heating or stimulating (...) are to be avoided, particularly where calculi
are fixed or very obstinate to remove; for they are apt to aggravate the
painful sensations, and bring on inflammation -- infusion of wild carrot-seed,
(No. 123.) has been known to give considerable ease -- a solution of kali
impregnated with fixed air, (199.) given two or three times a day, and carried
as far as the stomach will bear it, is in this case peculiarly applicable --
the leaves of the bear's wortle berry, (139.) is here also beneficial -- from
decoction of raw coffee, twelve berries boiled in a quart of water till it
becomes of a deep greenish color, to eight or ten ounces, with twenty drops of
ethereal spirit of nitre, twice a day for two months, great relief has been
derived.

Still, soap leys, (199. taken in milk or veal broth, or soap and lime water,
(199.) are considered either as perfect solvents, or rendering the rugged
surfaces and sharp points less capable of injuring the sensible membranes,
where these hard bodies pass through or lodge.

But sometimes a small stone will pass through the ureters into the bladder,
and from thence makes its exit: here then the disease terminates in the most
favorable manner; but if it should be too large, it remains there, forming a
basis, called Nucleus, for a larger stone -- indeed, any hard substance lying
in the bladder will give rise to this complaint in constitutions replete with
stony matter -- in this case it is termed,

STONE IN THE BLADDER, or LITHIASIS,
from lithon, lapis, stone.

DESCRIPTION. In this disease, there is generally a pain in the bladder,
especially about its neck, and oftentimes bloody urine after riding on
horseback, on being jolted much in a carriage, a sense of weight in the
perineum, or part immediately before the anus, with an itching of the glans
penis, (55.) a slimy sediment in the urine, and frequent stoppages in making
water.

But if the stone should be smooth, of a round form, it may lie a considerable
time before it is perceptible to the patient, till by its increase of weight,
acquired by accession of fresh matter, it creates uneasy sensations -- but
should it be angular, or have a rugged surface, yet small in size, it generally
occasions pain and bloody urine, or a discharge of slimy fluid, with a
fruitless effort to go to stool, called tenesmus, and difficulty of making
water.

All these symptoms though are fallacious -- examining therefore with the
instrument called a STAFF, used by surgeons for discovering the stone in the
bladder, is chiefly to be depended upon; and I believe, when one is found too
large to pass, cutting is the only remedy, which must be committed to the hands
of a skilful and judicious operator.

Of the cure by internal remedies, we must refer to what has been said above in
the cure for pain in the kidney and ureters, proceeding from calculi there.

In this place may be inserted those complaints where the urinary passages are
affected, and properly divided into three, according to the nature of the
affection -- as

1. A SUPPRESSION OR RETENTION OF URINE,
named ISCHURIA, from isko, cohibeo, to restrain, and ouron, urina, urine.

2. STRANGURY -- STRANGURIA,
from stranx, gutta, drop, and aureo, to make water -- when water is made by
drops as it were, and there is a perpetual propensity to make it.

3. DYSURY -- DYSURIA,
from dus, infeliciter, painfully, and oureo, when the strangury is attended
with heat, or a sense of scalding.

The FIRST may arise from inflammation of the kidneys, or a stone, and becomes
a symptom, and then must be cured as advised in cases of nephritis, (342.) and
nephralgia, (364.) but sometimes it derives its origin from mucus thrown into
the vessels of the kidneys, (48.) in such a degree as to hinder almost the
total secretion of urine.

DESCRIPTION. In this case there is generally a small quantity of turbid urine
made, without any pain of the region below the navel, or swelling over the bone
at the lower part of the belly, called os pubis, or any signs of the stone or
gravel but a dull, heavy pain over the loins; and this happens in constitutions
which are generally phlegmatic, (60.) mucous diseases having preceded, and
urine before made loaded with mucus.

CURE. Stimulating diuretics, (175, 176.) such as mustard, horseradish, with
squills; also soap, (177.) in order to clear away the mucus, free the urinary
vessels, leave at liberty and solicit the secretory vessels of the kidneys to
perform their office; for in these cases we find little or no urine comes into
the bladder. We must observe, that when the suppression is total, there can be
little or no hope of giving relief; it is only in cases where it is partial,
that our expectations with success can be flattered.

When the urine is retained in the bladder, we observe a swelling of the lowest
part of the belly above the bone situated at the bottom, attended with pain,
and often a sense of fullness, and pressure at the neck of the bladder.

CURE. Whatever the cause, the mode of relief is similar; if the pain is great,
blood should be taken away, and teribinthinate glysters, (No. 124.) thrown up;
fomentations (No. 85. 111.) should be used to the belly; the patient should be
kept perfectly quiet; the CATHETER, or an instrument to draw off the urine, be
as soon as possible made use of; and should the retention return in eight or
twelve hours, the operation must be repeated, and this occasionally till the
cause creating it be ren^^^ed, which may be various, and depend on other
diseases of the machine -- as paralytic affection of the bladder -- swelling of
the piles -- indurated excreme^ts -- fungus swellings in the urethra, (p. 54.)
-- tumor of the prostrate gland, (p. 54.) hysterics, ulcers, scirrhus, or
cancer of the bladder -- pregnancy; for the cure of which we must apply to
these things which are advised in such of these complaints as appear to be the
acting cause.

In THE SECOND AND THIRD DIVISION we find water passes from the bladder but
with painful sensations.

DESCRIPTION. Besides the effort to unload the bladder by passing urine by
drops, and with great pain, and sometimes scalding, the stimulus, after a small
quantity of water has been made, goes off, and soon returns; the feverish
affections are increased, the skin grows hot, the belly swells, at the lower
part, particularly the penis, and the part running to the anus, appear full;
the body is in general costive; and there are frequent efforts to go to stool;
there is also a perceptible pain in the back and lower part of the belly, an
uneasiness at the pit of the stomach, and vomiting sometimes attend.

CAUSES. Those which are considered the remote or inducing are said to be -- an
acrimonious disposition of the humors; cantharides internally taken; the
application of blisters; and matter carried from the kidneys, or translated
from any other of the ulcerated viscera; strongly stimulating injections, or
venereal ulcers of the urethra, (54.) inducing inflammation, exposing the anus
to the cold air, particularly during the operation of smart cathartics; an
inflammation of the rectum, (45.) or suppression of the piles.

The proximate, or immediate, an inflammation of the sphincter (51.) of the
bladder, or a deprivation of the mucus which defends it from feeling the
irritating power of the urine, as it passes through it.

This disease is by no means dangerous, and terminates in the same manner as do
other local inflammations, though extremely rarely in mortification.

CURE. This requires no mode of treatment different from other local
inflammations, particularly that of the bladder, (340.) only we should observe
great caution is necessary in attempting to pass the catheter, left we should
increase the irritation; and indeed should that operation be impracticable, a
puncture may be made into the bladder in case of great emergency, through the
perineum, the part which lays forwards before the anus; some recommend it over
the pubis; but the former is much the more eligible; in these cases glysters of
warm oil, and tincture of opium, are highly beneficial.

RHEUMATISM -- RHEUMATISMUS,
from reo, fluo, to flow down, or upon, as the ancients considered is to arise
from a defluxion of some humor on the particular part affected. There are two
other complaints properly come under this head, called

HIP GOUT, ISCHIATICA, or SCIATICA, and the LUMBAGO, deriving their names from
the parts they affect; the former attacking the hip, ISC^IUM, and the latter
the loins, LUMBI, -- hence their derivations -- hence the rheumatism is
considered as general and local; and it is also attended with febrile
affections, frequently -- sometimes not -- hence styled acute and chronic.

DESCRIPTION. When it affects the habit generally, it begins with a coldness
and shivering, which are succeeded by ^^at, restlessness, coldness, and
heaviness of the limbs; the body is commonly costive, the patient complains of
^hirst, and the pulse is quick and hard.

To these succeed in a little time acute pain, attacking particularly the large
joints, tendons, and their expansions running along the course of the muscles;
which pain is increased on motion, often changing its situation, and where it
fixes there comes on swelling and inflammation; it sometimes attacks the head
and stomach, and very often all the febrile symptoms will go off, and leave the
pain remaining. The blood taken away has the appearance of that of pleuritic
patients; this is called the acute RHEUMATISM; but when it is not attended with
febrile affections, the pain flies from one part to another, giving a sense of
stiffness to the muscular or ligamentous parts, and is seldom attended with any
swelling.

When the pain recedes internally, there arises much uneasiness and inward
stiffness, which on re-appearing go off.

WHEN IT ATTACKS THE HIP, it impedes the free motion of the leg, occasioning
pain and an halting in walking, or dragging of the leg; the pain often descends
from the hip along the thigh and leg to the feet; and it is sometimes attended
with a violent fever; in this case the seat of the affection is sometimes in
the joint of the hip, and at others in the nerve called sciatic.

WHEN IT SEIZES THE LOINS -- In them there is a very acute pain, with great
difficulty in raising the body into an erect posture; sometimes the pain
descends to the lower part of the back, to the thigh-joint, or through the
sides toward the bladder -- here the muscles of the loins, or the ligaments of
the vertebrae, are the seat.

CAUSES. The remote, or inducing, are, an exposure to cold suddenly whilst hot,
too great loss of blood, or severe purging, hard drinking, immoderate venery,
indigestion, a vitiated state of the fluids from other diseases, a too great
fullness from evacuations suppressed, and often from quick changes of the
weather. The lumbago will also be brought on by lifting too heavy weights, in
habits disposed to rheumatic affections.

The proximate, or immediate, have been supposed to be a viscid acrimonious
serum obstructing the serous and lymphatic vessels of the muscles, but
particularly of the membranes, or ligaments; or rather a peculiar acrimony,
electively affecting the larger joints, membranes, and tendons of the muscles.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. This disease arises from an external, and, for the most
part, from an evident cause, attended with pain about the joints, following the
course of the muscles, affecting the knees and the larger joints rather than
those of the hands and feet; sometimes the hip muscles, and vertebrae of the
loins: frequently having febrile affections for its associate, sometimes not.

CURE. When it is attended with febrile symptoms, we must have recourse to
bleeding, and that repeated according to the strength of the patient, and
violence of the inflammatory affection; and two drams of nitre dissolved in a
quart of water gruel sweetened with honey, and acidulated with lemon juice,
forms not an inefficacious remedy, giving a tea-cupful every second hour,
throwing up occasionally glysters, or giving occasionally cooling purges, to
keep the body open, (P. 171, 172. or No. 3. 22, 23, 24.) -- to the nitre may be
added one-eighth of a grain of tartarised antimony in each dose, or to the
purgatives.

Or the antimonial nitrated powder, (No. 125.) with the volatile saline
mixture, may be given every five or six hours, (No. 126) adding two or three
grains of the powder to the night dose.

Should these not keep the body open, glysters may be given, or aperients added
to the powder or mixture.

These generally abate the febrile symptoms, mitigate the pain, and evacuate
the acrimony, by keeping up a continued, gentle perspiration.

When the disease is on the decline, the rapidity of the fever and the violence
of the pain are abated, not before -- steams of warm water may be conveyed to
the parts affected, or friction if the parts can bear it, or liniment of water
of acetated ammonia, and oil may be rubbed warm into, and a flannel worn over
the part.

After sufficient bleeding, and emptying the intestines, partial or general
warm baths have been found to give great relief; and our patients should use
the same sort of diet as recommended in inflammatory fever, (212. to 214.) but
when all the febrile symptoms begin to abate, mustard whey, (No. 127.) will be
an useful drink.

Now from experience we find, though the crisis of this complaint happens
either by sweat, or urine dropping a yellow sediment, looseness, or depositing
an humor upon the exterior surface, particularly the legs -- still it is best
conveyed out of the machine by the pores of the skin -- hence a course of
diaphoretics are advised, and the patient ordered to lie in blankets in
preference to linen, in order to add to their efficacy.

When the pain goes off, and the fever subsides, the diet should be more
substantial; and with intent to clear the constitution as perfectly as possible
from the remains of the offending cause, a decoction should be taken of
diaphoretic woods, (No. 88.) or the compound decoction of sarsaparilla --
should ulcers happen upon the legs; they should not be dried up too soon, for
fear of imprudently repelling the humor to some internal part, which might
prove more dangerous.

But sometimes, after the febrile affections are totally gone off, the pain
still continues, and here we must labor to attenuate and throw out the
acrimony which creates the painful affections, by a course of gentle
diaphoretics -- such as compound powder of ipecacuanha -- or antimonials (230.)
joined with opiates, in order that rest may be procured, and the patient's
strength supposed.

Stimulants are here also required, as tincture of guaiac, 30 or 40 drops upon
sugar, and mixed with peppermint water, three or four times a day, or gum
guaiac, made into a draught, with 30 or 40 drops of some volatile spirit, (No.
128.) or gum guaiac, and quick lime, equal quantities, well rubbed together --
then lime water poured on, and when it has stood some time, decant the limpid
part -- to this add a few drops of any volatile spirit and it will mix with
water without separation -- sometimes there will appear an intermission in the
pains; and where, at the onset of the disease, there have been profuse
discharges by the skin, with a copious deposition in the urine; -- bark 193,
(194.) is highly serviceable, united with volatile tincture of guaiacum, (180)
and has been known to relieve very obstinate cases, particularly in debilitated
habits.

The CHRONIC RHEUMATISM chiefly affects old men, or those who by indiscretions
have so weakened their constitutions, that they are reduced to that standard.
The attack of this is not so general, seldom affecting so many places at once;
nor do the parts appear so red or swelled -- it returns at intervals, without
any febrile affections almost, or sweat -- and there are sometimes tumors of
the color of the skin, or very slightly red, rising in different parts, rather
round, of the size of a nut, affecting chiefly those of full habits, and women
who have nor their menses.

In full habits bleeding may be had recourse to once -- blisters and sudorifics
are more useful -- repeated purging expedites the cure.

Mercurials, joined with diophorets (No. 87.) are extremely efficacious -- and
also the addition of gum guaiacum to purgatives, (No. 19, 20.) -- guaiacum
given from day to day, so as to procure two or three stools every day, has been
often attended with success; or on the nights previous to giving a purge (No.
19, 20 21.) in the morning, calomel joined with guaiacum has been of great use,
(No. 129.) -- when the pain is excruciating, opiates (151.) may be given at
night.

Volatiles, and opiates externally applied, are often attended with salutary
effects, (No. 107.) or stimulating plaster, (No. 130.) sufficient to create
proper irritation over the part affected.

Oil of turpentine has been spoken of as an internal as well as external
remedy, (No. 122.)

Electricity has been recommended for 15 days, a quarter of an hour each day,
drawing the sparks through the parts affected, and giving a few general shocks.

In order to prevent relapses, a flannel shirt should be worn next to the skin;
compound decoction of sarsaparilla with milk taken for a month; now and then
the warm bath should be had recourse to, and at the proper season sea-bathing.

Some of these modes will be sufficient in common cases; but in such as are
more obstinate, change of climate is very often requisite, and also the natural
hot baths -- or in persons whose vascular system acts with freedom, nothing is
more conducive to prevent it return than cold bathing.

In those rheumatic complaints called SCIATICA, or HIP GOUT, and LUMBAGO, as
they are of acute or chronic kind, so must they be treated in the same manner
as we have specified in general rheumatism -- only in the hip-gout, when the
disease has been obstinate, an issue cut above, or below the knee, has been of
great service, as also blistering the thigh.

13. GOUT,
so called from the French word goutte, an acrid defluxion -- in medical
language it is called ARTHRITIS by many, from anthron, articulus, a joint,
because it affects the joints -- by some PODAGRA, from pous, pes, the feet, and
agra, captura, seizure, because they consider the feet as its natural seat --
and though it is thought, that there is truly only one species, yet, according
to the different appearances it puts on, it has been distinguished -- all which
may very properly come under two heads -- the REGULAR, or FIXED -- the
IRREGULAR, or UNCERTAIN, GOUT, respecting the seat it occupies -- both those
species, which we shall proceed to describe, appear to depend upon the strength
or weakness of the whole, or some part or parts of the constitution.

DESCRIPTION. Before the fit comes on, the patients most commonly experience a
general lassitude and weariness -- are low-spirited -- complain of a load and
fullness of the stomach after eating -- are squeamish very often, and throw up
wind -- the belly is distended with flatulence -- the habit costive, the
sweating or moisture of the feet goes off, and the veins there appear full.

After these an acute pain for the most part seizes the joint of the great toe,
accompanied with a sense of coldness, as if cold water was poured down --
slight shiverings, and other febrile affections -- a shooting, gnawing,
pungent, or burning pain, seizes the small bones of the foot, or they feel as
if squeezed strongly with the hand -- in about twenty four hours, the part
begins to look red, and swell -- a gentle breathing sweat comes on, and then
the pain begins to decrease, and the fever disappears.

In the morning patients find themselves better, in the evening worse, because
at that time the fit comes on -- during the fit men become irascible, and are
easily irritated -- they have little or no appetite -- the body is costive; and
a painful sensation of the part accompanies the whole fit -- on the first days
the urine is high-colored, and discovers a brick-coloured or red sandy
sediment.

In proportion as the constitution is stronger or weaker, so does the fit go
off quicker or slower; at which time an intolerable itching is perceived
between the toes, and the scarf skin falls off in scales like bran, -- the
joints feel stiff as if they were covered with plasters and dry, and a period
is put to the disease for some time -- which again returns.

This is the case of the gout in its first attacks, so long as the constitution
preserves a proper degree of power; but in process of time, as the habit
becomes weaker, the complaint takes deeper root, the disease seizes the hands,
wrists, elbows, knees, and other parts -- hard chalky tumors are formed, and
the distorted limbs lose all motion. At this period the fits continue almost
the whole year, and the afflicted make large quantities of pale urine; they are
also tormented with piles, putrid eructations, spasmodic affections, stony
concretions in the kidneys, gravelly complaints, and lose all appetite.

The strength of the constitution still failing more and more, till it becomes
almost exhausted, the gouty matter, incapable of being thrown out upon the
extremities, affects the internal parts of the system, and produces complaints
peculiar to those parts from the stimulus it there occasions -- sometimes upon
the head, producing apoplexy, lethargy, palsy, delirium, (...), and universal
convulsions -- sometimes upon the membranes of the chest occasioning pleurisy
-- or on the stomach and intestines, whence internal uneasiness and oppression,
sickness, vomiting, looseness -- during the continuance of these affections,
there is no pain in any part, otherwise it generally exerts itself -- at
length, the constitution being worn out, and having lost all its power, the
vital parts, as the brain, lungs, and heart, begin to be depressed, and the
machine falls a sacrifice to its own weakness, and the violence of the morbid
affection.

This description comprehends the gout in both its forms of regularity or
irregularity -- it being considered THE REGULAR GOUT, when it fixes upon the
feet, and is attended with a sufficient strong inflammation, continuing for
some days, and gradually going off, with swelling, itching, and peeling of the
scarf-skin, in form of scales, like bran.

THE IRREGULAR, when it attacks other places, and is attended with internal
debility of the stomach, or other parts; o^ has slightly affected the joints,
and receded, or has not attacked them, but produces inflammation on some
internal part.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, full, free, luxurious living -- hard
drinking, particularly acid and rough wines -- indolence, or the omission of
accustomary exercise -- relaxed, soft, and full habit -- immoderate venery in
youth -- too sudden changing from distilled liquors o^ spirits, to those which
are thin and watery -- suppressed evacuations -- and an hereditary taint.

It seldom attacks boys, castratas, or women, except viragos, or such as have
passed the time of having the menses; but most commonly men in the decline of
life, those of lively imaginations, the studious living a sedentary life, and
sitting up late at night.

The proximate or immediate CAUSE is, a peculiar humor electively fixing in
common upon the small joints, or rather thin ligaments; or, perhaps, upon the
membranous coverings of the nerves, there situated; or sometimes in other parts
of the machine, particularly those which are the most irritable.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A disease accruing without any evident external cause;
but having, for the most part, an unaccustomary affection of the stomach
preceding the attack, and also febrile symptoms -- a pain in the joints, and
that most frequently of the great toe, but certainly attacking chiefly the
joints of the hands and feet -- this pain returns at intervals, and often
alternates with affections of the stomach and other internal parts.

Though we allow of two species of the gout, yet it is pretty obvious, that
they depend only upon the different proportions of strength in the
constitution; -- and this will regulate our conduct in the mode of

CURE; and here are indicated a separation and expulsion of the morbid matter,
and a prevention of its return, or capability of reproducing its morbid effects
-- in all which we must be governed by the constitution. When the gout proceeds
regularly, and fixes in the feet, patience and warm flannels are recommended --
and the free use of wine allowed, under the idea of making the deposition of
the gouty matter more complete, and assisting the local expulsion.

However, in the most simple and regular cases, I do not recommend a total
prohibition of all medical assistance; nor can I think that large draughts of
wine, and loads of flannel, can compensate for the loss of judicious advice;
for to me, who frequently have experienced the gout, it is clear, that some
things may be done without any risque of present danger, or future mischief,
which render the fit oftentimes less violent, shorten its continuance, and
obviate the consequent debility; for I am persuaded, we suffer more from
constitutional defects, -- the effects of symptoms, -- and mismanagement, than
from the nature of the disease itself, particularly in those who labor under
recent attacks -- similar instances we have seen in the treatment of other
diseases; as in the smallpox, where warmth and cordials were instituted for
the same purpose, of throwing off the morbid matter by which the fever was too
highly increased, and destruction too often, and danger always the consequence.

Let us see who are the men most subject to this malady -- hard drinkers,
particularly wine-bibbers -- men of voracious appetites, who feed on
high-seasoned dishes -- venereal devotees -- men of lively imaginations, and
those addicted to severe study, (...) hours, and good living; and, in short,
most of those who, by various means, weaken their digestive powers -- if these
have (...) gout in their habit, they seldom escape; if not, commonly acquire it
from their own indiscretion.

In men, before they fall into the gout, it generally happen that their stomach
and bowels are loaded with crude materials, viscid humors creeping through the
mesentery and other viscera -- local fullness in the liver -- spleen or
sweetbread; -- impeded or irregular evacuations by stool, urine, or
perspiration -- (...) often an acrid state of fluids.

Now, in such constitutions, previous to the attack of (...) gout, we find a
number of symptoms announcing its approach such as flatulence, load at the
stomach, and nausea, or sickness.

Here it would be proper to admister an emetic, (No. 11, 1^. 38.) which some
gentle purgative should succeed, particularly of the aloetic class, (No. 108.)
and this last given two or three times, at proper intervals; after which,
stomachic bitters, joined with mild chalybeates, (No. 63 to 65.) or with some
of (...) warm diuretics, (175, 176.) will be useful -- these will suffer (...)
the first stage; for I consider the affection of the stomach as the state of
the disease; besides, if the patient be of a full habit, (...) strong, has a
good pulse, bleeding may very properly (...) this cause.

The mode of living should be moderate, with respect to eating, drinking, and
exercise -- the flesh of young animals allowed only once a day -- vegetables
stewed in their own liquid, (...) with very small portions of water -- the
beverage, small rum brandy, or geneva and water -- and the exercise chiefly on
horseback.

By these means the stomach and bowels are unloaded, and (...) free from
accumulations of crude and offensive faeces; viscera obstructions are opened;
the fluids made to circulate through the different viscera; the mass of blood
pushed forwards to the extreme parts, and surface of the body; the liver,
stomach, kidneys, and bowels evacuate their contents in proper proportion from
the lungs, and through pores of the skin, is thrown (...) due quantity of
perspirable matter, and noxious exhalatio^^ the powers of digestion are
increased; and, in fine, the whole machine put into as healthful a state as the
nature of the case will permit.

Prepared, therefore, for the second or painful stage, if the method above
pursued should not prevent its accession, it will come on less violently,
continue a shorter time, and leave behind it less debility, from the
constitution being freed from any superfluous load, the vascular and nervous
system rendered stronger, and the fluids being put in a mild state -- however,
even here something may be done to mitigate any degree of violence which may
occur from constitutional peculiarity, with respect to pain and febrile
symptoms, which last are now to be considered only symptomatic.

Diluent cordials, wine and water, sage, balm or mint tea, may be freely drank,
and antispasmodics, diaphoretics, and antimonials, joined with camphor and
volatiles, (No. 131.) may be taken -- if the pain should be excessive, not
otherwise, gentle opiates may be added -- ethereal spirit of vitriol, water of
acetated ammonia, with aromatic confection, and ethereal spirit of nitre;
these will promote perspiration, and increase the urinary discharge.

The body should also be kept open with small doses of rhubarb, castor oil,
manna, lenitive electuary, and glysters occasionally, if necessary.

The diet should be broths -- gruels with a little wine, sago, sa^^^,
arrow-root, tapioca, in which may be put wine, or a little brandy -- fresh
water fish, eels and salmon excepted -- chicken, rabbit, veal, lamb, small
birds, and such like may be allowed, but sparingly; they had better be
deferred, at least a free use of them, till the decline of the fit;

As for external applications, during the fit, by whatever (...) they have been
recommended, I am averse to their administration, because the pain seems rather
an instrument of nature for the full completion of depositing the whole of the
gouty matter, creative of the fit, in the extremities -- it should be mitigated
if violent, by the means above described.

Indeed, if the pain is moderate, as well as the febrile symptoms and the
bowels as well as kidneys perform their functions fully and regularly, little
is necessary to be done, till (...) decline of the fit, and then diaphoretics
at night are useful.

After the fit is over, a gentle dose or two of physic may be taken, and a
little stomachic draught once a day for a week or ten days; and should the
joints affected remain^ weak, we may early use the flesh brush, or flannels
impregnated with Franken-tense, amber, or myrrh, by way of friction -- however
painful it may be, I would advise using the joint affected during the fit
repeatedly; for that prevents the too great relaxation of the ligaments from
the flux and stagnation of fluids in these vessels.

By these means may this painful disease be mitigated, or the painful
consequences often subdued, and always made less severe; but if we would
attempt the cure, we must try that in the periods where there is some long
intermissions; and this by the preventive plan, (62. 97.) to which regimen
there pointed out, stomachic and aromatic bitters should be occasionally taken,
such as quassia wood, (175.) or bark mixed with steel, (No. 61 to 65.)
chalybeate waters, particularly those of Bath -- the skin should be kept clean,
and a flannel shirt worn next to it -- a dose of tincture of rhubarb, (173.)
should be taken twice a day; -- and, in fine, such things occasionally applied
to; as will contribute to strengthen the stomach and digestive powers, keep up
a free state of perspiration, and prevent the body from being costive.

Should these things fail, our last resort must be a milk diet, and that
constantly persisted in; though this will only suit such as have a pretty
strong stamina: the weak and very debilitated would probably fall a sacrifice
to the change.

When the GOUT assumes its IRREGULAR FORM, we conclude it is owing to the
weakened state of the moving powers, not being able to throw the offending
matter to the extremities, or, when there deposited, of not keeping it in that
situation -- and hence the head, lungs, stomach, kidneys, bladder, come to be
affected, because they possess more sensibility, and are more irritable than
other of the internal parts -- however, when it fi^^ on these parts, it is
extremely hazardous, in proportion to (...) degree of violence -- we,
therefore, as expeditiously as we can should labor to throw it out of the
habit into the extremities, particularly into the feet.

Now, if the HEAD and LUNGS are affected, and the habit full of blood, we must
bleed in proportion to the strength and fullness -- afterward apply blisters
to the inside of the thighs and legs -- bathe the feet in decoctions of
horse-raddish and bruised mustard seed -- some advise wine, or some other
spirituous menstruum -- sinapisms (No. 30.) may also be applied to the feet --
and we should give volatile camphorated medicines, (No. 33. 35 to 37) and with
cordials, (No. 13 to 18. 28 to 30.) to increase the motion of the blood, at the
same time that it is solicited to the extreme parts.

But should the STOMACH be the seat, vomiting will often be so violent, as to
reject almost every thing which is taken; in order to allay this, we must
depend upon cordials, as above, united with opiates; and occasionally give
opiates themselves, as twenty or thirty drops, or more, of tincture of opium,
at proper intervals -- and hot wine, or rather brandy, with spices and garlic,
should be copiously administered -- and strong aromatic diaphoretics, as
snake-root, camphor, volatile salts, etc. (178, 179, 180.)

Which remedies may be applied if the BOWELS should be attacked, and in
consequence a looseness supervene, then to them we must add some astringents,
as extract of logwood, (140.) tincture of catechu, (139.) columbo root, in
powder, ten grains, in tincture, two drams -- a drop or two of the compound
water of acitated litharge, or ley of iron, called lixivium martis, given at
proper intervals, have been efficacious, when other applications have failed.

Indeed, in every species of the irregular gout, whatever internal parts it
attacks, the same modes of proceeding are necessary, as pointed out here in
general, increasing the force of the circulating powers, and soliciting a free
flow of them to the extremities, endeavoring, at the same time, to alleviate
the oppressive symptoms peculiar to the affected part; as when it attacks the
kidneys, we have recourse to emollient decoctions and glysters, with warm
baths, etc.

With regard to the mode of living to be observed by gouty patients, or those
in whose constitutions there is much of that ^^tter creative of the disease,
TEMPERANCE has always been advised -- on which I shall beg leave to observe,
that by this term is meant such a mode of living as is best adapted to the
constitution; for there may be as much intemperate mischief to some habit by
drinking too large a quantity of water as of wine; and, indeed, in every
species of abstinence, were pursued as such extremities, as weaken rather than
properly support the powers of nature.

SECTION XV. MORBID EVACUATIONS.
WE must now proceed to treat of those disorders whose most striking symptom is
some evacuation, which is either not natural, exceeds the limits, or returns at
more frequent periods, than what is usual in a s4tate of health.

These may be properly divided into such evacuations as flow from the bowels,
called ALVINE, from alvus, the belly -- SANGUINARY, from sanguis, the blood --
called HAEMORRHAGES, from aima, sanguis, and reo, fluo, to flow -- and SEROUS,
from serum, or the thinner fluids, as lymph, urine, mucus, sweat, and similar
fluids.

Now all these evacuations are either ACTIVE or PASSIVE, similar to what we
have said on inflammation. (298. 305.) -- when they are ACTIVE, they are
solicited by some morbid stimulus, or medicines by which the excretory vessels
of the parts affected are put into stronger action, and throw out their
contents too copiously, or the vessels burst, and from thence is the evacuation
produced -- when PASSIVE, the proper powers of the living machine do not
excite, but become defective in resistance, as in cases, of a constant flux of
urine from the relaxation of the sphincter of the bladder. (51.)

Of these truths we shall be convinced, if we consider, that all the fluids of
the human machine are contained in different receptacles, as bile, urine, etc.
and also that part of them are kept in perpetual motion, as the blood, etc.
part of them secreted and excreted; some of which secretions flow out of the
body in regular succession, as the matter of perspiration; some are retained
for a time, till nature calls them into motion for particular purposes, as
milk, semen, etc.

It will therefore appear obvious, that whenever the force of the impelled
fluid, or the weight of it, when collected, is too powerful for the natural
strength of the vessels or cavities, the vessels which burst, or the sphincters
by which they are guarded, and prevented from pouring out their contents, be
opened; hence, when either the expulsive force of the contained liquid is too
great, and the sides of the vessels too much weakened; or when the fluids are
in too great quantity, and the sphincters in too relaxed a state, the rupture
of the one, the want of contractile power of the other, will necessarily lay
the foundation for the disease; so that it may arise either from an increase of
the expulsive and decrease of two resisting power, or from them both happening
conjointly in the same habit, and at the same time.

The indications of cure will then be, in ACTIVE EVACUATIONS, to attempt to
remove the morbid stimulus, and weaken the powers of the vessels or cavities --
in the PASSIVE, to strengthen the vessels or cavities, and give power to the
sphincters, that they may act with proper force.

CHAP. I. ALVINE EVACUATIONS.
THESE may all come under the term LOOSENESS -- DIARRHOEA from dia, per, and
rheo, to flow, though they are by authors divided into different species,
either from the nature of the affection, or from the appearance of matters
which flow through the bowels in too large quantity -- the first of which is
(...) DIARRHOEA, or COMMON LOOSENESS, when there is a constant and remarkable
evacuation by stool of liquid matters without much pain or uneasiness; but when
there is an evacuation of slimy matter, sometimes bloody, attended with febrile
affections, severe gripings, nausea, or sickness, and frequent pro^^^sity to go
to stool, with very small evacuations from such efforts, it is called
DYSENTERY, DYSENTERIA, from dus, male, and enteron, intestinum, intestine.

When the disease is very acute, attended with a continual vomiting of bilious
matter, and at the same time a violent looseness, or at least a nausea, and
strong propensity to go to stool, with loss of strength, and very often cramps
of the thighs and legs, it is called CHOLERA MORBUS, from kole, bilis, bile.

When there is a frequent purging of bloody serum, as if raw flesh had been
washed in some liquid, supposed to flow from the liver, it is called INDOLENT,
because unattended with any severe pain, great sickness, or remarkable loss of
strength -- this evacuation is therefore named HEPATIRRHOEA, from epar, jecur,
the liver, and reo, fluo, to flow.

If there is a frequent purging, in which the aliments appear scarcely to be
changed by the digestive powers, and comes on immediately, or soon after
eating, it is termed LEIENTERIA, from leios, laevis, smooth or slippery, and
enteron, intestinum, intestine

Should there be a frequent evacuation of white matter, supposed to be chyle,
it is termed COELIACA, from hoilia, ^enter, the stomach, or first bowels, where
the first digestion takes place, and forms chyle, which chyle is supposed to
give the appearance from whence this disease is nominated.

If of black matter, or of a deep red color, is then called MELAENA, from
melas, niger, black, unattended with any putrid smell, sudden deprivation of
strength, or remarkable degrees of pain, or nausea.

However, it will be sufficient to take notice only of two of these, as the
rest may be cured by the same means made use of in some of the stages.

1. CHOLERA MORBUS, OR BILIOUS, VOMITING AND INTESTINAL FLUX.
The seat of this complaint seems to be the whole intestinal canal,
particularly the stomach, head of the duodenum, (42.) and doctus communis
choledochus, the common duct of the gall bladder. (36.)

And it is apt chiefly to attack such as are of bilious, dry, choleric habits,
or whose constitutions are loaded with scorbutic acrimony, or the first
passages with acid humors, or are of irascible dispositions.

DESCRIPTION. Though this disease will sometimes come on very suddenly, it is
often preceded by heart-burn, a gnawing painful sensation of the stomach and
bowels, and rancid eructations -- after which succeed enormous vomitings, and
intestinal discharges of vitiated humors, bilious, green, yellow, and
sometimes black, with great difficulty and pain -- there is also a violent pain
and distention of the belly and intestines, accompanied with thirst -- a pulse
at first full, strong, and frequent, afterward weak and irregular -- heat, and
anxiety -- moreover there attends a nausea extremely troublesome -- sometimes a
contraction of the legs and arms -- an acute pain above the navel -- retention
of the urine -- fainting -- coldness of the extremities -- the body becomes
weak, and the spirits low -- with other symptoms of a similar nature, which
greatly terrify the attendants, and will destroy the patient in forty-eight
hours.

This disease generally makes its appearance in autumn, more especially after a
hot and dry summer.

If the disease is more than commonly violent, the evacuations downwards are
very numerous, amounting in the space of a few hours to ninety or a hundred --
the patients soon become emaciated and reduced -- and the symptoms above
specified are quickly followed by hiccough -- universal convulsions -- cold
sweats -- frequent swoonings -- and either in one of these fits, or in a
convulsed state, when the disease proves fatal, they expire.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, eating of pork, bacon, fat meat fried in
oil or butter -- or sweets, grapes, cherries, cucumbers, melons, or all such
viands as become readily rancid or acid -- poisons -- strong purgatives --
violent rage -- and acrimonious bile.

The proximate or immediate, constrictions of the stomach and small intestines,
particularly the duodenum, by bilious or acrimonious humors irritating and
vellicating the sensible nervous coats, which cause an increase of action in
these organs, producing different symptoms, according to the parts locally or
sympathetically affected.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. An acute disease, attended with the vomiting of some
humor, mostly bilious or acrid matter, at the same time a frequent intestinal
evacuation, or at least a nausea and tenesmus, or frequent desire to go to
stool, accompanied with anxiety, abdominal pains or gripings, and very often
spasmodic contractions of the legs.

CURE. The indications are, to sheath, dilute, and expel the acrimonious
humors, take off the convulsive affection; afterward to restore strength and
activity to the stomach and intestines; and these are done, first, by drinking
freely of weak chicken water, made by boiling a chicken in three gallons of
water, to that the decoction just tastes of the flesh -- large draughts of
which should be taken, and given in glysters till the whole is consumed --
about three or four hours after which an opiate, (No. 4.) may be given; and
this mode, if at first made use of, will generally complete the cure.

Or, very weak beef or mutton broth, divested of fat -- or milk and water --
fresh butter -- milk -- decoctions of rice or barley -- or infusions of oaten
bread, toasted and made brown like coffee -- or wheat-bread, or oat-meal
toasted may do, where chicken-broth cannot be had -- indeed the infusion of the
eaten bread has been preferred by some, as it has been observed to fit easiest
on the stomach, and never vomited up.

But should the patient have been purged for ten or twelve hours before
assistance has been given, an opiate should be administered during the urgency
of the symptoms, and the doses large and repeated, approportioned to the
violence of the disease. -- SYDENHAM gave twenty-five drops in an ounce of
cinnamon water, and that proving inefficacious, in half an hour the dose was
increased, and repeated at such intervals as gave room to suppose the effect of
the former dose had ceased, before the succeeding one was administered -- and
after the severity of the disease abates the opiate should be repeated night
and morning till the strength and spirits return.

In common cases this will be sufficient, but if the patient is of a full,
sanguinary habit, bleeding is immediately necessary should the pains of the
stomach and intestines be extremely ^^^lent, partial warm baths, or local
fomentations of the (...) kind, may be had recourse to, and camphorated and
volatile (...), (No. 107. 182.)

Should, after copiously washing the stomach with some of (...) diluting
liquids, the affection of the stomach still continue the fermentative saline
draught, (No. 59.) may be exhibited; or the infusion or powder of columbo-root,
ten or fifteen grains (...) dose, at proper intervals, which is often an
effectual remedy (...) cataplasms of mithridate, Edinburgh New Dispensatory.
1789*
Venice trecle, * or opiated confe^^^ or the leaves of common mint bruised,
boiled in port, may (...) applied to the pit of the stomach and wrists -- and
mint (...) weak infusions of cloves or cinnamon, may be taken occasionally.

In cases of great heat and internal uneasiness, nitre is (...) -- from thirty
grains to sixty of powdered columbo-(...) from the (...) taken every three or
four hours, have been (...) in three or four days to have completed a cure --
indeed (...) climates (...) has been esteemed almost a specific.

(...) the stomach extremely well, in ten or twelve hours that organ settles,
opiates then given in a liquid, or (...) form, as best agrees, are requisite to
allay the disturbance wh^^ has been created in both the nervous and vascular
systems; (...) must be continued at bedtime; and, in about three or (...)
days, a dose of rhubarb may be proper, and, at night a^ (...).

Should the appetite be left weak, a draught of the infusion quassia (...) with
a few drops of dilute vitriolic acid may (...) given twice a day, or some other
bitter infusion, (No. 62 to (...)) -- and the (...) should return gradually to
the common (...) of livi^^.

The mode of treatment here recommended is proper in (...) complaint arising
(...), or from an epidemic cause.

But when it originates from food got into a state of fermentation and (...),
besides plentiful dilution (...) mucilaginous liquids, we must have recourse to
emetics and (...), (165. 172, etc.) ((...) emetic, tartar (...) oil, rhubarb
etc;) and afterward warm bitters and tonics (...) corroborants, with
aromatics, (No. 61 to (...).)

If it is brought on by strong emetics and purgative, warm (...) are necessary,
to allay the agitation of the bowels, and (...) (No. 113.) spirituous
fomentations and volatile camphorated liniments, (No. 107, 132.) afterward, to
alleviate the uneasiness occasioned by the violent action of the emetics and
^^^gatives.

If violent anger should be the cause, emetics and purgat ves are to be
avoided; nor must cold water be given immediately afterward, as we should run
the risque of bringing on an inflammation of the stomach -- the acrimony of the
bile we must endeavor to correct, by proper absorbents, (191.) united with
nitre, (No. 2.) diluting and sheathing it with mucilaginous and watery liquids,
as barley-water, thin gruel, bran tea, decoctions of hartshorn shavings, and
such like lubricating and emollient drinks -- afterward, when the hurry is
over, it may be carried of by emetics and aperients.

If it deduces its origin from acrimonious irritating poisons taken internally,
we must depend upon filling the stom^^n and intestines with oily and
mucilaginous liquids, to guard them from the effects of their stimulus --
absorbents added to these liquids are said to render them more efficacious --
or alcalescent substances, (192.) well diluted, might be serviceable, if the
poisons had ^een of the saline kind, for reasons advanced in inflammations of
the stomach from the same cause. (337.)

2. DYSENTERY, OR TENESMODAL, DYSENTERIC, INTESTINAL FLUX.
When this disease is epidemic, it seizes indiscriminately all (...) of people
-- but those in general are most subject to it who (...) bilious constitutions,
(60, 61.) -- who feed on corrupted (...) ^^ripe fruit, and drink fermenting
liquids -- and who expose themselves to the moist night air, after being in the
daytime (...) heated by the sun. It is most rise in summer and autumn, (...)
damp cold nights succeed hot weather.

It is not only infectious but contagious; because it has been (...) to be
occasioned by the smell of dysenteric faeces, and (...) having recourse to the
same close-stool after people labourly under dysentery, and also from the
nurse's milk, under (...) circumstances.

DESCRIPTION. This disease is generally ushered in by a (...) lassitude and
chillness, with a loss of appetite for some its, which are succeeded by great
degrees of heat -- restlessness causea -- vomiting -- heart-burn -- and
uneasiness at the pit of a stomach -- thirst -- and a quick pulse --
excruciating pains then (...) the belly, which occasion a frequent evacuation
from the (...) but small in quantity -- the matter evacuated is either mucous,
thin, and serous, bloody, frothy, and often mixed with thin skin-like, or
filamentous substances -- the bowels are loaded with wind, which rolls about,
and makes a considerable noise -- and the patients are perpetually desirous of
going to stool -- have a strangury, and often a slipping down, or protrusion of
the lower part of the rectum, (43.) -- the loss of strength becomes extreme --
and whilst the extremities are cold, they perceive in the interior parts great
heat -- then soon come on a hiccough, and cold sweats.

At length the pain suddenly ceases -- the faeces, extremely offensive, pass
away involuntarily -- the pulse becomes weak -- the thirst goes off -- and,
whilst the unhappy patient is flattering himself with the hopes of recovery,
from the apparent alleviation of the symptoms, he suddenly expires.

This disease, notwithstanding it is often fatal to adults, but most of all to
such as are much advanced in life, still in infants it is very mild; for they
will be affected with the same disease for some months without any
inconvenience, if it is left to the direction of nature.

Though the general progress of the disease is here described, practice demands
as to make some necessary distinctions.

If the dysentery is of the INFLAMMATORY KIND, there will be a high degree of
fever -- hard full pulse -- extreme pain of the belly, which, on handling,
increases, and, after vomiting is still more distressing -- the head aches --
the countenance is flushed -- sometimes the belly is distended -- in quantity
the evacuations are small.

If of the PUTRID KIND, there will be a bitter taste in the mouth -- shiverings
now and then come on, as it pursues its course -- the feverish affections are
slight -- the face pale -- the evacuation matter variously colored -- besides
which, a bilious vomiting sometimes accompanied with worms, is an associate.

If of what is termed the MALIGNANT SORT, which it may be from the very
beginning, or occasioned by the milder (...) degenerating from constitutional
defect or mismanagement -- the pulse is then weak -- the strength fails
suddenly -- the countenance has a cadaverous aspect -- the voice is weak -- the
head heavy-there is great oppression at the pit of the stomach, attended (...)
slight convulsions, sickness, and frequent fainting -- and, now and then,
eruptions of different kinds make their appearance, such as those of the
miliary class, spots like flea-bites, and thrush.

CAUSES. It is supposed to arise from acrimonious matter of a putrid nature;
because it makes its appearance in moist warm seasons, adapted to generate
putrescency, chiefly attacks those of scorbutic habits, (61.) and originates
from vapors of putrescent blood; particularly because it softens and corrupts
the parts affected, generates air very copiously, and renders the faeces highly
putrid; and also because, on the dissection of bodies dying of this complaint,
the intestines, especially the colon and rectum, (43, 45.) are preternaturally
thick, distended with air, inflamed, ulcerated, and in a mortified state -- the
inner or villous coat abraded -- the bile greenish like a leek, viscid, and
often of a black color -- and the blood very dark in appearance.

CURE. Of whatever nature this disease may be, the indications are similar, and
depend upon evacuating the acrimony, or determining it to other places --
weakening its action -- alleviating the distressing symptoms, by rendering the
intestines less sensible to its irritating effects, in its FIRST STAGES -- in
the LAST, recovering the tone, and giving strength to the relaxed and weakened
vessels.

To promote these purposes, in full habits, where there are apparent symptoms
of inflammation, the patient should be bled once or twice, according to their
urgency, and the strength of the patient.

In the next place, the stomach and intestines should be unloaded by emetics
and cathartics -- twelve grains of powdered ipecacuanha, and one of tartarized
antimony, should be well mixed together, and divided into three parts, and one
given every second hear -- no liquid should be taken after the first dose; but
after the third, weak beef tea, or chicken broth, should be drank liberally to
encourage the vomiting -- after which a slight opiate will be requisite.

Should the emetic produce smart evacuations upwards and downwards, the
succeeding day it is not necessary to order any thing except a grain of opium,
mixed with three or four grains of ipecacuanha into pills, with syrup of white
poppy heads, and given at bedtime.

But should the emetic not have produced any purgative effects, a purging
powder, made of thirty grains of rhubarb, and three of calomel, must be
administered the morning following. -- As for my own part, in the beginning of
this complaint, I prefer the oil of castor emulsion, (No. 66) as it relaxes the
coats of the stomach, sheaths the acrimony, produces evacuations, and mitigates
the pains of the bowels.

But as is the nature of the disease, so should be the election of our
purgatives -- if of the inflammatory kind, the salines are preferable, (172,)
-- if the putrescent, the antiseptic, as tamarinds, cream of tartar, etc; (No.
23, 24. 50, 51.) but in every case, after the effects is produced, an opiate
should be administered at night.

In the intermediate spaces of time, small doses of nitre, accompanied with
antimonials and saline mixtures, may be exhibited, joined with sheathing
medicines, such as gum tragacanth, (...) starch, if the fever keeps up -- or
should it be of the low malignant, gentle cordials are proper.

However, should not the disease soon yield to this mode, but the symptoms
still continue, particularly griping and purging, small doses of ipecacuanha
may be given, sufficient only to create a nausea, (No. 133.) increasing or
decreasing the dose agreeable to the effects, and joining it with antiseptics,
cooling, or cordial medicines, as the particular nature of the case may require.

Should the stools continue remarkably viscid and offensive, every second or
third day a purgative should be given, and at night an opiate.

We must proceed in this manner, till, from the regularity of the pulse, the
cessation of pain, and propensity to stools, as well as from the want of them,
we may conclude the disease terminated -- but should not these appearances
occur in the course of a few days, we have reason to apprehend the greatest
danger -- we must then, if the symptoms continue as violent as at first, have
recourse to fomentations, (No. 111.) and glysters of the sheathing and anodyne
sort, made of milk, broth, marsh-mallow or linseed decoction, with starch and
tincture of opium.

Besides the ipecacuanha, other medicines are recommended, and, if we believe
the recommendation, falling little short of infalibility, viz. form two to ten
grains of created glass of antimony, from ten to fifteen grains of powdered
columbo every three or four hours -- the decoction of semirauba bark is
considered as a specific, and said to remove the disease without the danger or
inconveniences attendant on astringents, (No. 134.)

At the close of the complaints astringents are useful, particularly tonics;
and, indeed, also when the most violent symptoms of fever, pain, and tenesmus
have ceased, to relieve the relaxed state of the vessels.

In pursuing the modes here laid down, we shall seldom fail of curing this
complaint; but should it be accompanied with a putrid malignant fever, there
will be little hope of a recovery -- however, we should try the effects of
ANTISEPTICS, (192 to 194.) particularly wine, infusions of bark and snake-root,
with a few drops of tincture of opium in each dose, and the free use of subacid
fruits, (192.) taken by themselves, or squeezed plentifully into other liquids
-- indeed, fruit, and things of a similar nature will form, in these cases, the
proper plan of diet -- but when dysenteries are unattended with any high degree
of putrefaction, demotions, and jellies of rice, sago, tapioca, salep, the
white decoction, chalk mixture, weak chicken-broth or beef tea, are most proper
-- though all solid animal food must be avoided.

When flatulencies become distressing, which will sometimes be the case,
chamomile flower tea, infusion of cinnamon or cloves, or liquids impregnated
slightly with other aromatics, may be occasionally administered with great
advantage.

However, we have had instances of some of these complaints which were
epidemical, and from their nature so extremely destructive, as exceeded the
powers of medicine, supposed to be owing to their deducing their origin from
acrimonious humors, highly caustic -- in which a total loss of strength,
swelling of the belly, sinking of the pulse, a discharge of blackish stools,
and clammy sweats, were certain signs of the irremediable state of the disease.

With respect to the COMMON DIARRHOEA, if it is unattended with any weakness,
loss of appetite, or febrile affections, and is moderate in quantity, it very
often is of service to the constitution, and is rather conducive to health than
otherwise; but should it can on to too great excess, it will require the same
means for its care, and will be conquered much more easily than the dysentery
-- and, indeed, all the other species we have specified require the same
treatment -- at the beginning clearing the first passages of any irritating
contents, by proper emetics and cathartics, next soliciting the flow of fluids
to the surface by diapho^^^^, and strengthening the stomach and bowels by tonic
astringent, bitters strengthening medicines, and particularly riding on
horseback, at the close of the complaint.

With regard to the HEPATIRRHOEA, we must proceed as (...) in that disorder
called tabes hepatica, or hepatic consumption, (334, 335.)

CHAP. II. HAEMORRHAGES,
FROM the Greek words aima, sanguis, blood, and rennumi, erumpo, to break out,
or SANGUINARY EVACUATIONS.

All these effusions of blood are considered as morbid, which either flow from
particular parts not naturally accustomed to produce such evacuations; or,
though producing them periodically, still afford them in too great quantity, or
return at too quick periods, that the machine, by these means, is so injured,
as to experience some defect in executing its functions properly, and
consequently falls into a diseased state, attended with a greater or less
degree of danger, according to the violence of the effusion, or to the
consequence of the part from whence it flows.

Now all haemorrhages arise, either when the circulatory propulsive powers are
increased to a great degree of violence; or that the resistance of the blood on
its part and the vessels should be diminished; or that each of these things
should happen at one and the same time.

Hence, then, we find, that complaints of this nature may be occasioned in four
different ways -- by the vessels being ruptured, dilated, or eroded; or, by the
blood having lost its natural viscidity, and becoming to thin -- under any of
these circumstances, the vessels not being capable of confining the blood
within its proper channels, occasion haemorrhage -- whence arise a variety of
these complaints, taking their names from the places from whence the blood
issues; or the action of the parts producing, instead of their natural, these
sanguinary discharges.

Hence BLEEDING OF THE NOSE, named EPISTAXIS; from the Greek word epistaz^,
sanguinem e nasibus stillo.

SPITTING OF BLOOD -- HAEMOPTYSIS, or HAEMOPTUON, from aima, sanguis, blood,
and ptuo, to spit.

VOMITTING OF BLOOD -- HEMATEMESIS, aima, sanguis, and emeo, to vomit.

MAKING BLOODY URINE -- HAEMATURIA, aima, blood, and ouron, urine.

PILES -- HAEMORRHOIDS, aima, sanguis, blood, and rheo, ^luo to flow.

MAENORRHAGIA, mean, menses, and rheo, to flow.

In all morbid effusions of blood, from whatever place they issue, we endeavor
to find out the proximate or acting cause before enumerated, and form the modes
of cure accordingly; -- but as effusions of blood from the lungs is of the most
dangerous nature, we shall select that, in order to point out the particular
mode of proceeding, and occasionally advert to what deviations may be necessary
on account of the difference of situation of the part affected.

1. SPITTING OF BLOOD, OR HAEMOPTYSIS.
All morbid effusions of blood through the mouth take this general name, except
that which is vomited up -- and this appelsation we think improper -- if blood
comes from the gums or throat, or drops from the superior part of the nose
internally into the superior part of the fauces, it may be right; for the
effusion externally will only be attended with a spitting, slight cough, or
hawking; but, when from the lungs, the cough is more considerable -- we shall
therefore distinguish the complaint of which we are about to treat, by the term,

2. COUGHING UP OF BLOOD.
DESCRIPTION. In this complaint, for the most part, a chillness -- lassitude --
coldness of the feet -- difficulty of breathing come on -- a weight, or
undulating sensation is felt about the diaphragm -- fla^^^ence in the belly --
and pain in the back -- at length there comes on a tickling and itching in the
windpipe, from whence issues forth blood -- if it is recent, the color is
florid, the fluid frothy, and coughed up in large mouthfuls -- but it is not
always of a very florid color -- in some cases it is of a blacker hue, as it
remains and concretes more or less in the vesicles.

From the symptoms here enumerated it appears, that a spasm of the whole
machine takes place before the effusion.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are said to be, a fullness of blood, brought on
by some accustomary evacuations being impeded, if, at the same time, the action
of the vessels should be strongly increased by anger, violent motion, living
upon too hot food or liquids, or violent cough, should the exertions in
protruding the faeces in costive habits be too powerful -- long exposure to
severe cold, causing a contraction on the surface of the body and the external
vessels, air possessing too much levity in very high situations, a suppression
of the menses or piles, too great a rarefaction of the blood, spasmodic
contractions of some of the viscera, scirrhus obstructions in the neighboring
viscera, or a scirrhus or polypus in the vessels of the lungs themselves -- or,
in fine, whatever determines too large a quantity to the lungs, and causes it
to circulate too forcibly against the vessels which are not obstructed, or some
diseases which break down the texture of the blood, or erode the vessels, as
scurvy, pulmonary consumption, smallpox, or those depending upon a putrescent
acrimony of the fluids.

Those which are proximate or immediate we have before enumerated, (622, 623.)
but most commonly it is a rupture of the vessels preceded by an universal spasm.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A flushing of the cheeks, sensation of uneasiness, or
pain, sometimes heat in the breast, a tickling of the fauces, cough, and
throwing up of florid colored blood, often frothy.

People most subject to this complaint are those of slender, delicate frames,
who have long necks, are narrow chested, whose blood is acrid and copious, and
are between twenty-five and thirty years old.

CURE. -- This disease is always to be considered of a very dangerous nature,
and requires very early and effectual assistance -- in doing which, we must
endeavor to solicit the blood from the lungs, moderate its heat, take off the
external spasmodic affections, and heal the vessels, if ruptured. -- If then it
proceeds from too great fullness we must have recourse to bleeding, in proper
quantities, and at such intervals as the necessity of the case demands -- all
animal food must be prohibited, even the weakest broths -- and the diet should
be by no means ^^^ritious, but should chiefly consist of vegetable juices, such
as burned turnips, apples, oranges, panada, thin gruels, ices, and such simple
materials -- the liquids allowed should be nitrated emulsions, Seltzer water
with milk, or barley water, thin whey, or toast and water drank cold -- the
body should be kept at perfect rest, seldom in a recumbent posture, nor should
the patient be allowed to speak, scarce at all; nor, indeed, should any thing
be permitted that can in the least increase the motion of the lungs -- opiates
should be exhibited now and then, if necessary, to procure rest, and the body
kept open by glysters, (No. 25, 26.) or gentle cooling aperients, (171, 172.)
that the blood may not be impeded in its circulation downwards.

The mind of the patient should be kept perfectly at ease -- and the first and
second bleeding should be copious, from large orifices, and quickly repeated,
if the violence of the case requires it -- for one free bleeding in this stage
is of infinitely more service than a number of sparing ones.

Nitre should be given freely in any eligible form, as it is much to be
depended upon; for it lessens the motion of the blood, and allays its heat,
consequently prevents strong vascular action, and the expansive power of the
blood.

Keeping the body open with cooling aperients, (171, 172.) particularly
Glauber's salts largely diluted, (No. 135.) is extremely useful, taken now and
then, till the effect is produced twice, or oftener.

Should the cough be very troublesome, some of the oleaginous medicines, (No.
81 to 84) to which nitre may be added, and given to allay the pulmonic
irritation.

This method in common and recent cases will almost always succeed; but when it
proceeds from previous injury in the texture of the blood, and weakness of the
lungs, constituting that kind which is habitual or consumptive, little can be
expected from bleeding; for this, by weakening the system, and contributing
more to dissolve the texture of the blood, seems rather calculated to increase
the mischief, inasmuch as it adds power to its causes; small doses of
antimonials, (180.) or ipecacuanha, (180.) are most likely to produce good
effects, by determining the flow of blood to the surface, and demulcents,
(188.) by adding to the viscidity of the fluids.

And should the pain, difficulty of breathing, and cough, cease with the efflux
of blood, we may give tonic medicines, as decoction of bark, (193.) to which
may be added the balsam of capivi, (165.) or some of the mild balsamic class;
for we may reasonably infer, that there is no more extravasated fluids in the
pulmonary vesicles.

But it sometimes happens unfortunately, notwithstanding all our efforts, that
though the efflux of blood may be stopped for a few hours, or days, it will
return with a quick hard pulse, troublesome cough, oppression, and difficulty
of breathing, then we may have reason to be alarmed, and fear a supervening
consumption -- in this case we have little to depend upon but general remedies,
such as goats whey, ass' milk mixed with Seltzer water -- (...) the waters of
Bristol should be had recourse to -- riding, swinging, sailing, and a milk
diet; for some have, by these means being rigidly pursued, happily recovered.

(...) vomits may also be given three or four times a week, early in the
morning, merely to give two or three motions -- three or four grains of
ipecacuanha is sufficient and fully adequate to answer every useful purpose.

3. BLEEDINGS OF THE NOSE
are not commonly attended with much inconvenience, and generally yield to
topical applications -- which may be had recourse to, if the pulse becomes weak
and small, the cheeks and lips lose their natural color, and the extremities
be seized with unusual coldness -- the common remedies are smelling at vinegar,
or ^^ations of white vitriol, applying dosils of lint by themselves, or loaded
with some styptic, as styptic tincture, alum, (...), cold wet cloths, or cold
iron applied to the nape of the (...).

But when the affection is accompanied with any great increase of vascular
action, which will be attended with a strong, quick, full pulse, heat,
headache, and other symptoms, indicative of too strong vascular power, we must
have recourse to bleeding, and such remedies of the cooling kind as we have
advised, (392, etc.) -- but should vascular debility, or the blood being in a
loose dissolved state, be the cause, we must depend upon astringents and
tonics, paticularly bark and the vitriolic acid -- creating nausea and gentle
vomiting is recommended, as advised, (394.) -- if by these means a period is
put to the haemorrhage, the body should be kept in a state of perfect quietude
-- if costive, aperients and glysters should be exhibited, and a paregoric
should be given at night. And as almost all active haemorrhages arise from too
great plenitude, occasioned by the suppression of some natural discharge,
particularly in young full habits -- in older constitutions, which are
supported by plentiful, or more copious diet -- whence they are preceded by
pain and fullness of the head, occasioning drowsiness -- in order, therefore,
to form a preventive plan, abstinence is necessary, keeping the head cool the
body open, making the slightest suppers, and those of the most light and
refrigerating diet; but they are altogether better avoided.

4. VOMITING OF BLOOD, OR HAEMATEMESIS. (390.)
The characteristic marks of this disease are, frequent nausea or efforts to
vomit, and at the same time a rejection of bloody materials by the mouth, mixed
with such as have before been swallowed -- from whence the stomach feels some
alleviation; but the blood vomited up is grumous -- and the stools which
succeed afterward are black.

This affection, however, is more common to women than to men, and less
frequent in both than the making of bloody urine, -- If a women in this disease
should menstruate, she is cured; for it often is occasioned by a suppression of
the menses -- and in men, from an obstruction of the bleeding piles, and also
from infarction of the liver and spleen -- still it may be occasioned by other
causes; such as full and free living -- swallowing down constantly large
quantities of succulent or juicy food, at the same time indulging in indolence
-- and the blood pushed for wards in the course of circulation too rapidly, by
severe exercise, running, riding, fits of anger, and the too free use of vinous
and spirituous liquors.

CURE. In these cases, though bleeding may be sometimes necessary, it must be
cautiously repeated -- we must be governed by the strength of the patient,
which is sometimes apt to fail suddenly -- the pulse readily flags; -- the
sanguinary flux is apt to be extremely copious, and often occasions fainting --
Nor should any thing be given that is likely, in the least degree, to be
offensive to the stomach. -- As therefore it is essentially necessary to have
the body kept open, we must depend upon glysters chiefly -- though rhubarb in
small doses, if the stomach will bear it, has been recommended.

Weak, broths, with some of the astringent vegetables unboiled; -- such as
plantain -- ground ivy -- cup-moss -- nettles -- or rather their expressed
juice, may be given -- infusion of red roses -- sloes -- or cold water,
acidulated with the vitriolic acid -- may be administered as drink -- also ices
-- and at night gentle opiates, mixed with astringents of the milder class; --
avoiding all those which are likely to create nausea -- such as alum, white
vitriol, etc.

In all the different species of this complaint it will be necessary to proceed
in this manner. -- But if the suppression of the menses, or of the bleeding
piles, should be the cause, these are to be solicited to their natural passages
by proper means; or should they arise from affections of the liver, or spleen,
such medicines should be exhibited as are calculated to relieve them as much as
the state of the stomach will permit.

But here we must observe, that in the middle of pregnancy, they are rarely
injurious; but if in fever, they are always fatal, if the blood be black and
fetid; nor should we flatter ourselves with much hope, if they proceed from
enlargements of the spleen, or liver, and induration, or should there be
fainting to any degree of severity.

5. BLOODY URINE, or HAEMATURIA. (390.)
In this complaint, the matter passed through the urethra is either pure blood,
or bloody urine, that is, urine having acquired intense redness from being
mixed with some particles of blood. The most common causes of which are stones,
or gravel lacerating the different parts of the urinary passages; but it may be
occasioned by venereal excesses, as blood may issue from the seminal vessels
(two membranaceous cellular tubes, lying on each side, between the bladder,
(50.) and rectum, (45.) on the outside of the vasa deferentia, (53.) and also
from the prostate glands; (54.) hence are they considered amongst the causes,
as are also dissolution of the blood, or violent exertions of the circulatory
powers, in severe inflammatory fevers, particularly in the smallpox.

Whatever may be the cause, two points are to be considered, whether there is
an inflammatory, or, putrefactive disposition in the blood.

If the former is prevalent, and the habit full, we must bleed, and that
repeatedly, till we have taken off the general plenitude, and allayed the
intenseness of the action of the vascular system, the bowels should be kept
open with saline purges and manna, (172.) and emulsions with gum (...), and
cooling decoctions of linseed tea mixed with nitre, should be freely
administered, and the uva ursi (139.) may be administered, which in this case I
have seen extremely efficacious, other astringents are not advisable.

If the SECOND, -- tonics -- astringents -- and balsamics -- as bark -- lime
water -- tincture of roses -- alum whey should be had recourse to, to restrain,
as quickly as possible, the efflux of blood -- and by continuing afterward the
use of the bark, joined with the balsam of capivi -- drinking chalybeate
waters, and using a milk diet, endeavoring to strengthen the tone of the
system, and prevent a relapse.

But without either of the constitutional tendencies above recited, should the
cause be a suppression of menses, or piles, and these cannot be restored or
solicited to their natural passages -- occasional bleeding will be a salutary
substitute.

Or should it deduce its origin only from calculi, during the fits of pain we
must guard the parts against the effects of their stimulus, by emollient and
demulcent remedies, (140 -- 187.) -- aetherial spirits of nitre, and such like
-- afterward we must endeavor to strike at the cause, as recommended in pain
of the kidneys. (364.)

Here we must observe, that in all cases of great pain, opiates should not be
forgot, especially if stone or gravel is the cause -- and, indeed, in
discharges from the ureters, and kidneys, the infusion of carrot-seed (No. 123)
has not been slightly recommended.

But in all cases of bloody urine, all powerful astringents should be
industriously avoided, lest they should produce too strong a constriction of
the passages, and from thence coagulated blood might be restrained, productive
of inflammation, or forming a nucleus, or basis for a stone.

Sometimes the urine will appear to be extremely high-colored, as if blood had
been mixed with it -- of this it is necessary to be certain; -- which may be
discovered by straining the urine through fine linen -- perfectly clean -- if
there should be my admixture of blood, it will be stained of a red color -- if
not, there will be no such appearance. -- And lastly, great care should be
taken in properly discriminating between bloody urine, and sanguineous
discharges of a gonorrhoea, or clap -- or from piles making their exit through
the urinary passages; -- and critical discharges should be distinguished from
those that are not.

6. PILES, or HAEMORRHOIDS. (391.)
These have been divided into the OPEN and BLIND -- the first, when they are
attended with an effusion of blood -- the last, when they give no such
appearance -- or into exterior and interior, from their situation.

They are not always, however, to be considered as a disease, for they are a
very salutary discharge, and sometimes periodic, preventing a number of other
complaints, which are apt to appear, on their being imprudently expelled, or
stopped. -- I have known people, from this cause, labor sometimes under a
variety of internal affections, which have all vanished on their re-appearance.
To those afflicted with gout -- who are hypochondriacal -- hysterical --
subject to complaints of the kidneys, or bladder -- to sciatic pains -- asthma
-- mental derangement, and some others, they are considered to be highly
serviceable. Hence, whilst they continue moderate, and appear to be a salutary
effort of a nature to relieve herself from some superfluous load -- there is no
need of medical assistance. But if they are extremely and constantly painful,
or pour forth a large quantity o^ blood, so that the patient experiences great
debility, and grows thin, they then may be considered as morbid.

These who are disposed to become corpulent, eat, and drink freely; -- whose
habits are relaxed -- costive -- plethoric -- from indolence, or any other
cause, are most liable to this complaint; besides, strong purges will also
bring them on. These causes induce obstruction in, inflammation, and swelling
of, those vessels called haemorrhoidal; whence, about the anus, there will be
livid, painful tubercles; from which frequently issue blood, which also
sometimes flows without any visible tumor, attended often with a load, and
pain of the head, giddiness, and pain of the loins and anus.

CURE. When there is no efflux of blood, from the piles; they are generally
attended with such great degrees of pain, that people are afraid of going to
stool. Under these circumstances, if people are of full habits, bleeding,
abstemious diet, and mild aperients -- (No. 3. 22 to 24. 66. 135, or 136.) to
take off the fullness, and preventive costiveness, should be had recourse to,
-- after, warm olive oil may be applied to the part -- or diluted preparations
of lead (139) with camphorated spirits and lime water; -- juice of houseleek --
to any of which may be added tincture of opium. The patient should, as much as
possible, be kept in a recumbent posture; and, when sitting up, avoid pressure
on the parts -- or heating them -- for which purpose a chair, stuffed round the
edges, with a vacuity left in the center, should be used.

The diet should be of the mild laxative, emollient kind, nor any thing taken
which can heat, or cause the blood to circulate with too great freedom.

WHEN THE PILES ARE OF THE BLEEDING SORT, and it becomes necessary to stop the
flux of blood, cloths dipped in vinegar and water may be applied to the loins,
and anus, which failing, or not soon succeding, a gentle emetic may be
administered, (No. 11.) and after the operation, the anodyne draught, (No. 4.)

In these cases, the indications of cure are very obvious. To take off the
superincumbent pressure from, and lesson the action of the vessels, toward the
affected part; to strengthen the tone of the vessels relaxed, and take off
local irritation.

But as these discharges are brought on by infarctions and obstructions of the
liver, other things are necessary to be done, in order to prevent a relapse;
for under these circumstances patients are liable to frequent returns; hence,
in order to remove the causes, we must have recourse to such medicines and
regimen as have been advised in pain of the liver from those sources -- (Page
351.)

Sometimes this disease will arise merely from want of strength, and tone in
the rectum, (46.) -- Preparations of iron, (139.) united with bitters, as
quassia wood -- gentian -- chamomile -- and such like, and continued for some
time, are highly beneficial, -- and bathing the parts with a sponge dipped in
cold water, twice every day. -- And in every species we must carefully avoid
all aloetic aperients -- for they are too apt to stimulate the rectum, -- nay,
rhubarb will sometimes have this effect; hence, as it is of the utmost
consequence to keep the body open, should there be occasion, and that
moderately; for strong purging will exasperate, rather than alleviate the
complaint, the gentlest aperients, (171, 172.) should only be insisted upon,
and those given in such quantities, and at such intervals, as merely to keep
the bowels empty. This disease has been observed also to originate from excess
of grief, long continued, as well as from a profusion of the menstrual
discharge -- and most probably is caused by a general relaxation of the solids,
brought on by a torpid state of the nervous system; whence the fluids, deprived
of proper circulation from the inactivity of the vascular propulsive power,
form congestions, which fix in these parts.

Changing the scenes of life -- traveling -- dissipating gloomy ideas by
seeing new objects -- and diverting the attention, are amongst the best
calculated remedies, in these cases -- which have been greatly aided by taking
four spoonfuls, three or four times a day, of bark infused in limewater. (No.
137.)

Where the piles have continued a long time, occasioned by a continued
acrimonious looseness, I have known them cured by gentle vomits -- small doses
of ipecacuanha in a strong decoction of nettles and opiates -- administering
after the pain had ceased, and the looseness perceptibly abated, bark joined
with chalybeates.

CHAP. III. ON FLUXES. When the Serum or Lymphatic Part of the Fluids are
evacuated in too copious Quantities.
ALL fluxes may be said to be of the serous kind, which depend upon an
evacuation of some of the secreted fluids, and are neither of the alvine nor
sanguineous class. In this place, however, we shall treat only of the DIABETES,
from diabaino, permeo, to pass through, or a

MORBID DISCHARGE OF URINE.
When, therefore, the evacuation of urine happens in such quantities, be the
color or smell what it may, so as to bring on emaciation, or falling away of
the flesh -- weakness -- loss of appetite, and thirst, we may consider it as a
disease under this denomination.

DESCRIPTION. Besides an unusual flux of urine, it is accompanied with severe
thirst -- the mouth is clammy and dry -- and the patients spit up frequently
frothy saliva -- they complain of heat in the viscera -- the urine is limpid,
sometimes sweat, and has generally not an unpleasant smell -- there is a kind
of fullness of the loins, testicles, and feet -- hectic fever -- after which
succeed a tabes, and death.

It seldom attacks young people, but those advanced in the latter stages of
life, who have been used to drink freely of ^^nous liquors, and employed in the
severer occupations.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing, pre^eding febrile diseases, particularly if
they are subdued by immoderate evacuations -- too long continued use of
acidulated waters, particularly in a cold climate, or diuretic medicines --
also the bite of a serpent called DIPSAS, from the Greek word dipsa, sitis,
thirst, because it occasions so great thirst as often proves mortal.

The proximate or immediate, an increase of action of the secretory vessels of
the kidneys, arising from a state of relaxation, and a thin acrid serosity of
the circulating fluids, and a too powerful determination of them to the kidneys.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A preternatural discharge of urine, immoderate in
quantity, and of long continuance, attended commonly with loss of appetite,
emaciation, and hectic symptoms.

CURE. The indications are, to lessen the action of the secretory vessels, by
altering their relaxed state, and correcting the too great serosity and
acrimony of the fluids -- hence we must apply to the use of inspissants,
diaphoretics, stimulants, and tonics -- and as soliciting a flow of liquids to
the skin will prevent too great a determination to the kidneys, in order to
keep a free and constant state of perspiration, the patient should wear a
flannel shirt next the skin, use moderate exercise, and dry friction.

Alum whey is strongly recommended, (No. 138.) four ounces to be taken at least
three times a day -- limewater drank also, whilst the warmth in quenching
continues, taken as freely as the thirst requires, has been said to exceed the
use of Bristol water, which by some has been considered as a specific in this
disease -- half an ounce, or six drams of oak bark infused in two pints of
limewater, and the chalybeate waters, have had their powerful advocates.

White vitriol is a useful astringent, (139.) but some depend on half a grain
of blue vitriol given twice a day in any proper liquid.

Preparations of iron, (139.) or elixir of vitriol joined with bark, (193,
194.) are no inferior tonics; and, by strengthening the habit, contribute much
in the promotion of perspiration.

Rhubarb, (173.) has been recommended as efficacious in laying the foundation
for the success of antispasmodics.

As a stimulant, tincture of cantharides, (175.) is by some in this case looked
upon as a specific.

Notwithstanding the thirst is a very distressing symptom, aqueous liquids
should be avoided -- they should be impregnated with some inspissating
ingredient, as comfrey-root, or made with lime; and these should be used as
common drink -- boiled meat is less useful than roasted -- broth made of beef
may be allowed -- shellfish -- wild fowl -- jellies in small quantities, and
often repeated -- tapioca, milk, rice gruels, and such similar viands, may be
permitted.

Opiates also at night will be serviceable given with some preparations of iron
and diaphoretics. (No. 139.)

This disease sometimes affects hysteric patients, who pass large quantities of
limpid urine; hence it is called hystericus -- sometimes it supervenes
intermittents; hence denominated intermittens -- sometimes it attacks people
worn out by the gout, in whom, during the painful fits, the urine is small in
quantity, and turbid; but in the intervals of the discharge, from perspiration
being defective, becomes clear, watery, and copious.

To the general plan, which we have before laid down, we must therefore subjoin
antispasmodics, under the first circumstance -- under the second, tonics,
particularly bark -- and under the third, invigorating cordials, agreeable to
the specific nature of the case. See HYSTERIA, INTERMITTENT FEVER, and (...).

Sometimes people will be affected with a morbid evacuation of sweat, where
that discharge is remarkable for its quantity, (...), and unseasonableness --
this is called

2. EPHIDROSIS, OR MORBID EVACUATION OF SWEAT
from ephidroo, suderam movere, to occasion sweating, which is proportionable
to the quantity of perspirable matter contained in the blood, to the velocity
with which it is separated, and to the heat or laxity of the pores of the skin
-- when it arises from an increased circulation of the blood, it is active --
when it depends upon the laxity of the skin, and superabundance of serum, it is
passive.

When the sweat is cold, it denotes superabundance of perspirable serum, and a
relaxed state of the skin -- when warm, velocity, and, at the same time,
ferocity of the blood.

But when these profuse sweatings are connected with miliary, hectic, or other
fevers, we are not to consider the discharge as a disease which requires
management particularly adapted to itself, we must endeavor to destroy or
evacuate the seeds of the febrile affection, as by that means only can we
conquer its consequences; for in those cases the sweating is purely symptomatic.

But when profuse discharges of the skin come on without any evident cause or
fever, flowing chiefly in the nights, and occasions falling away of the flesh,
loss of strength and appetite, with lowness of spirits, it then requires
medical assistance.

CURE. Here are indicated a diversion of the flow of fluids, a decrease of
their ferocity, and our endeavors to give general force and tone to the system.

Hence purgatives, at proper intervals, will answer the first and second
indications -- tonics and strengthening medicines the last, such as
preparations of iron, bark, bitters; steel waters, moderate exercise, and the
use of the cold bath -- to which we would add, the frequent administration of
milk.

Properly supporting, and judiciously increasing the alvine discharges, are in
this case extremely beneficial; for these divert the flow of fluids from the
skin, as in the former case increasing perspiration solicited the humors from
their determination to the kidneys.

When this complaint arises, as it sometimes does, from a scorbutic acrimony,
and the blood being in a loose dissolved state, which is very often succeeded
by that species of consumption called ATROPHY -- the sweat pours forth in the
middle of winter under the slightest covering, and at the same time affects the
patients with restlessness and anxiety; nor do they cease till the vitiated
humors are in a great measure discharged by this cuticular flux.

Here, as well as where the sweats are of different colors, the remedies
recommended are, the juices of fresh vegetables, subacid fruits, and the use of
tonics, particularly bark.

THE FORMS OF MEDICINE PRESCRIBED AND REFERRED TO IN MIXED, REMITTENT,
INTERMITTENT, AND ERUPTIVE FEVERS -- ALSO IMFLAMMATORY, PAINFUL DISEASES, AND
FLUXES.
No. 70. BARK DRAUGHT.
Take Decoction 1 ounce.
of each 10 grains.
of Bark, Tincture an ounce. Powder Extract

Syrup of Quinces, 2 drams.
Mix. --

71. INFUSION OF QUASSIA WOOD AND SNAKE-ROOT.
Take of Quassia Wood, 1 1-2 dram. Snake-root, 1 dram. Boiling Water, 1 pint.
Infuse -- DOSE. Four spoonfuls.

72. OAK BARK BOLUS.
Take of Oak Bark in Powder, 6 grains. Alum, 3 grains, Chamomile Flowers in
powder, 8 grains.
Syrup, sufficient to form a Bolus.

To be taken every third or fourth hour. -- The Extract or Powder of the Scale
Cup may be used in the same proportion -- or the Pomegranate Bark, and
Chamomile Infusion, (No. 60.) may be also exhibited.

No. 73. BARK GLYSTER,
of each 2 ounces. Take of Bark Decoction, Distiled Water,

Extract of Bark, 2 drams. Olive Oil, an ounce. Tincture of Opium, 8 drops.
Mix. -- And let this be thrown up every fourth hour.

74. BARK CREAM.
Take of Bark Powder, 1-2 an ounce. Extract of the same, 2 drams. Cream, 1 1-2
ounce. Sugar, 3 drams.
Mix -- DOSE. Two or three spoonfuls every second, third, or fourth hour,
according to the exigencies of the case.

75. ASRINGENT DRAUGHT.
Take Cinnamon Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Spirits of Cinnamon, 2 drams Electuary of
Scordium, 1 scruple. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 2 drams,
Mix. --

or -- 76.
Take of Infusion of Roses, 2 ounces. Spirits of Cinnamon, 2 drams. Extract of
Logwood, 10 grains. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 2 drams.
Mix. -- Either of these may be given every three or four hours, -- or the
quantities of these may be enlarged, and formed into mixtures, of which two or
three spoonfuls may be administered occasionally.

77. ASTRINGENT OPIATES.
Take Infusion of Roses, 2 ounces. Columbo-root powdered, 10 grains. Tincture
of Opium, 6 drops. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 1 dram.
Mix. --

or -- 78.
of each 6 drams. Take Infusion of Logwood, Lime Water,

Tincture of Catechu, 2 drams. -- Opium, 6 drops. Syrup of White Poppy Heads, 1
dram,
Mix. -- Either of these may be taken every fifth of sixth hour.

No. 79. CALOMEL POWDER.
Take Prepared Calomel, 2 scruples. -- Crabs Eyes, 2 drams. Tartarized
Antimony, 1 grain.
Let these be rubbed well together, and ten or twelve grains administered for a
dose.

80. PURGING POWDER.
in powder, Take Rhubarb, 6 grains. Jalep, 3 grains. Ginger, 1 grain.

Mix. --

81. OILY EMULSION.
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, 1 ounce. Gum Arabic, 2 drams. Fine Sugar, 1-2 an
ounce.
Mix these well together, then gradually add Decoction of Barley, 8 ounces.

DOSE. Three or four spoonfuls often in the day.

82. OILY LINCTUS.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, 1 ounce. Gum Arabic, 3 drams. Syrup of
Marshmallows, 1 1-2 ounce.
Mix these well together. DOSE. Two or three spoonfuls often in the day, or, it
may be acidulated with a few drops of dilute vitriolic Acid -- or, an ounce of
Syrup of Lemon may be added.

or -- 83.
Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds, 1 ounce. Gum Arabic, 3 drams. Syrup of Wild
Poppy, 1 1-2 ounce.
Dilute vitriolic Acid, which will give it a grateful acidity.

Mix. -- DOSE, as above.

84. SPERMACETI MIXTURE.
Take spermaceti, (dissolved in a proper quantity of Mucilage of Gum Arabic, or
Yolk of an Egg.) 1 1-2 dram Cinnamon Water, 6 ounces. Syrup of Wild Poppy, 1
ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Two table spoonfuls occasionally.

No. 85. DISCUTIENT FOMENTATION.
Take of common Fomentation, 2 pints. Crude Sal Ammoniac, 2 drams.
of each 2 ounces. Common Vinegar, Spirits of Wine,

Mix --

86. CAMPHORATED LOTION.
of each 4 ounces. Take of simple Lime Water, Common Vinegar, Camphorated
Spirits,

Mix. --

87. ALTERNATIVE MERCURIAL PILLS.
Take Gum Guiacum, 1 dram.
of each 2 scruples. Calomel prepared, Precipitated Antimony,

Balsam of Capivi, sufficient to form these into a mass -- and make of every
dram twelve pills.

88. DECOCTION OF THE WOODS.
Take Sarsaparilla, 3 ounces.
of each 1 ounce. Guiacum Wood, Sassafras Shavings,

Boil these in three pints of water till they are reduced to two adding toward
the close, Liquorice-root bruised, 1-2 an ounce. Then strain it for use.


or -- 89.
Take Sarsaparilla, 2 ounces. Bark of the Root of Mezereon, 1-2 a dram.
Boil these in the same manner as above, and add the liquori^^^.

90. ANTIPUTRESCENT LOTION.
Take of Lime Water, 16 ounces. Camphorated Spirit, 3 ounces. Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. --

91. ANODYNE EYE WATER.
Take Rose Water, 2 ounces. Tincture of Opium, 2 drams.
Mix. --

No. 92. VITRIOLIC SOLUTION.
Take Purified White Vitriol, 6 grains. Rose Water, 2 ounces. Tincture of
Opium, 30 drops.
Mix. --

93. DETERGENT GARGLE.
Take Decoction of Barley, 8 ounces. Common Vinegar, 1 ounce. Tincture of
Myrrh, 1-2 an ounce. Honey of Roses, 1 ounce.
Mix. --

94. AMTISEPTIC GARGLES.
Take Tincture of Roses, 8 ounces. Honey of Roses, 6 drams. Tincture of Myrrh,
1-2 an ounce.
Spirit of Sea Salt, sufficient to create an agreeable acidity, Mix. --

95. EXPECTORANT MIXTURE.
Take Pectoral Decoction, 8 ounces.
or each 3 drams. Ammoniacum Milk, Oxymel of Squills,

Mix. --

or -- 96,
Take Acetated Ammonia, 2 ounces. Distilled Water, 5 ounces. Myrrh in powder,
40 to 60 grains. Nitre purified, 1-2 a dram. Vitriolated Steel, 15 grains.
Balsamic Syrup, 6 drams.
Mix. -- DOSE. Three or four spoonfuls two or three times a day.

97. SALINE PURGING MIXTURE.
Take Epsom Salt, 6 ounces. dissolved in Boiling Water, 1 pint.
DOSE. Two or three spoonfuls every half hour.

98. OILY PURGING MIXTURE.
Take Oil of Castor, 2 ounces. Distilled Water, 5 ounces.
Unite them with a proper quantity of the Yolk of Egg, or Mucilage of Gum
Arabic, and then add Syrup of White Poppies, 1-2 an ounce.

Mix. -- DOSE. Two spoonfuls every second hour.

or -- No. 99.
Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds; 1 ounce. Manna, 1 ounce. Rochelle Salt. 6 drams.
dissolved in Infusion of Senna, 6 ounces.
Mix, as before directed, and let this be taken in the same manner.

100. PURGING PILLS.
of each 1-2 a dram. Take Jalap in powder, Polychrest Salt,

Venice Soap, 6 grains. Opium, 1 grain.
Let these be formed into six pills for a dose.

or -- 101.
Take Extract of Jalap, 10 grains.
of each 3 grains. Resin of Jalap, Calomel prepared, Opium, 1 grain.

Syrup of Roses, sufficient to form four pills for a dose.

102. SUPPOSITORY.
of each an equal quantity. Take of Honey, Common Salt,

Boil them to the consistence of a soft pill, and roll a portion of this up
about the thickness of a Goose's quill, and an inch long, which pass into the
rectum -- Aloes, Bitter Apple, (...) some other ingredient of this sort may be
occasionally mixed with them.

103. IRRITATING GLYSTER.
Take the Decoction for Glysters, 1-2 a pint. Tincture of Aloes, 1 ounce.
Common Salt, 2 drams. Linseed Oil, 2 ounces.
Mix. --

104. PURGING ANTIMONIAL MIXTURE.
Take Distilled Water, 5 ounces. Epsom Salt, 2 ounces. Tartarized Antimony, 2
or 3 grains. Syrup of Roses, 6 drams.
Mix. --

No. 105. CALOMEL BOLUS.
Take Calomel prepared, from 3 to 6 grains. Tartarized Antimony, 1-8 of a
grain. Conserve of Hips, 10 grains,
Mix, with the addition of Syrup, into a bolus, to be taken at bedtime, and in
the morning after the following draught:

106. PURGING DRAUGHT.
Take of Infusion of Senna, 2 ounces. Tincture of Aloes, 1-2 an ounce. Tincture
of Senna, 3 drams. Syrup of Roses, 1-2 an ounce. Spirit of Lavender. 2 drams.
Mix. --

107. VOLATILE OPIATED LINIMENT.
Take of Soap Liniment, or the Liniment of Ammonia, 2 ounces. Tincture of
Opium, 2 drams.
Mix. --

108. ALOETIC PILLS.
Take Extract of Bitter Apple with Aloes, 1 1-2 dram. Calomel, 20 grains. Oil
of Carraway-seeds, 10 drops.
Syrup of Roses, a sufficient quantity to form pills* DOSE. From ten to twenty
grains.

109. APERIENT SOAP PILLS.
Take Venice Soap, 1 1-2 dram. Rhubarb powdered, 1 dram. Calomel prepared, 10
grains.
Syrup of Ginger, sufficient to form pills.

DOSE. Twenty grains.

110. SEDATIVE LINIMENT.
Take Oil of Almonds, 1 ounce. -- Amber, from 10 to 20 drops. Tincture of
Opium, 1 dram.
Mix. --

111. SEDATIVE FOMENTATION.
Take the Heads of the White Poppy bruised, 4 in number.
Let these be boiled in forty ounces of Water to twenty, then add, Vinegar, 3
ounces. Fixed Ammoniacal Salt, 5 drams.


Mix. --

No. 112. OPIATED PLASTER.
Take Burgundy Pitch, a quantity sufficient to form a plaster of a proper
size, to which and ten grains of Opium.
113. OPIATED CORDIAL MIXTURE.
Take Peppermint Water, 6 ounces. Spirit of Juniper, 1 ounce. Opiated
Confection, 1 dram. Syrup of Saffron, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Three or four spoonfuls.

114. GLYSTER WITH BITTER APPLE.
Take the Common Glyster Decoction, 8 ounce^* in which boil Senna, 2 drams.
Bitter Apple, 1-2 a dram. strain, and add, Linseed Oil, 2 ounces. Honey, 1
ounce. Sal Ammoniac, 2 drams.
Mix. --

115. PURGING PILLS.
Take Resin of Jalap, or Scammony, 5 or 6 grains.
Rub these well with Mucilage of Gum Arabic, and Crumbs of Bread, sufficient to
form three or four small pills.

116. SEDATIVE GLYSTER.
Take Common Glyster Decoction, or Barley Water, 6 ounces. Tincture of Opium, 1
dram. Mithridate, 1 1-2 dram.
Mix. --

117. DEOBSTRUENT SOAP PILLS.
of each 1 dram. Take of Soap, Myrrh, Ammoniacum,

Ammoniacal Iron, 1-2 a dram. Rhubarb in powder, 1 dram.
Syrup of Ro^^^, ^^^^^ient to form pills.

DOSE. Fifteen or twenty g^^^s.

No. 118. OPIATED EMULSION.
Take Castor Oil, 2 ounces. Tincture of Senna, 1 1-2 ounce. -- Opium, 40 drops.
(...) Water, 5 ounces. Syrup of White Poppies, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Three spoonfuls.

119. OPIATED ANTIMONIAL POWDER.
Take Antimonial Powder, 4 grains. Opium, 2 grains. Rhubarb in Powder, 5
grains.
To be administered every eight hours.

120. VITRIOLIC MIXTURE.
Take of Blue Vitriol, 1-2 a dram. Distilled Water, 1 1-2 pint.
Mix. -- DOSE. From one tea-spoonful to two table-spoonfuls every two or three
hours, till it produces its effect.

121. BALSAM OF PERU DRAUGHT.
Take of Balsam of Peru, from 10 to 30 grains. Mucilage of Gum Aarbic,
sufficient to mix into a draught, with Peppermint Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Syrup of
Ginger, 2 drams
122. TEREBINTHINATE MIXTURE.
Take Ethereal Oil of Turpentine, from 1 to 2 drams. Mucilage of Gum Arabic,
sufficient to form a mixture, with Peppermint Water, 6 ounces. Tincture of
Rhubarb, 1 ounce. Syrup of Saffron, 1-2 an ounce,
DOSE. four spoonfuls two or three times a day.

123. INFUSION OF CARROT-SEED.
Take the Seeds of wild Carrot, 1-2 an ounce. Boiling Water, 1-2 a pint.
When cold, add to it a little Milk and Sugar, and drink it twice a day.

124. TEREBINTHINATE GLYSTER.
Take either of the Glysters, No. 25, 26. in which dissolve, by means of the
Yolk o^ Egg, Venice Turpentine, 2 drams.
No. 125. ANTIMONIAL NITRATED POWDER.
Take Antimonial Powder, 3 or 4 grains Nitre purified, 10 grains. Crabs Claws
prepared, 8 grains.
Mix. --

126. VOLATILE SALINE MIXTURE.
Take Water of Acetated Ammonia, 2 ounces. Polychrest Salt, 1 1-2 dram. Syrup
of Wild Poppy, 1-2 an ounce. Penny royal Water, 6 ounces.
Mix. --

127. MUSTARD WHEY.
Take Bruised Mustard Seed, 1 ounce. Cow's Milk, 1 quart.
Boil them together, and strain off the Whey.

128. GUM GUAIACUM DRAUGHT.
Take Gum Guaiacum, from 20 to 30 grains. Mucilage of Gum Arabic, sufficient to
form a draught, with Peppermint Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Compound Spirit of Ammonia,
from 20 to 30 or 40 drops. Syrup of Saffron, 2 drams.
129. GUAIACUM AND CALOMEL BOLUS.
Take of Gum Guaiacum, 20 or 30 grains. Calomel prepared, 3 grains. Oil of
Carraway-seeds, 2 drops. Conserve of Orange-peel, 20 grains.
Syrup of Saffron sufficient to form a bolus.

130. STIMULANT PLASTER.
equal parts. Take of Soap Plaster, Gum ditto,

Powdered Spanish Flies, 1-8 part of the whole.
Mix. --

131. ANTIMONIAL CORDIAL DIAPHORETIC BOLUS.
Take of Atimonial Powder, 3 grains.
of each 4 grains. Camphor, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn Aromatic Confection, 10
grains.

Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus.

No. 132. CAMPHORATED LINIMENT.
Take Camphor, 2 drams. Oil of Almonds, 1 1-2 ounce.
Mix. --

133. NAUSEATING POWDER.
Take ipecacuanha Powder, 1 grain. Nitre, or Aromatic Powder 10 grains.
To be taken every third hour.

134. DECOCTION OF SEMIRAUBA.
Take of Semirauba Bark, 2 drams. Distilled Water, 20 ounces boiled to 16
ounces.
DOSE. Four spoonfuls.

135. APERIENT COOLING SOLUTION.
Take Vitriolated Natron, 1 ounce. Nitre, 2 drams. Dissolve them in one quart
of Water Gruel, then add, Syrup of Roses, 1 ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Eight spoonfuls.

136. GENTLE APERIENT ELECTUARY.
Take Compound, Electuary of Senna, 1 1-2 ounce. Precipitated Sulphur, 3 drams.
Syrup of Roses, sufficient to form an electuary.

DOSE. Quantity of a Nutmeg.

137. TONIC INFUSION.
Take Peruvian Bark in gross powder, 2 ounces. Infuse it for three days in Lime
Water, 2 pints. strain and add, Tincture of Cinnamon, 1 ounce. Compound Spirit
of Lavender, 1-2 an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Two ounces.

138. ALUM WHEY.
Take Cow's Milk, 2 pints. Alum, 3 drams.
(...) together, and strain off the Whey for use.

Dose. Four ounces.

No. 139. OPIATED CHALYBEATE BOLUS.
Take of Ammoniacal Iron, 8 grains. Powder of Antimony, 6 grains. Opium, 1
grain (...) Tincture of Opium, 25 drops. Conserve of Roses, 1 scruple.
Syrup of Quinces, sufficient to form a bolus.

SECTION XVI. NERVOUS AFFECTIONS.
UNDER this head we are to enumerate those particular complaints in which the
nerves are primarily and principally concerned, as the causes from whence
disorders of this kind are produced. -- And here we shall be under the
necessity of reasoning from effects, because we cannot point out the precise
mode of the action o^ the nervous system; for neither from the labors of the
anatomists, nor physiologists we are certain of the structure of the nerves
themselves, nor of the means by which they produce such a wonderful variety of
actions in different parts of the human machine.

We, therefore, in order to avoid cavil, attempt to materialize, as (...) were,
qualities; and speak of the different degrees of influence which this part of
the system exercises; and attributes all complaints arising from this source,
either to that influence being too strong, mutable, or too weak, producing
SPASM, CONVULSION, o^ FALSY* -- according, therefore, as we find the different
parts subservient to nervous influence affected, so do we consider the
different states of its power. And if we add to the account the different
degrees of muscular irritability inherent in the habit, which we consider as
independent of nervous influence, yet for its continuance supported by that
influence, (27.) -- we shall be furnished with a tolerable clear idea of the
nature of different nervous complaints, so called, and be enabled to conceive,
pretty distinctly, the reasons why such an amazing variety (...) affections
(...) ^^ise from one and the same source; for in spasmodic affections, the
muscular fibers, thrown into a state of contractility, remain in that state for
some time; in convulsive, contraction, and relaxation take place, and alternate
with each other -- (145, 146, 147.) and in paralytic there appears to be a
deprivation, or debility of that influence; as well as sometimes an alteration
in the irritable power of the muscular fibers, with respect to the different
degrees they possess. In the order we have set down these nervous complaints,
shall we treat them* and first -- of spasmodic affections: --

CHAP. I.
1. TETANUS;
SO called from the Greek word teino, firmo -- and its varieties --
EMPROSTHOTONOS -- from emprosthon, ante, before -- episthon, pone, behind --
and TRISMUS, from trizo, stridor. These are marked by different appearances
arising from similar causes.

The TETANUS -- is a spastic rigidity of the whole body -- commonly continued
-- and involuntary; if it is bent forwards it is called EMPROSTHOTONOS -- if
backwards, OPISTHOTONOS -- when the jaws are fixed close, TRISMUS, or locked
jaw.

This complaint is most commonly met with in hot countries, where it is
considered as endemial, particularly in rainy seasons succeeding those which
are hot, or in such where there are sudden changes from extreme heat to extreme
cold, as in South Carolina -- among those who imprudently expose themselves to
the night air. -- In the more temperate countries it is very rarely met with as
an original disease.

DESCRIPTION. In tetanus the body grows stiff, and appears like a species of
wood, from the equable contractility of the muscles before and behind -- a
spasmodic affection is felt below the breast bone, verging to the spine -- when
the spasms are violent, most acute pains come on -- the face is red and
distorted -- the cheeks are drawn backwards -- the eyes fixed -- the jaw
sometimes locked -- the pulse most frequently is slower than what is natural --
and should blood be taken, its texture appears to be less firm -- there is much
difficulty in respiration -- the body is costive -- the natural actions only
are not suppressed, and the senses both external and internal, remain perfect
-- the ribs curve inwards -- and if the disease should be conquered, the
patient continues a long time in a state of great debility.

In the two succeeding varieties, the neck at first becomes immovable --
afterward, by strong spasms, it is drawn either backwards or forwards -- the
motion of the jaw and the act of swallowing are impeded -- the spasm under the
breast bone brings (...) others which are more violent -- the pulse is
sometimes slow and hard -- at others small, fluctuating, and irregular -- the
tongue grows rigid -- a bloody kind of froth issues from the mouth -- the
muscles of the spine and inferior extremities are drawn into similar action --
at length, either by the spasms becoming more violent, or from an epileptic
attack, the unhappy patient expires. -- In the third variety, the
distinguishing symptom is, a strong contraction of the muscles which elevate
the lower jaw.

These diseases are of the most dangerous nature, as very few survive the third
day, without they come on gradually; and in that case, if the patient can get
over nine or ten days, there is a greater chance of a recovery -- hence, from
the manner of the attack, it is that we are to estimate the degrees of danger.

CURE. The indications here, are to take off as speedily as possible the
spasmodic affections, and afterward to give tone to the system -- and these
are done chiefly by the bold administration of opium, and the warm bath; for
opium given in this way has been known to cure when every other remedy has been
tried in vain.

The quantity of opium to be given at a dose, and its repetitions, depend upon
the violence of the spasms -- therefore, from one or two to five grains may be
given every hour in any convenient vehicle, and the dose may, according to the
urgency of the symptoms, be occasionally increased; for in these cases it never
stupifies -- it may be advantageously used with other spasmodics, particularly
asafoetida or musk; and these likewise must be freely exhibited: glysters also
of opium dissolved may be thrown into the intestines, joined with oil or
turpentine, dissolved in the yolk of an egg; and these must be often repeated,
particularly if there is any difficulty of swallowing, or the jaws are closed.

The body must, if possible, be kept open by doses of manna, Polychrest,
Glauber's, or Rochelle salt, or that of Epsom, formed into emulsions, with oil
of almonds and tincture of senna -- or castor oil will, perhaps, better answer
the purpose. (See No. 97, 98, 99, 118.)

With regard to warm bathing, those who recommend it order the patient to lie
along the bath, and, whilst they are in it, frictions used -- when taken out,
to be wrapped up wet as they are in warm blankets, and put to bed, having,
whilst there, the abdomen fomented, and a bladder full of warm water laid upon
the stomach.

The copious exhibition of bark and wine, two or three ounces of the former,
and from two to three pints of the latter, in the space of twenty-four hours,
have, from their success, been recommended; along with which a blister was
applied to the back, and two or three ounces of mercurial ointment rubbed into
the throat, in the space of ten days.

Cold bathing has also been used with some efficacy, and seemed to answer,
though the patients were plunged into the water during the violence of the fits
of pain and spasm. -- Oil of amber and flowers of zinc have been recommended
amongst the powerful antispasmodics in these cases

From the very different methods used by practitioners i^ these complaints,
which seem, according to our conceptions, to produce such opposite actions on
the habit, and both proving successful, I should conclude, that the nature of
the habit constitutes the necessity for this deviation.

In constitutions, therefore, which were athletic and robust, with a hard full
pulse, I should not hesitate to bleed, and have recourse to the sedative mode
of opium, joined with antispasmodics, and warm bathing.

In such as were relaxed, and showed evident signs of debility, to the
stimulant and strengthening: of bark and wine, joined with antispasmodics --
blistering -- and the cold bath -- and in both, to the local application of
mercurial inunction.

And when it proceeded from any local affections, out off all communication
between the part affected and the common sensorium, by dividing the nerve, or
amputating the part; for this has proved successful, by removing the irritable
cause, which sympathetically induces such dangerous spasmodic affections -- and
in cases of locked jaw, a blister should be applied to the throat.

After the disease is conquered, in order to prevent a relapse, and recruit the
strength of the patient, we should have recourse to bark and chalybeates, cold,
or sea bathing, and such other modes as we have formerly recommended to people
recovering from other severe diseases.

2. CONVULSIONS,
from the Latin word convello, to shake or pull, are different in their
appearance, though affections of the nervous system, from the former; for in
all tetantic complaints the muscles continue for some time in a state of
contractility -- in these they suffer some agitation, by quickly contracting
and relaxing -- as if in tetanus (...) irritability was so powerful, and the
tone of the muscular fibers so strong, as to be capable to continue the
contractile force of the muscular fibers, brought on by the increased nervous
influence -- in convulsion, as if there was a deficiency of that irritable
power, and the tone of the muscular fibers so much in a debilitated state, that
relaxation must unavoidably take place, the muscular fibers, from the want of
that strength, being capable of maintaining that action only momentaneously --
or they may arise from the nervous influence, though more powerful than
natural, only being exerted in a less degree; for we find tetanus and
convulsion will arise from similar causes, (...) never run one into the other
-- hence have they been divided by authors into tonic, from teino, firmo, to
strengthen, and (...), from kloin^o, moveo, to move or shake.

CONVULSIONS, therefore, are to be considered as affections of the nerves, by
which the muscles are thrown into involuntary contractions and relaxations,
whilst, at the same time, the faculties of the mind, and the external senses,
remain perfect -- Now (...) these, though different in some peculiar
appearances, differ not from epilepsy, but acknowledge the same causes, both
remote or inducing, proximate or immediate, and similar methods of cure, we
shall proceed to speak of that disease:

3. EPILEPSY, OR FALLING SICKNESS;
so called from the Greek word epilambanesthai, disuper deprehendi, to be
seized from above. It has various other names, as morbus comitialis, because it
was observed frequently to attack people whilst in those assemblies called
comitia -- morbus sacer, divine disease, as appertaining to divinity for its
infliction or cure -- pu^rilis, because of its frequency in children --
Herculeus, on account of its violence, and difficulty of cure.

It is a sudden deprivation of the internal and external senses, with violent
alternate contractions and relaxations of almost the whole of the muscles of
the human machine, termed convulsive; -- of which there are said to be three
species -- cerebralis, from affection of the brain, when it owes its origin to
some imperceptible cause, preceded by no uneasiness, except giddiness or loss
of sight -- when it arises from any manifest cause, and is preceded by some
singular sensation, mounting upwards from different parts of the body to the
head it is termed sympathica, as deriving its origin from sympathetic
affections -- when from perceptible irritation the ^it is brought on, and
vanishes on the cessation of that morbid effect, occasionalis.

It differs from convulsion, from being accompanied by total insensibility --
in its returning at different periods, though not always regular -- in its
being a chronic disease, that often, without destroying life, continues for a
series of years.

DESCRIPTION. The attack of an epilepsy is something like that of an apoplexy,
the patient falls down suddenly, deprived of all sense* but then they do not,
as in an apoplexy, lie quiet, as if in a profound sleep -- in this it is quite
the reverse, for the whole muscular system is agitated by such violent
convulsive motions, that it is almost impossible for the attendants to prevent
the unfortunate afflicted from hurting themselves -- and should, during the
violence of the paroxysm, the tongue be caught betwixt the teeth, it will be
much wounded, bit through, or, perhaps, a portion bit off.

Sometimes the urine, faeces, and semen, from the violence of the convulsions,
will be forced from the places where they are deposited, and blood will pour
from the vessels of the nose and ears; besides, there is for the most part, a
good deal of froth foams from the mouth, even in the more slight attacks; -- as
soon, however, as the convulsions cease, the patients lie quiet, as if asleep;
and, in about an hour or two, recover their senses, feel sore and fatigued, yet
still are forgetful of all which has passed.

Some people have been so expert, as to counterfeit these fits so well, that
inattentive observers, though medical practitioners, have been deceived -- but
we must remark, that a total deprivation of sense and feeling distinguish the
true epilepsy -- if, then, by the application of strong volatile substances to
the nose, or suddenly pricking some sensible part, without mentioning the
intent, they show evident signs of feeling, the deception may be made obvious.

Sometimes, before the fit comes on, it will be preceded by weariness, stupor,
headache, or giddiness affecting the sight -- ringing in the ears -- frightful
dreams, palpitation of the heart, difficulty of breathing -- a fullness of, and
rumbling noise in, the belly -- the patients also will make larger quantities
of limpid urine than usual -- stammer in their speech, their countenance will
be pale, their extremities cold, and complain of a sensation of cold air
ascending to the head.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, wounds, blows, and fractures of the skull
-- any fluid deluging the brain, or filling the ventricles -- an inflammation
or mortification off the brain -- indurations there, or in the membranes --
concretions or polypi within the cavity of the skull, carries of the internal
surface of the skull -- projections of the bony substance pressing upon the
brain -- erosions, lacerations, or wounds of the nerves -- the retention of
accustomary evacuation, too great fullness or emptiness of the vascular system
-- strong passions or affections of the mind, particularly sudden and severe
frights -- noxious particles taken into the machine -- poisons, or an
hereditary taint; for few diseases it is allowed, are so hereditary as this, as
it is so easily transmitted from parents to their offspring. For the proximate
or immediate causes, see what has been said in treating of convulsions.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A convulsion of almost all the muscles of the body,
particularly those s^bservient to voluntary motion -- with a deprivation of all
sensation, and terminating in a state of insensibility and apparent sleep -- to
which, according to the opinion of some authors, may be added, a foaming of the
mouth, and a strong compression of the thumbs within the other fingers; for
these two are by them considered the certain symptoms of this disease.

CURE. As several of the precise causes cannot before death be discovered; or
were they, they would be irremediable -- we must content ourselves with general
modes of cure, and depend upon those applications which have, in a variety of
cases from experience, proved successful -- but where the causes are
perceptible, and within the reach of our art, they must be particularly
adverted to, and removed.

In this complaint, from undiscoverable causes, a variety of medicines, chiefly
empirical, have been recommended -- animal oil, oil of amber, (150.) -- flowers
of lady's smock, twenty grains, increased to thirty, (...) in powder twice a
day -- leaves of the orange tree, a handful boiled in a pint of water for two
doses, or in powder, half a dram twice a day -- blue vitriol. (139.) twice a
day -- ammoniacal copper, a quarter of a grain -- bark and valerian, joined
with cinnabar, (No. 140.) -- flowers of zinc, (139.) have been highly spoken
of, and said to have performed permanent cures.

According to different constitutional circumstances various methods have been
recommended.

1st, Where the fluids have been acrimonious -- or, 2d, in a state of fullness
-- 3d, subject to affections of the stomach, from indigestion or foulness --
or, 4th, irritation of the intestines, from worms or other acrid materials.

In the FIRST case, courses of mineral waters, which best agree with the
constitution -- goat's whey -- seawater -- with cold bathing.

In the SECOND. issues between the shoulders, or on the inside of the thighs --
setons in the neck -- occasional bleeding -- and the body should always be kept
open.

In the THIRD, emetics given now and then; for they are of service, not only by
unloading the stomach, but giving a general shock to the habit; and seem
calculated to remove irritation from acrid materials on the origin of the
nerves and spinal marrow, or from the dura matter, (26.) which is supposed to be
the immediate seat of this complaint.

In the FOURTH, purgatives, joined with calomel, should be administered
occasionally, intermediately giving anthelmintics. (196.)

The mind, at the same time, must be kept free from any uneasy sensation or
unruly passion -- the diet should be light, and easily digestible -- gentle
exercise -- free, clear air, and whatever will conduce to preserve an equable
circulation of the blood, and keep up perspiration, ought not by any means to
be avoided; for where there is a predisposition to convulsive attacks, any
irregularity is greatly conducive to occasion a renewal.

If the fits should be of long duration, mustard poultices and blisters are
advised -- thrusting a wedge between the teeth to keep the mouth open -- this
last is said to prevent even the fit, if applied on any warning being given
before the fit comes on.

When uneasy sensations are felt in the toes, feet, or legs, creeping upwards,
ligatures below the knee in these cases have been know to prevent the fit --
or, in whatever part these affections may be perceived, applying ligatures
above the part so affected.

Some, however, advise, during the fit, not any thing to be attempted, except
preventing the patients from hurting themselves, by getting the tongue between
the teeth; and they are of opinion, little can be done to shorten the paroxysm.

Amongst the most effectual remedies, I have generally thought musk, and have
used it with success, joined with diaphoretics and tonics -- and, in order to
prevent the accession or return, occasional emetics and aperients.

Inveterate and habitual epilepsies are irremediable, as is that also which is
hereditary, if it continues longer than the age of twenty-five.

That species callee the HYSTERIC, or UTERINE EPILEPSY, is distinguished from
the sex of the patient, from its being intermixed with, or preceded by,
hysteric affection -- by its following the time of the menses, at its periods
-- or being brought on by fear, or some such similar cause -- and by sensation
during the fit, being extremely obscure, though not altogether suppressed.

SYDENHAM says, in this complaint the patients exert unusual strength, bawl out
incoherently and inarticulately, and smite their breast; and that women most
subject to this disease, are those who have an uncommonly sanguineous habit,
and are high spirited.

Obstructed menses are generally accounted a cause of this disease, which makes
its appearance agreeable with the periods of this discharge.

Should it happen during the flux, besides those things indicated from their
discharge and painful excretion, volatile and antihysteric remedies are
required, such as oil of amber, spirits of vitriolic ether, castor or animal
oil liquor of hartshorn, camphor, musk, etc. (150.)

If from the menses being obstructed, such things should be administered as are
calculated to promote the discharge, as madder-root, (139.) tincture (...)
Spanish flies, (175.) ammoniacal iron, (139.) sabine, (149.) bathing the feet
in warm water.

Extract of hemlock, (152.) taken for two months, cured a girl seized with an
epilepsy, who for five years had experienced many fits.

Dividing the cartilaginous, or gristly substance of the ear with a knife, not
extremely sharp, and thick at the back, so that the division may be large, has
been successful, procuring and promoting, at the same time, a copious
evacuation, as long continued as possible.

CHAP. II. PASSIVE NERVOUS AFFECTIONS.
THE nervous diseases of which we have before treated are obviously of the
active sort; but there are others which are associated with inactivity, with
respect to muscular motion, and constitute a class of diseases opposite to the
former. These are ranked by authors under the terms DEBILITIES and PRIVATIONS;
because of the loss of, or weakened action of particular powers in the
constitution, which are the distinguishing characteristics of these diseases.

Dr. CULLEN arranges these under nervous diseases; and are known by that
propensity to sleep, muscular relaxation, and insensibility, which are their
constant concomitants.

But, in order to give a proper idea of these diseases, we should consider the
cause of the three predominant symptoms. If we revert back to what has been
said, page 27, on nervous incitability, and muscular irritability, and to the
introductory part of nervous affections, we shall not be at a loss to account
for two of the symptoms. -- As for the unnatural propensity to sleep, it is
supposed to arise from the nerves not being sufficiently supplied with their
proper fluid, either from a defect of the general mass of this enlivening
liquid, or from some compression on the nerves, by which its free distribution
is impeded.

Hence extreme cold, excessive discharges of blood -- congestion, and over
distensions of the vessels of the head, of sanguinary or serous fluid in the
ventricles, (27.) and cellular interstices of the brain -- extravasated blood
within the cranium -- depression, o^ fracture of the skull, forcing it upon the
brain, so as to compress the medullary part, and prohibit the circulation of
the nervous fluid from thence to the several organs of sensation, and
instruments of voluntary motion, may give rise to this symptom of somnolency,
or unnatural propensity to sleep.

Now, where this symptom predominates over the rest, those diseases come under
the general term COMATA, comatous or somnolent, from the Greek word koma,
somnus profundus, a deep sleep -- and are defined as diminution of voluntary
motion, attended with sleep, or a deprivation of sensation.

1. APOPLEXY -- APOPLEXIA;
so termed from the Greek apoplesso, desuper percutio, to be struck down, is a
deprivation of all the internal and external senses and animal motion, except
of the heart and chest, attended with oppressed respiration, and sleep more or
less profound. It has been divided into different species, from the cause --
first, into sanguineous -- 2d, serous.

DESCRIPTION. In the first of these, the apoplectic stroke, at the beginning,
is accompanied with a florid, or deep red color of the face, heat, and full
pulse; though, in the progress of it, the heat and color recede -- and, on
these accounts, it is understood to proceed from an internal cause -- the veins
grow turgid, the eyes half open, but not transparent -- the respiration
tolerably free, though attended with snoring, or rattling noise in the throat
-- and the pulse full and strong. It attacks more suddenly than the serous,
without much previous oppression, or unusual sleepiness.

In the second, from the beginning the pulse is weak, the countenance pallid --
the heat diminished, and it attacks old people, acrimonious, phlegmatic, and
debilitated habits -- and, before the stroke, it is apt to be preceded by an
unusual pain, heaviness, and giddiness of the head, and drowsiness -- after the
attack, the (...) are not turgid, the respiration is more straitened, and there
is more of the rattling and snoring, with frothy foaming from the mouth, than
in the other -- and the pulse is neither strong nor remarkably full, but
inclines to intermit.

Though the apoplectic fit will sometimes come suddenly on -- a^ others, it is
preceded not only by a pain and giddiness of the head, but a general torpor of
the senses -- slowness of speech -- a trembling and stupor of the extremities
-- hypochondriac and hysteric affections -- that oppression in sleep called the
nightmare -- involuntary flow of tears from the eyes -- ringing noise of the
ears -- and a deeper mode of breathing than is usual.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, surfeits, indigestion -- too long exposure
to the sun -- inordinate drinking, particularly about the age of sixty --
strong passions, hysteric affections, convulsions, serous collections,
libidinous excess, particularly in old men -- repulsion of acrid matter,
suppression of urine, sallivation interrupted by cold and other causes suddenly
-- blows and rounds of the head, poisons, noxious effluvia, an hereditary taint
-- or, indeed, whatever can increase the volume of blood, or occasion a
stagnation in the brain, o^ produce such effects there as will prevent the
nerves from exercising their influence, which is considered as the proximate or
immediate cause.

It generally attacks those who lead slothful lives -- are corpulent and full
of blood -- have short necks, are hard drinkers at advanced periods of life --
it is also most common in winter and rainy seasons, and is sometimes epidemic.

The CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. have been specified, page, 423. line 3.

CURE. Nature has sometimes, by her own efforts, relieved and remedied this
complaint, but seldom, by producing some copious evacuation, as bleeding from
the nose, looseness, or a large flow of saliva, though the cure is generally
dependent upon art.

Of whatever nature is the disease, our efforts must be exerted with all
possible expedition, to conquer the obstrustions, and take off the congestion
in the brain, according to the difference of the obstructing cause.

We must therefore, if the constitution of our patient will bear it, bleed
copiously, and from large orifices; first in the arm; if no relief accrues,
then in the foot; and, should the habit be full of blood, the operation must be
repeated. -- The application of cupping-glasses, with deep scarifications, to
the back part of the head is very useful, to unload more immediately the
vessels of the brain -- or blood may be taken from the jugular vein, running
(...) the neck into the head -- and if the patient recovers so far as to be
able to swallow, the evacuating plan must be persisted in -- hence quick and
powerful purgatives should be administered, (No. 146.) -- but, notwithstanding
the sanguinary evacuations, should the patient remain in a state of topor,
acrid stilating glysters, (No. 103, 114.) should be immediately throws up --
and, none of these efforts succeeding, blisters should be applied to the legs
and thighs -- some advise an actual cautery to the soles of the feet, to
stimulate and rouse the constitution.

The pulse in these cases is commonly soft, full, and slow; but when it is more
depressed and unequal, and the respiration deep and laborious, in proportion to
the excess of these alterations, death is nearer at hand.

If the disease be of the serous kind, with regard to bleedings we must act
cautiously; it is rarely requisite; if at all -- it must be moderate; or
leeches may be applied to the temples -- quick and brisk vomits are in these
cases most eligible, such as white vitriol, (168.) tartarized antimony, (168.)
or antimonial wine, (168.) -- after the operation, brisk purges should be
given, (17^.) -- blisters applied, and stimulating acrid glysters, (No. 103.
114.) -- emetic wine, tobacco smoke: and volatiles, should be given pretty
freely, (No. 36, 37.) and things similar -- and, though in the sanguineous
species sternutatories and emetics are prohibited, at least before the fullness
is absolutely taken off, for fear of bursting the vessels of the brain, in this
case they are highly beneficial.

Some are of opinion, that the compression productive of apoplexy seldom or
never deduces its origin from extravasation of serum; and think, that whether
blood or serum is the case, the same methods are to be pursued to accomplish a
cure, as bleeding -- brisk purging -- applying blisters to the back, legs, and
thighs -- volatiles and preparations of iron internally, out of the fit -- a
table spoonful of whole mustard seed, in gross habits taken two or three times
a day -- mustard seed or horseradish infused in wine, two ounces to be taken
at the same periods, I consider a more eligible medicine after the paroxism is
over; for it is certainly useful to endeavor to recover the tone of the
vessels, which are in these cases apt to be too torpid, and have been
debilitated by too great a degree of distension.

One common remedy, which is said to be efficacious in recovering patients from
the fit, has been advised, viz. a handful of (...) dissolved in a pint of
water, and poured down the patient's throat.

With respect to bleeding, some prefer opening the temporal (...), or jugular
vein -- and, when no threatening fullness appears; leeches applied to the head,
or scarifications with cupping-glasses to the hind head, are esteemed
preferable to general bleeding.

Blisters all over the feet are recommended by some, whilst others prefer their
application to the head -- but, in fine, those remedies are most to be
preferred, and the places of application for external remedies, which most
speedily promote evacuation and remove the torpor or inactivity of the vessels.

I should, therefore, upon the attack, recommend bleeding from the arm, and
that repeated, if necessary, till the general fullness was relieved -- and
blisters, or stimulant poultices to the feet, with purgatives -- afterward
local bleeding, and the (...) of stimulating volatiles -- and, in order to
prevent a relapse in full habits, (60.) the diet should chiefly be of the
vegetable kind, light and sparing, that too great plenitude might be avoided --
not more than six or seven hours sleep should be allowed at a time -- and brisk
exercise taken -- in lying down, the head should be elevated, and thinly
covered -- the body kept always open -- and all natural and habitual discharges
in due order, for fear any suppressions should take place -- hence cold and
(...) should be avoided, and frictions every night applied to the extremities.

But in weakened and relaxed habits, where the circulation is languid, the
vessels sluggish, as in those styled phlegmatic, (60.) issues and setons, as
preventives, are advisable -- cathartics and emetics should be now and then
administered -- brisk exercise, and dry frictions -- and courses of steel
waters; -- and, by way of medicine, mustard, horseradish, (165.) squills,
(176.) ammoniacal iron, (139.) myrrh, (165.) and such like, should be
occasionally given.

When this disease occurs from a blow, fall, or some external injury, the
patient falls down suddenly, or lies as if lifeless -- and, on coming to
himself, rejects the contents of the stomach -- blood issues from the nose and
mouth -- afterward the pulse rises, and becomes frequent and strong, attended
with heat.

Large and repeated bleeding is in this case requisite, and the evacuating
plan, to relieve the ill effects produced by a con^ussion on the brain -- and,
should there be any fissure, fracture or depression, chirurgical assistance is
absolutely necessary.

There are two other complaints, one called CARUS, from the primitive Greek
word karos, signifying a profound sleep -- (...) ^ETHARGUS, from lethe memoria
abolita, a loss of memory, and argos, ignavus, a kind of state of oblivion --
each of (...) are but a species of apoplexy; and as they require similar
remedies, according to the causes and constitutions they attack, little need
here be said on these complaints more than what (...) been advanced relative to
the cure of apoplexy.

CARUS is distinguished by the profound sleep from which the patient can scarce
be roused, and in which the patient is deprived of all sense and motion, though
having easy and free respiration -- and the LETHARGY, by the slight sleep, from
whence the patient is soon awakened, answering questions which he is asked,
moving his posture; but forgetting every thing, however recent; and on account
of that sluggishness, which is its concomitant, not caring for, or troubling
his head about any thing -- attended with increase of heat, -- slow fever -- a
full pu^^e, often remitting -- respiration not quick -- paleness and swelling
(...) the eyelids -- and cold sweat in the extremities.

The CATALEPSY, from the Greek word katalambano, retineo, from the retention of
the position in which the attack (...) made, seems to be of the same species;
but as it is attended with some striking peculiarities, it merits observation.

DESCRIPTION. The patients are suddenly seized with the fit, which returns at
intervals -- a topor of mind or body, or a headache precedes -- on a sudden
they are deprived of all sense and motion, and constantly retain the first
posture of the body and limbs, whether standing or sitting, in which they were
when attacked -- for the most part, after some minutes, seldom longer, they
rise as if from a sleep, the head being relieved from its load, and in a proper
situation to exer^ise its functions, though they are totally forgetful of the
time which passed in the fit; during which they not only lose all sense and
motion; but whatever may be done to them thus afflicted to produce sensation is
without ^ffect; for they neither feel, hear, nor see, though their eyes are
open, and continue fixed as if upon one object; and when they recover, it is
with repeated sighing -- still the pulse and respiration appear not affected.

This complaint is of the chronic kind, returns, like an epilepsy,
periodically; -- sometimes it is simple -- sometimes combined with other
diseases.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, mental affections -- close thinking --
suppression of some evacuations -- worms -- cold -- or collection of
contaminated serum within the skull.

The proximate or immediate, an irregular exercise of nervous influence,
whereby some of the nerves continue to act, whilst others remain in an inactive
state.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A deprivation of all sensation -- the patients
maintaining the position of the body and parts in the same state as when they
were seized, whilst the pulse and respiration continue as in health.

CURE. During the fit little is to be done, except to rouse the patient to a
sense of feeling, by the application of stimulant, volatile, and foetid
medicines to the nose -- or strong acid spirits -- rubbing the neck, spine, and
back part of the head with rectified oil of amber and spirits of wine,
camphorated solutions, or ether -- giving also acrid glysters, (No. 103. 114.)
-- and if there is reason to conclude any fullness of the head, leeches may be
applied to the temples, or the internal part of the nostrils may be scarified.

After the fit, we must have recourse to such things as are calculated to
remove the inducing cause -- hence, should it be occasioned by too serious
thinking or melancholy, in which the viscid humors stagnate in, or circulate
slowly through the vessels of the brain, we must apply to such remedies as thin
the blood, derive it from the head, and are appropriated to bring on an equable
circulation -- besides glysters and mild cathartics, we must bleed in proper
ti^^, advise brisk exercise, a judicious use of the non-naturals with light,
easy digestible and stimulating diet, -- bathing the feet in warm water --
general warm baths -- and courses of mineral waters, or milk whey -- with bark,
steel, or such other astringents as give strength and activity to the system.

If from sanguinary evacuations suppressed inducing a fullness of the habits,
as the menses or the piles -- or any neglect or omissions of accustomary
evacuations, from setons, issues, blisters, etc. -- we must endeavor to lessen
the quantity of circulating fluids, by bleeding in the feet -- or, if the
apprehension of an apoplexy, should strike us, the inside of the nostrils
should be scarified -- and afterward the suppressed evacuations should be
attempted to be renewed.

Should worms be the cause, to vermifuges we should have recourse, of the
milder (...) only, as Indian pink root, cowhage, (197.) powder of tanzy, (197.)
asafoetida, (149.) rhubarb, (173.) -- these promise to be more effectual than
the more acrid.

Should it occur from severe cold, and any signs of life remain, the patient
should be removed into a moderately warm place -- gentle friction should be
used, the feet bathed in warm water -- and the constitution invigorated by pure
wine, and warm cordials.

If from mental affections, medicines will avail but little -- the chief that
can be done is, to keep the natural evacuations regular, support the strength
of the system, and recommend cheerful company, traveling, and change of air

In general, our plan of cure will consist of the most active stimulants and
strengtheners -- emetics and brisk cathartics -- with blistering and cupping,
to which should be had occasional recourse.

2. PALSY -- PARALYSIS,
from the Greek paraluo, abolito, vel dissolvo, because of the debility and
apparent loss of motion and sense attendant.

It is said to be an abolition or diminution of motion or sense or both, in one
or more parts of the body.

When one side of the body is affected, it is called HEMIPLIGIA, from emisus,
dimidium, half, and plesso, percutio, to strike or affect -- when it affects
the superior or inferior parts of the body, transversely above or below the
diaphragm, (33.) -- PARAPLEGIA, from para, trans, across, and plesso.

When it affects any particular parts only, as the tongue, the lip, the
eyelid, etc. it is a local palsy.

Now all these depend upon the same cause, only it operates upon different
parts of the nervous system -- for when one side is affected, a compression of
one portion of the spinal marrow, (27.) called crus, is the seat -- when the
interior parts of the body, or the legs and feet only, or the belly also, and
all those parts at the same time, which are situated below the diaphragm, the
superior parts remaining in a sound state; in the former, the spinal marrow
about the first vertebrae of the loins, (32, 46.) is shook, or ruptured beyond
the middle of its substance -- in the other, from the same vertebrae, it is
totally flaccid through the whole inferior part of the spine, and altogether
juiceless, so that between it and the bony cavity there appears a remarkable
space -- or the spinal marrow may be affected much lower down, then the disease
discovers itself by inability in walking, and great weakness of the legs and
feet.

When the arms and hands are affected, the cause sometimes fixes itself within
the superior vertebrae of the neck and back, or passes to the nervous parts of
the arms, chiefly the wrists.

And in local palsy, the nerves themselves of the parts which supply the proper
influence to them, in order to perform their functions, are affected; or,
perhaps, in slight cases, it may be owing to a defect of muscular irritability;
for we know, where, from obstruction, or some other cause in the vascular part
of the system, by which the parts themselves will not be properly supplied with
blood, they are defective in, or lose their motion -- besides, we know great
cold will produce similar effects.

DESCRIPTION. Generally before a part becomes paralytic, patients perceive a
paleness there -- numbness and heaviness of the part -- and a want of activity
and quickness of motion -- after this, the part or parts thus affected are
deprived, in a great^^ or smaller degree, of the power of feeling, or motion,
or both -- they soon lose their firmness, grow flaccid, and become cold --
gradually wasting away -- or are subject to a soft pasty swelling -- the pulse
preserves no regularity -- most frequently it is small, (...), and slow,
sometimes quick and unequal. In the course of time, very often, nay, indeed,
generally in that species where the whole side is affected, the memory fails
greatly, as well as the power of reason -- nay, indeed, sometimes patients are
totally deprived of both.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are similar, at least many of them, to what
occasion apoplexy, such as sanguinay or serous fullness -- suppressed
evacuations, inebriety, spasmodic colic, spasms of the inferior parts -- a
congestion of water or matter among the membranes of the brain -- wounds of the
spinal marrow or brain -- a retrocession of external eruptions, scorbutic
acrimony, the division of a nerve, sudden fright, an injudicious exhibition and
use, as well as the fumes, of mercury, arsenic, and lead -- old age, convulsive
epileptic disorders -- a flaccidness of the brain, and debility of the nervous
system -- or touching, it is said, the fish called torpedo -- or, in fine,
whatever can prevent the proper power of nervous influence, or destroy muscular
irritability -- all which will produce the proximate or immediate causes,
before recited, page 428, where also the characteristic signs are specified.

CURE. Whatever may be the cause, our indications are, to endeavor to remove
that which proximately, as well as more remotely, contributes to impede the due
influence of the nervous power, by intercepting the influx of the fluid in the
nerves, by which it is said that influence is promoted; and attempt so to
strengthen the affected part, and the whole nervous system, by which their
strength and activity may be recovered.

Now, as the hemiplegia and paraplegia seem to be so nearly allied to apoplexy,
as they are occasioned by the same causes, only differently situated, that they
require similar remedies, we shall therefore only mention them in general, and
refer for further particulars to what we have said when speaking on that
subject -- at least for the recent attacks of the palsy -- and these must be
regulated by the nature of the constitution.

Such as bleeding in full habits -- glysters and purgatives, to continue
copious alvine discharges for many days, (though in old people this must not be
done) and bathing the feet in warm water -- if accompanied with internal
spasms, and there should be great commotions of the blood, diaphoretics of the
milder class, as antimonials, (180.) joined with absorbents, (191.) and spirit
of vitriolic ether, (150.) -- should we suspect the blood to be in too viscid
a state in these complaints succeeding an apoplexy, myrrh, guaiacum, asa
foetida, ammoniacum, (165.) joined with fixed alkalies, (185.) may be
administered, and continued; and also chalybeate waters and liniment of
ammonia, or soap, would at the same time, rubbed freely down the spine, be of
great use.

In serous cases, and debilitated habits, emetics should be given, from time to
time, in a dilute state, and taken gradually, (No. 11.) or strong infusion of
horseradish or mustard seed, till their effects are produced as fully as
required -- and errhines, (157.) may be applied -- setons may be cut, and
issues, as near the source from whence the parts are affected as possible; --
and when the paraplegia arises from some injury in the vertebrae, and at the
part there appears a projection, a caustic applied on each side of the
vertebrae, and an issue made by that means, is often a certain remedy.

In more obstinate species of these diseases, in order to make a revulsion, and
evacuate gradually those humors from their origin, the stimulant aperient
pills, (No. 142.) and volatiles united with some of the stimulant
antispasmodics (149.) are recommended, taken in a decoction of the woods, (No.
88.)

With respect to external applications, in order to promote sensation and
motion, volatiles -- essential oils -- balsam of Peru -- dry frictions with
rough cloths, or flannels impregnated with the fumes of some of the pungent
gums, applied to to the head, parts affected, and the spine, will be of use.

But the most capital and efficacious are the Bath waters -- or, where they
cannot be afforded, warm baths, sprinkling, whilst in the bath, upon the part
affected, a solution of vitriolated iron. (139.)

Stimulating the parts with nettles has produced good effects, as well as
electricity, particularly in local palsies.

The diet of the patients thus affected should be of the warm aromatic kind,
taking with their viands freely of mustard, which also may be applied
externally, and horseradish -- drinking a glass of mustard wine twice a day --
or a table-spoonful of whole mustard seed may be administered in a glass of
wine -- they should use brisk exercise -- sleep moderately -- and live in a
warm dry air -- cold must be avoided -- and connubial indulgencies very rarely
gratified.

When the palsy is the consequence of some other complaint besides the
apoplexy, whether rheumatism, gout, scurvy, scrophula, colic, or the venereal
disease, the mode of cure will require some variation, adapted to the
peculiarity of the case.

Though these complaints frequently terminate fatally in a short time, yet they
sometimes continue for a series of years. When the sense of feeling remains,
there is much more probability of a certain recovery than in cases where both
motion and sensation are lost. A palsy of the lower extremities and abdomen is
for the most part fatal, and often attended with a mortification of the
diseased parts.

Should the part, however, be painful, have perception, retain a degree of
warmth, and does not waste away or a tremor comes on, there may be some
expectations of a recovery; but more particularly if a sensation of creeping or
pricking be perceived -- sometimes febrile affections coming on have been the
means of curing the complaint -- and a looseness has been of evident advantage
tending to the same end.

SECTION XVII. MADNESS -- INSANIA.
THIS is divided into two species -- MANIA, furious madness and MELANCHOLIA,
glooomy madness. Notwithstanding which division, authors have considered them
only as different degrees of the same disease; which is defined an alienation,
of the mind, or deviation from the rules of sound reason -- or a constant
delirium without fever.

This doctrine has been long given us by ARETAEUS (...) TRALLIAN. The former
asserts, that melancholy is the beginning and origin of mania, into which it
glides more from incre^^^ that any other cause -- the latter, that mania is
nothing more than melancholy brought to a greater degree; as, on account of
their close connection, the transition becomes extremely (...) from one disease
to the other. And HOFFMAN, imbibing the opinion, advances, that from attentive
practice and observation we learn, that both diseases arise from the same
origin and containing cause, and vary only in degree and time of invasion, that
melancholy may be justly received as the primary dis^^^^ but mania as its
exacerbation and accidental effect -- which connection daily and every close
observation confirms; for melancholic people, particularly if the disease has
been of long standing very readily fall into mania; which easing, melancholy
(...) turns again; although afterward, at certain periods, they (...) again be
revisited by mania.

DESCRIPTION, The MELANCHOLIC are thus affected they appear sad, dejected,
dull, without any real cause -- (...) are seized with fear and trembling --
encouraged with diffic^^^ -- are watchful -- love solitude -- prone to anger,
and mutab^^ enquiring after the most minute trifles, covetous, but soon (...)
simple and profuse -- their habits are costive; sometimes has (...) no stools
at all; sometimes they are round and dry, surrounded with a black bilious fluid
-- they make small quantities of uri^^ and that acrid and bilious -- have great
flatulence at the pi^ (...) the stomach -- putrid eructations, foetid and
offensive; and some times a sharp liquid with bile is rejected -- the face is
pallid -- the pulse is small, dull, and weak -- and the sick are at (...)
extremely voracious.

The MANIACAL, roused to anger, are wild with rage -- some run a great way --
some bawl out violently -- some fly from the ^^ght of men into solitude, and
only converse by themselves -- some cut and tear their limbs. -- In the height
of the disease, during sleep they are disturbed with vision, are immoderately
lascivious, and openly, without fear or shame, gratify their desires -- but
when the disease abates, they are quiet, stupid, and sorrowful -- also, coming
to the knowledge of their malady, (...) are oppressed with grief at their own
calamity and misery.

These are the symptoms which denote the presence, or declining state of mania.
The following are such as appear (...) the attack, at least a few of them which
have been (...) observed.

The eyes are red and suffused with blood -- there is an (...) vibration of the
eyelids -- their usual mode of conduct is (...) -- pride manifesting itself in
their countenance, voice, and (...) -- they grind their teeth -- conceive a
hatred for this or particular person -- get little sleep -- have violent
headache, (...) quickness of hearing -- ringing of the ears, and musical (...).
To this place is worthy to be referred the remarkable (...) of limbs, and
incredible capability of bearing cold, of (...) maniacal subjects, in the
increase of disease, are possess^^ (...) in women, the collection of blood in
the breasts. (...) people afflicted with madness are not subject to be affected
(...) epidemic disease; and are often cured of other (...) under which they
labor, or have their progress (...) during their state of insanity.

The greatest part of this description, exact and elegant as it (...) been
handed down from ARETAEOS, and copied by most (...) moderns: and in examining
the whole of the symptoms, (...) strike us pretty clearly that they must flow
from some (...) of those parts which are considered as the seat of (...),
sensation, and voluntary motion; and these are the (...) portions of the brain.
Even from HIPPOCRATES the (...) have been said to be borrowed, "for," says he,
speaking (...) the brain, from this part derive we wisdom, and under^, ^ear,
see, and know good from bad; and also from (...) we insane.

CAUSES. Those which are considered the remote or inducing (...) ^ental or
corporeal -- the mind being too strongly, or too (...) continued fixed upon one
object -- grief, fear, hope, joy, (...) love, totally absorbing the faculties
of the mind -- (...) dread of Divine vengeance, from the false principles (...)
religion; -- the membranes of the brain indurated -- dryness (...) the brain --
of where the disease is hereditary -- too sedentary life -- poisons possessed
of a stupifying power -- immoderate (...) excesses -- suppression of natural or
proper evacuations -- and sometimes it is the effect of preceding febrile
diseases.

The proximate or immediate of melancholic affections may be placed to the too
great applause of thick blood, to the weakened and flaccid brain, and its
stagnation and difficult progress -- but the origin of mania, and foundation to
the more violent and impetuous motion of the thick and melancholic blood
through the vessels and fibrellae of the brain, or parts of the brain; whence
arises, on the one hand, too weak influence, on the other, too strong, of the
nervous energy.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. MELANCHOLY, or GLOOMY MADNESS, is said to be a partial
insanity without indigestion; or a difficulty of digestion being a concominant
symptom; for we say people are insane, when the relations of things altogether
false are conceived in the mind, so that either the passions or actions of
mankind may be exerted irrationally, or not within the limits of reason -- and
it is called partial, because melancholic people will do many things, and think
on many points, not with proper or well-regulated judgment; yet in some they
act and think with some degree of sound reason.

MANIA, or FURIOUS MADNESS, is universal insanity, where the whole ideas are so
generally deranged, that no act, or thought, is conducted within the bounds of
cool and deliberate reason.

CURE. All species and degrees of madness which are hereditary, or which grow
up with people from their early youth, are incurable; and so, for the most
part, are all maniacal cases that are above a year's standing, originate they
from whatever source they may.

Very often the remains, or dregs of some particular disease, as intermittents,
smallpox, nervous fever, give rise to different degrees of foolishness, or
madness, termed amentia -- the cure in this case must be attempted by
nourishing diet, clear air, moderate exercise, and the use of wine; not by
evacuations, which in almost all other cases of insanity are generally thought
necessary, unless the constitution of the patient be such as absolutely to
forbid them.

And here we must enquire what kinds the patient can be^^ best; and these
should be proportioned to his strength; else from being violent, though they
may, perhaps, cure furious madness, they will be apt to bring on incurable
dejection (...) mind, and melancholy.

If patients, therefore, are of a strong habit of body, full, (...) symptoms of
mania from melancholy make their appearance or, in the earlier stages of
melancholy, the vessels show signs plenitude, bleeding may be had recourse to,
either in the arm, jugular vein, and sometimes by cupping, if any affection of
the head requires it; o^, should the patient's weakness forbid the taking away
much blood, leeches may be applied to the temples.

In recent cases though this is generally attended with most success; but if of
some continuance, similar advantages have not been derived from it.

In melancholy, however, bleeding must be sparingly used -- in mania more
freely -- and some consider opening a vein in the arm sufficient -- bleeding
the patient in an erect posture till near fainting -- which proves some
diminution of the fullness of the vessels of the brain taking place.

Vomiting, in weakly people, with ipecacuanha, (168.) -- in the more robust,
with antimonial wine, or tartarized antimony has been thought preferable,
(168.) -- in mania it may be a doubtful remedy, by determining too freely to
the head, in melancholy it may be more freely used.

Purging is extremely useful -- the most efficacious cathartics have by some
been thought infusion of senna, (No. 106.) quickened with one or two drams of
the tincture of jalap, instead of tincture of aloes, and senna -- but the
frequent use of cooling purges have, from experience been recommended. (No.
147, 148.)

But should there be an obstruction of the menses in women, or the piles in
men, a reproduction of these evacuations are thought necessary -- the aloetic
purges, (173.) (No. 106. 108.) then will be the most proper -- and these
evacuations by vomit and stool require to be alternately repeated.

Diuretics have been considered by some of the greatest moment, especially if
any degree of fever should accompany insanity -- but this will happen more in
maniacal cases; for melancholic subjects, for the most part, make too much
water -- the most proper diuretics are, the vegetable alkali prepared, (191.)
and the diuretic salt, (176.) and these may be given in large doses
alternately, two or three times a day.

Besides these, discharges by the pores of the skin are to be promoted.

HOFFMAN particularly recommends the warm bath, who has (...) numerous
instances of melancholic and maniacal cases cured by this means. Dr. CULLEN is
of a contrary opinion, and has found it rather hurtful to maniacs -- though to
rigid melancholic habits it may be useful, or exhibited in form of a partial
half bath, pouring at the same time cold water upon the head and superior parts
of the body.

From camphor having been said to prove successful in forming radical cures, Dr
LOCKER gave it in large doses, but without success -- though he found camphor
dissolved in vinegar had good effects -- he thought then the efficacy might
depend upon the vinegar -- he gave one ounce and a half of distilled vinegar
every day, after having first prepared the patient by bleeding and purging,
which he sometimes occasionally repeated -- eight by this method, and none of
them took more than from six weeks to three months, had the cure completed. He
recites the following effects, soon after they began the use of vinegar --
their eyes lost their wild staring look, and presently after became calm and
quiet, it acted chiefly by sweating; and the ^ore they sweat, the sooner they
were cured -- the menstrual discharge in such as were obstructed, or had too
little of this salutary evacuation, was promoted or increased. From this
account, and from the simplicity of the medicine, it ought certainly to undergo
farther trial.

Blistering the head has been thought useful -- and, perhaps, it may, says Dr.
MEAD, in cases of long standing; but, in preference, he recommends shaving the
head after the manner of the ancients, and rubbing it often with warm vinegar;
and also passing a seton in the nape of the neck. Dr. CULLEN is of a contrary
opinion, for he says, in recent cases, blistering the head has been found
useful in inducing s ^leep; and when it has this effect, the repetition is
proper -- but in maniacal cases that have lasted for some time, blistering has
not appeared to be of any service -- and in such cases he has not found
perpetual blisters, or any other form of issue, prove successful.

However, setons and issues I consider in all cases of mania extremely
serviceable, by preventing a fullness coming on the habit, from the constant
drain, and this in an easy and gradual manner.

A frequent use of the cold bath in cases of mania is very serviceable; for
CELSUS says, nothing is so beneficial to the head as cold water. In order,
though, to render this remedy the most effectual, the maniac should be plunged
into the cold bath by surprise, and detained in it for some length of time,
frequently pouring cold water upon the head; so, with the assistance of fear, a
cooling effect may be brought on -- this has often been useful; as has also the
application of ice, snow, o^ the clay-cup to the naked head.

To procure rest, Dr. MONRO used to give two drams of borax, camphor, musk, and
other medicines of that class, have been preferred to opium, in order to
procure sleep; for in maniacal cases opium is usually forbidden -- but there
are instances, where, in large doses, it has proved a cure -- and, perhaps, if
it were tried oftener, more powerful effects may be derived from it -- and
after large evacuations and proper bleeding, and where there was no appearance
of inflammatory affections of the brain attending mania, and the patients were
restless, I should not hesitate in having recourse to it, for two or three
times; which, should it be found to exasperate the disease, might be easily
left off -- if otherwise, the effect would authorize the pursuit.

Constant and hard labor has been recommended; because it is said, forced
attention is a very certain means of diverting the (...) from pursuing any
train of thought; and from hence its utility -- also a journey carried on for
any length of time; during (...), complete cures of mania have been known to be
effected* (...) diverting the attention from disagreeable and painful
affections.

These are the remedies which are generally applied in cases of mania, or in
such cases of melancholy as seem to be approaching (...) that state -- but
there are some deviations necessary to be observed where insanity is in its
primary state, without such ap^^^^t tendency.

(...) both cases, however, costiveness ought to be avoided by (...) of gentle
aperients, particularly in melancholy, the dras^^ ^^rges are better omitted.

Blood-letting will here be seldom necessary, except under the ^^^^^cular
circumstances before specified. (p. 434.)

^arm bathing is also preferable to cold bathing; because we (...) here the
nervous system in too torpid a state, and (...) the fluids to be solicited
externally, and not thrown too (...) internally, lest want of proper
incitability of the nerves (...) permit the internal parts to be too much
loaded, from (...) vessels being incapable of producing re-action adequate to
the ^^ternal force.

Nor should opium in cases purely melancholic be had recourse (...); for the
action of its sedative power would contribute to add (...) to the nervous
torpor.

The diet in maniacal cases ought to be perfectly light and thin, (...) such as
is neither stimulating nor nourishing -- hence vege^^^^^ diet is the most
proper -- but should in melancholic cases be (...) with caution, as, where the
stomach is torpid, such viands (...) apt to occasion symptoms arising from
indigestion.

As nothing is more conducive to the recovery of patients la^^^ring under
insanity than proper management, to this point (...) attention ought to be
paid; and in the two states of the (...) different modes ought to be adopted.

The violence of the mania is to be restrained, and the despondency of the
melancholic to be dissipated -- the former we are to keep in subjection by
chiding and threatening -- and it must be remembered, that mad people are
always cowardly, and can be awed by the l^ok of a very expressive countenance
-- and when those who have the charge of them once can impress them with the
notion of fear, they will readily submit to any thing required -- and this is
much better, and infinitely more humane than beating them, or chaining them
down in dark cells or rooms, as was formerly the custom when they were
outrageous -- the strait waistcoat, or tying their legs down to the foot of the
bed, if the former succeeds not, will be sufficient for preventing them from
injuring themselves or others.

The latter should be encouraged and soothed, and diverted by concerts of
music, or any other pleasing entertainment, in which they have been known to
take delight whilst in their rational state.

A mistaken humanity often prevents the friends of unfortunate insane people
from putting them under the care of strangers, and sending them from home --
this, however ought to be complied with, for, whilst at home, and amongst their
friends, the cause and continuance of unpleasing ideas are apt to be too
frequently renewed, and subjection is infinitely more difficult to be acquired;
still, the prevention of the one, and the attainment of the other, are
essentially necessary.

In these cases the head is apt to be affected with fullness, therefore, where
circumstances will permit, the patients ought to be kept as much in an erect
posture as possible -- indeed, should there be no perceptible symptoms which
indicate such a preternatural fullness, or an increased force of the
blood vessels (...) the brain; for an horizontal position always augments the
fullness and tension of these vessels, and therefore may increase the
too-powerful action of the brain.

To prevent a relapse, which is very apt to recur, the plan of medicine and diet
here laid down ought to be repeated for a considerable time, at proper
intervals, after the patient has recovered -- and chalybeate waters and the
cold bath will also be highly proper, to strengthen the whole frame, and
prevent a return of this unhappy disease -- from which to relieve our patients
must afford satisfaction inexpressibl^.

SECTION XVIII. AFFECTIONS OF THE LUNGS.
1. COMMON COUHG, OR TUSSIS.
THIS complaint is so common, and so often experienced by almost every
individual, that a minute description seems unnecessary; but as from neglect it
may be, and is frequently, attended with disagreeable consequences, it will be
useful to see (...) these originate, in order to show the necessity of
attending to this complaint, though apparently trivial, and taking it off by
(...) readiest and easiest means, in order to prevent subsequent mis^^^^^; --
to this, which is occasioned by what is called catching (...) cold, and the
hooping, or convulsive cough, we shall confine ourselves.

(...) of the first we say, a cough is a concussion of the lungs (...) at
uncertain periods, induced by some irritating cause (...) on their internal
surface, or that of the windpipe, (29.) (...) quick reiterated action of the
muscles of the ribs, (...), (33.) and belly; and this irritating cause by some
(...) obstructs perspiration, and determines the matter, which (...) pass off
by the perspirable pores, too freely to that or^^^, or part leading to it --
and chiefly, as it is termed, from ^^^hing cold, for the most part attended
with hoarseness, run^^^g of the nose, sneezing, chillness, and sometimes with
slight degrees of febrile affections. People thus affected generally cough up
mucus from the lungs, now and then of a yellowish color, and viscid; which,
when expectorated, puts a period to (...) of coughing for that time.

From what has been said, the indications of cure will be (...).

To remove the irritating cause, and guard the lungs, so that, (...) it is
removed, they shall not feel too sensibly the effects of that stimulus -- and
these are performed by restoring perspiration -- evacuating the morbid mucus,
sheathing its acrimony, rendering the lungs insensible to its effects -- and
giving proper strength to the vessels of the lungs; for, by the repeated shocks
and distension, they become debilitated.

And these will be accomplished, for the most part, by very easy means -- by
avoiding cold -- keeping the breast warm, by wearing flannel over it, drinking
warm liquids in the morning, and at meals warm water, or inhaling the vapor --
taking the compound decoction of barley, linseed, or bran-tea, with honey and
nitre -- or drinking at night barley-water, sweetened and warm, in which is
dissolved the yolk of an egg, or taking any gentle diaphoretics, (178.) or
small doses of antimonial powder, (180.) -- these, or some of these, early
applied, will readily prove effectual.

But should the complaint be obstinate and violent, bleeding may be necessary,
and a spare diet -- saline, and antimonial medicines may be given, (No. 6 to
9.) to which may be added camphorated tincture of opium, (152.) or nitrous
medicines, (No. 2.) may be joined with antimonials, and some of the liquids
before spoken of adhered to -- the body should also be kept open, and the
urinary discharge promoted, by gentle aperients and diuretics -- linctusses and
emulsions, (No. 81 to 84.) may also be occasionally administered; and are very
useful, if swallowed gradually, particularly should there be a tickling upon
the top of the windpipe, which sometimes appears to be the principal cause of a
cough, especially in the beginning.

At the latter end of the complaint, if the cough should continue, though not
violent, but come on now and then, and there should be expectorated tough,
viscid mucus, the ammoniacal mixture, (No. 141, 143.) given three or four times
a day, I have found serviceable, not only in promoting an easy expectoration,
but strengthening the vessels of the lungs -- and where I find people subject
to frequent returns, after the cure, benefit may be derived in the prevention,
by bark given twice a day for a little time.

During the severity of the complain^ the patient should (...) advised to keep
much within doors, avoid the night air, be rather warmly clothed --
particularly keep the feet warm -- and by these means success is certain.

But should the complaint be long neglected, from the repeated stresses laid
upon the lungs by continually coughing, hard glandular tumors, called
tubercles, are not rarely formed -- sometimes the vessels of the lungs are
ruptured, by the blood, being so often too forcibly thrown into them -- in both
of which, consumptions have been the consequence -- the cough then begins to
put on another aspect, and induce a disease of a very serious nature; for the
relief of which the reader is referred to Pulmonary Consumption. (331.)

2. HOOPING, OR CONVULSIVE COUGH.
It is so called from the violence of the concussions, and that particular
noise of hooping which is observable in the fits of coughing -- also CHINCOUGH,
from the Dutch word kincken, to ^^nt -- in medical language TUSSIS CONVULSIVA,
or PERTUSSIS.

DESCRIPTION. In the beginning chiefly there is a dry cough, in which there is
not thrown up any, or a very small quantity of thin serum, more or less acrid
-- sometimes the cough is moist, and then a blackish or blue mucus, often
extremely tenacious, is evacuated -- at the same time, the extremities grow
cold -- the bowels are costive -- the urine is thin -- and the blood is forced
up copiously, and with great force, into the superior parts, breast and head;
from whence, during the fit, the face grows turgid with blood -- the veins
swell -- the arteries beat stronger and quicker -- the eyes appear prominent --
the tears (...) -- the eyelids puff up -- and sometimes the blood,
particularly if a sneezing comes on, is forced out from the nostrils --
^^^^times the vessels of the lungs are ruptured, and there arises ^^itting of
blood -- a hiccough often accompanies it, and very (...) vomiting. -- With
respect to the convulsive affection, it (...) not appear generally till the
second or third week from the attack; 'till that time, it appears like a common
cough, (...) then it comes on at different times of the day, and conti^^^ till
some mucus is thrown up by the lungs, or the contents (...) the stomach
evacuated, and then it ceases -- when it has put (...) these appearances, its
time of continuance is uncertain; it (...) go off in a few weeks, or remain
some months. -- Before (...) ^^ts come on there is some warning given, chiefly
an uneasy (...) in breathing, and children will at this time catch (...) of any
thing that is near them, in order to support them^^^ves during the fit of
coughing, which they dread.

(...) there are some cases where this arises from a peculiar in^^^^on, that
appears only like a common catarrh -- still it is (...) commonly, indeed,
almost always, with a peculiar kind of and, different in different cases,
during some parts of the (...) called hooping, occasioned by many expirations
being ^^^vulsively made, rapidly succeeding each other, whence a (...) quantity
of air must be thrown out of the lungs; which ^^^^^^stance necessarily requires
a full inspiration to succeed -- (...) this act the air rushes with unusual
rapidity through the (...) part of the windpipe, and occasions that particular
(...), which forms the striking and characteristic marks of the (...).

Various have been the opinions of authors respecting the (...) of this disease
-- but if to what we have said, the occasional (...) accidental causes, which
are apt to bring on the fit, be added, (...) as violent exercise -- full meals
-- food difficult of digestion -- irritation of the lungs from smoke, dust, or
disagreeable odours -- strong passion -- or other considerable emotions of the
mind -- the relief occasioned by vomiting or expectoration of mucus freely, and
the propensity to coughing being less when the stomach is empty -- we shall not
hesitate in concluding the lungs or the windpipe are the parts of the
constitution affected; and that predisposition in the parts to feel the effects
of peculiar infection form the immediate causes of the disease, and also
authorize us to say,

That the HOOPING-COUGH is a reiterated and violent concussion of the pulmonary
organs, induced by the convulsive action of the muscles of ribs, diaphragm, and
belly, brought on by the stimulus of peculiar infection acting upon the lungs
or windpipe, attended with a sense of strangulation, repeated sonorous
inspiration, and often with vomiting and expectoration.

CURE. The indications of which are, to correct or evacuate the peculiar
infectious matter -- to alleviate and lessen the violence and duration of the
cough -- and prevent those mischiefs which are likely to arise in the habit, or
parts of it, from its excess.

But as we know of no means either to correct or clear the constitution of the
morbid matter creating the disease, on these we can make no attempt -- we must
therefore imitate nature in her efforts, by such means as experience, founded
on the knowledge of the laws of the animal economy, will point out to us, in
accomplishing the two succeeding indications.

In full habits, therefore, if the face swells much in coughing, looks red, and
also the eyes, and other appearances of local plenitude show themselves,
bleeding is essentially useful; and this must be repeated so long as such
appearances render it necessary -- but this must not be pushed too far; for
then we should increase the convulsive affection -- hence, in the slighter
kinds of the disease it may be omitted -- the body should be kept moderately
open, not less than two or three stools procured every day -- violent purging,
for the reason above recited, might be hurtful.

Gentle vomiting every day is beneficial in the forenoon, by small doses of
antimonials, one or two spoonfuls of the emetic mixture, (No. 11.) for a dose,
or as much as will produce the effect -- and should any feverish symptoms
attend, a quarter or half a grain of tartarized antimony may be given at night
with the powder, (No. 2.) lessening or increasing the dose according ^o the
constitution; for this mode not only does good by the shock it gives to the
habit, assisting expectoration, and clearing the stomach, but by determining
the fluids to the surface, (...), and keeping the body open; which last if five
must be added -- by persisting in this mode, till evident symptoms of amendment
presented themselves, then omitting the vomit to every second or third day,
afterward giving it once or twice a week, has been crowned with desired
success.

But, notwithstanding, should symptoms appear indicative of an inflammatory
tendency on the lungs, which will be shown by difficulty of breathing, ^ever,
and quick pulse, where no coughing for some time has preceded, blisters then
should be applied, particularly on the chest.

Rubbing the pit of the stomach, and down the spine, with equal parts of
rectified oil of amber and spirits of wine, where there has been no
inflammatory symptoms, or febrile tendency; or after these had gone off, has
been considered of great use; but bleeding and purgatives, when necessary, have
preceded their use.

Small doses of hemlock, (152.) have been given with apparent success; and is
by much the best amongst that class styled specifics.

Toward the close, where mucus appears viscid and difficult to expectorate,
the ammoniacal mixture, (No. 141. 143.) is not an unprofitable medicine.

The stimulating tonic mixture, (No. 144.) has been spoken of with exaggerated
praise, but I think too indiscriminately -- early in the disease I would never
recommend it, particularly in full habits with an inflammatory tendency --
though in the latter stages, where evacuants have preceded, I have given it
with apparent advantage -- and, perhaps, in weak, delicate constitutions, it
may be exhibited at an earlier period, in small doses two or three times a day,
till a slight strangury is excited -- the dose may either be diminished, or
given at longer intervals.

However, in the general mode of management, I should, in (...) beginning,
recommend vomiting and aperients, with bleeding, blistering, and use of
antimonials, if necessary -- small doses of cicuta -- and where no febrile
symptoms declared themselves, external antispasmodics.

When the symptoms ^ad considerably abated, tonics, particularly bark, should
supply their place.

And, in the first period, the diet should be abstemious and sparing, as in
inflammatory fever, if the symptoms ran high. -- In the second, the mode of
living should be more generous -- and should the lungs be weakened by the
violence of the disease, a course of ass' milk, riding exercise, pure, clear
air, and the use of bark, would be proper. -- Indeed, in some cases, change of
air is highly necessary, and very often alone produces the most salutary
consequences.

We must observe here, that often, when the coughing ^it is over, the patients
are almost always perfectly relieved; but should they not, and the difficulty
of breathing should continue, and there be any considerable febrile affections,
there is danger, which must ever be suspected; for few die but under these
circumstances -- now and then bringing on immediate suffocation, and sometimes
consumption -- and often attended with extremely troublesome and painful
affections; but it will sometimes occur in so mild a state, that all fear is
unnecessary -- and this will manifest itself by the gentleness of the symptoms;
for though the complaint should be completely existing, accompanied with its
certain symptoms of convulsive cough and hooping, if these should be moderate,
and their returns observe distant periods -- if the ejection of mucus from the
lungs should be in no great degree -- the difficulty of breathing and febrile
affections do not manifest themselves -- and between the fits the patient
preserves his common habits of health, and the symptoms gradually decrease,
nature will be her own physician -- in these cases little is necessary to be
done.

3. ASTHMA.
from the Greek word ao vel aemai, anhelo, to breathe with difficulty. Though
authors have divided this disease into different species they may all properly
come under one head, considering them, as they truly are, the same, only
differently circumstanced; or arising from other diseases in the habit, and
merely symptomatic; we shall therefore consider them under one head, as asthma
in its different states, whether periodical, continual, or acute. -- If the
difficulty of breathing returns periodically, it is termed ASTHMA -- if it is
chronic or continual, DYSPNAEA, from the Greek word dys, difficulter, and pueo,
spiro, to breathe -- if it is acute and violent, comes on suddenly, and soon
terminates, and returns not again, ORTHOPNAEA, from orthos, rectus, upright,
and pueo, spiro, because the patients can only breathe in an erect posture.

DESCRIPTION. Before the difficulty of breathing comes on, patients complain of
a tightness in the region of the stomach, which is distended, and wind passes
in considerable quantity upwards -- they then begin to be hot -- are heavy and
dull, complain of a pain of their head, are sick, and make a quantity of pale
urine, their spirits become depressed, the lungs feel a degree (...) inactivity
and stiffness -- the breast is more than commonly loaded -- they grow hoarse,
are sick, breathe with great difficulty -- and experience almost universally a
kind of stupor, from the contracted state of the chest, inspiration and
expiration are performed slowly -- and, indeed, so uneasy are they in the
execution, that they elevate their shoulders, and extend their necks, in order
to get relief in their manner of breathing -- very frequently they vomit
materials of different kinds -- sometimes viscid slimy (...), sometimes green
or yellow bile -- in the violence of the fit, they have a palpitation of the
heart, a livid color of the face, and feel as if they should be suffocated --
when the spasmodic constriction remits, they spit up viscid phlegm, which
tastes differently, intermixed with which are black colored streaks -- the
urine now changes its color to a deeper hue, and deposits a sentiment -- all
the symptoms increase at night, and are worse in ^ed -- patients feel most
alleviation in the open air -- as soon, however, as the paroxysm goes totally
off, the expectoration ceases.

From this account, though concise, it appears, that whatever will impede the
passage of the air into, or the free circulation of blood through the lungs,
either by affecting the lungs themselves, or diminishing the capacity of the
chest, will produce this complaint -- hence the remote or inducing CAUSES are,
thick, dense, foggy air -- or air impregnated with noxious particles or vapors
received into the lungs -- the aperture of the glottis, (the narrow ^it at the
upper part of the windpipe.) being so contracted, or closed up, and the
passages leading to it from the parts about the (...) being much swelled, and
the investing membranes (...) over with a mucous or purulent exudation; or
themselves greatly thickened; or the aperture may be shut by the muscles of the
windpipe being affected with spasmodic contractions, which is not seldom the
case -- accumulations of watery, purulent fluid collected in the cellular
substance -- earthy concretions, or schirrous tubercles formed in the lymphatic
glands dispersed ^^rough them -- tumors lying contiguous to, or adjoining the
(...) -- extraordinary quantities of fat collected in the chest, particularly
about the large blood vessels -- too copious secretion, or a deficiency of the
mucous which lubricates the branches of the windpipe -- blood issuing from the
extremities of the arteries into the air vessels -- by an over distension of
the blood vessels in the lungs -- spasmodic affections or pain affecting the
the muscles destined for respiration, especially the diaphragm, (33) --
spasmodic contractions of the branches of the windpipe from internal causes --
collections of water, blood, and matter within the (...) of the chest,
swellings of the belly from dropsical collections, enlarged viscera, or from a
foetus -- and, indeed, from an unnatural small-formed chest -- strong passions,
old ulcers healed, any accustomary or critical evacuation thrown back into the
habit -- wounds of the diaphragm, with a variety of others -- and according to
the nature of the acting causes, so shall we find the nature of the disease --
but as in a work of this kind we cannot go into the minute particulars, we
shall confine ourselves to two; of one or other of which almost all asthmatic
complaints consist, viz. the humid and spasmodic; or convulsive.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A difficulty of breathing, with straightness of the
chest -- sometimes continual, at others periodic -- and sometimes acute,
violent, and not subject to return.

DISTINCTIONS. Such as are affected with the humid, or moist asthma, are seldom
free from cough, and, before the accession of the fit, they have some signs
indicating its approach, as languor -- loss of appetite, oppression, a
flatulent fullness of the stomach -- after these there comes on a violent
difficulty of breathing -- there is no certainty of the duration of the fit, as
it is from a few hours to three, four, or more days -- still the sense of
suffocation and difficulty of breathing is so distressing, that the patients
are scarce able to lie, speak, or expectorate -- yet an inflammation of the
lungs seldom succeeds the fit, notwithstanding there appears such violence
affecting that organ -- as it terminates, the breathing begins to be more free
-- mucus is expectorated -- the urine changes to a darker color, and deposits
a copious sediment.

From the humid asthma, the dry or convulsive is distinguished, from the
suddenness of the attack -- a pain and cramp affecting some part of the breast,
particularly if any part of the breast has been injured formerly by a wound or
blow -- from the violence of the symptoms -- but the most certain sign is said
to be, if a convulsion of any other part be present, or has preceded.

Indeed, both these species may be considered, and not improperly, of the
nervous class; one having associated with it (...) accumulation of viscid
phlegm in the lungs, the other free from such a congestion.

CURE. In full strong habits, in fits of the asthma, bleeding may be had
recourse to; and, if the constitution will bear it, and the continuance of the
violence of symptoms require it, it may be repeated -- but in those which are
delicate and debilitated, or far advanced in life, it is more judicious to omit
it -- as soon as possible afterward, the glyster, (No. 26.) in which from a
half to a whole dram of asafoetida, or more, may be dissolved, should be
administered -- and if these do not in a short time prove efficacious, a
blister should be applied between the shoulders.

Vomits should be administered, (No. 11, 12. 38.) either will answer the
purpose; but not till expectoration comes on with some degree of freedom; for,
in the height of the fit, they might produce mischief, by creating too great an
accumulation of blood in the head, and occasion not only dangerous, but fatal
symptoms -- indeed, if the stomach is loaded with any kind of foulness,
vomiting will often prevent the asthmatic fit.

A strong infusion of roasted coffee has been known to alleviate the fit.

In order to promote expectoration, emetics should from time to time be given,
and compositions formed of the attenuating gums, (No. 141. 143. 145)

Garlic is useful, (165) or extract of tobacco, (153.) is supposed to be
capable of being so managed as to exceed all the rest of our medicines for this
purpose: for tobacco chewed by those unused to it till it has brought on
sickness, and then going to bed to sweat; afterward repeating it, has, we are
told, cured the (...).

Squills, (176.) mixed with other expectorants, (164, 165.) increase their
power, or are themselves active; and also soap mixed with the gums before
mentioned.

And in all cases where the body is costive it should be kept gently open; for
which purpose the pills, (No. 108, 109.) may be used.

If opiates dare be administered in the humid asthma, they should always be
c^^pled with expectorants and volatiles -- to which end, drops of opiated
tincture and salt of hartshorn may be added to the foetid attenuant mixture,
(No. 145.) for these may prevent the opiates from making the mucus too viscid,
or hindering expectoration from going on.

Diuretics are also beneficial, particularly in those who have an acrimonious
state of fluids.

Though very great caution is necessary in the humid asthma (...) our
exhibition of opium, yet in the spasmodic species it may be given with more
freedom; though it should be joined with such aperients as will keep the body
open.

Cold bathing in an artificial salt bath, or in the sea, which is the most
eligible and certain, has proved efficacious in those asthmas where, from the
predisposition in the lungs to become irritable from slight causes, this
complaint was brought on, except some peculiar circumstances forbid the use, as
tubercles, dropsy of the chest, ulcers in the lungs, etc. etc.

Some have been said to die suddenly from suffocation in this disease; but this
has generally been found to be from polypus in the lungs -- partial palsy, or
some species of dropsy, has been its termination.

Issues in both species are recommended in the inside of the thighs just above
the knee.

Light diet, easily digestible, and not flatulent, is the most proper, and
riding on horseback ought not to be dispensed with because it is always
extremely beneficial.

With respect to situation, the patients ought to be left to themselves, and
fix in that in which they are most lively and comfortable, and wherein they can
breathe with the greatest freedom* for I have known the air of London more
salutary to some than the purest in the country.

Those of sanguine habits, with straight chests, who have been subject to
frequent coughs, are most liable, in the latter part of life, to fall into
asthmatic complaints, particularly if they are gross and fat -- and it rages
more in summer and autumn, than in the winter.

We shall find, by the enumeration of the remote causes, this complaint may be
the consequence of others, and is itself, therefore, purely symptomatic -- to
the original disorder we are to advert, at the same time that we use modes
proper for the alleviation of this distressing symptom.

4. SUFFOCATING CATARRH -- CATARRHUS SUFFOCATIVUS.
We must be careful not to confound this with the TRACHAEAL QUINSY, or CROUP,
(p. 317, 320,) because some authors have given the same name to this:
notwithstanding, we shall find them widely different, and that they require
different modes of cure -- that being an inflammatory affection of the branches
of the windpipe, requires bleeding, which might be highly serviceable -- this
being spasmodic, bleeding would be as injurious.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint there is a peculiar kind of shrill croaking,
accompanied with a quick and difficult breathing, attacking violently and
suddenly, and generally in the night -- from the singular noise, we may easily
distinguish it from inflammatory affections of the lungs, which never attends
them, and always makes its approach more gradually.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A suffocation arising from a spasmodic constriction of
the lungs, or rather windpipe, or a spasm of the diaphragm, without hysteric
affections.

CURE. We must here endeavor to take off the spasmodic affections as soon as
possible, by blistering the back, and the copious use of asa foetida, giving
glysters of a solution of this gum, and pouring the same down the throat: and
if the fit abates, or is conquered by these means, bark must be given freely,
to prevent a return.

To a child eighteen months old, some have given an ounce of asa foetida in
solution, and injected as much by glysters, in the space of forty eight-hours.
-- In so short a time it will probably be very difficult to get a child so
young to swallow so large a quantity.

However, in smaller doses it has been equally efficacious -- alternate doses
of musk and asa foetida will answer the purpose, in conjunction with the
glyster.

This disease is often met with in children, and is in some seasons epidemical
-- but it very frequently proves so suddenly mortal, that medical assistance is
of small consequence.

5. SPURIOUS PERIPNEUMONY -- PERIPNEUMONIA N^THA.
from the Greek word nothos, spurius.

There have been different opinions concerning the seat of this complaint,
though all agree respecting the affection of the lungs, yet differ with respect
to the part -- some assert that it is the small branches of the pulmonary
arteries, and those of the windpipe -- others, that it is in the cellular
substance of that organ, that is, the membrane which connects together all the
parts of which the lungs are formed, and is the same connecting medium which
unites the smallest fibers of the body with each other^^^ ^ungs and Cellular
Membrane.

I confess myself of the latter opinion; for, though expectoration has been
carried on freely in this complaint, the patients notwithstanding have died,
which is not the case in humoral asth^^, or the inflammatory peripneumony,
where the air vessels, (...) the small branches of the pulmonary artery, have
been affected; for, under these circumstances, the lungs have an opportunity of
freeing themselves from the oppressive load, by the free ^^^munication those
parts have with the windpipe -- whilst, on (...) hand, in order to form a cure,
the offending matter must (...) sufficiently to be re-absorbed by the
lymphatics, and (...) back into the course of circulation. We have thought it
necessary to premise thus much, in order to furnish a perfect (...) of the
complaint, which, we think, will farther be corroborated by the symptoms and
consequences.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint, though there are chillness and heat
alternating with each other, yet neither is the heat, pain, or thirst, in any
great degree -- the pulse is frequent, weak, (...) small -- it is often
attended with, or there is a strong propensity to; vomiting -- giddiness or
pain affects the head -- the pati^^^ ^^ugh, and experience a sense of weight in
the breast, with a difficulty of breathing, and tightness within the chest --
and, for the most part, the urine is of a pale color -- in some cases they
expectorate tolerably freely; but even then the difficulty of breathing abates
not, but they still wheeze and feel themselves oppressed; and, when that is the
case, we must be very careful not to prognosticate too favorably; for the
fatal cause still exists, and most commonly terminates in death.

CAUSES. An accumulation of serum in the cellular substance of the lungs --
hence arises great oppression on the air vessels, and some slight obstruction
on the pulmonary and bronchial arteries, thereby hindering a full and free
circulation of the blood through the substance of the lungs -- to which old
people, those who a^^ phlegmatic, weak, relaxed, and fat, are most subject --
and these it attacks most frequently in moist, foggy, and rainy seasons.

CURE. The indications are, to dislodge the contaminated serum, and throw it
out of the constitution, by making it sufficiently thin, so that it may be
absorbed from the cells where it is lodged -- and this we must attempt by
emetics and stimulants; for on these we can alone depend for saving the life of
the patient.

The antimonial emetics are the most proper, (No. 11, 12.) given in such a
manner that the shock and agitation may be most powerful -- hence administered
on the stomach being empty, or nearly so -- the arms, back, sides, and legs
should be fomented, and blisters applied to them -- mustard whey, (No. 127.)
decoction of seneka root, (179.) have been thought useful -- when the cough has
been violent, gentle opiates, joined with aloetics, have been admitted --
volatile saline mixture, (No. 126) coupled with nauseating doses of
antimonials, in order to promote expectoration, have been advised, and may,
perhaps, be useful to remove obstructions formed in the small branches of the
blood vessels of the lungs, occasioned by the external pressure of serum
collected in the cellular substance; but they touch not the grand cause; for
though these, or the application of some of the attenuating medicines, such as
camphor, vinegar of squills, gum ammoniac, may cause expectoration; in spite of
all our endeavors, we very often, indeed, most commonly, see death ushered in,
by a perpetual laborious wheezing -- great restlessness and anxiety,
intolerable oppression at the pit of the stomach -- a constant drowsy
disposition -- coldness of the hands and feet, and a livid color of them as
well as the face, owing to the blood there stagnating.

In phlegmatic and relaxed habits, issues on the inside of the thigh above the
knee may act as a preventive, by hindering a serous accumulation taking place
in the cellular substance of the lungs, by affording a continual drain to the
constitution; but in the ^it of the disease, though advised by some, can afford
no relief, from the slowness of their action. The body should always be kept
open by glysters, whatever mode we pursue; and we may venture to assert, that
if emetics, blisters, and the use of volatiles, will not afford relief,
medicine cannot be of much service.

We must be very careful in distinguishing this from the true peripneumony,
which may be readily done by remembering, notwithstanding there may be some
similar appearances, that in the spurious peripneumony there is no acute fever
-- add also from the (...) ASTHMA, because that is never attended with any
fever; in this a slight fever manifestly shows itself, though far more obscure
(...) in the inflammatory peripneumony.

We should have observed, that in all diseases where a cough appears to be a
prevailing symptom, mucilaginous and oily compositions are freely exhibited --
here though they must be avoided, as must also opiates, except under
circumstances which we have before specified.

SECTION XIX.
WE now come to speak of those diseases wherein the humors of the machine are
particularly concerned, owing to some (...) in point of quantity, or quality,
or both, wherein they de^^^^^ from their natural state, and from thence produce
a variety of diseases -- the first of which we shall specify is

1. JAUNDICE;
(...) the French word jaune, yellow -- it is also called ICTERUS, from the
Greek ikteros, aurugo vel aurigo, which name it bears, from the appearance of
yellowness like gold -- MORBUS REGIUS -- MORBUS ARQUATUS -- SUFFUSIO BILIS,
from bile being suffused (...) the habit -- this, therefore, is considered as a
disease produced by the bile either obstructing the common duct of the gall
^^^dder, called ductus communis choledochus, (36.) by its viscidity, or
concreting into a hard substa^ee, named gall-stones -- though it may be
produced by other diseases, as we shall see in the enumeration of its remote
causes.

But we here mean only to speak of it as originating from (...) causes above
specified, the rest being properly considered (...) as symptomatic, and must
have applications accordingly.

DESCRIPTION. At the commencement the patients generally appear languid and
indolent, with an uneasy sensation of tightness and oppressive weight at the
pit of the stomach -- after this there comes on (...) slight yellowness at the
angles of the eyes, which disperses itself over the white, the skin at the same
time putting on a similar appearance -- there is very often a pain of the
stomach -- the body becomes costive -- the appetite fails -- the excrements
appear of a clay or ash color -- and the urine yellow, tinging any white linen
immersed in it of the same color, and depositing a copious yellow colored
sediment -- there is generally a weight, fullness, and stretching of the right
side under the spurious ribs -- there is also a general nausea and loathing of
food, sometimes attended with vomiting -- the skin often itches -- the pulse is
sometimes quick -- sometimes there is a hiccough -- and, should a looseness
come on, with yellow colored faeces, the disease terminates. -- These are
(...) common symptoms, and this the common course of the curable jaundice,
which will go off in a few days, if it has originated only from a constriction
of the duodenum, or the common g^ll duct -- nor will it continue much longer if
viscid bile has only been the obstructing cause -- but if biliary concretions
have been the source, in a few weeks, or months, most probably the same
symptoms will make their appearance in the same succession; and, at length, the
disease will, from a repetition become perpetual -- sometimes better and worse,
though less severe than (...) first.

Under these circumstances, the yellow color becomes deeper in a great degree,
forming what is called the black jaundice -- so much does the bile diffuse
itself through every part of the habit, that it has been asserted, objects
appear to such patients of a yellow color; and even the saliva acquires a
bitter taste -- however, in these cases, the blood seems to be so surcharged
with bile, that its texture is broken down -- frequent haemorrhages appear,
particularly of the nose; and the blood transuding also through the sides of
the vessels is deposited in the cellular connecting membrane, occasioning a
general livid cast -- the fluids then running into a thin acrimonious state,
occasions great itching -- the body becomes dropsical -- the belly fills with
water; and thus is the miserable scene closed.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, bilious or hysteric colic -- strongly
operating purges -- ossification, or compression of the biliary ducts, from
tumors externally or internally situated -- pregnancy -- violent anger, or
long continued grief -- obstruction, scirrhus, or abscess of the liver -- that
black colored viscid fluid in the intestines of new born or young infants,
called meconium, being not properly purged off -- intermittent fevers taken off
too soon by the use of the bark -- gall stones or (...), or viscid bile,
obstructing the gall duct.

The proximate or immediate, an absorption of bile, which has (...) separated,
into the habit -- some are of opinion, that bile must be secreted and thrown
back into the fluids before a jaundice (...) cake place -- whilst others hold,
that an increased quantity of bile not secreted into the gall bladder, by its
viscidity (...) may also be the cause -- however, it is not our bu^^^^^^ here
to attempt to settle these doubts -- our opinion will (...) known by the
following.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A partial or total obstruction of the ductus communis
choledochus, (36.) most commonly (...) viscid or concreted bile, attended with
a yellow color of (...) white of the eyes and skin -- high colored urine,
tinging (...) dipped into it of a yellow color.

CURE. The indications of cure are, to remove the obstruc^^^^; which, as it
originates from different causes, will require (...) modes of treatment.

(...) it should arise from viscid bile, which we take to be the (...) common
cause, in full habits, bleeding may first be had (...) to, and afterward
dandelion draughts may be given, (No. 149.) every night and morning, for two or
three succes^^^ days; then the saponacious pills, (No. 150.) four, two or (...)
times a day, with four spoonfuls of the saline mixture, (No. 1.) or infusion of
quassia, (175.) or dandelion tea, -- after (...) have been continued for six or
seven days, if no signs of (...) appear, if the yellow color of the skin and
eyes (...) not to grow thinner, the urine to be of a lighter tinge, (...) there
should be no yellowness in the stools, an emetic, (No. (...)) then will be
proper, which may be often repeated, if (...); and the day after the calomel
bolus and purging (...), (No. 105, 106.) -- some indeed advise small doses of
(...), (No. 109.) to be mixed with the saponaceous pills, (...) purged off
occasionally -- in addition to what is here advis^^ fomentations, (No. 85.) may
be applied frequently to the right side, or bags of hot salt, oats, or a
bladder half filled with (...) bran and water, pretty warm; and, by proceeding
in (...) way, there is little doubt but the viscid bile will be remo^^^, and
the cause of the disease conquered.

But should there be any acute pain attendant in the region of (...) liver with
a quickness of the pulse, and other symptoms (...) of any inflammatory
affections, we must proceed as (...) in inflammation of that organ, (340.)
before we have (...) to any emetic, which may safely be administered (...) the
inflammatory or painful symptoms are subdued.

Toward the conclusion o^ the disease, and to prevent a relapse, the aromatic
bitter bolus, (No. 64.) or the deobstruent soap pills, (No. 117.) may be
continued for some time twice a day, washed down with chamomile tea, or
infusion of quassia, (175.)

Bath and Harrowgate waters have been by some considered as specific -- they
may certainly be very useful in jaundice pr^ceeding from viscid bile, or
bilious infarction of the liver, toward the conclusion of the complaint, and
calculated perfectly to clear the liver from these causes; but in other cases
would, from their heating and stimulating powers, be highly improper.

When it proceeds from gall-stones, or scirrhosity of the liver, we must act as
in cases of pain in that organ from these causes. (3^1.)

When from a redundancy of bile, and bilious colic, what has been recommended
in those complaints, (356, etc. will (...) proper.)

In order, however, to prevent a return, and invigorate (...) part of the
system particularly affected, the diet of our patients should be light and easy
of digestion, avoiding all fatty or viscid substances, or things too powerfully
astringent: the body should be kept regularly open, by the occasional
exhibition of the aperient pills, (No. 108, 109.) -- riding exercise should be
persevered in, and the place of residence should be such as afforded a pure,
light, clear air.

HOFFMAN, in curing this disease arising from obstruction, used to begin with
bleeding; afterward prescribed half (...) ounce of antimonial wine in one or
two ounces of oil of almonds, and ordered the patient to drink freely of the
decoction of the roots of strawberries, marshmallows, liquorice, (...) a
handful of endive, succory, chickweed, chervil, beet, and (...) sorrel -- to
each of which decoctions he added two drams ^f cream of tartar and fifteen
grains of nitre -- in the evening (...) opening glyster was given, and
afterward, a purge of Epsom salt and syrup of roses, of each an ounce,
dissolved in two or three ounces of water, or made with senna and tamarinds --
(...) these formed not a cure, to the acidulated chalybeate springs he had
recourse.

Thirty grains of the aloetic pill, with myrrh occasionally, i^ a beneficial
medicine.

2. DROPSY -- HYDROPS;
from the Greek word, udor aqua, water; because this arises from a collection
of lymph, or serous fluid within the cellular membrane, or different cavities
of the body.

When it is general, it is called ANASARCA, from ana, per, through, and sarx,
caro, flesh -- when local, it receives its name from the part it affects, or
the appearance it occasions.

If in the breast, it is called HYDROTHORAX, from udor, and tho^^^ pectus, and
chest -- if in the belly, ASCITES, from askos, ^ter, a leathern bottle, from
its appearance -- if in the womb, HYDROMETRON, from udor, and metron, matrix,
the womb -- if in the head, HYDROCEPHALUS, from udor, and kephalos, caput the
head -- and other species, as DROPSY OF THE LUNGS -- OVARIA -- FALLOPIAN TUBES
-- but as they all originate from one and the same proximate cause, when
curable, they require similar internal modes for the accomplishment. -- We
shall therefore describe the symptoms by which they may be discovered, before
(...) proceed to the method to be adopted for their cure, making (...)
observations where the general rules may be deviated (...), with respect to the
situation of the watery collection -- and, FIRST, of

GENERAL DROPSY, or ANARSARCA -- this is also called LEU^^^^LEGMATIA, from
leukos, albus, and phlegmatia, pituita, (...) the colorless swelling of the
skin, arising from the collation of a watery or pituitous humor beneath.

DESCRIPTION. In this disease the body has a pale appearance -- the whole skin
grows soft, with an inelastic swelling -- this originates from watery lymph
copiously diffused through, (...) accumulated in the cellular membrane, (25.)
encircling the (...) body, its muscles and coats -- whence arises a soft tumor,
(...) and squalid, over the whole of the machine, retaining the ^^^^tation, or
print of the finger, wherever strongly impressed (...) feet and legs swell,
particularly toward the evening, and (...) ^umefaction gradually ascends
upwards (...) the whole (...) membrane -- hence it differs from tha^ kind of
pasty (...) which only affects the lower extremities in the evening (...)
subside in the morning; for in the anasarca, in the morning, (...) parts are
more swelled, particularly the eyelids and cheeks, also the scrotum, (53.) and
penis, (53.) -- a difficulty of ^^^^thing comes on, and cough -- the patients
lose their appetite, but are very desirous of liquids -- the urine at first is
pale and watery, though in the latter stages high colored, though almost
always small in quantity -- the pulse is small, quick, and irregular -- there
is a slight fever -- sleep affords little refreshment -- and they seldom or
never sweat.

ASCITES is a considerable swelling of the belly, with a perceptible
fluctuation within; for if the hand be laid on one side, and the other struck,
this fluctuation is readily discovered. I^ the common species of this
complaint, before the belly appears to swell, the patients make water in very
small quantity, which is foul, and deposits a yellowish sediment, or one
colored like brick-dust -- the legs generally swell, then the belly -- after
which a difficulty of breathing comes on, especially upon lying down -- the
patients complain of weight or heaviness -- the flesh wastes away -- and the
bowels are commonly costive -- general debilty takes place -- the pulse becomes
weak and frequent -- there is a slow fever attends -- by continuance the water
become^ putrid, and brings on inflammation, ulceration, and mortification of
the viscera; for, on opening bodies who die of this complaint, some of them are
sound diseased, most frequently the liver, next to that the spleen, sweatbread,
and mesenteric gland^.

Though we should observe, that in some cases of ascites, the fluctuation is
not always perceptible, owing either to the great viscidity of the contained
fluid, or to its being confined in (...) number of cysts, or mixed with what
are termed hydatids, (...) small vesicles full of fluid.

Sometimes the ascites is accompanied with an anasarca, (178.) -- in which case
a cure is scarce to be expected, and, indeed, ^^less the ascites is recent, and
the abdominal viscera in a tolerable sound state, our hopes cannot be more
favorable; because when the viscera are diseased, or strongly obstructed,
th^se form insurmountable obstacles to a pleasing termination.

HYDROTHORAX. Some authors who have been much employed in opening of dead
bodies, assert, that this disease is much more common than is imagined -- it is
attended with a difficulty of breathing, and sometimes of the acute kind -- a
weight in the chest, pallid countenance, pasty swellings of the hand^ and feet
a fluctuation upon motion -- a sudden sense of suffocation during sleep, and
stupor of either arm -- the patients are affected wi^^ a dry cough -- nor can
they lie down upon the side affected, (...) in a supine posture, if both
cavities of the chest are loaded. The complaint is of long continuance, and
does not intermit. Th^^^ is often very great difficulty in discovering this
disease -- however, if there is a constant difficulty of breathing, with a
paleness of the face, pasty swellings of the feet -- should the urine be made
in small quantity -- with difficulty in lying down, a sudden and spontaneous
starting out of sleep, with palpitation -- and water fluctuating in the chest,
the undulation of which can be hea^^ on shaking the patient by the shoulders,
or striking upon the ribs -- there can then little doubt remain of the nature
of the affection.

Sometimes there will arise a dropsy of the membrane surrounding the heart,
called a DROPSY OF THE PERICARDIUM, ((...).) in which urine is made in small
quantity, and of a very red color -- there is a difficulty of breathing, but
nor so severe as in (...) former case -- and the patients lie down with more
ease on the (...) than left side -- (...) generally complain of thirst, and
have (...) cough -- and feel^^^ sense of weight, oppression, straitness, (...)
pain about the region of the heart after fatigue or conversation; they
frequently faint, and are affected with palpitations, (...) pulse is weak,
easily quickens, and sometimes intermits -- (...) often perceive an undulating
motion about the third, fourth, (...) rib -- have pasty swellings of the hands
and feet, and die (...).

The HYDROMETRON -- the water is either contained in the (...), Fallopian
tubes, or ovaria, (50, 51, 52.) there are no (...) of properly distingushing
the two latter; but a (...) may be formed, if any tumor appears in the place
where (...) are situated, and this should be accompanied with other (...)
appearances. With respect to a dropsy of the womb, (...) discovers itself by a
suppression of the menses -- a swelling of (...) belly -- flabbiness of the
breasts, attended with unwilling^^^^ or inability to move, pain, shiverings,
and febrile affec^^^^^.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, suppression of any customary evacuations,
as menses, lochia, or piles -- too free an (...) of fermented liquids, spirits,
wine, o^ malt liquor -- crude and (...) food, cold water drank too copiously
whilst the body is (...) than naturally heated -- the exhibition of very
powerful (...), immoderate bleedings, and salivations; -- and indeed, (...) are
often the consequences of other diseases, as haemorrhages (...) gout,
dysenteries, consumptions, jaundice, continued, (...), or intermittent fevers
-- pregnancy, scirrhous tumors (...) abdominal viscera, but particularly of the
liver, or poly^^^ or stoney concretions about the heart -- or, in fine,
whate^^^ ^ill occasion too free a secretion of the serous fluids into the (...)
membrane, or any cavity of the human machine, and (...) the proper action of
the absorbent system, either (...), (...) degree inadequate to take up the
fluids separated into the (...) by the exhalent arteries -- which last may be
considered (...) proximate or immediate cause of all dropsies.

CURE. The indications are, to evacuate the water from the (...) places where
it may be affected; and afterward invi^^^^^ the system, so that the absorbent
vessels shall be enabled (...) perform their functions properly. With regard to
the first (...), if the patients are not too far exhausted, and have strength
to bear the operation, and the case is recent, brisk purging is necessary, with
some of those medicines which are known to (...) in the greatest proportion the
serous fluids, particularly jalap, joined with nitre, (No. 151.) gamboge, with
cream (...), (No. 152.) in robust habits -- in constitutions more (...) the
saline mixture, (No. 1.) with two or three drams of (...) of jalap, is
sufficient to answer the purpose.

Or ten grains of calomel may be given, at proper (...) to prevent a
salivation, assisted with six or seven ounces (...) strong decoction of garlic
-- and this last given three or four times a day.

On the intermediate days of exhibiting purgatives, (...) and flight tonics may
be administered -- a spoonful of (...), with a decoction of broom. (176) powder
of squills. (176) (...) in powder or decoction, (176.) quassia wood, (175.)
(...) of iron* (139.) or half an ounce of kali, (...) quart of Rhenish wine,
two or three glasses of which may be (...) in the day, and in the evening a
slight opiate, (No. 5^) the (...) salt, (176.) may be given in any convenient
vehicle -- or the (...) or infusion of fox-glove, (176.) joined with some of
the (...) powders twice a day, increasing the dose as much (...) stomach will
bear with ^ase; for this medicine, though in (...) as a diuretic, is apt to
create, if too rashly admini^^^^ed, an (...), and uncommon sickness -- the
oxym^^ of (...) one or two drams three or four times (...) ounce once or twice
a day.

(...) of (...), from half an ounce to six drams, (...) in ten (...) a pint of
water, taken early in the (...) has been successful in various ^ases both of
the anasar^^ (...)

But, should neither cathartics nor diuretics prove (...) the (...) chair has
been recommended, as by this (...) part of the stagnant lymph may be evacuated
through (...) pores of the skin.

Indeed, some advise for this purpose from one to two (...) of the compound
powder of ipecacuanha, formerly, called (...) powder to be taken at bedtime,
and laying the (...) in flannel, and this repeated every other night -- the
(...) if procured, should be kept up for some time, and the (...) supported
with gentle cordials, (No. 28, 29.) or camph^^^^^^ mixture, (150.) when the
sweating abates, the patient (...) gradually cool* and the surface of the body
be rubbed with (...).

In many cases recourse may be had to scarifications, with the lance^, or those
used in cupping in the lower part of the le^^ but care should be taken not to
make the wounds either (...) long or too deep, for fear of bringing on a
mortification; which must be prevented by spirituous fomentations and proper
digestives -- from this operation considerable quantities of water have been
evacuated.

If there are no visceral obstructions, small doses of bark may be continued
through the whole course of the disease with considerable advantage, as they
will contribute to strengthen the system, consequently promote the action of
the symphatics.

The juice of leeks, a table spoonful taken twice a day, has been known to
perform a cure -- and when there is any fever^^ disposition, the neutral salts
of the diuretic class are preferable to the kali prepared -- the diuretic
electuary and draught, (No. 153. 154.) and the deobstruent pills, (No. 155.)
have been, (...) dropsical cases, in high estimation -- the pills in cold
phlegmatic habits have been said to be efficacious; but where there has been a
tendency to inflammation, suppuration, or mortification, they are prohibited.

Different have been the opinions relative to the abstinence from, or free
indulgence in, the use of liquids -- instances of cures (...) been produced
where both one and the other have been efficacious -- one would naturally
conclude that the former was the (...) rational plan, calculated to prevent too
great an accumulation of aqueous fluid -- but, in desperate cases, I should not
refuse the indulgence, particularly where there was an extreme longing; for the
mind being gratified, often produces astonishing good effects on the
constitution; for which we are not always (...) to account. I knew a woman
cured by drinking a large quantity of forge-water one evening, where every
other remedy (...) been tried for a long time in vain; and many other instances
(...) to be found in the works of medical writers. In cases of ^^^^inence, the
thirst sometimes will be so distressing, as almost to conquer the most
determined resolution -- in order, therefore, to ^^^^viate this unpleasant
symptom, the mouth may be kept moist, and intenseness of thirst assuaged by a
mixture of lemon juice and oil -- hard biscuit soaked in Rhenish wine -- nitre
lozenges, ^^^arinds, or holding a leaden bullet in the mouth, which solicits
flow of saliva, and keeps off thirst.

The remedies advised for the anasarca may also be had recourse to in the
ascites -- in addition to which, the abdomen should be rubbed freely, and for
some time together, two or three times a day, with the camphorated liniment,
(No. 132.) increasing the quantity of camphor, if necessary -- for this has
very often proved an useful auxiliary. Indeed, some practitioners have
attributed the cure to frictions with oil alone.

However, when all our methods fail for evacuating the water, we must have
recourse to tapping -- which (...) deferred too long, till the absorbent
vessels, by soaking in the watery fluid become so relaxed, that they never can
recover their tone and action -- and the viscera, from the same cause, will be
so spoiled, that the relief procured can never be permanent -- (...), where the
disease continues obstinate, notwithstanding the use of internal and other
remedies, a fluctuation of (...) is (...), and the abdomen sufficiently
distended to prevent the danger of wounding the viscera by the trochar used in
the operation, we should not hesitate in performing it, taking care to
inc^^^^^^ the pressure on the abdomen, either by the hands, or a (...) belt,
during the evacuation of the watery fluid, in proportion (...) the abdominal
cavity is emptied; otherwise the blood will (...) in such superabundance into
the weakened vessels, that the (...) for want of a sufficient quantity being
carried to it to stimulant its ventricles, would lose its action, and a fatal
swooning be (...) consequence -- for the prevention of which, the operation
should be performed as advised by HEISTER, SHARP, or MO^^^ (...) the Medical
Transactions of Edinburgh.

On the undulating motion being very strong, the watery said pure, and capable
of being evacuated completely, are founded our hopes of success; for where the
fluctuation is not very ^^^ceptible, we shall have reason to suspect the fluid
is vis^^^, ^^^tained in cysts, or full of hydatids, or that it is purulent or
(...) which are cases more deplorable.

Sometimes though, after the water is evacuated, it will again accumulate --
tapping may be again repeated; for numbers (...) undergone the operation a
variety of times, and had by (...) means their lives prolonged; though their
health has been ^^ver thoroughly re-established.

In the DROPSY OF THE CHEST, the same internal remed^^^ may be made use of as
in anasarca; and, should these be in^^cacious, we should try what success might
be attained by making a similar aperture within the thorax, as advised in the
(...) under the hands of some skilful surgeon -- and when we are (...)
fortunate to procure an evacuation in any of these cases of (...) watery
contents, we must endeavor to prevent its accumulation by such things as will
invigorate the system, increase the digestive powers, and add strength and
force to the vessels, such ^^bark united with chalybeates and aromatics, (No.
39 to 41, 6^ to 65.) -- daily friction with a flesh brush -- and moderate
exercise -- and in an anasarca, if we can be assured that no mischief (...) in
the viscera, cold bathing may be conducive to answer (...) purposes -- rhubarb
also infused in wine may be occasionally given.

With regard to diet, plain meats are allowable, preferring (...) which are
roasted to boiled -- all crude, watery, flatulent vegetables should be avoided,
and those of the stimulant (...) (175.) only be permitted -- Rhenish wine, with
(...), is the best beverage -- or geneva mixed* with some (...), or common
water, if the other cannot be obtained.

As the DROPSY OF THE HEAD has often been mistaken for (...) diseases,
particularly worms, or cutting of the teeth, on (...) subject we think it
necessary to be particular. This complaint is divided into two species,
EXTERNAL and INTERNAL -- (...) former is of little moment, if not united with
the latter; for (...) that water is perceptibly collected under the integument
of (...) scalp and is cured by discutient fomentations, (No. 85.) -- (...),
scarifications, and setons -- having at the same time re^^^^ to cathartics and
diuretics.

(...) the INTERNAL DROPSY OF THE HAAD is not so readily distinguishable, as it
comes on with symptoms so similar to (...) attendant on worms, cutting the
teeth, and other iritating (...) -- and, when water is accumulated, very
rarely; indeed (...) me, it is a doubt, whether it ever has been cured.

DESCRIPTION. The symptoms of this complaint vary ^^^^^rent subjects --
sometimes they come on rapidly -- some^^^^^ considerably more slowly -- owing,
perhaps, to the parts of (...) brain affected, or to the different degrees of
distensibility (...) cranium; for if the water accumulates between the (...)
matter, (^0, 27.) the (...) matter and brain, (27.) and the (...) should be soft,
and capable of being much distended, the ^^^gress of the disease will be more
gradual, than if the accu^^tion happens in the ventricles, which is for the
most part, (...), and the skull should be firm, and not capable of giving (...)
at all -- in general however, it pursues the following course* (...) first,
there is a pain at the nape of the neck, or shoulders, sometimes, the lower
limbs -- the arms, though not o^^en, are (...) affected -- or, should these
parts ^eel no uneasiness, (...) and stomach become the seat -- sickness comes
on, and (...) of other symptoms, similar to those which happen in (...) cases
-- yet, in a few days, others of a more alarming o^ dangerous nature show
themselves, such as violent, (...) pain in the head, extending from temple to
temple, and (...) the forehead -- sickness is now and then very considerable --
sometimes the patient doses, frequently sighs, and breathes irregularly -- the
pulse also become^ irregular and ^low -- at the beginning, and a little before
death, there are some febrile affections, especially toward evening -- at
length, every symptom which is a concomitant with irritation of the brain
attends by turns -- the pulse quickens -- the breathing becomes very laborious
and difficult -- the heat excessive -- the patient is averse to light -- takes
things greedily -- and cannot bear to lie in any posture except horizontal --
the excrements pass away in voluntarily -- the hands are commonly elevated
about the head -- the eyelids become paralytic -- and the (...), or center of
the eye, dilated, and immovable -- the patients are apt to squint, (...)
scream out often upon raising the head, and the cheeks (...) and then flush,
the pulse soon flutters, the strength falls very quickly, if convulsions do not
suddenly put an end to the disease, and fatally close the scene.

CAUSES and MODES OF CURE. Besides those causes which have been enumerated in
dropsy, many of which (...) give rise to this, there has been reason to suppose
others (...) also be greatly instrumental in producing this, such as (...)
blows, or severe bruises upon the head, excessive exercise in hot weather, with
exposure to the powerful heat of the (...) violent vomiting, the hooping-cough,
standing long and repeatedly upon the head, or hanging by the middle over rails
(...) the head downwards, common tricks by which children (...) themselves --
or, indeed, any other cause which, in full (...) and active constitutions,
dispose the blood too much to the (...) -- and these particularly where no
dropsical tendency (...) made its app^^nance; for I am fully persuaded, that
(...) very many of these cases, if not in all, congestion and slight
^^flammation are the praecursors to the aqueous accumulation. In this
conclusion I am not only authorized by the opinions (...) some late judicious
writers on the subject, but by experie^^ particularly in three cases, two of
which were cured, and ^^proved fatal. IN THE FIRST, I was present, when a
lively, active boy, about five years old, came in from play to his mother
complained much of his head, and that, though he was (...) sleepy, he could not
keep his eyes open: on laying him down ^e begged to be turned from the light,
he could not bear (...) and soon after he began to be sick, and vomited
constantly when any thing was given to him -- on examining him, he appeared
heated, and his pulse quick, and frequent; but not much more so that what one
might naturally expect, from the exercise from which he had just retired, the
pupils of his eyes (...) contracted, and when a candle was held to him, it was
with difficulty that he could for a moment keep his eyelids open that there
was a loud and (...) on the brain, I could (...) doubt -- a glyster was given
him immediately, his legs were put into warm water, and eight leeches applied
to his temples; for his mother would by no means permit the use of the lancet,
nor cupping, and that night, four grains of calomel, with the same quantity of
jalap and cream of tartar, were given him; before ten in the morning he had
five or six stools, his vomiting (...) soon after the application of the
leeches, he could bear the light better, nor was the pupils of the eyes in any
thing (...) so contracted a state, still his head was not perfectly easy, (...)
was he free from that drowsy appearance, he was bled a second time, and his
purge repeated at night, which produced (...) wished-for effect, after which he
lived for some time very abstemiously, and now and then had recourse to
purgatives, (...) by these means he was perfectly reinstated in his health.

The SECOND was nearly similar, though the symptoms, not (...) of them,
appeared with so great a degree of violence, the (...) was equally sudden, and
the complaint yielded to the (...) mode of treatment. In this case I was sent
for when the (...) had been ill only a few hours; and I pursued the idea (...)
of unloading the head. I had no suspicion of water in (...) part of the brain.

IN THE THIRD CASE, the child had been ill for some days, (...) from the
account given me by the mother, a very sensible (...) intelligent woman,
confirmed by the surgeon, added to the ^^^ptoms at that time apparent, I did
not hesitate to conclude, (...) there was an accumulation of water in the
brain; for the (...) labored under a coma, the pupils of the eyes were (...),
a general stupor was prevalent, with obstinate costiveness, (...) pulse was
irregular, the face sometimes flushed, sometimes (...), the stools when
procured by glysters and doses of (...), were foetid, and full of jelly-like
gluey mucus, and very (...) urine passed, and that often involuntary, from the
applica^^ of a blister to the head, and rubbing in from half a dram (...) dram
of mercurial ointment, with two or three grains of (...) given every night, all
the symptoms appeared to be (...) alleviated -- indeed, so much, that the
parents flattered themselves with the hopes of a recovery -- but they were
(...) deceived; for, on the evening of the day when these (...) appearances
presented themselves, convulsions suddenly came on, and the patient in a few
hours expired. On (...) the head, the brain appeared to be full and tight, the
(...) of the dura matter distended with blood; and, in cutting (...) the
superior part of the brain down to the ventricles, innumerable red spots
appeared through the substance, which were small branches of arteries distended
with blood -- and in the ventricles was a great quantity of (...) supposed
(...) less than eight ounces -- the inner surfaces of, (...) showed evident
signs of inflammation, (...) of the optic (...), called by (...) opticorum.

From the (...) of these cases, and (...) conclude, that if the two former had
been neglected (...) would had been the same.

In the beginning, therefore, of complaints of this (...) bleeding and
purgatives should be depended upon; (...), if advised in proper time, (...) may
be snatched from the jaws of death. In the latter (...) I fear we can never
promise success, raising a salivation by (...) use of mercury* or throwing it
into the habit in a (...) quantity, to solicit the re-absorption of the serous
(...) of the (...), or places where it may (...) the head, vapor baths, and
the use of (...) (176.) as one of our most certain diuretics, (...) small (...)
bid the fairest for relief; if any under th^^^ (...) circumstances are to be
had, though I am (...) with respect to a radical cure -- however, as the (...)
ought to be pursued.

3. TYMPANY -- TYMPANITES.
called so from tympanum, a drum, either from (...) or distension -- this is a
light and elastic swelling (...) belly, making a sounding noise on being
str^^^, which (...) symptom of this disease -- to which may be (...)
eructations, rolling of wind in the bowels, (...) pai^, relief being afforded
by the emission of wind (...) downwards and a wasting of the other parts.

It is divided into two species, one named (...) it arises from flatulencies in
the intestinal canal -- the (...) DOMINAL, when it arises from air pent up in
the (...) abdomen, between the intestines and the membrane (...) of the belly,
called peritoneum, (34.)

THE FIRST we must attempt to cure by (...) of such stimulants a^ expel wind,
and are (...) as carraway seeds, an^iseeds etc. (145.) (...), (...) vitriolic
^ther, (149. 150, 151.) with opiates, ((...) the body open every now and then,
with gentle warming (...) medicines, (No. 108.) and using frictions (...) ^he
(...) once or twice a day -- by these means we may discharge the ^^^tulencies
-- and we should also attempt to strengthen the (...) of the intestines, that a
relapse may be prevented, by aromatic corroborants and stomachics, such as
zedoary, (146.) quassia wood, (275.) orange-peel, and some of the warmer
bitters -- something the body with a broad belt, and using riding exercise --
glysters also may be occasionally given of infusions of chamomile, wormwood, or
gentian, in which may be dissolved from (...) a dram to a dram of asafoetida.

THE SECOND requires tapping if curable at all -- but as this often arises from
the corruption of water or other fluids confined in the cavity, or from
ulcerations or mortifications of the different viscera, little can be expected
from this operation.

4. ATROPHY;
from the Greek a, alpha, non, not, and trepho, alo, to nourish.

This complaint is very often symptomatic, depending upon some other disease in
the habit, which disease, if it comes within the reach of the medical art, by
curing, the atrophy, an effect produced from that cause, will also be
conquered; -- but (...) hopes can be but small when the wasting of the flesh is
unaccompanied with any hectic fever, and comes on without our being able to
discover any manifest cause -- which is the case in the true ATROPHY, or
NERVOUS CONSUMPTION; for this is a perceptible wasting away of the whole body,
without any remarkable degree of fever, cough, or difficulty of breathing,
attended with loss of appetite, and too weak digestive powers whence arise
languor and daily increase of emaciation.

DESCRIPTION. In the beginning the habit has a puffy (...) pasty appearance,
the countenance is pale and squalid, the appetite loathes every kind of food,
and is gratified only by liquids, the patients are constantly languid, and keep
very much ^bed -- the urine is often small in quantity, and high-colored;
sometimes pale, and copious -- there is neither fever nor difficulty of
breathing, but what arises from great weakness -- ^^ace the blood, from want of
its wholesome supplies, becomes acrimonious in length of time -- from whence
comes on heat -- a hectic fever, which increases -- and is at last attended
with cough and a difficulty of breathing.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, debility in the digestive organs -- a poor
and unwholesome diet -- a delicacy, and incitability of the nervous system -- a
defect or excoriation of the mucus which should defend the inner surfaces of
the heart and arteries, excess of passion, or severe mental affections -- very
free drinking of spirituous liquors -- unhealthy air -- too constant and too
luxurious pursuits -- too copious evacuations -- old age, etc. -- and, in fine,
whatever will produce a want of sufficient quantity of properly elaborated
juices -- or a deficiency in the power of applying them, which are the
proximate and immediate causes.

In children, this disease very frequently happens, which is owing to another
cause, as well as some of those above specified, which is too soon taking them
from the breast, and feeding them on solid food -- in this case the legs hang
closely down -- they refuse to stand upon their feet -- their skin grows
shrivelled -- the whole body, particularly the nose and nates, become flaccid
-- and, in many instances, their appetite is insatiable.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A wasting away and loss of strength, without any hectic
fever.

CURE. The indications are, to restore the tone of the solids, improve the
state of the digestive organs, and increase (...) appetite, by the use of
stomachics, as quassia wood, chamomile, orange and lemon, with chalybeates,
(No. 60. without the vinegar and muriatic acid, No. 61 to 65. 71. 137.) --
every third or fourth morning the patient should be purged with rhubarb, (1^3.)
-- medicated wine, or beer, should be taken twice a day, (No. 156.) and the
stimulating tonic electuary, (No. 157.) may be administered, balsam of copaiva,
(165.) Canada balsam, (17^.) the liquor of hartshorn, or ammonia prepared,
mixed with a little sugar -- malt liquor, especially London porter, may be
drank, as it has proved useful and nutritious to those who have not been
accustomed to it -- the lightest kind of nourishment should be had recourse to,
with ass' milk, beef tea, etc. (1^^, 134.)

As this disease happens to almost all old men, it is commonly attributed to a
want of fluids; and, though it may not (...) attended with, it follows a fever
-- here choice, nutritious food, full of juices, is requisite, (11^.) also the
use of generous wine, and constant warmth in winter, and sleeping with young
healthful subjects has been considered as particularly benef^^^^.

5. SCURVY -- SCORBUTUS.
There are vast variety of eruptive complaints which go ^^der this
denomination; for when spots of different kinds, of whatever nature they may
be, and however various their appearance, show themselves upon the skin, for
numbers of which we have no specific term, they are all called scorbutic.

However, we mean to confine ourselves to the PUTRID, (...) SEA S^URVY -- which
disease is considered to arise from a (...) peculiar humor, generated in the
constitution, and ^ough sometimes epidemic, is neither contagious nor
infectious.

DESCRIPTION. This may properly be divided into three ages, marked out by the
different degrees of violence of the symptoms.

IN THE FIRST, the patients complain of weakness, and are such fatigued on
using any exercise -- they have a difficulty in ^^^^thing, are very often sick,
and have a disrelish for, or dislike a animal food -- the gums are hot,
painful, itch, and on them, as well as the tongue, there appear ulcerations --
the teeth become loose, decay, from the gums being in a great measure
destroyed, and leaving the parts, which in the natural state they ^^ver, (...)
much exposed ^o the air -- the breath becomes extremely offensive -- the urine
is high colored, smells strong and disagreeable, and has floating on its
surface on oily film, or skin-like appearance -- the pulse, for the most part,
is weak, seldom hard, and always grows quicker upon motion -- different
colored spots appear on various parts of the body, except the (...), reddish,
sometimes of a blueish cast, livid, or black -- the gums become soft and
spongy; and from them, as well as from other parts of the body, there are
effusions of blood.

I^ THE SECOND, pains attack the legs, which also swell, as do the knees, which
impede the motion of these parts -- besides, pains also affect the belly,
breast, vertebrae, and all the muscles of the machine -- the face begins to
look ghastly -- and so great is the languor, when the patients have restrained
a long time from motion, that, on being slightly moved, they are apt to faint;
and sometimes, if exposed to the open air, they die; now they have often
febrile affections of the erratic, continued, or intermittent kind --
palpitations of the heart, and difficulty of swallowing -- their understanding
and appetite, notwithstanding their great debility, keep up in a tolerable
degree -- and they have no pain, except on motion.

THE THIRD STAGE, the tendons and joints grow stiff, they have frequent
fainting fits, great dejection of spirits -- and are extremely fearful, from no
apparent cause -- the cicatrices of old ulcers, if there should be any, again
break open -- and on the legs, soft, livid, and painful swelling takes place,
and spongy ulcers, which bleed -- obstructions, scirrhosities, ulcers, and
mortification effect the viscera -- the urine is small in quantity, foetid,
high-colored -- difficulty of breathing, suddenly destructive, sometimes
closes the scene, or they expire in some fainting fit.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, living in a moist, cold atmosphere,
particularly if in marshy situations -- suppressed or immoderate evacuations --
mental affections of the gloomy kind, (...) and fear, preceding diseases -- an
indolent li^e, with luxurious indulgences of the appetite -- gross viscid food
without any, or with too great a scarcity of, fresh vegetables -- living upon
the coarse salted, smoaked, or dried flesh of quadrupeds or fish -- few of
these causes singly are sufficient to bring on this disease; there must be a
combination -- sailors, from other sources besides these, are subject to the
scurvy, because they feed on musty bread, water, fish, and flesh, which are
corrupted.

Now these causes, either by suppressing the matter of perspiration, which
ought to pass out of the habit, or from their own corrupt nature, induce an
alcalescent acrimony in the blood, which particular acrimony is the immediate
cause of the scurvy.

But we must here observe, that it not only affects people who live in cold,
damp situations -- have little or no vegetable food, wine, or other cordial
drink, and are not sufficiently clothed -- but it sometimes rises in dry soils
and pleasant situations, and attacks people who live in affluence -- and hence
becomes epidemical, as was the case in the spring of the year 1760, in
Hampshire; for there it extended its influence in a most amazing manner amongst
all classes of people.

From the consideration of these causes, it appears probable, and is generally
allowed, that the scurvy arises in the body spontaneously, in consequence of
some unknown changes in the atmosphere, which are more capable of generating
scorbutic acrimony, in proportion as there is a defect of sound vegetable diet,
fermented liquors, and clean or sufficient clothing.

But though the combination seems necessary to produce this disease in the
soundest and strongest constitutions, still, in such habits as are weak, and
naturally relaxed, dull, and slothful, or which have been debilitated by any
preceding malady, notwithstanding they live possessed of generous and proper
diet, with warm clothing, experience convinces us, that from changes of the
atmosphere alone, in them this complaint will make its appearance.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Loss of strength, bleeding of the gums, and different
colored spots in the skin, for the most part livid, particularly at the roots
of the hair -- occurring in cold climates, most frequently, after feeding on
putrid or salted animal food, that of the vegetable class being at the same
time defective, particularly fresh vegetables.

CURE. Dreadful as are the symptoms of this complaint, if the texture of the
whole system of the solids is not destroyed they all give way to proper
treatment. The indications of cure are, to attempt to promote the free
excretion of the putrid humors by the intestines, kidneys, and skin, lest, by
a stagnation of this scorbutic virus, the corruption may become greater and
more acrid.

For which purpose, living upon fresh vegetables, be they of what nature they
will, is recommended, particularly those of the cooling acescent or acid kind,
such as leten^^, cabbage, endive, lemons, citrons, oranges, gooseberries,
sorrel -- using cider, perry, and white wine for drink -- milk diet, the creams
of rice, (...), barley, sago, wheat-bread well baked, and the flesh of young
^^^^als, or broths made from them -- onions, garlic, leeks, water cresses,
horseradish, mustard, etc.

With regard to medicines, gentle aperients are only allowable -- strong
cathartics are hurtful, as are also all opiates; for they destroy the strength,
and dissolve the blood -- all metalline preparations should be prohibited,
particularly those of quicksilver, iron, and antimony.

The most eligible aperients are tamarinds, prunes, cream of tartar, or such as
come nearest to the vegetable class -- in order to assist perspiration,
tar-water, spruce, decoction of the branches of the common red fir or pitch
tree -- to promote urine, oxymel of squills, taken in small doses, but often
repeated in the day, so that within that space of time one ounce may be
consumed; for by this the body is kept open, the pains are mitigated, and all
the excretions promoted.

Every other day, in the beginning, a sweat should be raised, by taking two or
three times in twelve hours twelve grains of the squill pill of the London or
Edinburgh Dispensatories, or the camphorated bolus, (No. 158.) -- these should
be continued (...) some time, though the disease should be much alleviated, to
prevent a relapse.

Goat's whey would be very beneficial, with small doses of Polychrest salt,
mixed with two or three ounces of the scorbutic juices, taken two or three
times a day; for these prove mildly aperient and diuretic.

If there should be no fear of haemorrhages, warm baths, made with aromatic
plants are serviceable in promoting perspiration, and diluting the humors.

Bleeding in general is extremely prejudicial in the second and third stage of
the scurvy -- nor should it be used even in the first.

The mouth may be washed with any of the gargles, (No. 44. 46, 93, 94.) -- or
decoction of bark, with tincture of myrrh, may be used -- to the ulcers, strong
decoctions of bark, absorbed by lint, or soft rags, is the most useful
application -- and, should the limbs be swelled, or the joints stiffened, they
may be bathed with warm vinegar, or partial vapor baths may be applied.

With respect to the use of vegetables, we must observe, that if patients have
been deprived of them for a long time, they must not be suffered to eat of them
at first voraciously, as they are apt to do if left to themselves, lest they
should fall into a dysentery -- they should begin moderately, and increase the
quantity by degrees.

On regularly observing what has here been laid down, particularly the feeding
on fresh vegetables, we shall have no reason to be doubtful of a cure, which
usually first shows itself by a gentle looseness -- and if in a few days the
skin becomes soft and moist, it indicates infallibly a quick recovery,
especially if the strength returns, and the ^atient can bear being moved and
carried into the fresh air without fainting -- but should the body remain in a
costive state, notwithstanding the free use of vegetables, and the skin harsh
and dry, we must have recourse to the gentle aperient medicines we have before
specified, and warm bathing; for nothing contributes more to the recovery of
scorbutic patients than gentle sweating.

Different other remedies are recommended, such as the decoction of water dock
root, with crystals of tartar, (No. 159.) -- communicating fixable air to the
stomach, by means of neutralizing prepared kali in that organ, (No. 160.) WORT,
(No. 161.) where fresh vegetables cannot be supplied, has been considered as
more efficacious than the inspissated juice of oranges and lemons, mineral
acids, or four crout, or what is generally taken and applied at sea for the
cure of the scurvy, of which from two or three or four pints in a day are to be
administered, if the patient can bear it, and the looseness, which it generally
occasions, be not too violent.

However, though the general plan here laid down will seldom fail where there
is a probability of success, still, in cases of emergency, where fresh
vegetables are not to be had, it may be of some essential service to be
informed of those things which may in some degree supply their defects.

6. SCROPHULA;
derived from scrofa, a swine, because these animals are subject to it: when it
fixes on different parts, it receives different names -- if the glands of the
jaw, or below the ears it is called STRUMA -- if under the tongue, RANULA -- if
in the lachrymal glands, LIPPITUDO -- if in the thyroid gland, BRONCHOCELE, o^
Derbyshire throat -- if the glands of the armpits, breasts, groins, lungs,
mesentery, or other parts, then it is called, though said to be improper, a
scirrhus of those parts. Notwithstanding the chief seat of this disease is in
the glands, (24.) it does not only occupy them, for it seizes the adipose
membrame, muscles, tendons, joints of the body, and the bones themselves.

Scrophulous patients, it is observed, usually possess a more lively
disposition, and a maturity of understanding superior to others in the more
early periods of life; and that this fixed disease will continue, without
almost any change, until the age of puberty, at which time it recedes, and the
patients become more robust, and freer from other disorders.

Authors are not agreed whether it is contagious or not -- some say, that it
may be transmitted from one to another, and that it is capable of being
communicated by a nurse -- however, so long as a doubt remains on this head,
prudence should persuade us to advise scrophulous patients to lie alone.

DESCRIPTION. Tumors, generally about the bigness of a pea, bean, or chestnut,
hard, indolent, moveable, of the same color with the skin, unless they should
be in a state of inflammation, for the most part, seize the fauces and neck --
often preceded by irregular pains of the belly; but they are also fixed in the
armpits and groins -- though they increase gradually, and adhere to the
neighboring parts -- after they have remained for some time in this state,
they at length begin to be painful^, attended with heat and redness of the skin
-- the pain is of the lancinating kind, coming on now and then, from the
scrophulous humor becoming acrimonious -- now a lurking fever begins to make
its appearance -- and in the part affected there is a hard lumpy feel before an
imperfect suppuration takes place, which in some weeks, or months, breaks, and
from thence (...) forth a thinnish white and curdly matter, which distinguish
them from other species of tumor, leaving a foul ulcer, with the lips swelled
and hard, these are healed with difficulty, and then very slowly, leaving a
disagreeable cicatrix -- sometimes the ulcers are of so virulent a nature, that
they occasion a foulness of some of the contagious bones -- when these
scrophulous tumors affect the lungs and other viscera, a consumption is the
consequence -- and, indeed, perhaps, greatest part of the consumptive cases may
to this owe their origin -- and such children are very obnoxious to many
incurable diseases, dropsy of the belly, diarrhoea, hectic fever, emaciation,
dissolving sweats, etc.

The scrophulous humors of long continuance sometimes fixes in the joints, and
there creates tumors -- whence stiff joints, swelling of the bones, and
infinite other incurable maladies -- so that strumous swellings of the neck may
be considered as the smallest part of the disease.

The joints most commonly affected are those of the fingers, wrists, knee,
elbow, and ancle; sometimes that of the thigh -- a strain in any of which will
often be the cause of the scrophulous ^^int settling there, and showing itself
more suddenly, th^^ if no such accident had happened; for then the swelling
(...) on more gradually, and without pain or discolouration.

But sometimes this humor does not show itself externally, but fixes itself in
the internal parts of the habit -- in these (...) if there should be thickness
of the upper lip, which is generally held as a symptom peculiar to
constitutions, where the scrophulous taint is prevalent, and without any other
conco^^^^^^ symptom, there will be sufficient room to suspect a scrophu^^^^
acrimony -- in these cases, the glands of the mesentery are generally found
stuffed and enlarged with a cheesy, puru^^^^, earthy matter -- hence come on
emaciation, hectic fever, and death.

Sometimes the same matter will fix itself on the lymphatic glands of the
lungs, and produce cough -- difficulty of breath^^^ -- and consumption: -- and,
when scrophulous tumors are ^^equal, they are apt to become cancerous.

CAUSES. Those which are remote or inducing, are (...) be, living upon coarse,
viscid, or acid diet -- or too great (...) of sweets -- want of proper exercise
-- external injuries -- (...) diseases -- venereal virus -- a moist atmosphere
-- (...) to too severe cold -- nurse's milk being too acescent or (...) -- or
being herself in a diseased state -- drinking snow (...) dislocation of any
joint -- o^ having the scrophulous taint (...) in the constitution.

The proximate or immediate, a viscid depravity of the (...) or lymphatic
humors, obstructing and stuffing up those (...) of the machine called
conglobate or conglomerate -- the FIRST (...) which is a little smooth body,
wrapped up in a fine skin, (...) which it is separated from all other parts,
only admitting (...) artery and a vein to pass in, and giving way to a vein and
^^cretory duct to pass out -- the LAST consists of a number w^^^ped up in one
common membrane.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. In general there are (...) of the conglobate, and often
of the conglomerate, (...) particularly of the neck, the upper lip and sides of
the nose (...) full and swelled, the face florid, the skin smooth, and (...)
belly swelled. -- When it does not make its appearance (...), see the symptom^.
(472.)

CURE. This disease is extremely difficult to conquer, (...) to the scrophulous
humor being of such a nature, as to (...) capable of lurking long in the
habit, without manifesting itself, hence, before people are aware of its
existence, it gets a firm footing in the constitution, which renders it so
hurtful and unconquerable in its effects.

However, the indications of cure are, to clear the lymphatic system, subdue
the acrimony of the morbid fluid, and strengthen the habit in general -- for
which purposes many medicines have been recommended.

Some advise the application of the hemlock plaster, with ammoniacum, (No.
162.) with lime water and burnt sponge, or vegetable alkali, internally --
purging the patient now and then with black hellebore and calomel.

Others, millipedes, or wood lice, ass milk, decoction of sarsaparilla, with
burnt sponge, or kali prepared.

The long continued use of the decoction, or juice of coltsfoot, has been
considered by some a certain remedy -- milk whey, with the dead nettle, has
acquired much praise.

But the chief remedies in which practitioners place any confidence are,
hemlock-bark, fixed fossile (...), and sea^^^ing -- and, perhaps, in the proper
applications of these we shall find the greatest probability of success,
applied according to the different circumstances of the disease.

Before there are any symptoms of suppuration, or hectic fever, with wasting
away of the flesh, the seawater answers the best; of which from half a pint to
a pint is to be drank every morning for some months; and the patients should
also bath in the sea -- the water gently purges, promotes secretion, warms and
strengthens the habit -- and, externally applied, discusses the tumors, and
prevents the increase of the acrimony of the fluids -- but in the inflammatory
state of the tumors it is better o^^^ed, until the inflammation abates, or the
matter is discharged.

At first seawater generally occasions thirst; but that soon wears off, or
sleeping after it abates this uneasy sensation. It (...) also been of service
where a caries has affected the bones.

Some give it only in such quantity as to keep the bowels moderately open; and,
when it creates thirst, mix it with common water.

When there are running ulcers, and a degree of hectic fever, the bark is then
preferable; and the best mode of administering it is in tincture made with
limewater, (No. 163.) with which may be administered the powder or extract of
hemlock, (152.)

When the disease becomes to be inveterate, and approaches to the scirrhous or
cancerous state, hemlock must be given freely, gradually increasing the dose to
the utmost quantity the patient can bear; to which small portions of calomel,
or corrosive sublimate, may be added, a quarter or half a grain of the former
or one-twentieth, or somewhat more, of the latter, to each dose; for these not
only promote suppuration, but meliorate the discharge from the ulcers: -- but
this mode of termination should be avoided if possible, as the ulcers which
succeed are slow in healing -- when they, however, form abscesses, it is
necessary to observe, that they should never be opened till all the lumpy
induration is dissolved; perhaps in this state it is even better to leave them
to themselves; for it is remarked, that they often answer better when they
break spontaneously, than when opened by art; and the sinuses that are formed
afterward are seldom cured by dilating -- hence it is unnecessary, as well as
inhuman, to torture the patients by repeated incisions; for these sores never
heal up until the acrimony shall be either subdued, or the constitution
acquires sufficient firmness.

The common sea wrack rubbed on, or applied in form of cataplasm, sometimes
softens, and disperses them -- or (...) ox-gall, mixed with soap liniment, is
considered to form an efficacious resolvent mixture.

However, in the indolent state of these tumors, all irritating or stimulant
applications, though of the weaker class, are scarce ever to be used, because
they are apt to bring on suppuration.

Fixed fossile alkali, called soda, (191.) with strong decoction of coltsfoot,
I have known serviceable, continued for some months -- and it is advisable to
give mercury united with hemlock, (473.) and bark decoction, (193.) and
administer these alternately, changing them every three or four weeks, when we
find the symptoms cease to abate by the application of any of them -- that
medicine called the terra ponderosa muriata, muriated barytes, given in small
do^^^ of three or four drops, gradually increased, is a medicine preferable to
the soda -- though alone I have never experienced the very great efficacy which
I have been told it possesses -- though in some of the serous eruptive cases I
have perceived very evident advantages from its use -- it seems chiefly to act
as a diuretic and gentle aperient.

Large setons, or issues, may be set, as perpetual drains to the habit; they
are serviceable.

In scrophulous cases of long standing, sulphurous waters, as those of
Harrowgate, Moffat, and Llandridod, have been said to be highly beneficial;
but, in order to accomplish a cure, there should be a steady perseverance in
general for some years; -- still it is frequently found that all these various
methods fail, and nothing, except the removal into a warm climate, will so well
eradicate the complaint -- though we have instances of people being cured by
living a series of time upon the sea coast.

With regard to all external applications, those of the astringent and
stimulant class are the best such as water of acetated litharge, (139.) diluted
-- seawater, water with every kind of saline or mineral impregnation -- cold
water alone has often produced a good effect; for these promote circulation
through the vessels, and give firmness to the parts already in too great a
state of relaxation. These, however, come more under the surgeon's hands; and
therefore we refer the reader to the works of Mr. Wiseman, Heister, and Bell,
which may be consulted on this subject with advantage. With respect to diet, it
should be of the light, dry, and easily digestible kind -- all viscid food
should ^e carefully avoided -- sleep should be taken moderately -- and also
gentle and constant exercise, particularly in a dry, warm air; for moist
situations, and those which are cold, are extremely pernicious -- and also
frictions will be beneficial -- in fine, every thing that will keep up a free
and regular state of perspiration, and assist in invigorating the system,
should be solicitously observed.

6. CANCER.
This we may sometimes trace from the foregoing disease; for it has been
observed, that some of those who, in the early periods of their lives, have
shown appearances of scrophula, have in the more advanced stages been affected
with cancers -- hence it is not improbable but that there may be some affinity
between the humors producing these two diseases. It has been called CARSINOMA,
from the Greek word karkinos, cancer, a crab, from its appearance, the turgid
veins running round the margin of the tumors being something similar to crabs
claws -- and when a hard scirrhous tumor begins to be unequal -- puts on a
livid color -- has acute darting pains shooting through it -- and at the same
time veins surrounding it being distended, and having a serpentine appearance,
called varicose -- these are symptoms considered as declaratory of a cancer --
but, indeed, sometimes it will arise in the lips, gums, tongue, and some other
parts of the body, without the appearance of scirrhus preceding it.

When this tumor lurks under the skin, it is called OCCULT -- but when it
becomes ulcerated, it then is called OPEN, and is distinguished by a very
offensive and foetid discharge -- the lips of the ulcer inverted -- an hardness
of the skin, an exudation of a thin, acrimonious fluid -- pricking, darting
pain, very acute, and obstinate resistance to every application.

Like scrophulous tumors cancerous ones are lumpy, unequal; but exceed these
and every other species of tumor in hardness, though, whilst they remain in an
indolent state, and without any discolouration in the skin, they are termed
SCIRRHI -- when an itching is perceptible, succeeded by the darting pain we
have before described, the skin turns darkish or livid, and the veins under the
skin put on a varicose appearance (475.) in the part affected, they then are
considered as CANCERS.

DESCRIPTION. A cancer in the beginning is generally small, and increases
gradually; and notwithstanding the changes of the color of the skin already
mentioned, and that of becoming painful from being indolent, it is sometimes
very difficult to determine, when the transition from one state to the other
takes place, because, according to concurring causes, the progress becomes
quick or slow.

It has, with great judgment, been remarked, that when peculiar kinds of
burning shooting pains, an alteration of the color of the skin to that of
brownish, purple, or livid, appear, then the disease may be considered as a
malignant scirrhus, or (...) cancer -- and also when it is arrived to this
state in women breasts, the magnitude of the tumor greatly increases, and (...)
quickly, having a knotty, unequal surface, a greater number of glands being
obstructed, the nipple sinks in -- full and turgid (...) conspicuous, diffusing
themselves some distance round the (...), and resembling the claws of crabs.

These are deemed characteristic signs of an occult cancer externally situated;
but when these pains and heat succeed in parts where the patient has before
been sensible of a weight and pressure, accompanied with a dull pain, we have
great reason to believe it lurks internally.

A cancer may remain in an indolent state for years, without any ulceration,
yet the humor may acquire such a degree of acrimony as to erode the
integuments, then commences the (...) cancer, from which will issue a thin
fluid of so caustic a (...) that the neighboring parts will be speedily
corroded, whether hard or soft, and thus forms an ulcer so obstinate, that it
is incapable of being healed by any applications yet discovered, (...) can the
acrimony be corrected or subdued by any known ^^^^^ative -- the flesh within
the ulcer becomes spongy -- the (...) the wound swelled, livid, and inverted --
the pain (...), (...) glands of the neighboring parts become (...)
haemorrhages ensue, the appetite is lost -- a (...) of the flesh, comes on --
the strength fails, the (...) are af^^cted with convulsions and swooning -- and
death, more desira^^e than life, closes the miserable scene.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are said to be, suppressed ^vacuations -- great
dejection of spirits -- frights and anger -- a (...) of living, medicines, or
other diseases generating a cor^^sive acrimony in the blood -- an increased
motion in the blood, (...) whatever cause it may arise, cold, external
irritation from (...), compression, erysipelas, or medical substances --
barren^ess, and a life of celibacy; for women who have lived in that (...), as
well as arriving at the period of menstrual cessation, (...) most liable to
this complaint -- next to those, mothers who (...) not suckled -- afterward,
those who are past child-bear^ng, and those who are least subject to the
disorder, are men, and women who have raised their own children by the breast.

The proximate or immediate is supposed to be, a specific cor^^ption or
putrefaction, though slow in its progress, of the humors obstructing the
glands.

CURE. A true cancer, I believe, is seldom or ever cured, (...) by amputating
the part affected -- if, therefore, the com^^^int is in its recent state,
small, solitary, and moveable -- espe^^lly if it comes from an external injury
-- if it is in a free situa^^^^, neither adhering to any large vessels, nerves,
ligaments, (...) to the bones -- the constitution being good, and in young
subjects; the part affected may be taken off by the knife; and this mode is
preferable to the application of any caustic substances -- but, in all these
cases, where operations are to be performed, or external applications made use
of, the best advice (...) can give is, for the patients to depend on the
judgment of (...) cautious and experienced surgeon.

With regard to medical assistance in those scirrhous tumors, before they have
put on the positive appearance of cancer, experience authorizes us to recommend
bleeding, to take off the (...) fullness of the habit -- afterward the
application of ^^ches to the part affected, and that repeated, as occasion may
(...), and now and then exhibiting a cooling purgative -- (...), where we are
led to believe there may be a cancerous ^^^dency, from some degree and
continuance of pain, topical (...) is necessary, and the application of
poultices made ^^emlock leaves, with the internal exhibition of the same (...),
(152.) in extract of powder, has apparently stopped (...) progress of the
complaint. Indeed, in these three cases of (...) of the uterus, by (...) proper
management of (...) corrosive sublimate, opium, and some arsenical prepara^^^.
I have known great benefit to be derived -- one of which, (...) most violent,
occurred at Knightsbridge lately, when I attended with Mr. Williams, an
attentive and judicious practitioner, the patient was a person of delicate
habit, subject to hysteric affections, from strong nervous incitability, and
whose muscular system was also more than commonly irritable -- she complained
of excruciating pain in the lower part of the belly -- her pulse was quick,
skin dry, totally restless, and very thirsty, she now and then complained of
chillness, which was always succeeded by a heat of the skin, and a quickness of
the pulse, that always increased toward evening, and went off by copious
perspiration, the womb was apparently much enlarged, very hard, and pressed low
down into the pelvis, she complained of pains darting through the lower part of
the belly, and, from the weight and pain was altogether incapable of walking,
nor could be moved from her bed without great agony -- whatever she took for
some time she vomited up, so that she received, for the space of three weeks,
little or no nourishment -- she was also often and strongly affected with that
unpleasant sense of suffocation, or choking, from the contraction of the
throat, called globus hystericus -- she had also through the vagina a very
offensive and acrimonious discharge, which, from excoriating the parts,
occasioned her much additional uneasiness, however, by the use of hemlock,
corrosive sublimate, and a solution of arsenic given internally, after her
feverish symptoms were abat^^, by the use of saline medicines, alleviating her
pains by ^^ates, and keeping the bowels open by mild aperients, (...) enabled
to leave her bed, was totally freed from all pain, (...) has continued
apparently so well for some months, that she ^^joys a state of health superior
to what she experienced for some time before her indisposition began to be so
severe. I should (...) have observed, that she made use of an injection for^
(...) decoction of hemlock and poppy heads.

In all cases of cancer, whether occult or ulcerated, the patients should be
kept on cooling diet, milk whey, and milk, (...) the use of warm baths, and,
perhaps, whilst the cancer (...) the former state, wearing a hare or rabbit
skin over the part affected is extremely useful -- the pain should be moderated
by occasional bleeding, cooling purges, a spare, thin, cooling di^t, and gentle
opiates; cordials, exercise, and whatever (...) too quick motion to the
circulating fluids, or increase the (...) of the machine, should be avoided.

The purgatives proper to be used are Glauber's salt, (...) polychrest, or some
other of the cooling and gentle purgatives, (171, 172) -- and in cases of
febrile affections, saline (...), or nitrous medicines, (No. 1, 2.) are
advisable -- and for (...), milk and water, or sarsaparilla decoction.

Hemlock joined with bark, and small doses of corrosive sublimate, has by some
been ranked among the most efficacious of all cancerous medicines -- half a
grain of the latter of which, dissolved in spirits of wine, and given in
cancers of the face and nose, night and morning, has been recommended as very
beneficial -- in cancers of the breast, an infusion of deadly nightshade has
been considered as the most useful.

Of hemlock, the fresh juice is thought more efficacious than the extract,
beginning with four or five drops, and gradually increasing the dose.

With respect to external applications, various are the materials recommended
in this point, such as poultices of hemlock, goose-grass, carrot, solutions of
arsenic, lead, acetated ceruss, fixable air, etc. but as it is our province
only to treat on complaints medically, we must refer our readers to the works
of surgical authors on this part of the subject.

8. CLAP, OR GONORRHOEA VIRULENTA; POX, OR THE LUES VENEREA.
Notwithstanding there are authors who consider these as two distinct diseases,
and give it as their opinion, that they arise not from the same contagious
matter, I shall beg leave to treat them under one and the same head, perfectly
persuaded that they are the same disease, under different constitutional
circumstances -- the first acquired from the matter acting locally, the second
from its being absorbed into the habit, and being more general in its affects
-- for I certainly have known the lues arise from the injudicious treatment of
a gonorrhoea -- and have seen patients who, having had commerce with the same
woman, differently affected -- the one laboring under a gonorrhoea only, the
other completely poxed -- Besides, I have known some men, who, in their
intercourse, when unfortunately diseased, have never experienced the former,
but were always affected with the lat^^^.

I should therefore consider the gonorrhoea virulenta as the morbid matter
acting in its simplest state, and the lues in its more ^^ffused and confirmed
state.

And, first, of the GONORRHOEA, improperly so called, as the term imports a
flux of semen, from the Greek gone, semen, seed, (...) reo, fluo, to flow,
which is not the case, the discharge being nothing more than a flow of mucus
similar to what issues from all inflamed surfaces. See EXUDATION, (300, 301.) I
shall consider it, therefore, as a VIRULENT MUCO-PURIFORM GLEET -- the method
of preventing which, after commerce with a suspicious woman, has been pointed
out, (101.) the means must be supplied of discovering and curing it, when it
has begun to exert itself.

DESCRIPTION. To this complaint both sexes are equally liable -- and it is
generally allowed to manifest itself in each in the following manner:

IN THE MEN -- some days, from four to six, seldom longer, after the reception
of the contagious matter, there arises not an unpleasant titillation in the
glands of the penis, (55.) in the orifice of the urethra, (54.) there appears a
little thin liquid -- soon after which the orifice swells, grows red, with a
degree of heat, and is more than commonly open -- in a small space of time
there is a sensation in making water, hot and scalding, and something like the
pricking of needles -- a kind of matter, more viscid than the former, and in
larger quantity, makes its appearance, issuing from the urethra -- that when
the disease is more violent in its attack, through the course of the urethra,
as far as the neck of the bladder, there is perceived a sort of tightness or
fullness, attended most commonly with erections, more frequent and painful than
usual -- the inflammation now begins to increase, if left to itself, every day,
consequently the heat and pain, and the discharge puts on a yellow or greenish
appearance, sometimes (...) with bloody streaks -- if the inflammation runs
high, the^^ will not unfrequently be pains in the groins, testicles, and (...)
-- sometimes a strangury, (367.) will come on, and the patient (...) night will
be tormented with erections, and a bending down wards of the penis, called
CHORDEE.

At length all these symptoms grow milder as the inflammation abates -- the
discharge becomes white, and more uniform, and at last issues from the urethra
white and viscid like a find thread, gradually diminishing, 'till appearing,
now and then only, in drops, it totally ceases.

This is the description when it pursues its natural course, accounted for by
the inflammation receding by degrees.

IN THE WOMEN, it discovers itself by a sense of itching at (...) in the
external orifice of the vagina, (51.) and a more than common moisture -- in a
few days the parts begin to inflame, (...) hot, swell, and become very painful,
occasioning a scalding (...) making water, but not so painful as in men -- add
to these, a discharge of virulent discolored muco-puriform matter makes its
appearance; and, as the inflammation goes off, becomes white and more viscid,
and by degrees entirely ceases.

With these appearances, we should naturally conclude that a patient had
received the virus; but this is not always the case; for the very same may rise
from other causes not associated with the venereal taint, as very severe
exercise -- hard riding, and immoderate drinking -- the too copious use of very
heating stimulants, using too caustic injection by way of prevention -- or, in
fine, whatever will bring on an inflammation of those parts. I mention this,
because sometimes, particularly when these circumstances arise in married
people, it is essentially necessary to make the proper distinction, to save the
peace of a family -- as I have seen that peace nearly destroyed by the
indiscretion and rashness of a practitioner, pronouncing in a husband that
discharge venereal, where the ties of connubial honor had never been
infringed, and where the character of the wise was, with great justice,
unsullied. In our opinions, therefore, we should be extremely cautious, and
wait for the appearance of some unequivocal symptom before we pronounce
positively, particularly (...) the first stage of the disease may be cured in
the same manner as should be advised in cases of simple inflammation without
any venereal taint.

This complaint we consider as a virulent muco-puriform gleet, arising from
irritation, produced by venereal virus, after impure concubinage, attended with
inflammation of the urethra, a flux from thence of puriform mucus, and a heat
or scalding in making water.

The common term CLAP arises from the old French word ^^^pieres, which were
single shops, kept and inhabited by single prostitutes, and generally confined
to particular parts of the town.

CURE. The indications are, to take off the inflammation, (...) give strength
afterward to the vessels, which have been ^^kened by too strong action and
distension.

If, therefore, at the onset of the disease, the patient is of a plethoric
habit, strong stamina, possessed of great vascular irritability, we must have
recourse to bleeding and gentle aperients for two or three days, and plentiful
dilution with watery fluids, such as barley-water, linseed-tea,
marsh-mallow-tea, or solution of gum arabic in warm water -- bathing the penis
once or twice a day in warm milk and water, or poppy head decoction -- keeping
the glans clean, and supporting the testes by a suspensor.

The opening medicines may be given occasionally, so that two or three stools
may be procured every day, (No. 23, 24. 66. 97. 99, 135.) any of which, as best
suits the pati^nt, may be administered.

After three or four days, when the discharge begin to flow copiously, we must
alleviate the inflammation by the sedative injection, (No. 164.) which should
be thrown gently up the urethra two or three times a day, and retained for some
time after each operation -- when this has been used for four or five days, or
sometimes longer, 'till the painful symptoms appear to be yielding, and the
discharge alters its color, and grows more viscid, to this may be added six or
eight grains of acetated ceruss, and applied in the same manner, and in a few
days more the cure will be often completed -- but the discharge in some cases
will be of longer duration, from the relaxed state of the vessels, brought on
by the preceding inflammation -- when this is the case, the discharge is much
whiter, or clear -- the consistence viscid and ropy, under which circumstances,
we must have recourse to the restringent injection, (No. 165.) or that made
with calomel, (No. 166.) for this acts as a local stimulant, and may therefore
be serviceable.

But though this method will generally succeed, there is sometimes one symptom
extremely troublesome, and calls for particular attention, should it be
violent, which belongs to the first stage of this complaint, that is, the
CHORDEE, so called from the Greek word korde -- this is a contraction of the
under part of the penis, which, when it is erected, and only then, is painful,
and feels as if pulled down with a chord -- this pain is chiefly under the
froenum, (a membranous ligament under the penis, which ties the praepuce to the
glans,) and along the duct of the urethra, for the alleviation of this symptom,
low living is particularly necessary -- gentle exercise -- avoiding all
inebriating liquids -- lascivious conversation, and the company of lewd women
-- the penis may be bathed often in a day with warm milk and water, or the
sedative fomentation, (No. 11^.) may be used, keeping the glans covered with
the praepuce during the operation -- and poultices of bread and milk may be
applied to the parts.

Bleeding with leeches upon the part has been highly useful -- wearing tight
drawers, by which means the penis may be confined downwards to the thigh, and
erections prevented, which greatly aggravate the painful affection.

Sometimes it will happen, that, from the violence of the irritation, the
secretion of the mucus seems to be totally suspended, or, at least,
considerably diminished, so that no discharge, or only a very trifling one,
takes place, though the other symptoms rage with great violence, under these
circumstances we must have recourse to bleeding, emollient applications,
fomentations, (No. 85 or 111.) and poultices, these are necessary to abate the
irritation, and bring on the discharge -- and here also opiates are necessary
-- afterward we must have recourse to the same remedies as we have before
specified.

Besides the symptoms we have repeated, sometimes uneasiness in the glands of
the groins, and swelling, called bubo, and similar effects in the testicles,
occasioning pain and tumefactions, will occur; but these arise from sympathy,
where no absorption of virus has taken place, and will yield to the same modes
of treatment as above laid down, consisting of the cooling plan and topical
sedatives.

But when the virus is absorbed into the habit, it gives rise to to variety of
complaints, which have received various appellations from the parts affected,
but are all owing to one and the same cause. The disease then is considered as
the POX, or LUES VENEREA, which may be communicated to the habit, wherever the
venereal virus gets insinuated into any part which is wounded or ulcerated, or
from ulcers formed by its own acrimony, or from parts being touched by it where
the skin is abraded -- and the places where the acrimony first makes its
entrance, are those where the disease in general first makes it appearance --
and as coition is the most common way of contracting it, so the first symptoms
most frequently appear somewhere upon the genitals.

DESCRIPTION. We may justly suspect that the virus is diffused through the
general mass of lymph, if the local symptoms, such as shankers, buboes, etc. do
not give way to the usual methods of cure, or, when cured, if they break out
again without fresh contagion -- but if, at the same time, we find ulcers
breaking out in the throat, dry scabby eruptions on the skin, or hard callous
tubercles, or pustules covered with a yellow scab, and appearing chiefly on the
hairy parts, we may be certain that the case is confirmed.

But sometimes these symptoms appear without any disease of the genitals, and
may be produced by other species of acrimony -- it may be necessary to give
what we considered their characteristic appearance.

Venereal eruptions have a branny appearance, and are superficial, unattended
with itching, and the scales being picked off, the skin appears of a reddish
brown, or rather copper color underneath.

The tubercles or pustules, seldom occupy the cheeks or the nose, nor have a
purulent apex, but are covered at top, either with a dry branny scurf, like the
eruptions just mentioned, or else with a hard dry scab of a tawny yellow
color; they particularly break out amongst the hair, or near it, on the
forehead or temples.

Venereal ulcers of the mouth first affect the tonsils, avula, and fauces, then
sometimes, though very rarely, the gums -- frequently extend to the nose, and
are callous or hard in their edges -- they are circumscribed, and, for the most
part, circular, at least they are confined to certain places -- are generally
hollow, and most commonly covered with a white or yellowish slough at the
bottom -- are red in their circumference, and frequently corrupt the adjacent
bones -- and are also, in general, combined with symptoms known to be venereal.

With respect to pains, those which are deep seated, particularly of the arms,
head, and shins, always fixed in the same place, and which affect the middle
and more solid part of the bones of the arms and legs, and those of the head,
raging chiefly and with great violence in the fore part of the night, may be
held as sure signs of this disease -- but other wandering pains of the
membranes of the muscles, and the ligaments of the joints, though they may
arise from a venereal taint, they cannot be considered as certain signs without
other symptoms of the lues are apparent at the same time.

Hard indolent swellings in different parts of the body, as in those which are
fleshy -- in the periosteum; upon the tendons; upon the ligaments; or upon the
bones, or those extuberances at the verge of the anus, called sici; though they
are all of them signs of a confirmed lues, if they are not preceded or
accompanied by some certain signs of this disease that are more certain and
evident, we should be very cautious of concluding that they proceeded from
venereal virus; for they may depend upon some lurking scrophulous humor. And
here we must observe, that when they derive their origin from this last clause,
they are very seldom painful, or tend to inflame or suppurate, whereas those
which are venereal usually do; and, if they lie upon a bone, generally produce
a caries -- upon the large bone of the leg, fore arm, and those of the skull,
these carious ulcers are most commonly met with, and when they are associated
with nocturnal pains, we never can hesitate about pronouncing their specific
nature

Frequent abortions, or the exclusion of scabby, ulcerated, half-corrupted, and
dead foetuses, happening without any manifest cause to disturb the foetus
before its time, or to destroy it in the womb, may be reckoned as a sure sign
of one of the parents being contaminated.

The more recent the complaint is the less difficult it will be to cure -- and
the habit of body is a material consideration; for those whose blood is in a
mild and bland state suffer less considerably than those who have their juices
acrimonious; for the disease is remarkably violent, and extremely difficult to
cure, in scorbutic and scrophulous constitutions -- and in a person already
inclined to asthma, pulmonary consumption, dropsy, gout, or any other chronic
disorder, it (...) also more tedious, for the same reasons, than in one whose
^^bit is in a sound and healthful state; for as the original disease is
increased by the accession of the venereal virus, of the lues is aggravated by
being joined to a new disorder, insomuch as the constitution labors under
complicated mischiefs.

The remote symptoms arise, and the more they affect the bones, so much the
more difficult the cure; because the venereal virus appears to occupy the
minute parts of the habit, and be very universally diffused through the humors
-- but the malady becomes incurable if the virus affects the brain, the lungs,
the liver, or any of the nobler internal parts, the patients will either sink
under that consumption called tabes, or die apoplectic.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, all those applications which inflame or
dry up local venereal ulcerations, whether astringent given internally, or
exhibited externally, or the discussion of buboes without the exhibition of
mercury.

CURE. The indication is, to free the habit from the venereal contagion, which
may always be done by mercury in some shape or other, either alone, or combined
with some other medicines, which the peculiarity of the constitution may
demand, as in every species of this complaint, or every complaint arising from
this source, where we are called in before the virus has got firmly rooted in
some of the more noble organs of vitality.

Different practitioners have been fond of different preparations of mercury,
and different modes of throwing it into the habit.

Some advise calomel to be rubbed on the inside of the lips, or cheek, to the
quantity of four grains every day, and let it be taken into the habit by the
absorbent system.

Others prefer the mercurial ointme^t, (No. 167.) from half a dram to two drams
to be rubbed on the inside of the thighs above the knee once or twice a day for
some space of time, 'till all the venereal symptoms vanish.

Some have been fond of calcined mercury, (160.) and opium, half a grain of
each formed into a pill, and taken night and morning, with a decoction of the
woods, (No. 88.) increasing the dose to a grain each or more.

Others have given the preference to the corrosive sublimate solution, (No.
168.) mixed with half a pint of barley water, or decoction of the woods, (No.
88.) to be taken night and morning.

The patients should lie in bed to sweat after taking the medicine, and they
ought to drink plentifully of whey, barley-water, o^ some such liquid,
throughout the day -- and if the medicine acts not as a gentle aperient, a mild
purge may be given occasionally. It has been observed, that those whom it
purges two or three times a day get well sooner than those whom it does not
purge -- it very seldom affects the mouth, but promotes discharge by urine and
the skin. This course is to be continued some weeks after all the symptoms
disappear -- and the decoction of the woods should be taken for some time after
the solution is left off.

Some prefer the sublimate pills, (No. 169.) under the idea of their being more
easily and safely taken in greater quantity, and from the stomach bearing it
better in this way; for the pills, gradually dissolving, are said not to affect
the stomach suddenly as the solution drank.

However, I think quicksilver mechanically divided into its most minute parts,
which art is capable of completing, the best mode of administration, as in the
mercurial gummous solution, (No. 170.) or the mercurial gummous pill, (No.
171.) as the form best pleases.

These seldom produce salivation, if some purgative is exhibited every tenth
day, and are said quickly, safely, and pleasantly to take off all the effects
of venereal virus, where no chirurgical operation is necessary, and then to be
highly useful in expediting the cure; for by this mode of administration, a
sufficient quantity of this powerful medicine may be thrown into the habit with
the greatest ease, without producing those violent effects the saline
mercurials are very apt to occasion -- and, perhaps, it is from this power of
filling the habit by these mild means upon which its superior efficacy depends.

For children, where mercury is necessary to be given, the mercurial syrup,
(No. 172.) for obvious reasons, claims the preference.

Where mercury given in these modes sail, which, under proper management, it
rarely does, corrosive sublimate has been recommended -- esteemed by many the
most preferable preparation in venereal diseases of the skin, and those of the
bones.

Some cases there are, however, which will not yield to mercury alone, and some
where success has been derived by varying from time to time the mercurial
preparations administered, and conjoining them frequently with cicuta --
administering sarsaparilla decoction, that of mezereon, (No. 173.) or bark with
chalybeates, or cooling medicines, opiates, antispasmodics, or cordials, such
as the constitutional circumstances required. But here the sagacity of the
practitioner must be left to make the necessary distinction, as it is
impossible to point out up upon paper precisely the deviations which may occur.
We shall only observe, that where the disease resists the modes we have laid
down, the practitioner must labor to find the constitutional defect, and
combine with mercury other remedies appropriated to its relief.

Besides, there are now and then some venereal symptoms which will remain,
notwithstanding the mercurial course being properly persisted in, such as
nodes, and swellings of the periosteum -- these are sometimes cured by the
mezereon decoction, (No. 173.) or the compound one of sarsaparilla persisted in
for a long continuance of time, which will be aided much by the warmth of a
southern clime. As for other local affections, surgical assistance is not
immediately necessary; for healing up of shankers, and discussing buboes by too
hasty external applications, has often created mischief -- cleanliness and dry
lint, in the first instance, and depending on internal remedies for the cure of
both, is by much the soundest practice, and will almost always answer, if the
complaints are simply venereal -- if otherwise, and they obstinately resist
this mode, the skill of a surgeon may become a necessary auxiliary.

With respect to a salivation, it is seldom, if ever at all, necessary --
however, if it is determined on, before the course is begun, should the patient
be of a full habit, it is advisable to take away some blood -- have recourse
to the warm or vapor lath, two or three times, and clear the stomach and
bowels with a dose of gentle physic -- then let the patient put on a flannel
shirt -- and half a dram of mercurial ointment, (No. 167.) must be rubbed in on
the inside of the thighs every evening, gradually increasing the quantity to
two drams, or more, if the constitution requires it, 'till a spitting is
brought on -- and this must be kept up for a fortnight after every venereal
symptom has disappeared -- the patient should drink plentifully of some
diluting liquid, as barley water with gum arabic, marsh-mallow tea, or such
like -- and persist in a light, easily digestible diet -- avoid the cool air --
and spit from a pint to a quart every day -- the more gradually the salivation
is brought on the better.

If we want to prevent the mercury from laying too strong hold of the mouth, it
must be diverted to the skin, by keeping the patient in a constant state of
perspiration, from the warmth of the room, by drinking plentifully of warm,
diluting watery liquids -- or, should he wish to avoid a spitting, the patient
should take from time to time some gentle physic, or get into a vapor bath --
and this mode is thought by some the most advisable, as by these means we
shall be enabled to throw in a large quantity of mercury -- if inflammatory
symptoms occur, we must have recourse to bleeding, and confine the patient to a
low diet, and copious dilution with watery mucilaginous fluids -- but should
the strength be much reduced, a nourishing diet, with wine, infusion of bark,
and some chalybeate preparation, and a free country air, are peoper.

After the course is completed, and the cure performed, the patients should
return to their usual modes of living, as has been repeatedly recommended, when
recovering from any acute disease that has much harrassed the constitution.

SECTION XX.
WE now are to treat of diseases of the skin -- some of which are considered
merely as local complaints of the skin itself, beginning in, and not extending
themselves farther than that part of the machine; whilst others depend on acrid
states of the humors, and are more generally diffusive through the habit,
putting on different appearances, according to the parts they affect, and very
often alternating with those on the skin; so that, on the expulsion of the
acrimonious humors, they manifest themselves on the exterior surface of the
machine; and on being expelled, occasion internal affections.

We shall, therefore, form this class of complaints into two divisions, after
particularizing some, and from thence deduce our general modes of cure.

And, first, of the

1. ITCH;
so called from the effect it produces. Different are the causes from which
this complaint may arise, as the scurvy, so called, lues venerea, etc. -- but
as these eruptions are only symptomatic, when thus derived, we shall confine
ourselves to the common itch.

DESCRIPTION. This is discoverable by small spots about the size of a millet
seed, or somewhat larger, which, broken by scratching, form a scab, itch
violently -- it is contagious, and chiefly affects the hands.

This disorder chiefly begins between the fingers -- red, hot vesicles, full of
acrid serum, make their appearance, to which, by scratching, dry, rough scabs,
attended with great itching, succeed.

But this, according to the state of humors being more or less in a bland or
acrimonious state, puts on different appearances -- hence the spots, instead of
being merely vesicular, will have here and there appearances of matter
contained in them, especially if the disease has been of any continuance, and
the patients very dirty -- however, we may in general discover some spots
manifesting the true itch, particularly in the places where there is the most
warmth, as between the fingers, in the bend of the arm, under the arm-pit, in
the interior part below the knee.

Children are more subject to it than adults -- delicate habits with soft
smooth skins, and adults more than old people -- all which is owing to the
softness and moisture of the skin, and quicker sensibility of that part in one
than another.

The CAUSE is universally believed to be, animalculae in the ^kin -- and, from
the idea of this complaint so founded, a number of the appearances is readily
and satisfactorily accounted for, as why it is attended with itching, why
caught by contagion -- and why it returns after sometimes being cured.

The itching is occasioned by these animalculae irritating the ^^res in the
places where they are lodged -- hence raising a very minute blister, which,
provoking us to scratch, is burst, and se^^^ then oozes out and forms a scab --
and these animalculae running under the cuticle, or scarf skin, (25.) deposit
their eggs in various parts; which, by the heat of the machine, are hatched,
and th^s the disease spreads itself -- by contagion, it is communicated (...)
by the animalculae themselves getting from the affected to the sound person --
or from touching any soft substance where they may be lodged -- or from the
person receiving some of the eggs upon the cuticle, which are rubbed into the
furrows, and there lay a proper time for producing their young -- and probably
its return may be owing to the eggs not being totally destroyed in such as were
affected, and apparently cured.

Sometimes little prominent spots, itching and crowding together, neither
excoriated nor scabby, will affect the skin, from a ^^^^ntion of acrid
perspirable matter, made more acrimonious by stagnating in the small cryptae,
hollow places like cavities, containing some fluid, and small glands, called
sebaceous glands, of the skin and face -- these are called TETTERS or HERPES,
from erpo, repo, to creep, because they creep from place to place, and, like
the former, are only inherent in the part affected, and do not contaminate the
mass of fluids.

These we give as specimens of eruptions from external causes -- these happen
indiscriminately to all people.

But in infants, or the younger class of mankind, the skin is often eroded with
an acrimonious serum, and more frequently the hairy scalp in the skin, which
begins at first to grow moist, with an itching -- hence children rub their
heads against the pillows, or any other thing they lie upon -- when this
disease is in its beginning, a rather acid and very nauseous smell may be
perceived -- hence some have called such eruptions ACORES, from acer, sharp or
four -- afterward the skin begins to grow red, becomes granulous, then they
have named it HERPES, MILIARIS, miliary tetter, because the disease spreads and
creeps along, and spots like millet-seed are prominent above the skin -- others
have called it FICOSUS, from ficus, a fig, because in the skin the eruptions
look like the small round seeds of a fig cut in two -- the^ is the eflux of
serum augmented, which in a small space of time are concreted into foul scabs,
which sometimes are so thick, that they are penetrated with many very small
apertures, and now permit a somewhat thicker humor to ooze out; but that
begins to adhere on all sides to the crust or scab, increasing its thickness,
grows putrid, erodes the skin, and there degenerate into deep ulcers, which
pour forth an extremely foetid humor; and, as a moth-worm destroys clothes, so
does this the skin -- hence is derived the term

2. TINEA,
a moth-worm. It has also been called FAVUS, from its resemblance to a
honeycomb -- and in English SCALD-HEAD, from scald, scrufy or scabby, and head
-- when on the head it (...) that name -- when on the face, CRUSTA LACTEA, or
milk (...) -- indeed they both have been reduced to the same species, and
called HESPES PUSTULOSUS, pustulous tetter, and this is considered as the
mildest of all, infesting the forehead and temples, but occurs only in infants
one or two years old whilst they make (...) of milk -- hence the term CRUSTA
LACTERA or milk scab.

DESCRIPTION. This, to which we shall confine ourselves begins with numerous
little vesicles, or bladdery appearance^ full of an oily fluid, cohering
together, at first white, afterw^^^^ yellow -- these vesicles, dried and shrunk
up, pour forth a (...) quantity of colorless liquid milk, which, being dried,
(...) scabs; and they are either dry, or moist, white, or yellow, ^^^dom brown
-- they itch, from whence the child scratches them (...) which, being removed,
the skin appears bright; but very often there appears small apertures, whence
again flows out a vis^^^ ^^^our, forming scabs -- the disease cured, the skin
remains per^^^^, and free from any defect.

This affection sometimes creeps to the posterior part of the (...), ears,
chin, neck, and, indeed, through the whole surface of the body.

Gross, fat children are liable to be affected with this, who abound with milk,
who suck fat -- greedy nurses, full of milk -- (...) also occurs in children
replete with the seeds of the scrophu^^^ (^69.) not yet making its appearance,
or whose blood is viti^^^ with acrimony, from the faults of nurses -- who are
irascible, (...) of liquor, scrophulous, or subject to any acrimony of their
(...).

3. LEPROSY.
(...) the Greek word lepros, asper, rough, because the skin (...) rough with
scales -- and ELEPHANTIASIS, from elephas, an (...), because this disorder
creates some appearances in the (...) like those of an elephant. From the
accounts given by (...) and CELSUS, many have taken the two diseases to be
(...) ^ame, only in different degrees, supposing the LEPROSY more (...), the
ELEPHANTIASIS more deep-seated, calling one (...) leprosy of the Greeks, the
other the leprosy of the Arabi^^^ -- but modern authors have divided them into
different gene^^^ (...) have given us separate symptoms by which they may be
^^^guished -- however, we shall confine ourselves to the former, (...) the
elephantiasis, though endemic in Egypt, seems totally (...) in Europe.

DESCRIPTION. This is discoverable by hard, thick (...) or tubercles, or dry
scales like warts, rather of a reddish (...), affecting the face and hands,
without pain, sometimes (...) whole body, though in the vicinity there is an
itching, and ^^^^times these pustulous eruptions themselves itch also -- the
(...) frequently near them is rather pasty, commonly destitute of (...), and
the legs affected with a soft, pale, and in elastic swell^^ -- sometimes the
eruptions ulcerate, and afterward become (...) -- if a number of these make
their appearance, it is called (...) moist leprosy -- if otherwise, the dry.

Sometimes different parts of the body will be covered with (...) scales, which
are white, and lay one upon the other like the (...) of a fish -- these are
large, and, amongst the people of Asia (...) surrounded with a red circle; and
some have observed, that (...) eruptions were not only scaly, but smelt like
fish -- hence this (...) of leprosy was called ITCHYOSIS, from the Greek word
(...) piscis, a fish.

Now, the tinea and leprosy we take to depend upon some acrimonious humor
diffused through the habit, and, by the efforts of nature, deposited upon the
skin.

According, then, to the causes and constitutional circumstances do we form our
indications of cure; for having not, in the ITCH and TETTER here recited,
occasion to fear any ill consequences to be derived from repelling any humor
into the habit, and the causes creating them being merely external, external
applications will be sufficient to form a radical cure, at least very trifling
assistance will be requisite from internal remedies -- whilst in the SCALD HEAD
and LEPROSY, such internal remedies are necessary as will clear the habit of
those acrimonious humors, by promoting regularly and constantly some of the
natural evacuations, particularly that of perspiration and urine, and, at the
same time, so supporting the strength of the system, and especially that of the
digestive powers, that soft, mild, nutritious fluids may supply the place of
those which are evacuated, and the disposition which the constitution has to
generate acrimony so offensive may be altered as much as in the power of
medical aid to accomplish -- and indeed the same modes will hold good in all
the variety of eruptive complaints, unattended with any fever of moment, which
are of long continuance, and come under the denomination of land scurvy, etc.
and which we have not before specified.

In order, therefore, to exemplify the different modes, we shall proceed to
speak of the cure of the four just now mentioned -- and, first, of the itch,
whose

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS are, pustules, or itching small ulcers, contagious, and
chiefly affecting the hands, from small animalculae irritating the skin below
the cuticle.

CURE. In strong robust constitutions, it may be advisable to take away some
blood, and give a dose or two of gentle physic -- then let the skin be well
cleaned, by going into the warm bath, and afterward have recourse to some of
the applications, (from No. 174 to 177.) -- With regard to sulphur, (...) must
observe, that what is called sulphur vivum is preferable in these cases as an
external application, because, in forming flowers, it loses much of its
efficacy -- the flowers are also ordered to be taken internally, as it is
supposed that some of the animalculae might be too deep-seated for the ointment
to affect them, hence might they be reached by the streams passing through the
skin -- indeed, coupled with a little cream of tartar it makes an agreeable
opening and diaphoretic medicine.

With the mercurial wash and ointment it will be sufficient to wash or anoint
the parts affected, or to rub some of the latte^ into the palms of the hands or
wrists -- and it would be right now and then to take some gentle physic, and
drink copiously of some aqueous liquid, to prevent the mercury from affecting
the mouth.

If the complaint proves obstinate, as it will sometimes do if it is of the dry
species, warm baths may be used during the external applications, and small
doses of antimonials, (180) and mercurials, (160.) exhibited with a decoction
of the woods, (No. 88, 89.) -- but these are seldom necessary, though they are
useful as auxiliaries, where the acrid state of the humors is a concomitant.
Notwithstanding mercurials have been advised, and almost always succeed in the
cure of this complaint, there have been instances where it has continued, even
after the patient has gone through a salivation -- under these circumstances,
where mercury has not been efficacious, sulphur is our dernier resort.

With regard to the herpes or tetter, it is cured by topical applications, and
of such kinds as by their stimulus and astringency give strength and firmness
to the part affected, so that the matter of perspiration is made to pass off
freely, and prevented from accumulating on account of the weakness and relaxed
state of the places wherein the complaint manifests itself -- of remedies of
this sort there are a great variety, such as ink, water of kali, oil from burnt
paper, rags or wood which is acrid; this is to be diluted with fasting saliva,
and the part affected anointed with it -- but the most preferable is a wash
formed of ten grains of muriated quicksilver dissolved in a pint of water;
solutions of the preparations of lead, (139.) have been in the milder kind of
this disease useful and efficacious.

The TIENA, or SCALD HEAD, that species to which we confine ourselves, has for
its CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS, small ulcers in the skin of the hairy scalp, at the
roots of the hair, oozing out a humor running into a white, dryish scab --
when this happens to children otherwise apparently healthy, the body should be
kept open with mild aperients, such as magnesia and rhubarb, or Polychrest
salt, in properly proportioned doses; the hair kept close cut and short -- the
parts clean, by washing them with soap and water -- and a moderate diet
prescribed.

Indeed, it is usually cured by weaning the child, or changing the nurse, whose
milk is younger, thinner, and less loaded with oily matter.

These children get the teeth later, and with more difficulty -- their bowels
are costive -- and often there appears a propensity to rickets -- without the
eruption should be imprudently repelled, nothing else is necessary to be done
-- but if it should be attended with an acrimony of the humors, and spreads
itself to different parts of the body, a young nurse should be chosen whose
milk is bland and well diluted, not rich and thick; she therefore should live
on liquid or moistening food; at the same time, if restless, gentle opiates may
be now and then given to procure sleep.

Should this complaint prove obstinate, and be attended with great itching, a
paleness of the countenance, and the fleshy parts appear relaxed and flabby,
here we must have recourse to small doses of calomel, as an alterative, and
antimonial wine, with the same intent, proportioning the doses to the state of
the stomach and bowels, that the one may not purge, nor the other occasion too
constant sickness or nausea.

To allay the itching, the head must be rubbed with oil of sweet almonds --
several recommend the pitch ointment of the Edinburgh Dispensatory, which I
have found effectual -- cream mixed with chalk in fine powder -- solutions of
the preparations of lead, and that of muriated quicksilver, as in case of
tetter, may be had recourse to.

In every eruption of tettery kind to which children are liable, of which the
scald head we consider one, Mr. Bell asserts, the sulphur, in some form or
other, commonly proves the most effectual application, therefore, in failure of
other remedies, sulphur should be employed.

However, of these remedies I should recommend a very cautious use, because I
have seen great mischiefs occur from the injudicious application of stimulants
and repellents in some cases, from the idea of the complaint being merely
cuticular, borrowing nothing from the habit in general -- indeed, so obvious
has it been, that soon after the repulsion of the humor, coughs, and febrile
symptoms have come on -- uneasiness in the bowels -- perceptible emaciation,
which, upon the reappearance of the complaint, have all gone off -- in a
country town, where it was the practice of the old women to cure the scald head
with pepper and butter, it very often proved fatal.

I should therefore advise that cleanliness, change of nurses, or weaning, with
the use of gentle purgatives, should be first tried -- if these succeed not,
the use of alteratives and antimonials, or the ponderous muriated earth, should
be tried for some time, and issues, before recourse should be had to any of the
preparations of lead, mercury, or sulphur, then they might be tried with
safety, as I have from experience been convinced -- and these issues should be
continued 'till the complaint be totally cured, and the constitution has
recovered its usual strength and firmness -- when this has been repelled, it
has been thought advisable to endeavor to solicit the complaint back again,
if any internal symptoms manifested themselves, which, it is said, may be done
by the application of the leaves of beat to the part originally affected; but
of this I have had no experience -- it might, however, be tried, whilst the
other internal remedies above recommended to carry off the humor were
persisted in.

In the CURE of the LEPROSY, whose CHARACTERISTIC SYMPTOMS are, the skin rough,
with white eschars, which have a branny appearance, and are chapped --
sometimes moist underneath and itching -- warm baths, a clear pure air, with a
thin laxative diet, are essentially necessary -- and also the use of
antimonials and mercurials -- though a salivation exasperates this disease, six
grains of calomel, with one of camphor, may be exhibited once a week, and
purged off with a common purging draught in the morning.

Dr. RUSSEL asserts, he cured the dry leprosy in the course of a month, by
giving a bolus made of the flesh of vipers, twenty grains, and one of camphor,
with a little conserve of roses, every night, and the morning following half a
pint of seawater -- viper broth, or chicken broth with vipers, has been
considered as beneficial -- but the greatest success has been attributed to the
decoction of the interior part of the elm-tree, (No. 178.) which should be
continued several weeks -- and should, by its use, the efflorescences be
augmented, it is a pleasing symptom, as it promises a salutary termination.

We have had instances of this complaint, where the symptoms have put on a high
degree of violence, being cured by bark and sassafras, (No. 179.) and the
application of a stimulant lotion, (No. 180.) night and morning, a perpetual
blister being at the same time kept open between the shoulders.

In complaints of this class I have found great benefit from the judicious use
of mercurials and antimonials, intermediately (...) the ponderous muriated
earth, with the compound decoction of sarsaparilla of the London Dispensatory
-- to a quart of which I have occasionally added six drams of Peruvian bark.

Indeed, in all eruptive complaints which are united with, and proceed from an
acrimony of the fluids internally diffused, and manifest themselves by symptoms
which bespeak general affections of the habit, or internal local ones, I should
recommend the gentle evacuating and tonic plain, on the principles we have
specified in the former part of this section; and shall now proceed to speak of
some complaints which have been detached from the general arrangement
intentionally, and one accidentally omitted.

SECTION XXI.
1. INFLAMMATION OF THE WOMB.
DESCRIPTION. This complaint is attended with heat, tension, swelling, and pain
in the lower part of the belly -- vomiting, the mouth of the womb is so
painful, that it cannot bear touch, and is drawn inwards -- there is a
continued fever, sometimes of the remittent kind, accompanied with chillness,
delirium, tossing about of the body -- the head, though chiefly the fore part,
is painful, and also the eyes -- convulsions of the neck, hands, and feet come
on -- the pain extends itself to the groins, thighs, midriff, and collar bones,
associated with difficulty of breathing and pleuritic symptoms; -- nausea,
vomiting, hiccough, costiveness -- and pain in making water also manifest
themselves.

In the beginning the pulse is full and quick, afterward weak and frequent --
to which are joined faintings, coldness of the extremities, drowsiness, with a
number of other dangerous and violent symptoms.

CAUSES. The womb may be affected with this complaint from all those causes
which are apt to induce inflammatory affections in other parts. (See
Inflammation, p. 298, etc.) -- obstructed menses -- or any thing which will
determine the blood too freely to the womb, and create an accumulation more
than naturally large in that organ. But authors have very judiciously divided
it into three species -- 1st, Into that which affects lying-in women -- 2d,
That which is attended with a malignant fever -- and, 3d, That which deduces
its origin from the milk.

IN THE FIRST OF THESE, a suppression of lochia often precedes the complaint,
or it is brought on by violent efforts of the accoucheur in difficult labors,
blows, compression, laceration from the fingers, or the use of instruments,
retention of coagulated blood, and great force exerted in replacing a
prolapsus, or falling down of the womb.

CURE. Now, where only the symptoms of common inflammation are the
concomitants, such as local pain, heat, (...) and the pulse full, quick, and
hard, bleeding must be had recourse to -- fomentations and poultices -- the
patient should drink copiously of watery fluids -- and take of nitrous, saline,
and antimonial medicines -- and, in fine, the method pursued as in other
inflammatory cases. (See Inflammation, etc.) Besides, here, all external
pressure is to be avoided -- if necessary, the urine must be drawn off by the
catheter, and the rectum, (45.) emptied by glysters occasionally; -- but if the
complaint arises from a suppression of the lochia, and, notwithstanding all our
efforts, the pain should continue opiates may sometimes be given with success;
for this may proceed from some spasmodic affections, occasioned by irritation.

THE SECOND most commonly proceeds from internal causes, as putrid acrid
matter, or a translation of that which creates erysipelas to the uterus,
discoverable by a burning heat internally -- delirium, black dry tongue, and at
the same time coldness of the extremities, with a frequent and irregular pulse.

CURE. Here are required a freer use of opiates and diaphoretics, to determine
the fluids to the skin, and evacuate the offending matter, because these cases
seem more to depend upon irritating causes than mere inflammations -- the
patients, therefore, should be kept much in bed, moderately warm -- drink
freely of barley water, thin gruel, and these frequently repeated -- go
occasionally into the warm baths -- and gentle diaphoretics, (180.) should be
insisted upon, as antimonials in small doses, acetated ammonia, (180, 181.)
nitre, (176.) and such like.

THE THIRD, is an acute febrile disease, attended with a swelling of the belly
-- tension, pain of (...), thirst, headache, delirium, dryness of the tongue --
disturbed sleep, although the ^^chia flow freely -- and this inflammation
sometimes precedes, sometimes succeeds delivery.

CURE. Here we should pursue the mode similar to what we have laid down its
intestinal inflammation -- large evacuations, by bleeding, purging, with
diuretics, and a thin spare regimen -- the milk also should be solicited into
the breasts by every possible means, setting the child early to the breasts,
applying cupping glasses, saline mixtures, and antimonial preparations, given
(...) proper intervals, and the breasts kept warm.

With respect to bleeding, some have thought it unnecessary, because of the
discharge of the lochia; but in this case a larger quantity by much than what
flows in that case is necessary to be taken, that death may be avoided, and the
deposition of milk in the abdomen, or a milk abscess, may be prevented; -- for
this disease has been said to be fatal to many women -- and in opening (...)
bodies of those who have died of this disease, a milky, thin, or grumous
matter, to the quantity of a pint, has been effused in the abdomen.

But if the fever should be moderate, the lochia, sweats, and flow of milk into
the breasts proper and natural -- there should be no swelling of the abdomen --
no headache, particularly if there should be a looseness and bilious stools, it
will be sufficient to support these evacuations by drinking copiously mild thin
gr^^^ -- taking oily medicines, and the use of sheathing glysters. See
PUERPERAL FEVER. (243.)

Now, from the accounts given of these three species, the indications of cure
are plainly pointed out to us. IN THE FIRST, we endeavor to take off the
inflammation by the common mode directed for subduing inflammatory complaints
of other parts. IN THE SECOND, we attempt to evacuate the acrimony. And IN THE
LAST, to prevent the coagulation of the milk, or its effusion into parts for
which it is not destined by nature, by soliciting into and keeping it in its
natural reservoirs.

2. MENSES;
so called from the Greek word, mean, mensis, a month, from that being the
usual time of their periodic appearance -- they (...) called, for the same
reason, also MENSTRUA, or CATA^EN^A -- when these flow in their natural state,
there is a flux of blood from the vessels of the womb and vagina, (51.) every
(...) -- in some every three weeks -- they generally first make their
appearance about the age of fourteen or fifteen -- sometimes at an earlier
period -- and go off, or cease to flow, about the age (...) forty-nine or fifty
-- sometimes sooner, if they have made (...) appearance at an earlier period
than common -- this discharge though very salutary when it flows regularly, and
in due proportion, is always attended with disagreeable consequences when it is
either too profuse, too defective, or altogether ^^structed.

When the menses flow too copiously, continue too long, (...) return too
frequently, so that the machine feels evident (...) of debility, this we
consider as a disease, called.

MENORHACIA, from mean, mensis, and reo, fluo, to (...), which may arise from
too rapid circulation of the blood, he^^^ called ACTIVE -- or from too relaxed
a state of the uterine vessels then called PASSIVE.

IN THE FIRST CASE, it is generally preceded by headache -- oppressed
breathing, attended with heat, thirst, quick full pulse, pain of the loins,
often down the thighs -- and other febrile symptoms -- in this case we must be
exceedingly careful that we do not attempt to stop the flux of blood too
suddenly, not 'till the vessels have sufficiently emptied themselves, or that
has been performed by art -- then we are to proceed on the cooling plan, and
order such remedies as will abate the too great vascular action, such as we
prescribed in cases of ACTIVE haemorrhages when on that subject, (389, etc.)
such as bleeding, nitrous medicines given copiously, with cooling emulsions,
and a spare cool diet, and keeping the body open, is essentially necessary --
care should be taken to avoid heat -- violent agitation, and exercise, and
every mental, as well as corporeal exertion; for these will give too great
force to the circulating fluids, and contribute to increase the complaint.

But at the early period of the disease, if what is here recommended should
fail of success, small doses of ipecacuanha, (No. 133.) or tartarized antimony,
(No. 6, 7.) (168.) sufficient to create nausea, or gentle vomiting; for these
take off spasmodic constriction from the surface, divert the flow of humors
more generally to the external parts, and hence render the circulation more
equal.

On the other hand, when the face becomes pallid, the breathing is affected by
very moderate exercise -- the back feels weak and painful from continuing in
one posture -- the pulse grows feeble, the extremities become unusually cold --
in the evening (...) feet appears pasty, and an uncommon weariness from
exer^^^^, this disease must be considered of the passive kind; and so nay it
also if there are frequent returns of the disease; and in the intervals of the
periodic discharge, the whites, which we shall, (...) explain, constantly
attend.

CURE. In this case we must moderate the discharge, by (...) wet applications
to the pubes and external parts -- sponge (...) dipped in vinegar and water
passed up the vagina -- the patient avoiding an erect posture as much as
possible -- lying cool on hair mattresses -- by shunning external heat -- using
a light and cool diet -- taking cool astringent drinks, with astringents, (No.
56. 138.) and opiates internally -- keeping the body open with gentle
aperients, and avoiding every cause of imitation.

And, in order to prevent a relapse, we must endeavor to invigorate and give
strength to the system, by cold bathing, preparations of iron, and bark, and
moderate exercise in a clear cool air.

The diet should be of nutritious kind -- and, during the flux, all those
things called cordials should be avoided -- though in some passive cases, where
the flow is almost constant, joined with tonic remedies, they may be highly
useful -- and gentle exercise in a carriage has been said to moderate and
contribute to suppress the sanguinary discharge.

3. LEUCORRHOEA;
so called from the Greek leukos, albos, white, and reo, fluo, to flow, because
of the discharge being generally of a white color -- also FLUOR ALBUS, white
flux -- it is vulgarly called the WHITES, for the same reason -- this is a
discharge of serous or mucous matter, sometimes white, or others yellowish,
brownish, or rather greenish, from the womb and vagina.

DESCRIPTION. At first this discharge is mild and serous, which afterward, by
not passing freely off, or stagnating, becomes more thick and acrimonious, and
will be different with regard to its color and smell -- indeed, those symptoms
which we have enumerated as concomitants to a morbid flux of the menses from a
passive cause, generally here attend -- and when the discharge is excessive, or
of any long continuance, pains and weakness of the loins -- indigestion -- and
other symptoms of debility -- swelling of the eyelids -- thick urine --
palpitation of the heart -- frequent faintings, are almost always constant
concomitants; -- but in the early stages they do not frequently make their
appearance to any great degree.

Indeed, the color and consistence of the discharge alter, from a variety of
circumstances, according to the nature and duration of the disease, season,
climate, and constitution -- in warm weather, gross habits neglecting to keep
the parts clean, from quantity or acrimony painful excoriations are occasioned,
insomuch, that sometimes it has been difficult to distinguish it from the
effect of some venereal taint -- and here it will be necessary to advert to
some concomitant circumstances -- if a discharge comes on suddenly, with
symptoms of heat and pain -- if it is not attended with weakness or pain in the
back -- if the patient appears to be of a healthful strong stamina -- has had
no children -- no miscarriages -- nor severe or copious flow of the ^^^ses --
if the discharge should be thin and much discolored at first, we may then
suspect something of venereal affection in the case -- indeed, I have known
many cured of what they called the whites by means to which a virulent gleet,
or clap, (...) readily yield.

However, the WHITES often occur in women who are subject to too copious a flow
of the menses, or have them too frequently return, and are liable to this from
causes which weaken the vessels of the womb and vagina -- or are of a relaxed
or debilitated constitution -- hence it generally affects women advanced in
life, particularly those who have had children, have often miscarried,
menstruated irregularly -- also those who lead an inactive life; those who are
full and jolly, and whole solids are loose and flabby -- the more recent and
whiter the discharge, the more easy to cure the disease; the longer the
continuance, and the more green or brown the color, the more difficult.

CAUSES. Are all such as occasion a collection of serum, and weaken the vessels
of the parts affected, or the habit in general -- hence living in moist air --
feeding on viscid too food, leading a life of indolence -- using too frequently
warm baths; an immoderate flow, or an obstruction of the menses; or it may be
occasioned by a translation of humors to the womb and vagina.

CURE. Now it will appear obvious, as we consider the nature of the disease,
whether local or general, so must we adapt our remedies, whether it depends
upon the relaxed state of the vessels of the womb primarily and principally, or
we attribute it to the debilitated state of the system; in the former, we may
place much dependence upon external applications of the astringent class; in
the latter, some medicines internally should be exhibited, which will not only
give strength to the constitution, but contribute to maintain it in that state
-- hence, then, according to the different circumstances of the constitution,
we must regulate our modes of cure.

When it occurs in those who live sedentary and indolent lives, indulging in
luxuries, and supporting themselves by a full rich diet, by which the habit
will be loaded with gross humors, their mode should be altered to a diet which
is more sparing, and a cooling regimen, having frequent recourse to purgatives,
and a more active state of life; but to those of a more weak, relaxed state of
solids, we must invigorate the constitution in the same manner as directed in
too copious flow of the menses from a passive cause, (500.) -- here it is of
great use to keep the parts clean by frequent partial baths of cold water; and
after gentle evacuations, in those who have lived indolently and luxuriously,
an astringent wash of the gentle kind may be made use of, such as the
restringent injection, (No. 165.) with the addition of eleven ounces of
infusion of roses; in those of relaxed habits, injections of bark with alum,
alum water, infusion of tormentil roots, with litharge water, or some such
astringent preparations; for they are said to diminish the discharge, and, in
recent cases, entirely remove it.

Sometimes from a long continuance of this disease, the humors are apt to be
acrimonious and irritating, and assist in supporting the discharge; then
hartshorn jellies, or those of isinglass, are agreeable and useful auxiliaries.

Sometimes those stimulants which act upon the urinary passages, and
communicate their effects to the womb and vagina. have been thought beneficial
in these cases; Spanish flies in tincture, joined with some of the preparation
of iron, and bark, have produced good effects; balsam of copaiva; balsam of
turpentine, and those of this class, have been considered as useful.

But, in cases of long standing, I have seen much benefit derived, during the
use of astringent medicines, from a stimulating plaster or blister applied to
the region of the sacrum, or lower vertebrae of the back.

If the complaint proceeds from, or is supported by a (...) state of fluids,
that should be corrected by the use of anti^^^^als and mercurials, taken for
some time, with a decoction of the woods in lime water; and in this state of
the constitution issues are extremely serviceable; after this course, local
applications, and astringents internally bid fair to produce th^se good
effects, which they fail of doing without such an alterative (...).

4. We are now to treat of the menses in a different (...) of view, where they
are either retained, suppressed, or flow with difficulty, and these are all
comprised under the term AM^^^^RHOEA, from the Greek a, alpha, non, mean,
mensis, (...) and r^^, fluo, to flow.

THE FIRST OF THESE, or THE RETENTION of the (...) happens in women arrived at
a state of puberty, in whom ^^ter the usual time of their first appearance,
they do not (...) manifest themselves; and when at the same time there (...)
various affections, showing the machine to be in a state of ^^^ease.

THE SECOND, or a SUPPRESSION, in adults, in whom (...) menses, which have been
accustomed to flow, are stopped.

THE THIRD is where they do flow, but too sparingly, (...) with pain.

Now in the first of these, that disease, CHLOROSIS, from (...) Greek (...),
viridis, green, or pallidus, pale, from the color of the countenance, called
here the GREEN SICKNESS, (...) induced.

DESCRIPTION. This complaint is attended with (...) pallid or yellowish
countence, unassociated with any yellow^^^ of the eyes, like that in the
jaundice -- small and weak pulse, (...) the same time languid, a want of
alertness in motion, with (...) and debility -- the patients are affected with
nausea, vo^^^ing, often throw up wind, and have pain in the stomach -- (...)
though they want appetite for common food, have a desi^^ (...) such things as
are not used for food, as chalk, slates, or other absorbents, green fruit --
they are costive, and have other symptoms of indigestion; the whole body is
pale and flaccid; and the feet and great part of the body become pasty -- by
quick (...) particularly going up stairs, or climbing up hill, the (...) is
laborious -- palpitation affects the heart -- fainting -- sometimes a pain or
giddiness in the head comes on, but (...) certainly pains of the back, loins,
and hips. Now these (...) are among the certain signs of this disease, when
(...) ^o any considerable degree; indeed, in the earlier stag^^ most of them
prevail, but not to that excess.

As the menses appear at different ages, we must not style a (...) diseased
because they flow not at a given time -- but, if, (...) the common time has
elapsed, there appear evident signs (...) indisposition, such as we have
recited in their inferior degree, (...) numerous, we need not hesitate in
pronouncing the (...) a disease.

CAUSES. A debility of the system in general, bringing (...) similar state in
the vessels of the womb, whence a general (...) and local uterine circulation,
occasioning the menses to ^^^^tained.

(...). The indications are, to strengthen the system; (...) the action of the
vessels, particularly those of the (...) -- and these are done chiefly by bark
tormentil root, and (...), joined with preparations of iron and bitters -- the
pa^^^^^ ought to live on a generous diet, go into the cold bath (...) exercise
-- these will invigorate the constitution -- after^^^^s, aloetic purges are
useful -- frictions of the lower extre^^^^, and bathing the feet in warm water
-- indeed, all those ^^^^^^ives are of service which stimulate the rectum, as
aloes, (...), black hellebore, and calomel; for they communicate (...) effects
to the vessels of the womb.

Blistering the lower part of the back, or stimulating plasters (...) there,
may be advantageously recommended.

There this debility is brought on, as it sometimes is, by (...) uneasiness of
mind, occasioned by disappointments, or (...) delay in love, matrimony is an
efficacious remedy -- (...) also have great faith in the electric shock; and,
indeed, as stimulant, electricity bids fair to be of great service.

THE SECOND SPECIES, or SUPPRESSION of the menses rises (...) different cause,
from some resistance in the extremities (...) uterine vessels, originating most
frequently from spasmo^^^ constriction of th^se vessels, or, according to some,
from a (...) of them; the former seems to be the general cause, as it (...) its
origin from cold, fea^, irregular passions, fullness, or (...) similar, and
this complaint comes on after the men^^^^ discharges have gone on for some time
regularly; for, on (...) first appearance, they will sometimes stop, and not
return (...) year, or perhaps a longer space -- but, under this circumstance,
we are not to consider this as a disease, without it is attended with some
morbid symptoms, such as periodic fluxes of blood from some other parts, as
from the nose, eyes, ears, intestines, stomach, lungs, etc. which will
sometimes occur in cases of suppression, hysteric symptoms, costiveness,
frequent colic pains; for these in this species are very often comcomitants.

CURE. The indications of cure here are, to take off the spasmodic constriction
on the uterine vessels, which we attempt by that class of medicines called
emenagogues, or promoters of the menses (183.) amongst which I consider sabine,
(149, 150.) as the most certain.

However, it is often sufficient for the patient to keep quiet -- avoid cold,
and irregularities of diet -- go into the warm (...), or sit up in a half bath,
or let steams of warm water be directed to the womb -- or warm fomentations may
be applied on the lower part of the abdomen, round the hips, and the tops of
the thighs.

But we must observe, that these applications are only to be had recourse to at
the time when we expect nature would (...) made her efforts in a healthful
state -- and in some cases the ^^^^ent will feel some symptoms similar to what
usually (...) themselves before the coming on of the menstrual (...) each
period -- it is then we should attempt to assist her, (...) likely to be
successful -- but should the disease not yield to (...) applications, the
remedies advised in retention of the (...) (503.) may be tried, particularly
aloetic purges, electricity, and antispasmodics -- though here we should be
cautious in the (...) of tonic remedies and cold bathing -- we should rather
depend (...) on such as were more relaxing.

This complaint is very often brought on by other disease^ of the constitution,
and then is only symptomatic, to cure which we must advert to the cause, of
whatever nature it is, and (...) our remedies accordingly.

THE THIRD SPECIES, or painful menstruation, generally ^^fects the whole system
sympathetically, and the parts which (...) contiguous to the womb, producing
pains in the loins, hips, and down the thighs -- wandering pains of the lower
part of the abdomen, of the head -- occasioning also pain at the stomach --
^^^diness of the head, frequently sickness and retchings, a number (...)
hysteric symptoms, and sometimes epidemic fits -- and other ^^^vous symptoms,
notwithstanding the menses continue to flow (...) some time.

This disease chiefly affects viragos, who are of full habits, and those who
are lascivious, and is supposed to deduce its (...) partly from the weaker
action of the vessels of the womb; (...) perhaps, more particularly from some
spasmodic affections of the (...) vessels of that organ.

CURE. Pregnancy, for the most part, performs a radical (...); but the symptoms
may be alleviated by what has been ^^^^mmended in a suppression, (504.) made
use of some days (...) the coming on of the menses -- to which are recommended
(...) every night before bed time, and in smaller quantities (...) the day, of
any mild watery drink, a little warm, as (...) tea, thin gruel, barley water,
or such like, or slight infu^^^^ of mint or pennyroyal -- frequent lying in an
horizontal (...) -- or giving occasionally a spoonful of oil mixed with twenty
days of tincture of opium; or opiates, where oil is disagreea^^^ by themselves.

5. THE HYSTERIC DISEASE, CALLED HYSTERIA,
(...) the Greek usteros, uterus, the womb, because the ancients (...) it to be
a complaint proceeding from an affection of (...) organ -- respecting the cause
of this disease there have been (...) of opinions, we shall therefore proceed
to the descrip^^^^ and from thence endeavor to point out what appears to be
(...) most probable source.

DESCRIPTION. In this disease there are many symptoms (...) which spare no part
of the body; for the head, lungs, (...), belly, and many of its contained
parts, and the (...), have different appearances manifested in them, besides
(...) general affections of the whole machine.

(...) respect to the head, there is an oppressive pain, or sense (...) of the
forehead, temples, and eyes, attended with (...) of tears -- a torpor or
dullness of the senses and mind, (...) with a disrelish of all things.

Afterward, those who are seized with the hysteric disease (...), for the most
part, a very costive state of bowels, a strong (...) to make water, which they
do in large quantities, and (...) it is clear like water -- and this SYDENHAM
considers as a (...) symptom -- they have also a suppression of breathing, and
(...) the same time a languor of the whole body.

After this, great weight and pain are felt in the loins, and (...) coldness
succeeds -- the belly is hard and inflated -- afterward (...) is retracted, or
drawn inwards toward the back, and (...) a certain kind of globe, or ball, is
perceived to ascend from (...) lower part of the belly -- by and by the heart
begins to be (...) with palpitation -- and the pulse is irregular and (...),
sometimes intermittent -- the extremities grow cold -- (...) is a sense of
straitness in the throat, as if the patient was (...) with a rope, the face
becomes pale, the breathing very difficult, the voice fails, and the beating of
the arteries are scarce (...) longer perceptible -- but so great is the
stricture of the belly, that neither any wind can be transmitted, nor a glyster
-- sometimes there is a vomiting of extremely four materials, or green bile.

In some, so great is the violence of this complaint, that the head and limbs
are seized with strong convulsive motions -- the trunk of the body is wreathed
too and fro -- and commonly the hands are clinched, and with one the patient
beats violently upon the breast; sometimes though the hands continue (...)
others fall into a sound sleep, and lay without sense or motion (...) some the
face and neck are inflamed with blood, look red, (...) the arteries beat
strongly.

Some fall into immoderate fits of laughter, or of crying, (...) now and then
alternate with each other very quickly; a^^, (...) the voice is restored, talk
incoherently, have false ideas, and (...) imaginations, and some degree of
delirium.

However, though this is the general mode of proceeding (...) must not expect
to meet with all these symptoms in the (...) person; for the sits are varied in
different people, and (...) the same person at different times, both with
respect to the (...) of symptoms, their degrees of violence, and length (...)
the ^it continues -- but whenever it remits, and begins to (...) which often
happens in a certain period of time, then the (...) which was before weak and
languid, and scarce percept (...) comes more vigorous and softer -- heat
returns into the (...) parts -- the face contracted and pale in common, becomes
(...) more red -- the noise of wind is heard through the superior (...) -- and
rumbling sounds arise in the belly -- and at last, as i^ (...) from a profound
sleep, the patients regain their vo^^^, (...) and motion, but complain of a
heavy pain of the head, (...) and dullness of the whole body, legs, and feet.

Now it appears wonderful, that often in a very (...) these violent symptoms,
which threaten almost instant (...) should intermit and cease, so that the
person who the (...) appeared as if dying, should now seem to enjoy (...)
health.

CAUSES. From what has been above advanced, (...) advert to the nature of the
symptoms themselves, the (...) attack which in some cases is sudden, the
appearances of (...) very, or the state of the machine immediately afterward,
scarce can hesitate to pronounce this disease arising from (...) nervous
affections, owing to the great incitability (27.) of (...) system.

And as even those authors who attribute the cause to the (...) do allow that
it attacks even men, though much more (...) than women, we cannot suppose that
it is to be attributed (...) (...) the morbid affections of the womb, though
this may be one (...) principal sources in the more delicate sex -- we
therefore (...), that the constitutions subject to this malady have, for (...)
predisposing cause, great incitability of the nervous system, (...) from their
birth, or created by some accidental circumstances occasioned in the habit from
other diseases, indiscretion, (...) something of this nature; and that, as it
is united with a (...) or less degree of vascular irritability, (27.) in the
whole, (...) peculiar part of the constitution, so will the effect be (...) in
different constitutions, or in the same constitutions (...) different periods
-- and as the brain has a general communica^^^^ and connection with every
active part of the body, however (...), by means of the spinal marrow and
nerves; and as it (...) act, and can be acted upon, so as to produce general
affec^^^^ either from itself, or from other parts which are primarily (...) --
and as its connection with the viscera is extremely (...), particularly with
the stomach, bowels, womb, and geni^^^ -- and it is also liable to have its
powers exerted by mental (...) we conclude, that the hysteric disease may be
occasi^^^^ by primary affections of the brain, and different causes (...) in
different parts, and have a variety of its symptoms (...) upon sympathy. (57.)

(...) would therefore say, that the hysteric disease is a nervous (...),
arising from too great incitability of that system, (...) with different
degrees of irritability of the vascular system and muscular fibers, occasioned
by some things inherent in (...), or genitals, or from strong mental action,
having for (...).

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS, a rumbling noise in the (...) -- a sense of a globe or
ball rolling about there, ascending (...) stomach and superior parts of the
throat, and producing (...) affection imitative of strangulation -- profound
sleep, convul^^^^ a profuse and copious discharge of limpid urine -- and the
(...) spontaneously various and mutable.

(...) complaint is liable to be brought on by various causes -- (...) a
retention or copious flux of the menses -- from too great (...), whether by
bleeding, vomiting, purging, or (...) -- from the whites being considerable, or
of too long stand^^^ from the neglect of accustomary evacuations -- sedentary
life, (...) viscera, from viscid, acid, flatulent diet -- from defect (...) the
stomach -- from too great salaciousness, or from too strong (...) painful
mental affections.

CURE. The indications of which consist in taking off the convulsive and
spasmodic affections, and allaying the incitability and irritability of the
nervous system and muscular (...).

In order to mitigate the violence of the fit, foetid and volatile, substances
should be applied to the nose, such as tincture of asafoetida, spirit of
hartshorn -- ^^ther also is serviceable, and rubbing the temples and nostrils
with vinegar -- the smoke of burning (...) applied to the nose is esteemed an
efficacious remedy; (...) by these means women oppressed with deep sleep, and
lying (...) if apparently dying, have recovered, and soon returned to
themselves.

In women with child being thus seized, a compression (...) with a roller at
the lower part of the belly has afforded (...) relief -- and as patients
subject to this disease are apt to be (...) glysters made of rue, wormwood, or
chamomile flowers in ^^coction, in which is dissolved a spoonful of salt,
should be given; or if there is a difficuly in passing, pure expressed oil may
be administered in the same mode.

During the fit, or on its near approach, or in the intervals, antispasmodics
may be had recourse to, a variety of which have been recommended by different
authors, as valerian, cas^^r, (...), spirit of vitriolic ether, asafoetida,
musk, animal oil, ((...). 150.) and opium, (152.) these may be given in
different (...) agreeable to the wish, or the particular state of the (...)
which they are to be administered -- in the fit liquid, form (...) only
admissible -- and here I must observe, that where the (...) have been
inefficacious, I have found the odoriferous answer of the strong smelling
foetids, I give asafoetida, (No. 68. 18^.) (...) the valerian julep, (No. 32,
33.) or camphor, (No. 69.) (...) sweets, I prefer musk, (No. 31. with 32. 34.)
but of th^se ^^cording to the exigencies of the case, so do I prop^^^^^^ (...)
dose.

But as opium is considered one of the most powerful (...) in many diseases,
and acts by exerting its sedative (...) it must be observed, that when the
disease depends upon (...) fullness of the (...), and requires bleeding, opium
is like (...) be pernicious, by promoting accumulation in the system, (...)
weakening the circulatory power of the vessels -- but where (...) is no
fullness or inflammatory state, and the disease seems to ^^pend on irritation
and increased incitability, perhaps it may (...) the most effectual remedy.

Notwithstanding this opinion is supported by very (...) ^^thority, I cannot
avoid giving, in many cases, musk the (...), particularly if there is any
torpor in the vascular system or muscular fibers, which we shall explain more
fully when (...) speak on the hypochondriac disease; but then it should be
administered in tolerable large doses, from ten grains to half a (...) and
upwards -- moderate frictions about the pit of the (...), and on the feet, are
beneficial.

SYDENHAM, who has paid great attention to this disorder, (...), that it
comprehends two thirds of the chronic affections (...) mankind, advises
bleeding and purging -- and this he (...) of generally; here I must beg leave
to dissent; for (...) the constitution is loaded with blood too much, they do
(...) disservice -- there are few who can stand either the one of the other
without manifest signs of an increase in their (...); hence, when either are
necessary, except in cases where (...) fullness of the vessels is very
considerable, cupping and (...) aperients are preferable; and, if required,
they may be (...), but with the greatest circumspection; for bleeding (...)
purging in any other mode empties the vessels suddenly, (...) too copiously,
weakens the system too powerfully, and (...) aggravates the symptoms.

Indeed, some hysteric patients cannot bear the mildest (...), not even
glysters, without experiencing great inconve^^^^^es, having their spirits
immediately depressed upon any (...) evacuations downwards. I have often seen
hysteric (...) succeed after two or three loose stools.

After the fit is got over, we must next endeavor to prevent (...), by
alleviating the incitability of the system, and this (...) by giving strength
and firmness to the constitution, as (...) nervous cases, for which many
remedies have been (...), as mis^etoe of the oak, leaves of the orange tree,
Peruvian (...) bitters, with preparations of iron, arsenic, mercury, and (...)
copper; of the three latter I cannot say any thing in (...) disease; but in
very obstinate cases a trial of th^^ has (...) recommended -- of the two first,
they appear not so effect^^ the bark, bitters, and iron -- of several which we
have (...) set down; see the account. (400.)

With respect to the bark, a scruple or two taken night and (...) has been said
to produce considerable benefit; where (...) were delicate and relaxed, without
any fullness and (...) tendency, and free from viceral obstructions, (...) it
may -- but under these particular circumstances I (...) it detrimental, which
conclusion I draw from experience.

Preparations of iron united with bitters I have generally (...) most effectual
-- the effects of the former, and its most (...) preparations, are pointed out,
(p. 228.) and the (...) formulae of steel and bitters may be found, (p. 239.)
(...) to the draught, (No. 63.) it is useful to add about thirty drops of
spirits of vitriolic ether -- the body should be kept or pen by moderate doses
of some aloetic pill -- but in all cases it is necessary to take care that
there is no sanguinary fullness (...) inflammatory tendency in the habit.

Where the constitution appears to be of that nature, the fullness should be
kept under by moderate living, gentle exercise, particularly on horseback --
and, as having too often recourse to bleeding is apt to occasion an increase of
blood afterward in order to keep the solids and fluids in a healthful state,
with respect to their influence one upon the other, setons or (...) are proper.

It is also necessary to attend to the alleviation of the (...) mind, advising
change of scene, cheerful company, and (...) avoidance of such things as raise
sudden commotion of the (...) or depression -- a clear country is highly
beneficial, and (...) such things as assist in keeping up the proper tone of
the system.

6. HYPOCHONDRIAC DISEASE -- HYPOCHONDRIASIS.
from the Greek upon, sub, under, and kartilago, cartilage, (...) producing its
effects, and exercising its violence under the ^^^tilage called ensiformis,
(39.) chiefly, and also under the (...) rib of each side the chest, called
hypochondr^^.

DESCRIPTION. As in the hysteric, so in the hypochondriac disease there is no
part of the body, no function, (...) not be injured in this of long
continuance, and be esteemed (...) natural, and the symptoms so violent and so
numerous, (...) whole scarce comes within the power of description -- (...)
fever is a disease which may be considered amongst the (...) cases the most
universal, so amongst the chronic may be the hypochondriasis.

In the beginning, a violent tension of the stomach and (...) are perceived,
and flatulent inflations under the short, or (...) ribs, particularly on the
left side; there are also (...) loathing of food -- and an uncertain appetite,
sometimes (...) gone, sometimes voracious -- the food taken is digested (...)
difficulty -- sour and viscid crudities are generated; an (...) weight and pain
in the stomach particularly (...) eating; spasmodic constriction of the throat,
with frequent (...) of a clear mucus from the mouth; difficulty of swallowing
(...) of the stomach; sour belchings; frequent efforts to (...) sometimes
vomiting itself, wherein materials so acrid are (...), that the teeth have had
a kind of stuperfactive (...) vulgarly called, " setting on edge," and with
which cloths (...) (...) not unfrequently corroded; indeed, vomiting of fatty
(...) have been observed; besides, in the tract of the (...), acute, pricking,
or sharply darting pains are perceived (...) the navel; sometimes the bowels
are very lax, sometimes (...) obstinately costive, with a retention of wind,
which passes (...) upwards or downwards, and alleviates in a slight degree
(...) other affections; but by and by returns with greater (...); though, on
the contrary, they are oftentimes seized with (...) efforts of going to stool,
and tubercles, or what are (...) in the blind piles, (400.) beset the anus,
(43.) also (...) sometimes succeed -- sometimes the patients make (...) with
difficulty and pain -- the urine itself thin, dilute, and (...) sometimes with
a large sediment, and that gritty.

(...) is the belly the only part experiencing severe distress, (...) also
suffer by consent or sympathy, (57.) -- the (...) affected, in whose external
parts, those called CEPHALAD (...) HEMICRANIA, (346.) and various dragging
pains, joined (...) immobility, are perceived, and that known amongst (...) men
by the name of CLAVUS, from clavus, a nail, a fixed (...) not exceeding the
breadth of one's thumb -- in the (...), giddiness -- ringing of the ears --
with a difficulty of (...) manifest themselves -- a dimness of sight; sometimes
(...) vision affects the patient; the eyes become painful, with (...); and very
often in a certain space a burning and very (...) pain seizes the tongue -- and
the saliva flows so (...) copiously, that hypochondriacs are called SPUTATORES.
((...).)

At length the animal functions begin to fail -- the mind (...) by no cause, at
least by that which is extremely slight, to (...), anxieties, sorrow, anger,
fear -- becomes incompetent (...) to vain and perverse imaginations -- the
power of (...) dies away, and reason fails -- sleep is disturbed, turbulent,
(...) replete with terror -- in the breast great straitness, (...) -- violent
difficulty of breathing, joined sometimes with (...) of the chest -- tremblings
and palpitations of the heart (...).

Now, from these symptoms, it appears very obvious, that (...) disease is a
nervous affection like the former, though we (...) this to be somewhat
different, and to depend more (...) a torpidity of the nervous system, than too
great an incitability; and have the local incitability manifested in different
(...), brought on from the continuance of the complaint.

For we must observe, in its commencement the signs of great torpor only make
their appearance -- besides, the disease seldom appears early in life, and more
usually in those advanced in years only, and is apt to attack those who lead
indolent and sedentary lives, are much addicted to study, and deep thinking,
and oppressed with those particular mental affections I have called saturnine,
(79.) for these are apt to weaken and blunt the active powers of the
constitution, render the circulation and nervous influence weak and sluggish --
and, indeed, some medical writers have almost wholly attributed this disease to
a state of mental affections. Besides, their symptoms in winter, autumn, or any
cold weather, are always more violent -- but, on the contrary, in warm, and in
the summer season, hypochondriacs are more alert and vigorous; and in women
afflicted with this disease, it is always increased at the time their menses
ought to flow; for they, (...) the most part, labor under some defect in this
point -- add to this, hypochondriacs can very rarely be affected with
continued, epidemic, or infectious fevers -- to the plague though they are
liable -- still remain free from many other diseases which reign at particular
times; for, from the torpid state of th^^ ^^^vous system, the nerves become
incapable of feeling the (...) of the morbid particles which get into the
habit, and (...) these particles are permitted to pass through the machine
(...) creating any disturbance -- the same happens to the (...), but not to
hysteric people.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, besides those (...) above, too long
continued watching -- hard drinking -- regular diet -- natural predisposition
-- or whatever may (...) to nervous disorders in general in such constitutions.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. An affection arising from too torpid a state of the
nervous, and want of proper irritability of the vascular system, attended with
languor, sadness, and (...) from inadequate causes, affections of the bowels
and stomach, and mental despondency.

CURE. Our remedies must be of two kinds, corporeal and mental; for our
indications are, to remove the affections of the stomach and bowels, increase
nervous incitability, and (...) irritability, and properly regulate the last,
and alleviate the distress and uneasiness of the mind.

As little can be expected toward performing a radical (...), when the disease
is once fixed, as it very often originates (...) the very formation of the
constitution, and depends so much (...) the state of the mind, we must attend
to such things as (...) ^^leviate bodily distress, so that no imperfection in
any part of the machine shall contribute to increase the uneasy symptoms.

It is therefore first advisable to unload the intestines, with a glyster, or
some aloetic medicine, (No. 108.) after having procured two or three copious
evacuations, then let the stomach be (...) with a vomit, (No. 11, 12.) either
will answer the purpose, or white vitriol, (168.) if acidities prevail in the
stomach, they should be corrected with alkaline salts, (191.) chalk, etc.
((...).) (No. 42, 43.) particularly calcined magnesia, or spirit of (...)
ammoniac with quicklime, as they unite with acid, (...) fermentation and
creating any wind; and in this case (...) vegetables, (190.) should be avoided
-- though leavened (...) and vinegar may be taken with animal food, as the
least (...); for solely it could not be persisted in, without (...) to corrupt
the state of the blood, (74.) testaceous (...), or shellfish, (177.) are
proper viands with this intent -- if (...) want to contribute to keep the body
open by absorbents, the vegetable alkali, (191.) or magnesia, must be employed
-- if that of unnecessary, or a check is to be given to any evacuation of the
(...) by these means, chalk, crabs eyes, or other similar (...), (191.) or the
volatile alkali, (191.) must be exhibited (...) any of which though must be
employed in such quantities (...) totally to destroy the acid necessary for the
composition of animal fluids for the purpose of nourishment.

In cases of costiveness, we should confine ourselves to small (...) of the
aloetic pill occasionally, (No. 108) such as will (...) keep the body open; for
these after the operation, are (...) apt to leave the body in a costive state
-- rhubarb, therefore, (...) be avoided, and the common saline purgatives
joined with antimonials -- after these things are effected, we must consider
(...) are likely to prevent a return of the symptoms.

Should the stomach be relaxed, as is sometimes the case, though (...) always,
we must endeavor to give it increase of power, by (...) and strengthening
applications, as the vitriolic acid, at that of sea salt -- also tar water,
fixed sal ammoniac, or water (...) ammonia; these are said to stimulate the
stomach, (...) often increase the appetite -- in this disease the fixed
ammonical salt has been of singular efficacy, by the daily use of it in (...),
just what would render the bowels lax -- after taking it six, eight, or twelve
months, the cold bath has completed the cure -- (...), as cinnamon, ginger,
pepper, nutmegs, cloves, and other substances possessed of certain degrees of
pungency; these (...) extremely useful, particularly if the stomach is very
torpid, (...) much relaxed -- they fit that organ for feeling the effect of
(...) medicines, as well as increase its temporary action -- on which account,
volatile salts of hartshorn, or ammonia prepared, are well calculated, and with
tonics are very properly conjoined -- bitters also are very useful, as quassia
wood, columbo, orange^^^^, gentian, chamomile, etc. and their preparations,
either in infusion, tincture, powder, or extract -- but we must not persist in
the use of any of these too long, lest they should hurt the tone of the stomach
by their long continuance, which they art apt to do.

Bitters and astringents united are said to have more efficacy than either
separately -- bark, therefore, as possessing these properties, has been highly
extolled; but the same caution is ^ere necessary, (...) the same reasons.

The best remedy for producing the desired purpose in this case, and what may
be continued the longest with the greatest safety, in iron, and its
preparations -- the steel waters have been recommended, and often proved
successful -- but on these Dr. CULLEN makes, though a minute, a very judicious
remark, and says, though in the hypochondriac disease chalybeate waters have
sometimes been apparently efficacious, he imputes it more to the amusement and
exercise accompanying the drinking them at the fountain head, rather than to
the tonic power of the small quantity of iron they maintain -- perhaps the
elementary water favoring the excretions may have a share in alleviating the
disease -- and it is for the same reason, probably, that these people are
relieved more by drinking tea and coffee than those who labor merely (...)
indigestion, and also why the warm bath is preferred to the cold in the former
case, and in the latter prohibited.

If the mind is harassed, or in pain, and flatulence, attended with headache, a
slight opiate, joined with a cordial volat^^^ draught, may be given, at from
five to ten drops of tincture of opium, with five or six grains of salt of
hartshorn, in a little peppermint water, may be given; but opiates should be
very sparingly used -- in spasmodic affections they may be used also in the
same manner, coupled with asafoetida or musk -- if the pulse should be quick,
and there should be a perceptible feverishness, aromatics and steel must be
omitted, and exchanged for bark and the vitriolic acid.

We should be particularly careful that the patient should be thrown into such
situations, as to keep his mind in a state of cheerfulness, in order to its
being drawn from those unpleasant reflections by which it is disturbed,
particularly such as lead him (...) blood over what he considers an
irremediable calamity, his ill state of health -- lessons of philosophy and
reason are of little use, if any, it is momentary: for the first eructation or
pain, however trifling, overturns the strongest arguments that can have been
advanced, and he reverts back to his usual despondency -- nor can patients of
this sort bear raillery, not any thing is to them so offensive, they consider
it either as ignorance, or the want of humanity, and will form most
unconquerable dislikes to those who use it.

Cheerful company will be found always beneficial, and any exercise in the open
air that requires dexterity, for these amuse the mind -- as to exercise, riding
on horseback, or driving a carriage, is the most eligible; but, if it can be
afforded, taking a long journey, or going from one watery place to another,
claims the preference; for variety of objects are perpetually engaging the
attention, few of settled disgust are presenting themselves; and constant
exercise employs a good deal of his time, and steals (...) as it were from
himself; and by these means he will lead at least a life of comfortable
satisfaction, fancying the whole (...) he has derived from change of air, which
will encourage (...) in the pursuit; in fine, whatever is directed to him
should be capable of furnishing amusement, and never carried to excess; the
fatigue of every sort is extremely detrimental -- his diet should be light, sit
easy on the stomach, agreeable to the palate, cordial, nourishing, and easy of
digestion -- animal food is in general (...) most proper -- and his drink
should be spirits, which he likes (...), lowered with water.

I have, in the course of practice, met with some cases extremely perplexing,
where symptoms declaratory of both hysteric and hypochondriac affections
manifested themselves -- hence I have (...) to call it the

7. HYSTERIA-HYPOCHONDRIAC DISEASE,
(...) participating both of one and the other, which, as it has occurred to
me, I shall take the liberty to describe.

DESCRIPTION. In this complaint patients chiefly complain of heavy, uneasy
pains in the head, sometimes fugitive (...) acute -- a dimness of sight; but
this temporary, a sense of ^^^gulation, ringing in the ears, and quickness of
hearing -- (...) starting at any slight noise, on the opening of a door
quickly, or any thing falling in the room -- sometimes they have complained of
a coldness of the head, particularly the back part, (...) water was trickling
down it -- flatulence of the stomach and (...) -- sometimes they are costive,
now and then otherwise -- wine is made frequently, in small quantity, then
becomes turpid; at other times more copious, and of an amber color, (...) or
never purely limpid -- they oftentimes complain of an (...), tingling, or
pricking in the skin, especially if a gentle (...) is promoted -- sometimes an
eruption like the nettle-rash ^^ews itself -- frequently a general tumefaction,
of a puffy aspect, without any spots -- at others very small vesicular
eruptions at the tips of the fingers; and all these external appearances are,
for the most part, attended with great heat, itching, or a sense (...) pricking
-- the appetite is very irregular -- the mind easily disturbed, and generally
brooding over some personal calamity, chiefly imaginary -- the circulation
sluggish and languid -- the pulse slow -- and the extremities, for the most
part, cold.

CAUSES. These appearances I always suspect from some acrimony subsisting in
the fluids, and thus far practice (...) confirmed my opinion, enables me to
reason on these appearances, and reconcile them to the doctrines laid down.

For the incitability of the nervous system seems to have been kept by the
stimulus of the acrimonious humors, which was not sufficiently powerful to
increase properly the action of (...) vascular system -- hence the internal
parts would be loaded, and the acrid particles have a power of exerting their
stimulus (...) proportion to the quantity retained -- besides, from the torpid
state of the circulation, the acrimony would be greatly increased by the
retention of such materials as should naturally have been thrown out of the
habit; and this I am warranted to (...) from what occurred on any eruption
appearing on the (...) hot tumefaction of the extremities, or by gentle sweat
being promoted; for at that time the patients were more considerably relieved.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. Quick nervous incit^bi^^^^, united with strong mental
prepossession, and persuasion, of the patient's own misery, and fatality of
their situation, with torpor of the vascular system.

CURE. The indications are, to render the nervous influence more equable, and
take off the vascular torpidity; and these are chiefly accomplished by
cordials, aromatics, and stimulating antispasmodics, by promoting a
determination of the fluids to the surface.

But, notwithstanding gentle perspiration is not singularly (...), for this
purpose antimonials must not be exhibited, (...) must opiates for alleviating
spasmodic affections, for they very often do infinite mischief, by relaxing the
stomach, and inc^^^^ing the torpor of the system -- stimulants are better, and
(...) more the stimulating antispasmodics; such as volatile alkali, asafoetida,
musk, given occasionally, and the volatile saline (...) intermediately, joined
with cordials, instead of the Polychrest salt, (No. 126.) -- (of these see the
different formulae, (...) page 231 to 235.) -- and I have often found the
spirit of vitriolic ether and camphor answer every good purpose we could
expect from opium, without producing its disagreeable consequences -- the warm
bath in these cases is beneficial.

Though it is necessary to have the body kept open, strong (...) always does
harm -- occasionally the aloetic pill, (No. (...).) with or without the
calomel, may be given -- and as for (...), we should rarely, if ever, have
recourse to it -- if it is (...) thought necessary, cupping is the best mode --
perhaps (...) bleeding with leeches may now and then be useful in (...) local
complaints of the head, or other parts where severe (...) gives much
uneasiness; but, in order to keep off an (...) of blood, I should recommend
setons or issues -- riding on horseback, and that constantly persevered in, is
amongst the most (...) remedies -- and bitters, with preparations of iron, or
in (...) cases without them, generally must close the cure -- the (...) waters
are extremely useful -- and, when patients have (...) strength to bear the cold
bath, that may be had recourse (...) but care must be taken to proportion the
coldness of the (...) to the power of the constitution, for baths too cold are
(...) injurious -- indeed in our medical conduct great nicety (...) in these
complicated cases, in which we must (...), that the remedies recommended in the
hysteric and hypochondriac disease must be selected, as the complaint verges
(...) to one than the other -- upon the whole, I found antispasmodics and
stimulants to be the most efficacious auxiliaries; (...) former when hysteric,
the latter when hypochondriac symptoms were the most predominant; in which last
they may be (...) used; for it is astonishing in how large doses stimulants
(...) be given without injury, and how very necessary they are (...) produce
any good effect.

8. INDIGESTION, CALLED DYSPEPSIA,
(...) the Greek words dys, difficulter, and pepsis, concoctio, (...) -- If we
consider what has been said of the stomach, and (...) nature, (39, etc.) it
will obviously appear, that it is liable to a variety of complaints, such as
inflammation, abscess, ulcer, (...) of the lower orifice of the stomach, and a
variety of (...) -- indigestion is then said only to be considered as a symptom
-- indeed, it may always properly be considered in this (...); for where there
is a defect in any of the digestive (...) (see page 72.) this complaint occurs
-- and if we consider that has been advanced, when speaking of pains of the
stomach, the hysteric, and hypochondriac disease, we may form a tolerable
certain opinion of its cause, which generally proceeds from a WEAKNESS AND
RELAXATION OF THE STOMACH AND BOWELS, and which cause we must consider in this
place.

DESCRIPTION. Under this circumstance, there is a (...) of appetite -- nausea
-- vomiting flatulent distension of the stomach, with eructations either sour,
rancid, or some other, agreeable to the nature of the imperfectly digested, or
indigestible materials contained in the stomach -- cardialgia, or heartburn,
(352.) -- pain also in the stomach, attended, for the (...) part, with a
costive habit -- this disease will also very often produce the sick headache,
as proved by experience. Dr. (...) says, from numerous circumstances it is most
clea^, (...) this headache proceeds from the stomach, not the (...) has been
the opinion of those who have been suffered by it.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, too frequent over-loading the stomach --
living upon leguminous and flatulent (...) -- sedentary life -- too violent
evacuations, particularly of (...) -- taking too frequently strong purging
medicines; dysentery (...) miscarriages; intermittents; and spasmodic
affections of the stomach and bowels. The proximate or immediate have been
(...) fled above.

CURE. The indications are, to invigorate the tone of the stomach, and, where
wanting, to increase the heat -- the (...) of doing which have, in a great
measure, been set down when treating of pain of the stomach from indigestion,
(352, etc.) (...) the hypochondriac disease, (512 etc.) to which we shall only
(...) leave to add, that cold liquids should be drank in preference to those
which are warm, without actual warmth is necessary to account of the too great
coldness of the stomach, and then, instead of tea and coffee, infusion of rose
leaves, sage, (...), or mint, may be used -- and the preference should be given
to the cold bath.

If meat cannot be contained on the stomach, as will sometimes be the case,
cupping-glasses may be applied abo^^ (...) inches below the stomach,
stimulating cataplasms, or (...) applied at the pit of the stomach -- generous,
rough wine (...) be drank cold.

The mode of living should be carefully attended to, (...) means will prove
ineffectual -- all oily substances, butter, therefore, fat meats, and meat
pies, all unfermented farinaceous (...) malt liquors, particularly ale and
porter, watery and (...) fruits, and raw vegetables, should be avoided --
chewing (...) or any thing which promotes too much the discharge of (...) --
frequent inebriation are extremely pernicious, as also (...) of venery,
indolence, mental uneasiness, or too close application to intense study or
business -- for should any excess be committed in eating, though the food
should be of the easily digestible (...), of which to the animal class patients
should chiefly adhere (...), moist air, without exercise, is detrimental; but
cold air (...) it is beneficial -- food should be often taken, and in small
(...); but if patients will not adhere to this rule, they (...) be confined to
one kind for several days; and if vegetable most be indulged in, those which
are the most tender, and (...) in their own juices, are the most proper.

(...) we now consider the effects produced in the habit by this (...), we
shall see that a vast variety of chronic diseases (...) to it their origin,
and, therefore, on its very first (...) should be carefully attended to; for,
if it is suffered to (...) long, it is very rarely radically cured -- and,
indeed, I (...) persuaded that a great number of those complaints which (...)
children born of healthful parents, in their infantile state, (...) produced
from the same source, occasioned too often by the (...) of over-fond mothers,
or the ignorance or indolence (...), all which I think may be prevented by
adhering to (...) ^^rules laid down when treating of nursing. With regard (...)
their cure, similar modes must be pursued as we have laid (...) in the disease
just treated, appropriating the remedies to circumstances of the case, and the
delicacy of the frames (...) which we have to deal.

9. RICKETS -- RACHITIS.
(...) English name seems to be a corruption of the word (...), probably from a
supposition that this complaint (...) its origin from some affection of the
spine, as the Greek (...) raxis, from whence rachitis is derived, means spine.

(...) physicians agree that it very seldom, or never, attacks (...) the ninth
month after birth, and seldom comes on after (...) say six, years.

DESCRIPTION. In the beginning, the proportion of many (...) of the body is
irregular -- the skin loose, the belly thin, and (...) with wind -- the
muscular flesh wastes away, but the (...), wrists, arms, knees, and feet grow
large -- the bones afford (...) support to the belly, and are often accompanied
with ^^^dness of the spine, from whence all their bodily actions (...) ^ode of
moving on the ground are weak, which often (...) in weakness, unwillingness,
and dislike of motion -- (...) children ^it sluggishly in the arms of their
nurses, and (...) heavy -- at that time the arteries running up the neck (...)
full -- the head is large, and nods from one side to the (...) owing to the
incapability of the neck sustaining it erect, (...) the flaccidity of that,
part their dispositions are acute beyond their age, but the breast is narrow,
and, as it were, compressed from its sides with the sternum acuminated, and the
extremities of the ribs knotty.

As the malady increases, a slow fever comes on, with (...) cough, difficulty
of breathing, and other symptoms, which, (...) the most part, continue till
death closes the scene -- but this is not always the case -- a number of these
symptoms we have (...) instances of continuing for a long series of time, still
afterward the disease ceases to advance, and health is restored, except some
distortions of the limbs may remain. We (...) have observed, that the opening
at the top of the head, called fontanelle, and the parts where the bones join,
named sutures keep longer open, and in a greater degree, than others is an
healthful state; and the forehead is apt to protuberate in an uncommon manner
-- the children get their teeth slower, and much later than usual, and those
which appear soon become black, grow loose, and often fall out -- the desire
(...) food, and the appetite itself, is often quick and good; but there is
frequently a looseness, or a strong propensity to it -- and (...) sometimes the
disposition is acute, we have said, now (...) the faculties of the mind are
impaired, and dullness and (...) are prevalent.

These symptoms do not all of them prevail in every patient, but more or less
of them according to the degrees of (...) or violence of the disease; in some
those which are more moderate, in others those which are more severe, make
(...) appearance.

On opening those who have died of this complaint, in (...) the liver has been
preternaturally large, scirrhous, and adhering to the midriff -- the mesentery
beset with indurated (...), and obstructed with the sweatbread -- in others,
the lungs (...) to the pleura, or back, and they either livid, or loaded with
abscesses, called vomicae -- in some the pericardium, the (...) surrounding the
heart, surcharged with serum -- but in (...) the brain has been found flaccid,
replete in its ventricles (...) a thin watery fluid, and the fluids themselves
through the machine in a dissolved state; the muscular parts preternaturally
soft and tender, and the bones capable of being cut with a knife, particularly
near the places of their union.

CAUSES. The remote or inducing are, bad nursing -- suckling children too long
-- an acid produced from the milk with which the child is fed for the first
nine months, or feeding (...) on unfermented ferinaceous substances, and
indulging too much in their use, particularly such aliments as possess too firm
a (...), are too viscid and sour, as bread not well fermented, cheese-cakes,
garden fruits -- giving children sour wine -- living (...) bad air, or low
marshy places -- opiates too frequently and freely given -- want of proper
exercise -- the habit weakened by preceding diseases -- a diseased nurse -- and
external violence.

The proximate or immediate, a torpid state of the circulatory system, and
general flaccidity or relaxation of the solids preternaturally increased, by
which the organs of digestion, assimilation, and nutrition, are defective in
their power, and bring on a thin state of fluids, and want of that matter in
them which (...) the bones called off^^i^.

CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS. A large head, swelling (...) on the sore part --
tumefied knees and wrists, depressed (...), distended belly, the rest of the
body wasting away.

CURE. The indications are, to increase the tone of the stomach, improve the
digestive powers, and invigorate the system.

In the first place, however, some of the symptoms are to be ^^^eviated, as the
stomach and bowels are apt to be foul, at the (...) time the latter distended
with wind; they should be emp^^ by gentle vomits and mild purgatives -- small
doses of ipecacuanha, or of tartarized antimony, should be given for the first
(...); and for the other, rhubarb and calomel, or Polychrest (...); rhubarb is
the most eligible, as it is both bitter and astrin^^^^, therefore a good
stimulant and tonic -- the vomit may now (...) then be repeated, as it will, by
the shocks it gives to the ^^^els and the other viscera, of the belly, assist
in taking off, or ^^eventing the obstruction and enlargement that often occur
in (...).

The belly also may be rubbed with stimulant liniments, as (...) liniment, or
No. 182. which has been strongly recommended -- indeed, any of the joints which
are swelled may be (...) with this twice a day -- and, perhaps, it will be more
efficacious if it is applied after friction of the parts with a flannel (...)
the fire -- sca^e oil has also for this purpose been much (...), which is used
by the inhabitants of the western parts of (...) in the following manner; --
first, the wrists and ankles (...) rubbed well with oil in the evening, this
immediately raises febrile affections for several hours; when the fever
subsides, the ^^me parts are rubbed again the night following, and repeated as
long as the rubbing excites similar effects -- when, by rubbing these parts
alone, not any febrile affections can be excited, the ^^me process is
performed, and continued in the same manner on the knees and elbows -- then
afterward down the back bones, and on the sides -- and when no fever is raised
by this operation, a flannel shirt dipped into the oil is put upon the
patient's body, by which more violent febrile affections are raised than any of
the former unctions, and is continued till the cure is completed, which
commonly happens in a short time.

The chief tonics employed in these cases are bark and steel -- of the former,
from the nauseousness of the taste, it is scarce possible to get down a
sufficient quantity to render it effectual -- however, it may be applied
externally to the wrists, by forming the extract into plaster, or quilting the
powder in soft linen, (260.) applied in these modes I have been informed that
(...) has proved effectual; but I should prefer its being brought into contact
with the coats of the stomach immediately, as on that, it appears to me,
depends its greatest efficacy.

Steel, as a preventive, has had its warm advocates, who, in order to be able
to distinguish whether a child will become ricketty, point out the following
symptoms: -- a paleness and swelling of the countenance, and in that part of
the cheeks, which should be naturally red, a yellow color approaching to that
of sulphur; in which case, five grains of the filings of iron, and as much
rhubarb, with ten grains of sugar, should be given every morning fasting and
evening -- but should this prove too purgative at first, one dose should only
be given every day -- after (...) month's continuance, a keen appetite ensues,
quick digestion and a copious flow of urine -- the fullness of the face, and
yellowness of the complexion, by degrees are removed, and natural countenance
and firmness of the body gradually restored -- and this practice, it is said,
has never failed of success in any one instance.

Five grains of ammoniacal iron may be given twice a day (...) a month, or
longer, interposing occasionally aperient doses of rhubarb; but, in cases of
feverish disposition, bark, with the vitriolic acid, is more eligible.

In cases of rickets, prepared kali, (177.) half a dram dissolved in eight
ounces of bark decoction, four ounces taken every day cured a boy of seven
years old, who has so much (...) that his inferior extremities had become stiff
and immovable -- the body flaccid, he was much worn away by a looseness and
constant sweatings, and had five fistulous ulcers all discharging at the same
time -- in the course of one month from beginning to take the medicines he rose
from his bed, and walked with (...) support -- the bark was then changed to
madder, and in less (...) four months he walked with a crutch, and by that time
the (...) were nearly healed -- the watery solutions of kali have in (...)
ricketty people been successful.

Strong beer, porter, and wine have been recommended; but I should rather think
them pernicious, the two former from their viscidity, and the latter from its
proneness to become (...).

But the remedy most to be depended upon is cold bathing, or (...) in the sea,
and is certainly the most powerful preventive. (...) ^^otland it has long been
the practice with people of all ranks (...) wash their children from the time
of their birth with cold (...); and, from the time that they are a month old,
the supe^^ class dip them entirely in cold water every morning -- and, (...)
this practice has been pursued, Dr. CULLEN asserts, that (...) never met with
any instance of rickets -- among the common people, though they wash their
children with cold water, they do (...) so commonly practice immersion; and
when amongst these (...) with cases of rickets, he prescribes cold bathing,
which is accordingly checked the progress of the disease, and seems sometimes
entirely to have cured it.

With respect to diet, strong objections have by some been start^^ (...) milk,
and where nurses are apt to give large quantities of a (...) kind, it may
certainly be detrimental, because it (...) weaken and relax the stomach, fill
it and the bowels with (...) humors, and also the machine with too great a
load of wa^^^, ill-digested fluids, and hence favor the coming on of the
(...); but where the milk is of proper consistence, and does (...) appear to
disagree, it may be persisted in -- chicken or thin (...) broth, beef-tea with
rice, or rice with cow's milk, proper^^ (...), may be occasionally given -- and
leavened bread is (...) to the unfermented farinaceous substances, of which
(...) panada may be made, and now and then mixed with small (...) of aromatic
species.

Testaceous powders, crabs eyes, etc. (191.) may be given by themselves, or
mixed with the food, as they are tasteless; for of (...) we have accounts of
their utility.

Exercise in these cases is essentially necessary; but it should (...) the
gentler sort, and in an horizontal position, lest, by (...) upright, some
distortion should take place -- here cradles may be of use, or mattresses laid
upon swings, and judiciously (...) to secure the little infant from falling
out, which should (...) fixed in the open air, in some shady place, protected
from (...) too powerful force of the sun -- nurses should avoid carrying (...)
in this disease always in one arm, (126.) nor should they (...), or toss them
up much, for the breast may by these means be greatly injured, by the pressure
of the thumb and finger on (...) side the breast bone, from indentation or
bending of the ribs inwards.

And with respect to situation, as it has been observed, that people who live
in damp moist places, where the air in common abounds too much with watery
particles, are more subject to this disease than those who live in dry airy
situations, particularly in Holland, all such should be particularly avoided --
and by observing the rules here laid down, we may be almost always successful
in preventing, and very often in curing this malady, if at the same time care
is taken to preserve cleanliness, which is not the least useful rule in our
conduct.

10. HYDROPHOBIA;
so called from udor, aqua, water, and phobeo, timeo, to fear, or DREAD OF
WATER -- this is by no means a proper appellation the term of Dr. MEAD is more
characteristic, DUSCATAPOTIA, from dys, difficulter, difficulty, and katapino,
deglutio, to swallow, a DIFFICULTY OF SWALLOWING for it has been observed, that
dogs, wolves, and foxes, in which animals this malady arises spontaneously,
have, though they have been mad, (...) water, eat, swam over rivers, and run
along the banks -- however, as an incredible aversion to all liquids is in
general the leading symptom, it has retained the former name -- indeed, in men
(...) have been bit by dogs or wolves afflicted with this malady, the principal
symptom is an aversion not only to water, but (...) and light, and they
extremely rarely have any desire of (...). It has been differently divided by
different authors -- the best of which appear to be into that which arises from
the (...) of a mad animal, called therefore hydrophobia rabida, and (...) which
comes on from some undiscoverable or imperceptible (...) styled spontanea.

DESCRIPTION. It generally first discovers itself by the patient's becoming
languid, dull, and restless, and having (...) dreams -- suddenly the pains, for
the most part, shoot (...) the place where the skin was lacerated, all along up
to (...) throat, where it causes a sensation of suffocation, and a (...)
ability of swallowing liquids -- though there is not always a dread of them
attendant, yet there have been instances (...) the noise of falling water could
not be borne, it created (...) violent agitation, much less the sight.

These spasmodic affections of the throat, in the course of the disease,
gradually diff^ue themselves over the whole muscular system, similar to what
happens in tetanus, (415.) -- nor is it uncommon to observe, in strong
constitutions, a priapism, (...) even a lustful appetite, exerting itself with
some degree of violence -- should the wound have been healed, it begins to be
affected with pain, swells, inflames, and discharges a thin, (...) fluid --
this pain is considered a primary invariable mark of a beginning hydrophobia.

CAUSE of the first species, with which we oftenest meet, is the virus of the
mad animal absorbed into the habit affecting immediately the nervous system --
which virus may lurk inaction in the constitution for fourteen, twenty-one or
forty days, within which time it begins to exert its influence; and it is
observed to do that the sooner, in proportion as the bite is nearer to the
glands, (24.) of the upper part of the throat and mouth, called salival.

CURE. The indications are, to endeavor to take off the spasmodic symptoms, as
in tetanus, (415.) and throw the offending poison out of the habit.

For which purposes we apply and depend upon large doses of opium given every
three or four hours -- musk also may be (...) liberally -- plasters of opium
applied to the throat, and (...) of tincture of opium and camphor -- sponges
dipped in not vinegar should be put to the mouth and nostrils, that the (...) may
be kept perpetually moistened by its steams, -- nor should the use of the warm
bath be omitted.

Toward the close of the cure, opium may be advantageously (...) with
cinnibar, musk, camphor, and asafoetida -- opiate glysters should frequently be
thrown into the intestines; in (...), it should be applied to every place, and
by every means, (...) expeditiously as possible, in hopes of allaying the
violence of (...) highly increased degree of nervous incitability and muscular
sensation -- and, in order to procure an expulsion of the poison out of the
habit, mercurial ointment rubbed into the machine, that a salivation may be
raised as soon as possible, (...) this continued for two or three weeks.

OIL has lately been recommended in this complaint, thrown into the habit by
means of external frictions all over the body, thrown into the intestines by
way of glyster, and given by the mouth, when patients can be prevailed upon to
conform to the ^ode -- One case has lately occurred, where there was every
reason to conclude that the patient was preserved by this method -- sea and
cold bathing, with the pulvis Antilyssus, (101.) have been greatly recommended
in this disease, which have produced insufficient.

Indeed, cold bathing appears to me, if not a dangerous, a doubtful experiment,
and depends upon constitutional circumstances solely for its utility, if (...)
has any; for without perspiration can be increased by its use it certainly bids
fair to confirm, rather than remove, the malady, by forcing the fluids too much
upon the internal parts of the system, in which case, should the habit not be
strong enough to exert an expulsive force more than adequate to the impulsive
power, the poison would be more riveted on the nervous system, and humourous
and sanguinary congestions be added to the nervous affections -- indeed, CELSUS
himself seems to have been aware of this, or some other inconvenience, arising
from the use of the cold baths for he advises, as soon as the patient comes
out, to be plunged into warm oil, and drink of generous wine, evidently to
(...) and increase the motion of the fluids toward the external parts -- in
these cases, therefore, the warm bath and frictions appear to be the most
proper auxiliaries to the other remedies.

This disease is sometimes succeeded by inflammatory symptoms, in which case we
may have recourse to bleeding.

After patients have gone through the proper course of the remedies herein
advised, sufficient to remove the cause, the^ cold or sea bathing, adapted to
the powers of the constitutions, with the use of tonics and stimulants, may
doubtless have in use, in order to give strength and vigor to the system,
necessarily debilitated by evacuants and sedatives.

The second species arises without any contagion being communicated, in some
fevers -- from some preceding diseases -- from the accession of an epilepsy --
from the bite of an epileptic patient -- by the bite from people in violent
fits of rage, (...) according to the accounts of different authors -- indeed an
inferior degree of it will be observable in some hysteric cases, where, from
the difficulty of swallowing, patients are extremely, fearful of taking
liquids, nay, they cannot sometimes be prevailed upon to make the attempt.

In all which cases musk and opium appear to be the remedies most rational, and
productive of the greatest efficacy.

When it arises from the bite of a mad animal, the preventive method laid down,
(10^.) should be strictly observed, which appears to be the best calculated to
obviate the most dangerous and too often fatal effects of this destructive
malady -- and will CHARACTERISTIC SIGNS of which it may be useful (...) close
the account; these are, a very high degree of nervous incitability, or
super-sensation, attended with a loathing, or dread of any liquid, from the
difficulty of swallowing, (...) a painful spasmodic affection of the throat,
for the most (...) occasioned by the bite of a mad animal, and sometimes,
though less frequently, from other accidental or inherent causes.

FORMS OF MEDICINE.
No. 140. CINNABAR ELECTUARY.
of each 1 ounce. ^ake Bark, Valerian in powder,

Cinnabar of Antimony, an ounce, Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form an
electuary.
DOSE. Two drams.

141. AMMONIACAL MIXTURE.
Take of Milk of Ammoniacum, 3 ounces. Pennyroyal water, 6 ounces. Antimonial
Wine, 40 drops. Oxymel of Squills, an ounce. Compound Spirit of Lavender, 3
drams.
Mix. -- DOSE. One ounce or one ounce and a half.

142. STIMULANT APERIENT PILLS.
of each 20 grains. Take Extract of Bitter apple Aloes, Flowers of Benzamin,
Salt of Amber, Myrrh,

of each 30 grains. Castor, Calomel prepared,

of each 10 grains Camphor, Salt of Hartshorn,

Balsam of Peru, sufficient to form Pills.

DOSE. One dram.

143. AMMONIACAL MIXTURE.
Take Acetated Ammonia, 2 ounces. Peppermint Water, 5 ounces. (...) which
dissolve Gum Ammoniacum, 1 dram. (...) add Simple Oxymel 6 drams
Mix. --

No. 144. STIMULATING TONIC MIXTURE.
Take Decoction of Bark, 1 ounce. Camphorated Tincture of Opium, an ounce,
Tincture of Spanish Flies, 1 dram.
Mix. --

No. 145. FOETID ATTENUANT MIXTURE.
of each 1 dram. Take Gum ammoniac, Asafoetida,

Pennyroyal Water, 7 ounces. Syrup of Garlic, an ounce.
Mix. -- DOSE. Two or three spoonfuls.

146. PURGING MIXTURE.
Take Infusion of Senna, 6 ounces. Tincture of Aloes, 6 drams. -- of Jalap. 3
drams. Aromatic Tincture, 1 drams.
DOSE. One ounce and a half.

147. COOLING PURGING DRAUGHT.
Take Warm Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Acetated Kali, 1 1-2 dram. Honey, 2 drams.
Mix. -- Given two or three times a day.

or -- 148.
Take Common Mint Water, 1 1-2 ounce Tartarized Kali, 3 to 4 drams. Syrup of
Roses, 1-2 an ounce. Compound Spirit of Lavender, 1 dram.
Mix. -- To be given in the morning.

149. DANDELION DRAUGHT.
Take of the Leaves, Stalks, and Roots of Dandelion, well washed and bruised. 1
handful. Raisins, 1-2 an ounce. Let these be boiled in one pint to half a pint
of water, let it stand till cold, then strain off the clear liquor, in two
ounces of which dissolve Acetated Kali, 1-2 a dram. and add Tincture of Senna,
1-2 an ounce or 6 drams. Compound Spirit of Lavender. 1 drams.
Mix. --

No. 150. SAPONACEOUS PILLS.
Take Venice Soap, 2 drams. Rhubarb, 1 dram.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form thirty-six-Pills.

DOSE. Four.

151. SEROUS PURGATIVE POWDER.
from 20 to 30 grains. Take jalap in powder, Purified Nitre,

Mix. --

or -- 152.
Take Gamboge, from 12 to 20 grains. Crystals of Tartar, 1-2 a dram.
Mix. --

153. DIURETIC ELECTUARY.
Take of the Rust of Iron prepared, from 2 drams to 1-2 an ounce. Powdered
Squills, 1 dram. Aromatic Powder, 1 1-2 drams. Conserve of Roman Wormwood, 1
1-2 ounce.
Syrup of Garlic, sufficient to form an Electuary.

DOSE. Quantity of a Nutmeg twice or thrice a day, with the following Draught:

154. DIURETIC DRAUGHT.
Take of Diuretic Salt, from 1-2 to 1 1-2 dram. Distilled Water, 1 1-2 ounce.
Horseradish Water, 2 drams.
Mix. --

155. DEOBSTRUENT PILLS.
of each 2 drams. Take Extract of Black Hellebore, Myrrh Dissolved,

Powder of the Holy Thistle, 10 scruples.
Mix these well together, and let the mass be exposed to the dry air, until it
is proper to form into pills, a grain and a half into a pill. These pills have
been given to the number of twenty or thirty to a dose, dividing them into
three equal portions, one portion to be given every hour.

156. MEDICATED WINE OR BEER.
of each 4 ounces. Take of Gentian. Lemon Peel, Mint, Juniper Berries,

Cinnamon, 2 ounces. Rust of Iron, 1 ounce.
Infuse these in a Gallon of Wine, or Ale, for fourteen days.

DOSE. Of the Ale half a pint, of the wine three or four ounces.

157. STIMULATING TONIC ELECTUARY.
Take of the Root of Wake Robin, fresh gathered, and well bruised, Gum Arabic
in powder, of each 1-2 an ounce. Bark, 5 or 6 drams.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form an Electuary.

DOSE. The quantity of a Nutmeg -- or the ingredients may be formed into powder
or pills, and taken in that manner, properly proportioning the dose of Wake
Robin in powder of the dried root, that is, from five to ten grains at a dose.

158. CAMPHORATED BOLUS.
Take of Mithridate, or Venice Treacle, 20 grains. Camphor, 8 grains.
Syrup of Saffron, sufficient to form a bolus.

159. DECOCTION OF WATER-DOCK.
Take of the Bark of the Root of Water-Dock, 1-2 a pound.
Boil this in six pints of river or rain water to four, in which dissolve two
drams of Crystals of Tartar, and let half a pint to taken three or four times a
day.

160. KALI DRAUGHT.
Take of Kali prepared, 15 grains. Distilled Water, 1 1-2 ounce. Syrup of
Sugar, 1 dram.
Let this be drank, and immediately afterward let dilute vitriolic Acid, as
much as will neutralize the Alkali, be taken in half an ounce of distilled
Water.

161. WORT.
Take of Malt fresh ground, 1 pound.
Infuse it in three pints of boiling Water, let it stand for four hours and
then pour off the clear liquor for use.

DOSE. From two to four pints in a day.

162. HEMLOCK PLASTER WITH AMMONIACUM.
Take of the Expressed Juice of Hemlock, 4 ounces. Gum Ammoniacum, 8 ounces.
Vinegar of Squills, sufficient to dissolve the Gums --

Add the Juice to this solution, strain the mixture, and boil it is the
consistence of a plaster.

163. TINCTURE OF BARK WITH LIME WATER.
Take of Lime Water, hot, 1 1-2 pint. which infuse Peruvian Bark in powder, 1
1-2 ounce.
Let it stand for eight or ten days, then pour off the clear liquor.

DOSE. From two to four spoonfuls twice a day.

164. SEDATIVE INJECTION.
Take Rose Water, 6 ounces. Tincture of Opium, 2 or 3 drams.
Mix. --

165. RESTRINGENT INJECTION.
Take Infusion of Rose Leaves, without the Vitriolic Acid, 5 ounces. White
Vitrol, 6 grains. Acetated Ceruss, 8 grains.
Mix. --

166. CALOMEL INJECTION.
Take Infusion of Roses, as above, or Decoction of Bark, 4 ounces. Calomel
prepared, 2 ounces.
Mix. --

167. MERCURIAL OINTMENT.
of each equal parts. Take Hog's Lard, Quicksilver,

(...) them together in a marble mortar, till no globule of the Quicksilver
appears.

168. CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE SOLUTION.
5 ounces. Take of Water, Brandy, or Any kind of Ardent Spirit,

Corrosive Sublimate, 10 grains.
DOSE. Half an ounce.

169. CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE PILLS.
Take Corrosive Sublimate, 15 grains. Dissolve them in Distilled Water, 6
drams. (...) this liquor add Crumbs of white Bread, 2 1-2 drams.
(...) make 120 Pills.

DOSE. Two, night and morning, which may be gradually increased to four, if the
stomach will bear them.

170. MERCURIAL GUMMOUS SOLUTION.
Take purified Quicksilver, 1 dram. Gum Arabic, 3 drams.
Syrup of Rhubarb, a sufficient quantity.

These are to be rubbed together in a glass, or marble mortar, gradually adding
a little Syrup at a time, until the whole of the Quicksilver runs into a mucus;
then, in the same gradual manner, add Rose Water, 12 ounces.
DOSE. One ounce night and morning.

171. MERCURIAL GUMMOUS PILL.
Take the Mercurial Mucus above described, and add to it Crumbs of Bread, 1-2
an ounce.
(...) these into pills of six grains each.

DOSE. Five night and morning.

No. 172. MERCURIAL SYRUP.
Take Mercurial Mucus above described, formed with Syrup of Roses instead of
that of Rhubarb, and gradually add to it of the same Syrup four ounces and a
half.
DOSE. A tea-spoonful morning and evening; but let the spoon be of Wood, Mother
of Pearl, or China -- and the dose may be gradually increased.

173. MEZEREON DECOCTION.
Take of the Bark of the Mezereon-root, fresh gathered, 1 ounce. Distilled
Water, 12 pints. Boil these together to eight pints, and, toward the close,
add Liquorice Root bruised, 1 ounce.
DOSE. Half a pint twice a day.

174. SULPHUR OINTMENT.
Take Flower of Sulphur, 1 ounce. Fixed Ammonia Salt, 1 dram. Hog's Lard, 2
ounces.
Mix. -- A fourth of this to be well rubbed only on a fourth part of the body
every evening.

175. MERCURIAL LOTION.
Take of Muriated Quicksilver, 1 dram. Rock Alum, 2 drams. Purified Nitre, 1-2
an ounce. Lime Water, 1-2 a pint.
Mix. --

176. MERCURIAL OINTMENT.
Take Muriated Quicksilver, 10 grains. White precipitated Quicksilver, 1 dram.
Simple Ointment, 1 1-2 ounce. Oil of Lavender, a few drops.
Mix. --

177. MERCURIAL GIRDLE.
Take of purified Quicksilver, 3 drams. Let these be well shook with Lemon
Juice, 2 ounces.
till all the globules shall cease to appear, then pour off the liquor, and to
the killed Quicksilver, (so called) let there be added half the Yolk of an Egg,
and one scruple of Gum Tragacanth very finely powdered. This composition must
be spread upon a flannel roller, about the breadth of three fingers, and
sufficiently long to form a girdle to encircle the waist, which must be there
worn.

178. DECOCTION OF THE INTERIOR BARK OF THE ELM TREE.
Take the interior Bark of the Elm Tree, 4 ounces. Distilled Water, 4 pints.
Let these be boiled to two pints, and then strained.

DOSE. Half a pint twice a day.

179. BARK AMD SASSAFRAS ELECTUARY.
Take Peruvian Bark, very finely powdered, 1 1-2 ounce. Powder of Sassafras
Bark, 1-2 an ounce.
Syrup of Sugar, sufficient to form an Electuary.

DOSE. Quantity of a large Nutmeg twice a day.

180. STIMULANT LOTION.
Take British Spirits, 8 ounces. Ley of Tartar, 1 ounce. Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, 2 drams.
Mix. --

181. VOLATILE FOETID MIXTURE.
Take Asafoetida, 1 dram. dissolve these in the Liquor of Hartshorn, 2 drams.
Pennyroyal Water, 2 ounces. Syrup of Saffron, 2 drams.
Mix. -- DOSE. One or two tea-spoonfuls occasionally.

182. LINIMENT AGAINST RICKETS.
of each 2 drams. Take Palm Oil, Balsam of Peru, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac,

Oil of Nutmeg expressed, 1 dram.
of each 20 drops. -- Cloves, -- Amber,

Mix. --

INDEX.
This not only is an Index of reference, but of explanation; as there are in
the Work unavoidably some technical Terms, not very readily intelligible to
common Readers. Where, therefore, the Words are not explained in the Body of
the Work, they are in this Place. And Words marked with an Asterisk are
referred to the Page where such may be found, with the Sense given of them.
Where the letter F. is placed before the Figures, they refer to the article in
some of the Forms of Medicine, P. 229. 403. 527.

A.
ABdomen, lower belly. Abdominial, belonging to the abdomen. Ablutions,
cleansing. Abscess, (See Inflammation.) Abscess of the liver, not always
mortal, how accounted for, 340. Absorbent alcalescents, how removing spasm,
148; earths, 177; vessels, what their use, 23. Abstinence, unavoidable, what
necessary to be done, 107. Acetated litharge, 193. Acerb fruits, 193. Acescent,
partaking of the nature of acid. Acids, what their action and use, their
diversified powers, what, 189; divisions, 193, and alkalines styled demulcents,
why, 187; saline, 194; vegetable or native, 176, 186; mineral, 176, 186; 190:
fermented, 176. Acidulated waters, 177. Acid vapors, 164. Acini, 37. Acores,
why so called, 490. Acrid spirits, 163. Acrimonious, sharp, pungent. Acrimony,
imagined not to take place in the blood vessels, 188; putrescent, its effects
how remedied, 96; acid, its effects, how prevented, 96. Adipose, fatty.
AEthiops mineral, 160. Ether, vitriolic, 150; spirit, 156. Aggregates,
different bodies collected into one mass. Air, its properties and effects upon
the constitution, 68; the most salutary, 70; b^^ its signs, 70; which most
agreeable to valetudinarians, fixable, how communicable to the stomach, 470;
moderately warm, its effects upon the skin, 274. Aix la Chapelle waters, 359.
Alchohol,* 31. 82. 286. 193, 194. Ale and porter, their effects, 24, 88; ale,
porter, cider, 193. Aliment, what, 72. Alcalescent, 37. partaking of the nature
of alkali. Alkali, a saline substance, ^^^menting when put to an (...): fixed
fossile, 185, 191; (...) vegetable, 185. 191; volatile, 185, 191. Alkalies,
199; their use and ^^^ion, their diversified power what, 191. Almonds, 168.
286; oil of (...) F. 405, 409. 408. 412; milk of, F. 229. Aloes, 171. 197. 200.
F. ^7, 528. Aloetic medicines, 182. Alum, with its preparation^, 139. 200; F.
403. whey, (...) F. 412. Amber, oil rectified of, 150. (...). F. 408; salt
purified, (...) 176. 190. 193. F. 527. Amentia, what, cure, 434. Amenorrhoea,
what, and (...) so called, 502; divided (...) three heads, what, 502, (...);
explained, 502; (...), when to be pronounced disease, 503; causes of the (...)
species, etc. See (...) -- of the second, with the symptoms and cure, 504; of
the third, 504; whom it chiefly affects, 505. Ammonia, acetated, or
Myndere^^s's spirit, 180, F. 231. 362. 233. 238. 407. 408. 409. 411. 527;
prepared, 150. 180. F. 232, 234; water of, 235; liniment of. F. 408. Ammoniac,
sal, fixed, 176. 183. F. 409. 532; spirits of, F. 406. 533. 534. Ammoniacal
copper, 409. 509. Ammoniacum, gum, 149. 163. 164. 183. F. 407. 408. 527, 528.
531. Anasarca, what, and why so named, 454, 455; description, 455.
Anastomosing, uniting by contact. Anohylosis,* 21. Angelica, 162. Angina,
whence the (...). See Quinsy, 317. Animal-bile 170. 173. food, 286. 191; heat,
what, and from whence, 56; oil, 150. 200. Animalcules, small animals. Aniseed,
145. Anodynes,* 152. 163. Anomalous, irregular, uncommon. Antacids, 192; their
use and and action, 191. Anthelminti^s, 192; how removing spasms, 148; with
their use and action, 197. Antilyssus pulvis, 702. Antimonial powder, 180 F.
230. 410, 411. 413; wine, 168. F. 240. 527. Antimony, 168. 180. 181; cerated
glass of, 388; precipitated, F. 406. Antiseptics, 13^; division of, 194; their
use and action, 192; exhibits apparently contradictory powers, how accounted
for, and in what cases applicable, 192, 193. Antispasmodics, 131. 148. 191.
193; what understood by them, 148; how to be selected, 148; their action, 148,
in some of their sensible properties, opposite; what use to be made of the
knowledge, 148; to be given in full doses, how, 149. Anus, 143. the lowest
extremity of the rectum. Aorta,* ^9. Aperients. 163. Apex. top. Apoplexy, what;
why so named; description; causes; characteristic signs, 423 to 426, different
species, 423, whom it attacks chiefly, 424; symptoms of death, 424. Apozem
antiseptic purging, F. 237. Appendicula, vermiform^^, 43. Apples, 190, 193.
Aqueous Watery. Arabic, gum, 286, 287, 288, Arachnoide membrane, 27. Area, the
surface contained between any boundaries. Aromatic tincture, F. 528, 529.
Arrow-root, 286. Artery, what, its uses, 22. Arthritis, what; whence named.
Arsenic, 509. Artichoke, 170. 177. 185. 190. Articulation, joint. Asafoetida
149. 164. 180. 182, 183, 193, 194. 200. F. 240. 528. 534. proved by the
statical experiments of San^^orius, a diaphoretic, 180. Asarabacca, 269.
Ascites, what, and from whence named, 454, 455. Asparagus, 170. 175. (...).
190. Assarum, 157. Assimilation, what; how performed, 72, to convert into the
same nature. Ass' milk, 393; artificial, 134. Asthma, what; whence ^^med; how
divided; divisions properly come under one (...), 444, description, 445; (...),
445; characteristic signs, (...); distinction, 446; cure, (...) who most
subject to it, 44^ Astringents, 131. 136. (...). 193; what; their active (...),
136; Boerhaave's (...) 137; Cullen's opinion, (...), their action specified;
(...) in alum, white vitriol, (...) steel, pungent stimulants, ^^^^tives, 137;
the differe^^^ of their continuance of (...) 137; catalogue, 139; (...) this
class, 177; same (...) of the diuretic class, (...) saline mineral, not to be
(...) with volatiles, why, 264. Attenuants, 131. 183; w^^^ their use and
action, comprehending, diluting, resolving inciting medicines, 183. Attrition,
rubbing together. Atrophy, 355; wh^^; whence named, 465; description; causes;
characteristic signs; cure, 465 to 467; in children the symptoms, 46^, old men
subject to it, 466. Auricles, what, 29.
447. See jaundice. Aurigo, Aurugo,

Axis, center.
B
Balm, 142. Balsams, 163. Barberry, 190. Bark, Peruvian, 177. 182. 186. 194.
200. F. 235, 236, 237, 240. 403, 404. 412. 527, 528. 530. Bark, how to be given
in (...), 458. Barley, 142. 186. Barley water sweetened with (...), 178. Bath
waters, 176. 353. 359. (...). 453. Bathing, cold, 181, 182. (...); hot baths,
393; a salt (...) or sea bathing efficacious (...) some asthmas, 448; warm,
(...). Baths, warm, partial, 182; warm, 383. 469; to the feet, (...). 182.
Bauhini valvula, 43. Bears wortel berry, 139. (...). 193. 199. Beef tea, its
use, 82, 133. (...), medicated, 530. Beat, 142. 157. 170. 184. (...), leaves,
494. Betony, 157. Bibulous, absorbing, or sucking up. Bile, what, its use, etc.
35. Bile, or boil. See Inflammation. Biliary ducts, 35. Bilious affections, how
to be prevented, 60. 99. Bilious, vomiting, and intestinal flux, 382. Bitter
apple, 171. 173. F. 408, 409. Bitters, 182. 198, 199. aromatic, 163. Black
Flux. See Melaena. Black water. See Pyrosis. Black hellebore, 503. Bladder,
what, its uses, 50. Bleeding. See Phlebotomia. Bleeding of the nose, 396:
causes, cure, 393, 394. Blisters. See Epispastics. Blood, what, into what
divisible, 31, a stimulant, why, 31, offensive, by its too great or too small
quantity, or acrimony, complaints from thence arising, 94, 95. Blue vitriol,
168. F. 410. Boil, or bile. See Inflammation. Bolus, camphorated, 234. 530;
opiated, chalybeated, 413; oak bark, 403; calomel, 408; calomel and guiacum;
408; diaphoretic antimonial cordial, 411; antimonial, 230; cordial stimulant
232; -- musk, 234, 235; snake root, 255; aromatic bitter, 239. Bones, what;
their use, 21; forming the chest, what, 32. Borax, 184. 191. Brain, what, its
use, 26, 27. Bristol water, 400. Brandy, 412. Broom, 176. Bronchocile. See
Scrophula. Broths, their use, 82. 87; fat, or weak, 87. 142. Bubo, 483.
Buckthorn berries, 171. 173. F. 233 Bullets, leaden, 359. Burdock, 179.
Burgundi pitch, F. 395. Butter, 142. Butter-milk, 170.
C
Cabbage, 170. 185. 190. Calculus, stone in the kidneys or bladder. Callous,
hard, or firm. Calomel, 160. 200. F. 405, 406, 407, 408. 527. Camphor, 150.
180. 193, 194. 198. F. 231, 232. 234, 235. 237, 238, 239, 240. 406. 411, 412.
527, 528. 530. Canada, balsam of, 175. Cancer, 474; what, and whence its name,
475; scrophulous patients most liable to it, 475; occult, open, what, 475; when
termed scirrhi, 475; when considered as cancers, 475, 476; when cancers lurk
internally, how known, 476. Cantharides, 144. 146, 175. 181, 182. 195. 200. F.
528. Capillary, 35. air like. Capsicum, 145. Cardix,* 39. Cardamom-seed, 145.
Cardialgia, what; from whence named, 352. Carditis, 328; cure, 329. Caries. See
Inflammation. Carminatives, what; how removing spasm, 148. Carraway-seeds, 145;
oil of, F. 408. 411. Carrot, 186. 190; wild, F 410. Cartilago ensimormis, what,
39. Cartilages or gristles, what; their use, 21. Carus, what, and whence named,
426; how relieved, 426. Cascarilla, 145, 146. Cassia fistularis, 170. F. 232.
Cassia wood, 145. Castor, 150. 181, 182. F. 527; oil, 172, 200. F. 240. 407.
410. Catalepsy, what; whence named, description; causes; characteristic signs;
cure, 426 to 428. Catamenia. See Menses. Catechu, which was called Japan earth,
139. F. 404. Cathartics, 131. 183; what; their action and use, 168; Boerhaave's
opinion, 168; catalogue divided, 170; other powers necessary to be known, what,
170. Catheter*, 368. Catarrhus suffocativus, 448. Caustic alkali, 199. Cautions
necessary to be observed with respect to food, exercise, eating, drinking,
hunger, etc. 104. Cawl, what, 37. Celery, 170. 175. 185. 190. Cellular system,
what; its use, 25. Celfus' directions for the conduct of a man in health, 105.
Cephalalgia, Cepalla, what; whence so named, 346. Cervix*, 51. Ceruss, white,
F. 531. Chalk, 177. 191. F. 236. 238. Chalybeate springs, 362. Chammomile, 146.
193. F. 239. 403. Cheltenham waters, 177: Cherries, 190. 193. Chicken water,
383: Chincough, what, and whence named, 440. Chlorosis, what, and whence named;
description; certain signs, 502, 503; causes, cure, 503. Chocolate, its use,
81, 82. Cholera morbus, what; whence named, 381; its seat; description, 382;
causes 382, 383; characteristic signs; cure, 383 to 385; the time it most
commonly appears, 382; Sydenham's modes of giving opiates, 383; emetics and
aperients when necessary, 384; avoided, 384. Choleric, abounding with bile.
Chordee, 480, 482. Chronic, long continuance; complaints, how by neglect
occasioned, 228. Chyle, what, 42. 73. Cicuta, 148. 150. 477, to 479. F. 531.
Cinnabar, factitious, 160. F. 527. Cinnamon, 145. F. 231, 232. 234, 235, 236.
238. 404, 405. 412. 530; infusion of, 384. Circulation of the blood, how
performed, 29. Circulatory vessels, what; their use, 24. Circumcision, on what
account introduced, 54. Circumvallation, lines of, certain boundaries, beyond
which no one is permitted to pass. Citron, fresh juice of, 178. Class, from
whence named, 482. See gonorrhoea virulenta. Clavus, what, 511. Climate, warm,
its advantages, 474. Cloves, 147. 162. F. 533; infusion of, 384. Coagulated
lymph, or gluten, how separable, 31. Coagulable, 36; particles closely uniting.
Cockles, 177. Coction, digestion. Coecum, what; its use, 43. Coeliaca, what;
whence named, 382. Coffee, 83, 84; raw decoction of, its uses, 365; roasted,
infusion of, 447. Cold iron, 393. Cold water thrown suddenly upon the feet,
legs, etc. its effects, 339. Colic, what; why so called; description in
general; causes; characteristic signs; cure, 356, 357; a particular inquiry
necessary; what and why, 359. Colic, nervous, 359; description; characteristic
signs; causes; cure, 359 to 360; the mode of curing at Charlestown, 360. Colic
of Poictiers, 359. Coli valvula, 43. Colon, what; its uses, 43. Colts foot,
164. Columbo root, 379. 384. 388. F. 404. Comata, what; why so named; defined,
423. Comfrey-root, 185. 188. 400. Comminution, dividing or thinning.
Commixture, mixing together. Compression with a roller at the lower part of the
belly, in what useful, 508. Concoction, digestion. Concressible, uniting
together. Confection, aromatic, F. 231, 232. 234, 235. 240. 411. Congeries, a
mass or heap. Conical, like a cone, in form like a sugar loaf. Connections of
the stomach with the mind and distant part of the machine particularly proved,
129, 130. Constitutions, the only accepted terms explained, from 57 to 63; the
common ideas of the terms not well understood, 58; the differences, to what
owing, 59; farther divided, 64; no one application proper to all, 65; more
particularly specified, 89; arranged under particular heads, and modes of
conduct prescribed to each, 90. Constitution, its parts the objects of
medicine, 102. Consumption, dorsal, why so named; description, 335; cause;
cure, 336; of different kinds, what, 331. 334, 335; of the lungs, 331;
different species, what, 331; description, 332; causes, 333; immediate in the
different stages, ibid; cure, 333, 334. Contagion. See Infection. Contrayerva,
147. 180. Convolution, rolling round. Convulsion and spasm, the difference,
what, 148; Gaubius's opinion, ibid; by what terms distinguished; the reason,
ibid; distinction necessary to be known, why, 148. Convulsions, what, 414; from
whence named; how differing from tetanus, one called tonic, the other clonic;
why, 417. 418. Convulsive cough, 440. Copavia, balsam, 145. 163. 164. 175. F.
406. Copper, 139. Core. See Inflammation. Cornaro, some account of himself, how
relieved from ill health, 67. Corn salad, 185. 177. 190. Corpora spongiosa,
what, 54. Corrosive sublimate, or muriated quicksilver, 157. F. 531, 532, 533.
Cough, common, reason for treating of it, 439; causes and cure, ibid. Coughing
up of blood, description; causes; characteristic signs; cure, 390 to 393; who
most subject to it, 392. Country more healthy than a city or large town, why,
72. Cowhage, 142. 197. Cow itch. See cowhage. Crabs, 177. 191; eyes, F. 236.
405; claws, 177, F. 229. 411. Crassamentum, what, 31. Cream, F. 142; bark, 404;
mixed with chalk, 494. Cremaster muscle, 53. Crude, not well perfected. Crusta
lactea. See Tinea. Cryptae,* 489. Cucumber, 184. 186. 188. 190; wild, 171. 173.
Cup moss, 139. Currants, 190. Cutaneous, 130. Cuticular, appertaining to the
skin. Cider, 83, 84. 86. Cylindrical, like a cylinder, (...) circular tube.
C^^anche, whence the name. See Quinsy. (...) bile, 36; bile from the gall
bladder. Cystitis, what; whence named, 343; inflammation of the bladder;
description; causes, ibid; cure, 244.
D.
Dandelion, 146, 147. 170. 177. 185. 190. F. 528. (...), 53. D^^^s, 142. 188.
Dead nettle, 472. Dead nightshade, 479. Deafness, some cases of, er^^ines
useful, 156. Debilities, 422. Decay of the tooth, how discoverable when not
perceptible to the eye, in cases of pain from that cause, 349. Decoction of the
branches of the Common red fir, or pitch tree, 468; of garlic, 458; of broom,
ibid; of coltsfoot, 472; of pomegranate bark and chamomile, F. 239; of
waterdock, F. 530; of the interior bark of the elm tree, F. 533; of the wood,
406; of semirauba, F. 412. Defluxions, flux of humors upon a part.
Deleterious, destructive. Demulcents, 131. 163. 187. 190, 191; their action and
use, 187; division, of 188; how remove spasm, 148. Detergents, 163. Detersion,
cleansing. Detrusor urin^, 50. Devonshire colic, 259. Diabetes, what; whence
named; description; causes; characteristic signs; modes of cure, 309 to 401;
different species, ibid. Diagonal, a line drawn from angle to angle.
Diaphoretics, 131; what; their action and use, 177. Diaphragm, its use, 33;
inflammation of, 328, 329. Diarrhoea, what; whence named, 381; looseness, ibid;
often of service, how known, 389; cured, ibid. Diet, suited to different ages,
what, 113. Dietetic remedies, what, 65. Different effects and motions of a
muscle, 23. Difficult or painful menstruation. See Amenorrhoea. Digestion,
weak, what, useful, 187. Dilatation, expansion. Diluting liquors, what; their
use, 80; medicines, 183; and nutritive liquors, what, 88. Dipsas, its bite
productive of diabetes, 400. Disease, rules for preventing, 105; prevented,
made milder, or cured by the operations of habit, 64; what the consequences of
sudden change from industry to indolence -- revised, the consequences --
pursued under proper limitations advantageous, how, 110, 111; in general,
described; how discovered and distinguished; different causes and indications
of cure; definition of, 202; causes, predisposing, what; remote or inducing,
what; on what dependent; proximate; immediate, what; cure, indications of,
what, 202; preventive mode, what the division of, 203; produced by gout, what,
374; of the skin; how considered in two ways; what, 483. Dispendium, waste
Disseminated, to scatter or spread. Diuretics, 175. 178. 183; their action and
use, 174; divided into different heads, 175. Diuretic salt, 176. F. 529.
Dover's powder, how to be given in dropsy, 458. Draught, cooling, purging, 528;
dandelion, ibid; diuretic, 529; kali, 530; bark, 403; astringent, 404; purging,
408; balsam, of Peru, 410; gum guaiacum, 411; anodyne, or quieting, 230; saline
anodyne, ibid; emetic, 231; purging, 232; cassia, ibid; cordial saline, 233;
cordial aromatic, ibid; snake root, 235; antiseptic aperient, 237;
antiputrescent, ibid; inpecacuanha, 238; saline volatile, ibid; saline
fermentative, ibid; aromatic bitter, 239. Dropsy, description; anasarca, 455;
causes, 457; cure, 458; varieties, 458 to 464; all originate from one immediate
cause; described, 455 to 457. 461; of the pericardium, or membrane surrounding
the heart; description, 457; of the chest, see Hydrothorax; of the head, see
Hydrocephalus; of the Womb, see Hydrometron; of the belly, see Ascites. Ductus
communis choledochus, 36. Duplicature, any thing doubled. Dura matter, 26.
Dysentery, what; whence named, 381; description; different species; causes;
cure, 385 to 389; infectious, and contagious, how proved, 385; who most subject
to it, ibid; to whom most fatal, 386; some distinctions necessary, what, ibid;
purgatives adapted to the nature of the disease, why, 388. Dyspepsia, what, and
why so called, 517; description; causes, cure, 518. Dyspnoea, what, and whence
named, See Asthma.
what; whence named, 367; Dysuria, Dysury,

description; causes; cure, 368.
E.
Ear-ach, what; causes; modes of cure, 348. Ear, dividing the gristly or
cartilaginous substances, its use in epilepsy, 421. Eating, its excess, the
inconveniences, how remedied, 106. Edulcorated, 50; made milder or sweetened.
Efflorescences, 130; small red eruptions on the skin. Effluvia, the fine parts
flying off from bodies. Eggs, 186; crude yolks of, 142. Egg and oyster-shell,
their use, 191. Electuary, cinnabar, 528; diuretic, 530; tonic stimulant, 531;
bark and sassafras, 533; gently aperient, 412. Eelecampane, 163. Electricity,
145. 373. 431. ^^4. Elm tree, inner bark, F. 533. Elephantiasis, what; why
named, 491. See Leprosy. Embryo, 51; foetus, (...) in the womb. Emersion,
appearance, or (...) out. Emetics, 131; what; their (...) and action, 165, 168;
(...) into eight heads; the (...) from considering each division particularly
specified, 165; in small doses, their effects, 141; in the bowels, 171; as
^^^enagogues, 183; ipecacuanha, F. 235; powder, 387; a pulmonary consumption
useful; why, 334. Emmenagogues, 131. 180; divided, 181; one thing to be
particularly observed in their application, what, 182; their use and action,
180; our selection, on what founded, 182. Emollients, 131; their action, 140;
as demulcents, 188; how they remove spasm, 148; ^^alogue, 142; mucilaginous and
farinaceous, preferable to the oily; why, 142. Emprosthotonos, what; whence
named, 414. 416. Epyema, what; why so named, 330, 331; description, ibid; cure,
ibid. Empireumatic oils, 180. 246. Emulges, to milk, or drain out. Emulgents,
48. Emulsion, oil of castor, 240; camphorated, ibid; 405; opiated, 410. Endive,
170. 177. 185. 190. Enteritis, what; why so termed, 337; causes; characteristic
signs; cure, 338; does not so often occur as imagined; for what mistaken, 337;
sudden relief from pain often deceptive; the reason, 338; relapse, how to be
prevented, 338, 339. Ephidrosis, what, and whence named; causes; cure; either
active or passive; from what causes, 401, 402; sweat, cold or warm, what they
denote, 402; when to be considered a disease; when not, ibid. Epidermis*, 53.
Epididymis, 53. Epigastrium, 33. Epilepsy, what, and whence named; description;
causes; characteristic signs; cure, 418 to 422; divided into different species;
the reason, 418; differs from convulsion and apoplexy; how, 418; if
counterfeited how discovered, 419; various medicines and various methods
recommended; why, and what, 419, 420; what species incurable, 421; hysteric or
uterine, what; how distinguished; cured, 420, 421. Epispastics, 132; what;
their use, and action, 164. 193. 195. Epistaxis, what; whence named, 390.
Errhines, 131; their action, 155; mechanical and medical, what, 156; arranged,
with respect to their power, 157; their utility in rheumatic affections, 156.
Eruptive fevers, why so called; exanthematous; the specific nature of the
morbid matter, not to be considered, why; what to attend to in the cure, 264.
Erysepalis, whence its name; fever, serous inflammatory; Saint Anthony's fire;
description, 294; causes; characteristic signs; cure, indications of;
evacuations to be cautiously pursued, why, 295; local applications, different
opinions relative to them, 296; retrocession, in case of, what to be done;
zaster, zona, shingles, 297; repelled upon the train, the symptoms; also upon
the lungs; mortification, if threatened, the remedies; when to be dreaded,
ibid. Essential oils, 145. 180. 193. Euphorbium, 146. 157. 195. Evacuants, all
general stimulants; the reason, 156. Evacuations, sanguinary, 389; general
doctrine, 389, 390; divided, in what manner, 390, 391; occasioned in four
different ways, how, 390; morbid, how divided, into alvine, sanguinary, serous,
either active or passive, the reasons, 380; indications of cure in general,
ibid; serous and lymphatic, 433; alvine, 381: different species described, 381,
382. Evanescent, extremely minute. Evolution, disentangling. Exacerbation,
increase of violence. Exanthematous*, 264. Excess of every kind detrimental,
why; in eating more than in drinking, why, 135. Excretory vessels, what; their
use, 23. Exercise to be adapted to the prevention of particular diseases into
which people are liable to fall, 111; division of, ibid; its great intent,
ibid; what, 181; moderate, its use, 177; divided, 75; different, their effects,
ibid; and rest, their uses, 75, 76; mental as well as corporeal, 75; Sydenham's
opinion, ibid. Expectorants, 131; what; their action and uses; by what means
assisted, 163; which act by stimulating the lungs, 164; by taking off spasmodic
affections, 165; by irritation, ibid; by lubricating and relaxing, ibid.
Exudation, See Inflammation. Eye-water, anodyne. F. 406.
F.
False ribs, 48. Farinaceous grain, mealy, as wheat, etc. Fat, 142. Fatigue,
after it a common custom, what; injurious, why; what more proper, 107. Favus,
why so called. See Tinea. Fear, a relaxant; grief, a relaxant, 140. Febrile
affections in general, described, 203. Fennel seed, 175. Fermentation. See
Inflammation. Fern-root powder, 197. Ferruginous, appertaining to (...).
Fevers, the division of; continued, what, defined; their division; general
description, ^^4; how to proceed in, before their particular natures are
specifically known; simple, why so called; mixed; why so ^^med; difficult to be
referred to any class; the reason, 240; the difficulty attempted to be solved,
241, 242; mixed or ^^amolo^s, defined, 242; erup^^^^, one general observation
respecting them, 274. Fever, bullous; vesiculary, ^98; inflammatory, what;
vasculo-sanguineous inflammatory, why so called, 209; described; heat,
inflammatory, what, ^^9; persons most subject to this fever, 210;
characteristic signs; cure, ibid; pulse, not to be deceived by it, ibid;
bleeding advised with extreme caution, why; vomit, when to be prohibited, when
useful, 211; bleeding employed before a vomit, why, 212; blisters, when to be
applied, 213; different opinions, 213, 214; crisis, signs of, 213; in desperate
cases not to despair, why, 214; blisters how applied under desperate
circumstances, ibid; vapor bath, when useful, ibid; rheumatic affections, how
relieved, also dysenteric, 215; bilious remittent, whence its name; cure; marsh
remittent, 255; when it occurs, and how cured; how to be prevented, ibid; --
intermittent, whence its name, ibid; description of the different stages, 256;
intermission, what; foretelling the violence of the hot by the degree of cold;
erroneous; in what countries endemial, ibid; their division specified; from
whence denominated tertian, etc. causes; who most subject to this complaint;
characteristic signs, 257; cure, indications of, 258; bark, how, and the
quantity necessary to be given between the fits of intermittents, 258, 259;
what to be done to prevent a relapse; in the cold and hot fits, liquids how to
be used; bark, substitute for, where it disagrees, 259; medicines necessary to
be coupled with the bark in intermittents; vomits, in obstinate cases, when to
be given; opium also, 260; bark failing to cure properly administered, ^to what
owing; bark proving purgative, how checked; if astringent, how assisted; bark,
the best mode of exhibiting it to children, ibid; hectic, what; chronic
remittent without crisis; why so called, see Hectic Fever; what considered by
different authors, 261; description; Dr. Heberden's remarks on this fever,
what, 262; from the first stage of a watery head, difficulty distinguished;
causes; characteristic signs, 263; cure, the indications of, 263, Bristol
waters, 264; -- simple continued, what; vasculo plethoric, what; description;
causes; cure, 205 to 209; antimonials, caution in continuing them recommended,
why, 206; emetics, when necessary; Sydenham's opinion; glysters, when
necessary, 207; affections, particular, how alleviated, ibid; critical days,
which; crisis, cautions necessary to be observed in pronouncing, 208; when
perfect, 209; diet, how to be administered after a fever, ibid; -- miliary,
whence its name, its existence doubted; but not universally; sometimes
symptomatic, simple and complicated; description, 288; causes; characteristic
signs; the nature of the fever, what, considered, bleeding rarely necessary; to
be treated according to its nature, 290; blisters, how to be applied, ibid;
symptoms of great danger, what, 291; time of recovery, 292; who most subject to
it, ibid; apt to return, at what time; often seizes lying in women; nature of
this fever nervous, why; sometimes putrid, ibid; in case of looseness, what to
be done, 293; favorable and unfavourable signs, 293, 294; eruptions, which the
most favorable, 293; -- nervous, what, 215; described, 216; causes, ibid;
characteristic signs; cure, indications of, 217; bleeding in general injurious;
when it may be allowed; leeches, when necessary, or cupping; ipecacuanha
preferable to tartarized antimony, why, ibid; gentle aperients advisable, why;
profuse sweating mischievous; particular attention to diet recommended, why,
218; blisters, necessary rules to be observed respecting them, ibid; bark, when
to be given, 219; musk, when necessary; in looseness, what to be done; in
thrush, what to be done, 220; salivation coming on, Dr. Huxham's opinion;
symptoms favorable and unfavourable, ibid; -- remittent, what, whence so
called, 250; divided into quotidian, tertian, and quartan, why; of no use, why;
description, 250; called bilious, improperly, why; where endemial; sometimes
epidemical; causes; characteristic signs, 252; degrees of danger, by what
perceived; cure; great caution necessary in the conduct, the reasons, ibid;
favorable symptoms; unfavourable, how to be relieved or conquered, 2^^; if not
quickly successful, what consequences; bark in every stage not necessary,
though in some extremely useful, the reasons; nicest caution necessary with
respect to bleeding, why, ibid; in the West Indies, how managed; the varieties,
how to be treated, 254; -- puerperal or childbed, description, 243; causes,
244; characteristic signs; cure; the days of (...) termination, what, 245;
hopes, on what founded, ibid; chamomile-tea better omitted why; vomiting, when
necessary, to be promoted by the easiest means, why, and how, 246; peculiar
circumstances sometimes attendant, what, and how alleviated, 246, 247, 248; the
preventive mode necessary to be closely pursued, why, 243; -- all fevers to
which they may be reduced, and from the action of what parts they are
occasioned; the reasons; hence the modes of cure deduced, 248, 249; putrid,
what; sanguineo-putrescent, why so called; why (...) its commencement sometimes
putting on inflammatory, at others nervous appearances; the reason, 221;
description; to be distinguished in its earliest attack; ibid; the reason, how;
heat, peculiar, how discovered; characteristic signs, 222; cure, indications
of; bleeding not necessary but an a particular occasion; that specified, 223;
profuse discharges not to be occasioned, why; bark, when to be given;
unnecessary to wait as in other fevers, for a remission, 224; stimulants with
bark, when advisable; the good effects, how produced; corroborated by Huxham's
opinion of the mode of the fever being carried off, ibid; wine, which most
eligible, 225; modes, the different (...) of its termination, what; sudorific,
the most certain one in nature, what, ibid; accidental circumstances, to be
attended to, 226; what, and how alleviated, ibid; 227, 228; air, fixed, its
use, 226; bark, a substitute for, 227; after the fever, dropsical swellings
coming on, how cured; steel given in substance, why, 228; -- scarlet, whence
its name, into what divided; -- nettlerash scarlet fever; description, 287; how
distinguished from the meazles; causes; characteristic signs, ibid; cure;
convulsions sometimes come on, how a leviated; doubts of the existence of this
fever ill founded, 288; -- scarlet malignant, 288. 322. Fiber, what, 24. Figs,
142. 188. 190. Filamentous, appearances like threads. Fish, 186. Flesh, its
first use, the reason of. 73. Flowers of lady's smock, 419. Fluids, what, 20.
Fluor albus. See Leucorrhoea. Foecal halitus, offensive effluvia of the faeces.
Foenugreek, 142. Follicles, 49. small glands or bags. Fomentations, 182.
Fomentation, dry, 453; discutient, F. 406; sedative, F. 408. Fomes,* 227.
Fontanelle,* 520. Food, animal, what; which of them most nutritious; how
procured, 133; our first, what; how altered, 73; animal, its medical virtues,
134; animal, vegetable, their different properties, 75; its nutritious part, of
what it consists, 74; a constant, quick repetition necessary, why, 74; animal,
not to be our only support, why, ibid; a greater propensity to one than
another, the reason, ibid; should be properly proportioned in quantity and
quality to exercise, 107; animal, alters its properties from the culinary
process it has undergone, why, 135; by quantity more than quality, injurious,
136; vegetable, the most nutritious, what, 135; vegetable, most difficult of
assimilation, why, 134; vegetable, its medical virtues, ibid; Fossa,* 34.
Fovea,* 35. Fox-glove, 166. 176. 182. F^^able, easily reduced to powder.
Frictions, 177; strong, 178. Foenum,* 482. Fruits, sweet acid, 185. Fumigation,
the reception of effluvia or vapor on any part; of tobacco to the uterus, 182.
Fundus uteri, 52. Fungous excrescences, spongy productions. Fungi, mushrooms,
truffles, morelles; different from every other vegetable in their nature, why,
136; not correctors of animal food, ibid;
G.
Galbanum, 150. 183. Gall bladder, what; its use, etc. 35. Galls, 140.
Gall-stones, certain symptoms of, 361. Gamboge, 171. 173. 197. 529. Gangrene.
See Inflammation. Gargles, detergent, F. 236. 407. Garlic, 145. 164. 175. 190.
Gas sylve^^^e, 118. spirit, such as rises from fermenting liquors, now called
fixed air. Gastric, belonging to the stomach; -- juices, 41. Gastritis, what;
whence named 336. Gastrodynea, what; from whence named, 352, 353. Geneva, the
different sorts, what 84. Gensing, 146. Gentian, F. 231. 530. Gilead balsam,
145. 163. Ginger, 145. F. 405. 408. 410. Girdle, mercurial, F. 533. Gland,
what; its use 24; conglobate,* 472; conglomerate,* ibid; Glans, penis, what,
55. Glauber's salts. See Natron vitriolated. Globus hystericus,* 478. Glottis,*
493. Gold or silver, solution of, in particular acids, 171. Gonorrhoea
virulenta, what; whence named, 479; improper, why; to what altered, ibid;
proceds from the same cause as the lues venerea; the reasons, ibid;
description, ibid. symptoms in men, ibid; in women, 480; purulent discharge not
always the effect of venereal taint; cautions necessary in declaring the nature
of the disease, why, 481; characteristic signs, ibid; cure, 482. Gluttony, a
case of its consequences, 106. Glyster, bark, F. 404; irritating, F. 407; with
bitter apple, F. 409; sedative, F. 416; terebinthinate, F. 410; domestic;
common, F. 233; antispasmodic, F. 508; foetid, F. 465; sheathing and anodyne,
F. 388; of fresh urine, and sage infusion, F. 362; Gout, what; whence named;
description, 373; causes, 374; characteristic signs; cure, 375; division of,
373; who most subject to it, who not, 376; if in the head or lungs, stomach or
bowels, what to be done, 378; how alleviated or weakened in its attacks, 97.
Grains of paradise, 145. Grapes, 190. Grass and roots, 176. Gravel, 364. Grief,
a relaxant, 141. Ground ivy, 146. 164. Gruels, their use, 81. 83. Guiacum,
tincture of, with quick lime, how made, 372; wood, 145. 180; F. 406; gum, 145.
164. 170. 173, 180. 182, F. 406. 411. Gullet, 39: Guts, the small ones, what,
(...); thick or large, what, 43.
H.
Hartshorn prepared, 177, 191; volatile salt of, F. 527; liquor of, F. 533.
Harrowgate waters, 176. 198. 453 474. Haematuria, what; whence named, 390.
Haematemesis, what; whence named, ibid. Haemoptysis, what; whence named, ibid.
Haemorrhages, what; whence named, 389. Haemorrhoidal veins, those spread upon
the rectum and anus. Haemorrhoids, what; -- whence named, 391. Headache;
causes; incurable, specified, 347; modes of cure, 346, 347, 348; general rules
348. Heat, what, 145; united with motion, what, 179. Health, a description of,
104; the most perfect state not far distant from disease, 105. Heart, what; its
use, 28; heartburn, see Pyrosis. Hedge Hyssop, 147. 171. 173. 175. Hellebore,
bark, F. 529. Hemicrania, whence so named, 346. Hemiplegia, what; whence named,
428. Hemlock, 152; recommended by Stor^k too highly; where serviceable; its
doses; Cullen's remark to be observed, 154, F. 529. Henbane, 152; how differs
from opium, 154; Storks opinion, 155; Home's experience, ibid; a case related
by Savage of its curing cataract, produced a trial, the effect, ibid. Hepatic,
34; appertaining to the liver; duct, ibid. Hepatalgia, what, and from whence
named, 360. Hepatirrhoea, what; whence named; cure, 381, 382, 389. Hepatitis,
what; whence so termed, 339. Herb snuff, what a superior composition, how
operating, 157. Herpes ficosus, 490; herpes, why so called, ibid. See Tetters;
miliaris, ibid; postulorum. See Tinea. Heterogeneous, consisting of different
natures. Hip gout; description, 369; cure, 373. Hips, 188. Holy thistle, F.
529. Honey, 142. 163. 170. 173. 188. Hooping-cough; description, 441;
definition, ibid; cure; 441 to 444; appears sometimes like a common catarrh,
441; hooping accounted for, ibid; danger, when to be suspected, 443. Hops, 146.
Horehound, 163. Horse radish, 145, 146. 164. 168. 175. 195. F. 529. Houses, the
most healthful situation, what, 71; how discovered, 70. Human machine, of what
it consists, 49. Humors, natural, what; how creative of disease; accidental,
what, 94; partial, what; where generated, 97. Hunger, severe, after it to eat
immoderately, its consequences; feeding full and constant, after it absolute
fasting, its consequences, 108. Hydatids,* 456. Hydrocephalus, what: -- whence
named, 454. 461; particular account of, why 461, 462; description, 462; causes,
and modes of cure, 463; congestion, or slight inflammation, f^^eruner of this
complaint; attempted to be exemplified in three cases, 462, 463. Hydromel, 178.
Hydrometron, what, and whence named, 454. 457. Hydryphobia, what, and whence
its name, 524; Mead's alteration more eligible, why, ibid; division;
description, 525; a primary invariable mark of the attack, what, ibid; cause;
cure, 525, 526; characteristic signs, 526. Hydrothorax, what and whence named,
454. 456; more common than imagined; 457. Hypochondriac people, why called
Sputatores, 158. Hypochondriaus, hypochondriac Disease, what, and why so
called; description, 510; when it most commonly appears, and in whom, 512; when
most violent, the symptoms, ibid; causes; characteristic signs; cure, ibid.
Hypochondre,* 510. Hypnotic,* 152. Hyssop, 146, 147. 157, 163, 164. Hysteria --
hysteric disease, what, and whence named by the ancients, 505; description,
506; a certain symptom, what; so considered by Sydenham, ibid; symptoms on
recovery, what, 507; causes, 507, 508; not to be attributed solely to morbid
affections of the womb, why, 506; defined, 507; characteristic signs, ibid;
cure, 508; opium, when pernicious, when useful, ibid; Sydenham's opinion
relative to this disease; his practice erroneous, 509. Hysteria-hypochondriac
disease, why so called, 515; description, 515; causes; characteristic signs,
516.
I. J.
Jalap, 171. 173. 197. 200. F. (...) 405. 409. 407. 528, 529. Jaundice,
Hoffman's method (...) curing, 454; what, and whence named; description;
characteristic signs; causes; (...), 451 to 454. Ices, 392. 429. Ichor,* 255.
Icterus. See Jaundice. Icthi^sis, what; whence named, 786. See Leprosy.
Idiopathic,* 299. Idiotism. See Amentia. Jelly, hartshorn, its use, 82; (...),
its, use, ibid. Jejenum, what; its uses, (...) Ignorance of, or inattention
(...) constitution, the consequences, 18. Ileum, what; its uses, 42. Impacted,
to drive close and (...). Impetus, force. Inanition, want of proper fullness.
Incarcerated, confined. Inciding medicines, 183. Incitability, what, 27. 56;
and irritability, reasons for (...) the terms, 57. Inc^essant, thickening.
Incubus,* 92. Indian pink root, 197. Indigestion. See Dyspepsia. Indigenous,
native, of the same country. Inebriation with numbers relaxant, 141; its
effects, how obviated in different constitutions 19. Infarction, stuffing up.
Infection and contagion, their difference; what; the use from thence, 265.
Inflammation, or inflammatory diseases; on inflammation; its nature and general
history; fever in inflammations, what to be considered, 298, 299; idiopathic;
symptomatic; the particulars observable in inflammations, what; how produced,
299; in what places the pain is most violent, the reason; local inflammatory
causes from external accidents produce inflammation, ibid; the consequences,
what; owing to fever, how produced; the disturbance of the constitution, and
degrees of danger, in proportion to the consequence of the part affected, 300;
the modes of termination, resolution, exudation, suppuration, mortification,
301, 302; scirrhus, 301, 302; ab^ess, fermentation, gangrene, sphacelus,
caries, 302; mortification, the symptoms of, and when most likely to occur, ib.
the most eligible modes of termination, which and why, ib. i^flammatory
complaints, the modes of cure; resolution how brought about, 303; wine lees,
bea^^-meal. ib. in ab^ess, how to proceed, 304; gum elemi ointment; green
ba^^licon; bark in these cases, when necessary, when mercurials, 305; boil,
what; core, what; mercurials when in these cases necessary; deep-seated, how to
be (...), ibid: active cases of, what; passive cases of, what; how to be
treated, 306; some niceties necessary to be observed in our applications,
specified; abscess, critical, what; the mode of treatment, 306, 307;
metestasis; exudation, how to proceed in, 307; tubercles, crysipe^as, from
external injury, how to proceed, ibid: mortification, how to proceed in, how
manifesting itself, 308, 309; when attacking different constitutions, ib.
scirrhus, how to proceed in, ib. -- of the head and neck; -- of the brain;
phrenitis, why so called; description, 310; causes, characteristic signs; when
it terminates, and how generally, ib. often degenerates into other diseases, as
mania, etc. distinguished from delirium, how, when idiopathic, when symptomatic
how known, 311; good and bad omens, what; cure, indications of, ib. the period
of termination, 312; -- of the breast, 325; -- of the ear, otalgia and otitis;
whence the name, description, 313; causes, and cure, ib. -- of the eye;
description, three things to be particularly considered, specified,
characteristic signs, causes, 314; cure dependent upon the causes,
particularised, 315; when supported by any morbid matter in the habit, what to
be done, 316; what to be done to prevent a relapse in those subject to them,
317; -- of the eyes, errhines useful, 156; of the diaphragm, 323 cure, 329; --
of the kidneys; description; causes, 341; characteristic signs; cure, 342;
easily distinguishable from lumbago, how, 341; suppurations, how discoverable,
343: under this people live many years, why, ib. the most frequent source,
what; how discoverable, 343; -- of the intestines, see Enteritis; -- of the
liver; description, 339; causes, characteristic signs; cure, 340; in affections
of different parts, the symptoms different: the use of this distinction, 339;
-- of the lungs; description, 327; distinguished from pleurisy, how: causes:
characteristic signs; cure: termination different from the former, what, 327:
-- of the mediastinum, ibid. cure, 329: -- of the muscles of the lower belly;
description: cure: sometimes mistaken for that of the liver, how discoverable,
345; -- of the omentum, or caul; cure, 344, 345; -- of the pericardium, 328;
cure, 329; -- of the peritoneum; description, 344: cure, 344, 345: -- of the
plura; how divided, why, 324: description, causes, 325: characteristic signs;
cure, 325: seneka: rattlesnake-root, the lancet may be used: though patients
expectorate, under some circumstances: relief, how perceived, 326:
expectoration to be renewed, under what circumstances, and how, ^27: -- of the
stomach; description, 336; causes, characteristic signs, cure, 336; poison the
cause, what to be done, 337: -- of the womb; description, (...); causes,
divided into three ^^ecies, causes of the first: are, ib. of the second, and
symptoms, of the third, and symptoms, 497. Inflexion, bending or turning.
Infusion of quassia wood and take-root, 404: of carrot-seed, (...): tonic, 412;
vinous, of (...), 235: aromatic bitter, (...); of tamarinds, 233. mint:
pennyroyal, 505. Inhaling, to draw in. Injection, sedative, 531: re^^ringent,
501. 531; calomel, ibid. Ink, 493. Inosculate, conjunction of vessels by the
extremities. Insania, insanity, 432. Inspissants, what, 131; their (...) and
action, 191. Interse, among themselves. Intercostal muscles, their (...), 33.
Intermittents not always to be taken off immediately, why, subdued by other
diseases, 181. Interstices, 51: spaces between the folds. Intestines, how
fixed, 45. Introduction, 17. Introsusceptio,* 338. Ipecacuanha, 168. 180. F.
200. 231. 235, 238. 412. Iron, with its preparations. 139. 182. 200. F. 239.
407. 129, 530; ley of, 379. Irritability, what, 27. 56. Ischiatica, 369.
Is^ngl^ss, 186, 187, 188. Issues, 193. Itch, common; description; cause, 488,
489; who most subject to it, 488; indications of cure, 492; characteristic
signs; modes of cure 492. Jugular vein,* 424. Julep, cordial camphorated; 231;
cordial, 232; valerian; musk, 234; absorbent, 236. Juniper berries, 175. F.
530; spirit of, F. 409.
K.
Kali infused in Rhenish wine, 458; prepared, administered in the rickets, how;
its use; madder useful, 523; acetated, or diuretic salt, 173. F. 528; with
fixed air, 199; tartarised, or soluble tartar, 172. 191. F. 237. 240; and
vegetable alkali, 177. F. 229, 230. 238. 530; vitriolated, or polychrest salt,
172, F. 230. 407. 411. Kidneys, what; their use, 48. King's evil, or
schrophula, 470. Kino, 139.
L.
Lacteals, 23. 30. Lactiferous, 121; bringing milk. Lacunae,* 55; drain or
furrow. Llandridod water, 474. Lamina, 24. 46; layer, or thin plate. Lavender,
145; spirit of, F. 231, 232. 408. 412. 528; oil of F. 533. Lead, with its
preparations, 139. Leek, 145. 164. 175. 186. 190; juice of, cured a dropsy; how
given, 459. Leguminous vegetables, such as abound with matter similar to peace,
beans, etc. called pulse. Leinteria, what; whence named, 382. Lettuce, 172.
177. 190. Lemons, 190; peel, 146. 530; juice, F. 229, 230. 237, 280. 533.
Leprosy, what; why so named; description, 491; moist and dry, how
distinguished; on what it depends; indications cure, ibid; characteristic
signs, 494; calomel and camphor, how given, 495. Lethargy, what, and whence
named; how relieved, 426. Leucophlegmasia, what, and whence named, 455.
Leucorrhoea, what, and why so named, 500; description, ibid; how to be
distinguished from that proceeding from a venereal taint, 500, 501; who are,
most subject to them; causes; cure, 501. Ligaments, what; their use, 22.
Ligamenta lata, 51. Lilly-root, white, 142. Lime water, 177. 191. 199. F. 236.
404. 406. 412. 531, 532; quick, 199. Linctus, oily, 405. Linament against the
rickets, F. 533; volatile opiated; sedative; camphorated, 408. 412. Linseed,
the best emollient, 142; oil, 197. F. 233. 409. Lippitudo. See Scrophula.
Liquids, abstinence from, or indulgence in, dropsies, opinions relative to
them, 459; we in common drink their properties and effects; how divided, 80.
Liquorice, 191. F. 406. 532. Lithiasis, what; whence named, 366.
Lithontriptics, 132; what; their action and use, 198; what meant in general by
the terms, 199. Livea, what; its uses, 33. Living solids, what, 24. Lixivium
ley, 50; martis, 379. Lobes, 34; a division or distinct part, used for a part
of the lungs. Lobsters, 177. Lobule, 34; a small lobe. Lo^hia, the discharge
incident to women in childbed. Locked jaw. See Trismus. Logwood, 140. F. 404.
Looseness. See Diarrhoea. Lotian, mercurial; stimulant, 532; camphorated;
antiputrescent, 406. Lotians, 177; and repellent cosmetics dangerous, why, 97.
Lues venerea, what, 483; description; certain symptoms; venereal eruptions,
tubercles, or pustules, how distinguished, ibid; venereal ulcers of the mouth,
and pains, how distinguished, 484; hard indolent venereal swellings, how
distinguished, 484, 485; abortions, how known to proceed from a veneral cause,
485; in whom most violent, and extremely difficult to cure, ibid; causes; mode
of cure, 486; what to be done when mercury will not alone cure, 487; nodes, and
swellings of the periosteum remaining after a mercurial course, how relieved,
ibid. Lumbago; description, 369, 370; cure, 373. Lungs, what, 28; their use,
ibid; affections of, 439; subject to be loaded with phlegm, how remedied, 100.
Lymphatics, 23.
M.
Mad animals, the effects of their saliva, how prevented, 102 Madder, 139.
Madness, 432. Mace, 145. 175. Magnesia, 171. Malt, F. 530. Malvern waters, 173.
Mania and melancholy, different degrees of the same complaint; Aretaeus's and
Trallian's opinions, 432; description; causes; characteristic signs; cure, 432
to 439; Hoffman's opinion, 432; symptoms preceding the attack, 433; which
species are incurable, 434; warm bath, Hoffman's and Cullen's opinion, 435;
Locher's mode of cure, what, ibid; some deviation from the general mode of cure
necessary, what, and why, 437, etc. Manna, 170. 172. F. 230. 232, 233. 237.
240. 407. Marjoram, 157. Marsh mallows, 142. 186; Syrup, F. 405. Marrow, how
fixed; its use, 21. Mastication, the act of chewing. Masticatories, medicines
only to be chewed. Master wort, 162. Mastich, herb, 157. Materia medica, a
concise reason against it; form of, 200. Matter in the lungs not always
destructive, how accounted for, 231. Matrimony, 504. Meadow saffron, 176.
Measles, at what time they generally make their appearance; whom they most
commonly attack; by what propagated, 280; the attendant fever, of what nature
considered; description; its progress divided, 281; anomalous, or irregular;
described, 282; causes; characteristic signs, ibid; cure of the different
species, 283, 284; great attention to be paid to the lungs, perplexing symptoms
occur sometimes, what, and how alleviated; unfavourable symptoms, what, 284;
anomalous, favorable and unfavourable omens, what; inoculation of,
recommended, the reasons, 284. Meconium, 44; contents of the bowels of a
newborn infant. Mediastinum, 28; what; inflammation of, 328; cure, 329.
Medical (...), the best; what. 202. Medicine, their powers and modes of action
concisely specified, 128; the action of, in different parts dependent on the
stomach, how proved, 129; their action divided into five heads, 131; which act
upon the inert solids, 131, 132; which act upon the living solids, 131, 143;
which act upon the fluids through the system, 183; which manifest their
sensible action chiefly, if not solely, in the first passages respecting the
fluids, 131. 189; which produce their consequences from external application,
or on substances formed within the machine, and lodged without the verge of
circulation, 132, 195; the different forms which, under particular
circumstances, (...) eligible, why, 200; the active doses, how generally
ascertained, 140. 200; advantages to be acquired by carefully perusing that
part of the work, what, 201; forms of, 229. 403. 527; which relax, see
EMOLLIENTS; which bind, or give firmness, ASTRINGENTS; increase the force of
circulation, STIMULANTS; take off convulsive affections, and alleviate pain,
ANTISPASMODICS and SEDATIVES; cause sneezing, ERRHINES; a slow of saliva, or
salivation, SIALAGOGUES; coughing up of viscid matter from the lungs,
EXPECTORANTS; vomiting, EMETICS; purging, CATHARTICS; promote a flow of urine,
DIURETICS; increase perspiration, or promote sweating, DIAPHORETICS; promote
the menses, EMMENAGOGUES; thin the humors, ATTENUANTS; thicken them,
INSPISSANTS; sheath them, DEMULCENTS; counteract acidity, ANTACIDS; alkalescent
acrimony, ANTALKALINES; correct putridity, ANTISEPTICS. Medlars, 139. 193.
Melaena, what; whence named, 382. Melancholy. See Mania. Meliorating, 96;
making better. Melon, 185, 186. 188. 190. Membrane, what, 24. Men dying of
hunger, how affected, 74. Menorrhagia, what; why so named; active or passive,
498; descriptions and cures, 498, 499, 500. Menses, 51; what, and why so named;
when they make their appearances; when cease; when salutary; when otherwise;
when immoderate, 498; how promoted; accounted for, 182. Menstrua. See Menses.
Menstruum, all liquors used as dissolvents, or for extracting the virtues of
any ingredients by infusion or decoction. Mental affections; their effects more
or less violent, agreeable to the peculiar state of the constitution; divisible
into two heads, 78, 79; volatile, saturnine, or active and sedative, 79; on
what occasion they are to be inculcated separately, ibid; Mercurial gummous
pill; pills, 160; wash, 492. Mercury, 144; preparations of, 146; mercurial
solution; gummous pills; syrup, 532; useful in pulmonary consumptions; at what
time; which preparation the most eligible, ^33; English, 185. Mesenteritis,
what; from whence named; description, 345; cure, 344, 345. Mesentery, what, 46;
inflammation of, See Mesenteritis. Meso-colon, what, 46. Mezereon, or spurge
olive, 180. F. 406. Miasma, fine subtle particles productive of infectious and
contagious fevers. Midriff, its use, 33. Milk, its nature and use; which the
best, 82. 134. 142. 402; produces different effects in different constitutions,
what, 82; its medical virtues, 134. F. 233. 237. 411, 412; mixed with suet, its
use, 82; new, large draughts of, when useful, 337; whey, 184. 170. F. 233.
Millipedes, 146. 472. Miners colic, 359. Mint, spear, 152. F. 528; tea, a
powerful restrainer of vomiting, 147; leaves of, boiled in port, and laid on
the pit of the stomach and wrists, stops vomiting, 358. 384. Misletoe of the
oak, 509. Mithridate, F. 409. 530. Mixture, ammoniacal, F. 527; tonic
stimulating, F. 528; foetid attenuant, ibid; purging, ibid; volatile foetid, F.
533; spermaceti, F. 405. oily purging, F. 407, 408; aperient and purging
antimonial, F. 240. 407; opiated cordial, F. 409; vitriolic, F. 410.
terebinthinate, ibid; volatile saline, F. 411; saline, F. 229. antimonial, F
230; saline antimonial, ibid; neutral volatile saline, F. 231; emetic, ibid;
cordial, ibid; cordial aromatic, F. 234; cordial, with hot or cold infusion of
bark, F. 236; asafoetida, F. 240. Mixed, bodies intimately united one with
another. Morbid diseased state. Morbid fluidity, how occasioned, 185. 186.
Morbific, creating disease, 97. Morbilli. See Measles.
see Epilepsy. Morbus comitialis. -- sacer, -- peurilis, -- Herculeus,

451. -- arquatus, -- regi^s,

Motion moderate, 185. Moffat waters, 474. Mortification. See Inflammation.
Mothers and nurses, their ridiculous indulgence in feeding children
mischievous, why 133. Motion and heat, 179. Moving powers of the constitution,
what, 56. Mucilaginous and oily substances, 186. Mulberries, 139. Mumps --
singular peculiarity in this complaint, what, 321. Muria, what, 95. Muriatic,
the acid of sea salt so called, 193. F. 236, 237. 209; acid, vitriolic, 193
Muscle, what; its use, 22. Muscles and muscular fibers, what, 56. Muscular
irritability, what; its use, 27. Mushroom, 170. 185. Musk, 150. 180. 182. 193,
194. 200. F. 234, 235. Mussels, 177. Must, its effects, 85. Mustard, 145. 146.
164. 168. 170. 173. 195. 234. F. 133. Mutton-tea, its use, 82, 83. Myrrh gum,
143. 164. 193. F. 165. 183. 234. 236. 237. 239. 407. 409.
N.
Narcotic, 152. 163. Nasturtium, 175. 190. Natron, 191; vitriolated, or
Glauber's salts, 172. F. 229. 412; tartarized, or Rochelle salt, 172. F. 230.
407. Nephralgia, what, and whence named, 363. Nephritis, what; whence so
termed, 341. Nerves, what; their uses, 23. Nervous affections, general idea of
them, 413, 414; passive, the general idea, what, 382; their causes, 423;
consumption, see Atrophy; incitability, what; its use, 27; system, what; its
use; medulla oblongata spinalis, 24. Nettle, stinging, 139; in palsy, their
use, 431. Neutral salts, 185. 192. 194. Nidorus,* 100.
122. Nidus, Neft.

Nitre, 176. 178. 190. 193. F. 229. 407. 412; aetherial, or sweet spirits of,
176. Nitrous acid, 193. Non-naturals, what, 65. 67. Hoffman's opinion on their
consequence, 65; six, why reducible to four 67. Nostrums, no dependence on the
most extolled, 66. Nucleus,* 366. Nursing, 114; bad, its effects, ibid;
children, half die under the age of five years, the reason assigned, ibid;
disease itself generated from (...) nursing, ibid; disposition soured by bad
nursing, ibid; plain and simple, the best mode, in what it consists, 115, 116;
quadrupeds and birds, how brought up, ibid; children, how to be managed as soon
as born, 116; cold in newborn infants to be carefully avoided, why, ibid;
custom of nursing bad, how to be remedied, 116, 117; head swelled in labor,
how to be managed, 117; rollers injurious in children new born, how, ibid; how
to be managed in this point, ibid; dabs given to newborn children injurious,
why, 118; castor oil and simple syrup the most proper, why, ibid; purging, its
effects in newborn infants, ibid; rest essentially necessary for both mother
and child, why, 119; food proper for the mother at this time, what, ibid; child
early set to the breast, why, ibid; suckling in good constitutions not to be
dispensed with, why, ibid; suckling alone not to be the only mode of feeding
children, the reason, 120; children should be fed once or twice a (...), why,
ibid; substitute for breast milk, ibid; bread, London common, improper food,
ibid; acidities to correct, 121; stomach never should be overloaded, why, ibid;
child, when cross, how to be appeased, ibid; exercise proportioned to the age,
what; its use, 121. 126; cold bathing, how useful, 121; rickets, one prevention
against, ibid; cold bathing or washings all over with cold water, when to be
avoided, how meliorated; should be adapted to the nature of the constitution,
why, ibid; food, stronger, when necessary, and what kind, never given too hot,
nor too sweet, why, 122; children born sickly, how managed, ibid; magnesia,
when useful, 123; management of infants, some rules relative to, 127; feeding
weakly children, some caution necessary, 123; overloading the stomach
injurious, why ibid; suckling not to be attempted by all, why, 124; precautions
necessary to be observed when children are brought up by the boat, ibid, 125;
nurse, the selection of, rules to be observed, ibid; nurses, (...) of them,
some observations upon, ibid; exercise, which most eligible, 126; indolence,
its effects, ibid; air necessary, cleanliness also, filthiness, its effects,
how remedied, 126, 127. Nutmeg, 144, 145. F. 238; spirits of, F. 231. 236; oil
of, F. 233. Nutrients, 131, 132; their action on living and inert solids, what,
141; their particular powers specified, 132. 136; their action, 142. 182. 188;
the division of them, 133; all of them reducible to one state, how, 132.
Nutrition thrown into the habit too freely, why injurious, 95. Nutritious
liquids, what 82. Nutritive, stimulant and sedative, 88.
O.
Oak and ash bark, 140. Oak bark infusion, F. 400; bolus, F. 403. Oaten bread,
oat-meal, or that of wheat, infusion of 383. Oats, 143. Obt^nders of acrimony,
what, 137. Odontalgia, what; from whence its name, 349. OEdematous,* 60.
OEsophagus, what; its uses 39. Oil and mucilage, their different modes of
operation, 141; of burnt paper, rags, or wood, 493; mixed with opium, 505; in
glysters, 197. Olive, 163. 190. F. 404; oil, 142. 197. Oils, vegetable, mild,
and animal, 170. Ointment, mercurial, F. 531. 533; sulphur, F. 532. Omentitis,
what; whence named; description, 528. Omentum, what; its use, etc. ^7. Onions,
145. 164. 175. 186. 190; boiled, 142. 177. 185. Opisthotonos, what; whence
named, 416. Ophthalmia; whence the name, 314. Opiates, astringent, F. 404.
Opiated confection, F. 238. 409. Opium, 152, 153. 163, 164. 178. 180. 200. F.
230. 240. 404. 406. 407, 408, 409, 410. 413. 528. 531; taken in too large
quantities, its effects, 153; said to cure the venereal disease, its use here,
what, 154; usefully joined with asafoetida, why, ibid. Orange-peel, 147. F.
232. 236. 238, 239. 411; tree leaves, 419. 509. Oranges, 190. 193. O^^ice-root,
157. Organ, 46; a part of the machine by which some function is performed.
Organical, 24; consisting of various parts cooperating with each other.
Oscillatory,* 76. Os co^^ygis,* 43. Ossa (...) 42. 48. Ossa (...), 50. Os
sacrum, 43. O^thopnaea, what, and whence named; see Asthma. Otalgia, otitis,
what; from whence the name, 313. 348. Ovaria, 52. Ox-gall, how used in
scrophula, 474. Oxymel of meadow saffron, 150; of (...) ^69; simple, F. 173.
527. Oysters, 177; and egg shells, their use, 191.
P.
Painful diseases, 345. Pains of the ear, see Otalgia; -- of the head, see
Cephalalgia -- in the kidneys and ureters; description; causes; characteristic
signs; cure, 364 to 366; who most subject to them, 364; -- of the liver;
description; causes; cure, 360 to 362; who most subject to them, 362; general
characteristic signs, 364; -- in the side; description; causes; cure, 350 to
352; -- of the spleen; description; causes; cure, 363, 364; general
characteristic signs, 364; -- of the stomach; description; causes; modes of
cure, 3^2; to 356; -- of the teeth, see Odontalgia. Painters colic, 359. Palm
oil, F. 533. Palsy, what, 414; different species, what; description; causes;
cure, 428 to 431; local, what, 428; succeeding the nervous colic, how relieved,
360. Panacea,* 66; an universal medicine. Pancreas, what; its use, 37.
Papillae,* 49; small eminences. Par vagum, 37. Paralysis, what; whence named,
428. Paraplegia, what; whence named, ibid. Paraphrenitis, 328. Parsley-seed,
175. Paregoric,* 152. Parsnip, 186. 190. Pears, 190. Pectoral decoction, 407.
Pellitory of Spain, 157. ^50. Pelvis, 49. Pemphigus, what, 298. Pennyroyal,
145. 147. 149. 163, 164. 183; water, F. 231. 235. 527, 528. 533. Penis, what;
its use, 53. Pepper, 157. Peppermint, 145. 147; water, F. 231. 233. 240. 409,
410, 411. 527. Pericarditis, 328; cure, 380. Pericardium (...) membrane, ^28;
inflammation of, 328; cure, 329. Perichondrium,* 21. Periosteum,* 21.
Peripneumonia notha, what; whence named, 449. Peripneumony, what, and whence
named, 327; malignant, 329; description; cure, ibid; opiates, caution in their
use, 330; spurious, different opinions concerning the seat, 449; description,
causes, cure, 449 to 451; useful caution respecting prognosticating, 450; who
most subject to it, ibid; signs of death, ibid; preventive mode, ibid; how
distinguished from the true peripneumony, and dry asthma, 450, 451.
Peristaltic, 338; vermicular motion by which the bowels empty themselves.
Peritonaeum,* 34. Peritonitis, what; from whence named, 344. Permeability, open
to be passed through. Perriwinkle, 177. Perry, 83, 84. 86. 193. Perspiration,
insensible, how produced, 177. Pertussis, See Hooping-cough. Peru balsam, 145.
163. F. 410. 527. 532. Petechiae,* 222. Peyer's glands, 42. Pharynx, 39.
Phenomena, 130. appearances. Phlebotomia, what; its division; general and
local, their use and action, 127. 195; some caution in, what, 196. Phrenitis,
328; how differs from paraphrenitis, 329. Phthisis p^lmonal^s, why so termed,
ibid. Physicians, self-created, guilty of much injury, 58. Pia matter, 27.
Piles, open, blind, distinguished; when to be considered as a disease;
sometimes salutary, when; description; causes; cure, 397, 398; aloetic
medicines to be avoided, why, 399. Pills, stimulant aperient 527; saponaceous,
529; deobstruent, ibid; corrosive sublimate, 532; gummous mercurial, ibid;
alterative mercurial, 529; purging, 232. 407. 409; aperient soap, 408; aloetic,
ibid; soap deobstruent, 409; steel, 239. Pimento, 145. Pinguidinous ducts, 38;
ducts conveying the fat. Pitch ointment, 493. Plaster, stimulant, 411;
opiated, 409; hemlock, with ammoniacum, 531. Pleurodyne, what; from whence so
termed, 350. Pleurisy, what; and why so named, 324. Plumbers colic, 359.
Podagra, what; whence named, 373. Polychrest salt, 184. See Kali vitriolated.
Polypi, coagulations or concretions of blood in the blood vessels, because they
send many small branches into the adjacent vessels. Pomegranate, 140. Poppy,
186. 188; syrup of, 152; oil of, 163. Pori biliarii, 36. Porter, its effects,
84. 88. Potatoes, 177. 186. 190. Potters colic, 359. Poultice, mustard, 234.
Powder against the bite of a mad dog, 102; purgative serous, 529; calomel, 405;
purging, 387. 405; opiated antimonial, 410; nitrated antimonial, 411;
nauseating, 411, 412. Powders, nitrous, 229; antimonial, 230; astringent, 238.
Pox. See Lues venereal Praepuce, 54. Pregnancy, 505. Preserving from, or curing
diseases, on what dependent, 19. Privations, 422. Prognostic, good and bad,
specified, 261. Prophylactic, 88; preventive. Prolapsus,* 496. Propulsive,
forcing forward. Prostratae,* 54. Prostration, loss or deprivation of.
Proximity, nearness. Ptyalism, a continued discharge of saliva. Pudendum, 51.
Pulmonic, belonging to the lungs. Pulse, deceptive in inflammation of the
stomach, 337; of the liver also, 340. Pulsatiles, 313. Punch, 83, 84. Purge,
cooling saline, 226; saline, 454. Purging, whence it arises, 169; whence
injurious, ibid; acrid purgatives, their use, 182. Pustulous, pull of matter,
(pus.) Putrid infection, its effects how prevented, 102; particles received
into the habit, the effects by wounds how prevented, ibid. Pyramidal, muscles,
51. Pylorus,* 37. 39. Pyrosis, what; whence named, 352. 356.
Q.
Quassia wood, 146. 175. 193. F. 239. 403. Quicksilver, Boerhaave's opinion,
and that of others, respecting its action, refuted; how it act in this case,
158; its general action, what, 159; in its combined state most active, less
certain its effect, 160; not a specific in the pox, ibid; preparations of,
different, appropriated to different purposes, 161. F. 525. 527, 528; white,
precipitated, F. ibid; applied in various modes may produce salivation, 158;
vitriolated, or turpeth mineral, 168. Quinces, 139. 193; the seed, 142; syrup,
F. 236. 238. 413. Quinsy, why so called; what, 317; tonsillary; tracheal;
croup; pharingeal, 317. 320; parotideal; maxillary; mumps; branks, 317. 321;
tonsillary, malignant, or ulcerous, 317; tonsillary, imflammatory or common
fore throat; description; increase of danger, from what causes, 318, 319;
causes; characteristic signs; cure, 319; gargles, 319, 320, 324. 407; when
suppuration takes place, the symptoms 319, 320; when quinsy arises from a
passive cause, or relaxation, what to be done, 320; bronchotomy, under what
circumstances advisable; croup, what; how produced; method of treatment, 20,
321.
R.
Rachialgia, what, and (...). Rachitis, what; whence its name, 519. See
Rickets. Radish, 175. 186. 190. Raisins, 142. 188. 190. F. 528. Ramifications,
small branches. Ranula. See Scrophula. Raspberry, 190. Rattlesnake-root, 179.
Reasons for giving the antimony of some part of the machine assigned, 55.
Reasons for publishing this work, 18. Receptaculum* chyli, 23. Rectum, what;
its uses, 43. 45. Red globules, to what owing, 31^. Red precipitate, 160.
Regimen, a strict adherence to, necessary, in preventing or curing diseases,
66. Regress, going back. Regurgitation, swallowing back. Relaxants, 140.
Remedies to be selected and appropriated to particular constitutions, 65;
against too free drinking, 105. Repletion and evacuation rather to be
considered as diseases under different circumstances, 77. Resolution. See
Inflammation. Resorbed, taking back. Respiration, its use, 29. Resolving
medicines, 183; their action, 185. Restrictions necessary with respect to
Celsus' directions for the conduct of men in health, 105. R^st or labor, after
them running into the opposite extremes injurious, why, 108, 109. Retina,
nervous expansion at the bottom of the eye. Retention of the menses. See
Amenorrhoea; of urine, 367; description; causes; cure, 367, 368. Retroceded,
going back. Retropulsion, forced back. Rheumatic affections removed by
sialagogues, 163. Rheumatism, what, and from whence (...); description; causes;
characteristic signs; modes of cure, 369. 373; acute and chronic, why so
termed, 369, 370. 372; how alleviated or prevented, 99. Rhubarb, 171. 173. 200.
F. 232. 405. 408, 409, 410. 529. 532; infused in wine, 461. Rickets, what, 519;
description, ibid; the appearances on opening after death, what, 520; causes,
ibid; characteristic signs, 321; signs foretelling the approach of the disease,
522. Riding (...) always salutary in consumptions, 75; in a carriage; on
horseback, 178. Rochelle salt. See Natron tartarizatum^. Rock oil, (...).
Rosemary, 145. Roses, etc. 139; syrup of, 173. F. 230. 232. 236, 237. 240. 406,
407, 408, 409. 413. 528. 531.
280. Roseolae, Rubcolae,

Rue, 149; its particular properties specified, 250. 183; attenuant, resolvent,
deobstruent, 150; Boerhaaves opinion; Cullen's opinion, ibid. Rugae, folds.
Rye, 142. 187.
S.
Sabine, 149. 181. 183. 197. 200; its properties specified; Cullen's opinion;
Home's experience, proof of, 150. Saburra,* 92; from whence it arises; acid,
how known and remedied; rancid how known and remedied, 99; viscid and ropy how
known and remedied, 60. 100. Sac, 43. Saccharine, 81; formed of, sugar. Sago,
its use, 81, 82. 186. Sailing useful in consumptions, 330. Saline mixture, F.
230. Saliva, 37. Salivary glands, 37. Salivation seldom necessary; if so, how
to proceed, 487. Salop, its use, 81. 83. 186. Salt dissolved in water useful in
apoplexy, 425. Salt, epsom, 172. F. 233. 407; fixed ammoniacal, 512; sea, 184.
190. 197. F. 233. 407. Salts, fixed alkaline, 171; earthy, 193; metalline,
ibid; neutral, 171. 193; purging, 200; volatile, 179. 189. Sarsaparilla, 180.
F. 406. Sassafras, 145. 177. F. 406. 533. Saturated fully impregnated.
Saturnine colic, 359. Sauces, acid or ^our, why united with high seasoned
dishes, 74. Savory, 157. Scald-head. See Tinea. Scammony, 171. 173. 197. F.
409. Scarrification, cautions relative to, 458, 459. Scate oil, 521. Sciatica,
369. Scirrhus. See Inflammation. Scollop, 177. Scorbutic juices, 96. Scordium.
F. 404. Scrophula, what; and whence so termed, 470; fixing on different parts
differently named, which, ibid; where fixing improperly called scirrhus, ibid;
does not always occupy the glands, ibid; whether contagious or not, doubtful,
ibid; cause of consumption, etc. how 471; when fixed internally, the symptoms,
ibid. when apt to become cancerous, ibid; best in external applications, 474;
how to be prevented. 63. 99. Scrotum, 53. Scurvy, description: divided into
three stages, 466, 467; causes, 467; characteristic signs; cure, 468,
epidemical in Hampshire, though neither infectious nor contagious, 466, 467;
why, 468; vegetables, how to be used, 469; putrid, how prevented, 07. Sea air;
bathing; water, how taken in scrophula, 472, 473; wrack, how used in scrophula,
474; water, 420. Secretory vessels, what, their use, 23. Sedatives, 131; what,
their action; the precise mode, little to be said about: attempted to be
explained, 151; as relaxants, how, 141; their general sympathetic and local
action proved, 151; catalogue; appellations of, different, why, 151. 188. 191.
193; act not as common demulcents, why, 188. Seltzer water, 393. Seminal
vessels, 395. Seneka, 179. 247. Senna, 171, 173. 200. F. 232. 240. 408, 409,
410. 528. Serosity, from serum, the thinner part of the blood. Sensorium, organ
of sensation. Serum, what, 31. Setons, 195. Sheathing liquids, what; their
uses, 81. Shingles, 297. Sialagogues, 131; what; their action and uses, 158;
divided by authors into three classes, ibid; classes what, ibid. obstruction in
some parts prove sialagogues, ibid. Simarouba, or Guiana bark, 140. F. 412.
Skirret, 186. 190, Sinuses of the brain, 27. Sleep, properly proportioned,
necessary to be observed; its use, III; the period of indulgence different in
different constitutions, how hurtful; result or indolence, should be remedied,
how, 112, 113: in the day often, though not always, wrong, why, 113; and
wakefulness, their use, 76, 77; the time necessary, adapted to different ages,
76. Sloes, 139. 193. Small beer, its use, 81. Smallpox, or pocks, whence so
called; variola, whence so called; how divided, 265; its different stages;
description; mild species, 266; secondary fever of the smallpox, how formed,
266. 272; confluent, (...) fever, of what nature; the symptoms of each, 267,
268; one species why called dysenteric, 268; causes; characteristic signs;
cure, the indications of, 269; medical conduct to be regulated by the nature of
the constitution and nature of the fever, 269. 271. 273; particular
occurrences, what; how relieved, 271; opening the eruptions, as advised by
some, dangerous, why, 272, 273; eruptions, different appearances of, specified,
273; and modes of alleviations; alvine fluxes, much nicety required in their
management in febrile complaints, why, ibid; diet always to be adapted to the
nature of the fever, why; omens in the smallpox, good and bad specified, 274;
-- inoculated, the advantages of, specified, 275; the operation described;
subjects proper for inoculation, whom; and the best period with respect to age
and season, 275. 277; preparation, modes of, in different constitutions; the
advantages, what, 276; matter, from what patients the most eligible to take it;
description, 276; ^^^ourable symptoms, 277; favorable signs, 278; causes;
cure; Clutton's febrifuge spirits, 279; exposure to cold air to be regulated by
circumstances, ibid. Smoke of burning feathers an efficacious remedy, 508.
Snake-root, 145, 179. F. 232. 235, 236. 403. Soap, 177. 185. 191. 199. F. 409.
411. 529; ley, 199; liniment, F. 408. Soda, 191. Solids, what, 20; living, 24,
25; inert, 24, 25; and fluids variously divided, 20. Somnolency, sleepiness.
Sore throat, malignant ulcerous, or malignant scarlet fever, 322; causes, 323;
description, 322; whom it most commonly attacks, ibid; characteristic signs,
323; ought to be distinguished from the simple inflammatory sore throat, by
what means, and why, ibid; favorable omens, ibid; unfavourable, 324; cure;
bleeding to be avoided, why, ibid. Sorrel, 190. Solution, corrosive sublimate,
531; mercurial gummous, 532; vitriolic, 407; aperient cooling, 412; of cream of
tartar, 458. Soaps, their use, 82. 87. Solvents of the stone. See
Lithontriptics, 198. Spanish flies, 195; cantharides, F. 528. Spasm, what, 414;
and convulsion, the difference, what, ^48. Spasms arising from different
causes, by what removed, ibid. Spermaceti, 142. F. 405. Spermatic blood
vessels, 52. Sphincters,* 22. Spinach, 142. 170. 185. 190. Spirits, ardent, 83,
84, British, F. 533. Spitting of blood. See Coughing up of blood. Spleen, what;
its uses, 38. Splenalgia, what; whence named, 363. Splenitis, what; why so
termed, 341; inflammation of the spleen; description; causes; characteristic
signs; cure, ibid; abcess formed here destroys suddenly, why, ibid. Spruce,
469. Stratum,* 40. Sphacelus. See Mortification. Struma. See Scrophula. Sponge,
burnt, 472. Spurpe olive, or mezereon, 180. Sputatores, what, 511. Squills,
162, 163, 164. 168. F. 176. 407. 527. 529. 581. Staff, 367. Stamina, the solids
of the human body. Statical, the science of weighing. Starch, 186. 188.
Sterne's ether, 231. Sternum,* 32. Sternutatories, 155. 163. Stimulant and
sedative liquids, what, 83. Stimulants, 155. 191. 193; their action, 143;
oscillatory, ibid; direct and indirect, their action specified, ibid; divided
into three casses, general, local, mental, why; why a different division from
their uses, 145; catalogue of; their different powers, ibid; those of the
stronger class weakened, 177; mild, ibid. Stomach, what; its use, 39;
indisposed from drinking, how relieved; only to be applied to on particular
occasions, the reasons, 106; its great power over the system, one proof of,
ibid. Stomachics,* 95. Stone in the bladder, description; cure, 366, 367; the
only certain mode of discovering it, what, 367; -- in the kidneys, 364; in the
kidney may be lodged without pain, what produces it, ibid; also in the bladder,
366. Straight gut, 43 Strangury, what; whence named, 367; description; causes;
cure, 368. Strawberries, 190. Styptic powder, F. 238. Sublimation, raising up
solids and hard bodies by the force of ^ire. Subclavian vein, 73. Succory, 170.
Succulent,* 894. Suet, 142. Suffocating cartarrh, not to be confounded with the
croup, why, 448; their difference pointed out, ibid; description;
characteristic signs; cure, 448, 449; sometimes it is epidemical, and often
fatal suddenly, 449. Suffusio bilis, 451. Sugar, 170. 188. Suppuration. See
Inflammation. Sulphur, flowers of, etc. 170. 172. 197. F. 412. 532; drink for
preventing or mitigating the gout, 98; its action on the habit, ibid.
Sulphurous medicines mixed with alkalies, 163. Suppository, 407. Suppression
of the menses: See Amenorrhae; of urine, 367; description; causes; cure, 367,
368. Suture, those places where the bones of the scull are joined. Sweat,
morbid evacuations of. See Ephidrosis; what to be observed when we want to
promote it, 178, 179. Sweetbread, 37. Swinging in the open air useful in
consumptions, 334. Sympathy,* or sympathetic affections, 57: Symptomatic,* 299.
Syrup, gummous mercurial, 532.
T.
Tabes dorsalis, what, and whence named, 335; cure, 336. Tabes, whence so
termed, 334; its different causes; descriptions, 334, 335; cure, 335.
Tamarinds, 176. 190. F. 233. 237. Tanzey, 197. Tapioca, its use, 81. 83.
Tapping not to be deferred too long, why, 460; fainting, how prevented, 461.
Tartar, 171, 172; ley of, 533. Tartarized antimony, 168, 200. F. 230, 231. 233.
405 407, 408; wine of, 168. 180. Tartar, soluble, 191. Tarsi, edge of the
eyelids. Tar water, 469. Tartar, crystals of, 176. F. 233. 237. 529. Tea,
beef, 133; mutton, ibid; and coffee drank too hot, the evil consequences of,
84; hot, its effects, 141; its use, 81. Temperance, what meant by the term,
379. Temperament, constitution, 79. Tenesmodal, dysenteric intestinal flux,
385. Tendons, what, their use, 22. Terra ponderosa muriat^, 494; its action,
474. Terrestrius,* 49. Testaceous powders, 180; animals, 178. 191. Testes,
what; their use, 53^ Testicles, ibid. Tetanic,* 92, Tetanus, what; whence
named; description; cure, 414 to 417; warm bathing, how to be managed, 416;
cold bathing, its use, 417; in tetanus opposite methods being successful, how
accounted for, ibid. Tetters, 489, 490; indications of cure, 491; cure, 493.
Thirst in dropsy, how alleviated without drinking, 460. Thoracic duct, 23.
Thorax or breast, 32. Theroid glands, lymphatic glands on the lower part of the
windpipe. Tin powder, 197. Tincae os, 51. Tinea, what; why so called, 490;
description, ibid; who most subject to it, 491; on what it depends, 492;
indications of cure, ibid; characteristic signs; cure, 493; some appearances in
these children, what, ibid; cautions relative to external applications, ibid.
Tincture of bark, with lime water, 531. Tobacco, its powers specified, 152.
155. 162. 168. 175; extract, 447; smoke, 164; snuff, 157; in Sweden why given;
used also in Germany, for what; recommended here, for what purposes; not been
brought into practice, why, ^55. Tone, activity with strength. Torpor,
sluggishness, inactivity. Toothache, errhines useful, 256; relieved by
sialagogues, 163; causes; seat; modes of cure, 348, 349, 350. Tormentil-root
139. Trismus, what; whence named, 415, 416. Tragacanth, gum, 186. 188. Tubae
Fallopianae, 52. Tubercles,* 49; also small tumors often found in the lungs.
Tubuli, small tubes. Tulpii valvula, 43. Tunica vaginalis, 53. Tunica
albuginea, ibid. Turgescence, swelling. Turnip, 175. 186. 191. Turpentine, 145.
175. F. 410; oil of, 193, 194. F. 410; balsam of, 163. Turpeth mineral, 157.
160. Tussis, 439. Tympanitis, what; whence named 464. Tympany, divided into two
species; description; cure; its characteristic symptoms, ibid.
U. V.
Ulcers upon the legs from rheumatic affections, not to be dried up, why, 371.
Umbilicus, 42. Ureters, what; their use, 50. Urethra, what, 54. Urine, morbid
discharge of. See Diabetes. Urine, bloody, its different appearances; causes;
cure, 395 to 397; two points to be considered, what, 395; blood mixed uniformly
with the urine, how discovered, 397; arising from different causes, gonorrhoea,
piles making that way their exit, or being critical, it should be
distinguished, ibid. Uriniferous, 49. vessels conveying urine. Uterus, what;
its uses, 51. Uva ursi, 199. Vagina, what; its use, 51. Valetudinarians, rules
for respecting the quantity of food to be taken, 133. Valerian, 150. 263. F.
234. 527. Vapor, 142; of an animal recently killed, ibid; bath, 469;
stimulant, 182; warm, 178. particularly of water. Varicose,* 475. Vas deferens,
53. Vascular system, what; its use, 24. Valves, 23; a contrivance in the
vessels and other parts, which stops the return of any fluids which passes
through them. Valvulae conniventes, 42. Veal tea, its use, 82. Vegetable acid,
190; alkali impregnated with fixed air, 199. bitter, acrid, highly flavoured,
how classed, 136: cooling decoctions, 454; nutrients, 193; and native acids,
180. Veins, what; their use, 22. Vena cava, 29. 41; portarum, 35. Venereal
virus, its effects, how prevented, 101. Venice soap, 263. 170. F. 407, 408;
treacle, F. 530. Ventricle,* 39. Ventricles of the brain, 23. See Brain, 27.
Vermicular, 44; serpentine, or worm-like. Vermifuges. See Anthelmintics, 197;
Boerhaave's division, ibid; division of them into separate heads, ibid.
Vertebrae, 27. 37; back bone. Vertiginous, giddy. Vessel, what; how formed, 23.
Vesicatories. See Epispastics. Vesica sellis, 33; gall bladder. Vibices,* 222.
Villi,* 40. Vinegar, 84. 86. 163. 178. 190. 193. F. 234. 238. 406, 407, 408;
applied to the nostrils and temples, its use, 508; and ginger, Helmont's
opinion, 179; camphorated, 238; sweetened with honey, 179. Viper, the effects
of its poison, how prevented, 101; flesh; broth, 495. Viscera, 29; the chief
contents of the head, chest, and belly. Virulent muco^puri^orm gleet. See
Gonorrhoea virulenta. Vitriol blue, or Roman, 139. Vitriolic acid, 190; ether,
spirit of, F. 230. Volatile alkaline salts, 144, 145, 146, 163. 195. 200; oily
soaps, 163. Volatiles and astringents judiciously united, in what cases, 138.
Vomiting of blood; characteristic signs; causes; cure, 394 to 396; to whom most
common, 394; woman's menstruating a cure, ibid; in pregnancy rarely injurious,
in fevers fatal; when affording little hope. 395. Vomica, description of, 330.
cure, 331. Vomicae, 520
W.
Wake-robin, 145. 147. 175. electuary of, 147. F. 530. Walking, 178. Water,
177. 180. 185; its use, 80; cold, 176; warm, ibid; drank copiously, 170; the
only diluent, its effects; from whence, 183; brash. See Pyrosis; dock, 139.
190; pox, description, 285. Watery vapors received into the lungs, 164. Ward's
essence, 547. Wedge thrusting between the teeth, its use in epilepsy, 421.
Wheat, 142. 187. Whey of crystals of tartar, 233; antiseptic, 237; milk, 177;
mustard, 411; alum, 412. White flux. See Coeli^ca. While hellebore, 157.
Whites. See Leucorrhoea. White lily-root, 184; poppy, 142; vitriol, 139. 168.
200 F. 407. 531. Wild vine, 176. Wind, the strongest symptom in colic, how
known, 357. Windpipe, what, 28. Winds, the most salutary, which, 71. Wine, 83,
84, 85. 144, 145. 163. 180. 186. 190. 193. Wine acids, astringents, used as
inspissants, why, 186; of what composed, 85; medicated, 530; oil, saline and
some earthy substances as diluents defective, why, 184; pure, what, 85, 86;
spirit of, its effects, 85; composition, under that name, what, their effects,
sold, 86; Rhenish, 178. Wines, austere, 177. Womb, 51. Wood sorel, 139. Woods,
decoction of, 96. Worm medicines. See Anthelmintics, 197; seed, ibid. Worms,
351. Wormwood, Roman and common, 146. 193. 194. 529. Wort, 530.
X.
Xyphoid, or emiform, 353.
Z.
Zedoary, 146. Zinc, etc. 139.
297. Zona, Zoster,

FINIS.

