A CALL TO THE Unconverted, TURN AND LIVE, AND Accept of mercy while mercy may
be had: As they ever would find Mercy in the day of extremity from the LIVING
GOD.

By his unworthy servant, RICHARD BAXTER.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. 1795.

THE Reason of this work.
IN that short acquaintance I had with that Reverend learned servant of Christ,
Bishop Usher, he has often, from first to last, been importuning me to write a
Directory for the several ranks of professed Christians, which might distinctly
give each one their portion; beginning with the Unconverted, and then
proceeding to the babes in Christ and then to the Strong, and mixing some
special helps against the several sins that they are addicted to. By the
suddenness of his motion at our first congress, I perceived it was on his mind
before: and I told him, both that it was abundantly done by many already, and
that his unacquaintedness with my weakness, might make him think me fi^ter for
it than I was. But this did not satisfy him but still he made it his request. I
confess I was not moved by his reasons, nor did I apprehend any great need of
doing more than is done in that way: nor that I was likely to do more: And
therefore I parted from him without the least purpose to answer his desire. But
since his death his words often came into my mind, and the great reverence I
bore him, did the more incline me to think with some complacency of his motion.
And having of late intended to write a Family Directory, I began to apprehend
how congruously the forementioned work should lead the way; and the several
conditions of men's souls be spoken of, before we come to the several
relations. Hereupon I resolved, by God's assistance, to proceed in in order
following:

First, To speak to the Impenitent Unconverted sinners, who are not yet so much
as purposing to turn, or at least are not setting about the work. And with
these I thought a wakening persuasive was a more necessary means than mere
directions. For directions suppose men willing to obey them: but the persons we
have first to deal with, are wilful and faft asleep in sin, and as men that are
past feeling, having given themselves over to sin with greediness, Ephesians. iv. 19.
My next work must be for those that have some purposes to turn, and are about
the work, ^o direct for a thorough and true conversion that they miscarry not
in the birth. The third part must be directions, for the younger and weaker
sort of Christians, that they may be established, built up and persevere. The
forth part, Directions for lapsed and backsliding Christians, for their safe
recovery. Besides these, there is intended some Persuasions and Directions
against some special errors of ^he times, and against some common killing sins;
as ^or directions to doubting troubled consciences, that ^s done already. And
the strong I shall not write directions for, because they are so much taught in
God already. And then the last part is intended more especially for Families;
as such, directing the several Relations in their Duty; some of these are
already written; whether I shall have life and leisure for the rest, God only
knows. And therefore I publish the several parts by themselves as I write
them: and the rather because they are intended for men of different states, and
because I would not deter them by the bulk or price, from reading what is
written for their benefit.

The use that this part is published for is, 1. For Masters and Parents to read
often in their Families, if they have servants or children that are yet
unconverted. 2. For all such unconverted persons to read and consider of
themselves. 3. For the richer sort that have any pity for such miserable souls,
to give to the unsanctified that need them, (if they have not sitter at hand to
use or give.)

The Lord awaken us to work, while it is day, for the saving of our own and
others souls, in subserviency to the Blessed God, the Maker, the Redeemer, and
the Sanctifier of Souls.

RICHARD BAXTER.

A CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED.
Ezekiel. xxxii. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel?


IT has been the astonishing wonder of many a man as well as me, to read in
the holy Scriptures how few will be saved, and that the greatest part even of
those that are called, will be everlastingly shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and be tormented with the Devils in Eternal fire. Infidels believe not this
when they read it, and therefore they must feel it: th^^se that do believe it,
are forced to cry out with Paul. Romans xi 13. O the depth of the riches both of
the ^^^sdom and Knowledge of God! How uns^^^ha^^ are his Judgments, and his
ways past finding (...) But Na^^^ (...) does teach us all to lay the blame of
evil ^^rks upon the doe^^; and therefore when we see any heinous thing done, a
principle of justice both provoke us to enquire after him that did it, that the
evil of the work may return the evil of shame upon the author. If we saw a man
killed and cut in pieces by the way, we would presently ask, Oh! who did this
cruel deed? If the town was wilfully set on fire, you would ask, What wicked
wretch did this? So when we read that the most will be firebrands of Hell
forever, we must needs think with ourselves, How comes this to pass? and who is
it long of? Who is it so cruel as to be the cause of such a thing as this? and
we can meet with few that will own the guilt. It is, indeed, confessed by all,
that Satan is the cause; but that does not resolve the doubt, because he is not
the principal cause. He does not force men to sin, but tempts them to it, and
leaves it to their own wills whether they will do it or not. He does not carry
men to an alehouse and force open their mouths, and pour in the drink; nor does
he hold them that they cannot go to God's service; nor does he force their
hearts from holy thoughts. It lies therefore between God himself and the
sinner; one of them must needs be the principal cause of all this misery, which
ever it is, for there is no other to call it upon, and God disclaimeth it, he
will not take it upon him; and the wicked disclaim it usually, and they will
not take it upon them, and this is the controversy that is here managing in my
text.

The Lord complains of the People, and the People think it is long of God.
The same controversy as handled, Chap xviii. ver. 25. they plainly say, that
the way of the Lord is not ^qual. So here they say, verse 19. if our
transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we ^ine away in them how shall we
then live? As if they should say. If we must die, and be miserable, how ^a^ we
help (...)? as if it were not long of them, but God. But God in my text does
clear himself of, it, and tells them how they may help it ^f they will, and
persuadeth them to use the mean, and if they will not be pursuaded, he lets
them know that is long of themselves; and if th^s will not satisfy them, he
will not forbear to punish them. It is he that will be the Judge, and he will
judge them according to their ways; they are no judge of him or of themselves,
as wanting authority, and wisdom, and impartiality, nor is it the cavilling and
quarelling wi^h God that shall serve their turn, or save them from the
execution of justice which they murmur at.

The words of this verse contain. 1. God's purgation or clearing himself from
the blame of their destruction. This he does not by disowning his law, that the
wicked shall die, nor by disowning his judgments and execution according to
that law, or giving them any hope that the law shall not be execu^^d; but by
professing that it is not their death that he takes pleasure in but their
returning, rather that they may live; and this he confirms to them by his
oath. 2. An express exhortation to the wicked to return; wherein God does not
only command, but persuade and condescend also to reason the case with them.
Why will they die? The direct end of this exhortation is, that they may turn
and live The secondary or reserved ends upon supposition that this is not
attained are these two: First to convince them by the means which he used, that
it is not long of God if they be miserable. Secondly to convince them from
their manifest wilfulness in rejecting all his commands and persuasions, that
it is long of themselves, and they die, even because they will die.

The substance of the text does lie in these observations following:

Doct. 1. It is the unchangeable Law of God, that wicked men must turn or die.
Doct. 2. It is the promise of God that the wicked shall live if they will but
turn. Doct. 3. God takes pleasure in men's conversion and Salvation, but not in
their death or damnation; he had rather they would return and live than go on
and die. Doct. 4. This is a most certain truth, which because God would not
have men to question, he has confirmed it to them solemnly by his oath. Doct.
5. The Lord does redouble his commands and persuasions to the wicked to turn.
Doct. 6. The Lord condescendeth to reason the case with them; and asks the
wicked why they will die? Doct. 7. If after all this the wicked will not turn
it is not long of God that they perish, but of themselves; their own wilfulness
is the cause of their own damnation; they therefore die because they will die.
Having laid the text open before your eyes in these plain propositions, I
shall next speak somewhat of each of them in order, though very briefly.

Doct. 1. It is the unchangeable Law of God, that wicked men must turn or die.
IF you will believe God, believe this; There is but one of these two ways for
every wicked man, either conversion or damnation; I know the wicked will hardly
be persuaded either of the truth or equity of this: No wonder, if the guilty
quarrel with the law. Few men are apt to believe that which they would not have
to be true, and fewer would have that to be true which they apprehend to be
against them. But it is not quarrelling with the law, or with the j^dge that
will save the malefactor; believing and regarding the law might have prevented
his death, but denying and accusing it will but hasten it. If it were not so an
hundred would bring their reason against the law, for one that would bring his
reason to the law, and men would rather choose to give their reasons why they
should not be punished than to hear the commands and reasons of their governors
which require them to obey. The law was not made for you to judge, but that you
might be ruled and judged by it.

But if there be any so blind as to venture to question either the truth or the
justice of this Law of God, I shall briefly give you tha^ evidence of both:
which, methinks, should satisfy a reasonable man.

And first, if you doubt whether thi^ be the word of God or not, besides an
hundred other texts, you may be satisfied by these few. -- Ma^th, xviii. 3.
'Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted and become as little children,
ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' John iii. 3. 'Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, 2 Cor.
v. 17, If a man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Old things are past away,
behold all thing are become new. Col. iii. 9.10. 'Ye have put off the old man
with his deed', and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him. Heb. xii. 14. 'Without holiness none
shall see God,' Romans viii. 8.9. 'So then they that are in the flesh cannot
please God. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.'
Gal vi. 15. 'For in Christ Jesus ne^^her circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.' 1 Pet. i. 3. 'According to his abundant
grace he has begotten us to lively hope. Ver. 23. 'Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and
abides forever.' 1 Pet. ii. 1, 2. 'Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speaking; as new born babes desire
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby'. Psalm. ix. 17, 'The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.' Psalm.
xi. 4. 'And the Lord loves the righteous, but the wicked his soul hates.'

As I need not stay to open these texts, which are so plain, so I think I need
not add any more of that multitude which speak the like. If thou be a man that
do believe the word of God, here is already enough to satisfy thee, that the
wicked must be Converted or Condemned. You are already brought so far, that you
must either confess that this is true, or say plainly, you will not believe the
word of God. And if once you be come to that pass, there is but small hopes of
you, look to yourselves as well as you can, for it is like you will not be long
out of hell. You would be ready to fly in the face of him that should give you
the lie; and yet dare you give the lie to God? But if you tell God plainly you
will not believe him, blame him not if he never warn you more, or if he forsake
you, and give you up as hopeless; for to what purpose should he warn you, if
you will not believe him? Should he send an angel from heaven to you, it seems
you would not believe. For an angel can speak but the Word of God; and if an
angel should bring you any other gospel you are not to rece^ve it, but to hold
him accursed. Gal. i. 8. And surely there is no angel to be believed before the
Son of God, who came from the Father to bring us this doctrine. If he be not to
be believed, then all the angels in heaven are not to be believed. And if you
stand on these terms with God, I shall leave you till he deal with you in a
more convincing way. God has a voice that will make you hear. Though he
entreat you to hear the voice of his gospel, he will make you hear the voice of
his condemning sentence, without entreaty: We cannot make you believe against
your wills; But God will make you feel against your wills.

But let us hear, what reason you have, why will you not believe his Word of
God, which tells us that the wicked most be Converted or Condemned? I know your
reason, it is because that you judge it unlikely that God should be so
unmerciful; you think it cruelty to da^^ men everlastingly for so small a thing
as a sinful life. And this leads us up to the second thing, which is (...)
justify the equity of God in his laws and judgments.

And first, I think you will not deny but that it is most suitable to an
immortal ^oul, to be ruled by laws that promise an immortal toward and threaten
an endless punishment. Otherwise the law should not be suited to the nature of
the (...), who will not be fully ruled (...) any lower means than the hopes or
fears of e^er^asting things: As it is in case of temporal punishment, if a law
were now made that the most heinous crime^ shall be punished with an hundred
years captivity, this might be (...) some efficacy, as being equal to our
lives. But if there had been no other penalties before the flood, when men
lived e^gn^ or rine hundred years, it could not have been sufficient because
men would know that they might have so many hundred years impunity af^erwards.
So it is in our present case.

2. I suppose that you will confess that the promise of an endless and
inconceivable glory is not insuitable to the wisdom of God, or the case of man:
And why then should you not think so of the threatening of an endless and
unspeakabl^e misery!

3. When you fi^d it in the Word of God that so it is, and so it will be, do
you think yourselves fit to contradict this Word? Will you call your Maker to
the bar, and examine his word upon the accusation of falsehood? Will you sit
upon him, and judge him by the law of your conceits? Are you wiser, and better,
and righteouser than he? Must the God of Heaven come to school to you to learn
wisdom? Must infinite wisdom learn of folly, and infinite Goodness be corrected
by a swinish sinner, that cannot keep himself an hour clean? Must the Almighty
stand at the bar of a worm? Oh horrid arrogance of senseless dust! shall ever
mole, or clod, or dunghill, accuse the sun of darkness, and undertake to
illuminate the world? Where were you when the Almighty made the laws, that he
did not call you to his counsel; surely he made them before you were born,
without desiring your advice, and you came into the world too late for to
reverse them; if you could have done so great a work, you should have slept out
of your nothingness and have contradicted Christ when he was on earth, or Moses
before him, or have save Adam and his sinful progeny from the threatened death,
that so there might have been no need of Christ! And what if God withdraw his
patience and substentation, and let you drop into hell while you are
quarrelling with his word, will you then believe that there is an hell.

4. If sin be such an evil that it requires the Death of Christ for its
expiation, no wonder if it deserve our everlasting misery.

5. And if the sin of the devils deserved an endless torment, why not also the
sin of man?

6. And methinks you should perceive that it is not possible for the best of
men, much less for the wicked to be competent judges of the desert of sin.
Alas, we are all both blind and partial. You can never know fully the desert of
sin, till you fully know the evil of sin; and you can never fully know the evil
of sin, till you fully know, 1. The excellency of the soul which it d^formeth.
2. And the excellency of holiness which it does obliterate 3. And the reason
and excellency of the law which it violateth. 4. The excellency of the glory
which it does despise. And 5. The excellency and office of reason which it
treads down. 6. No, not till you know the infinite excellency, almightiness
and holiness of that God against whom it is committed.
When you fully know all these, you shall fully know the desert of sin besides.
You know that the offender is too partial to judge the law, or the proceeding
of his judge. We judge by feeling, which binds our reason. We see in common
worldly things that most men think the cause is right which is their own, and
that all is wrong that is done against them; and let the most wise or just
impartial friends persuade them to the contrary, and it is all in vain. There
are few children but think the father is unmerciful, or deals hardly with
them, if he whip them. There Is scarce the vilest swinish wretch but thinks
the church does wrong him if they excommunicate him: or scarce a thief or
murderer that is hanged, but would accuse the law and judge of cruelty, if that
would serve their turn.

7. Can you think that an unholy soul is fit for heaven? Alas, they cannot love
God here, nor do him any service which he can accept. They are contrary to God;
they loath that which be most loves, and love that which he most abhors:
They are incapable of that imperfect communion with him which his saints here
do partake of. How then can they live in that perfect love of him, and full
delights and communion with him, which is the blessedness of heaven? You do not
accuse yourselves of unmercifulness, if you make not your enemy your bosom
counselor? or if you take not your swine to bed and board with you: no, nor if
you take away his life, though he never sinned; and yet will you blame the
absolute Lord, the most wise and gracious Sovereign of the world, if he condemn
the unconverted to perpetual misery.

USE.
I BESEECH you now all that love your souls, that, instead of quarrelling with
God and with his word, you will presently stoop to it, and use it for your
good. All you that are yet unconverted in this assembly, take this as the
undoubted truth of God; you must ere long, be converted or condemned; there is
no other way but turn or die. When God, that cannot lie, has told you this;
when you hear it from the Maker and Judge of the world, it is time for him that
has ears to ^ear; by this time you may see what you have to trust to. You are
but dead and damned men, except you will be converted. Should I tell you
otherwise, I should deceive you with a lie. Should I hide this from you, I
should undo you, and be guilty of your blood, as the verses before my text
assure me, ver. 8. When I say to the wicked man, O wicked man, thou shall
su^^ly die? if thou do not speak to warn the wick^d from his way, that wicked
man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. You
see then, though this be a rou^h and unwelcome doctrine, it is such as we must
preach and you must hear. It is easier to hea^ of hell than to fe^l it. If your
necessities did not require it, we would not ^^^l your tender ears with truths
that seem so harth and grievous. Hell would not be so full if people were but
willing to know their case, and ^o hear and think of it. The reason why so few
escape it is, because they strive not to enter in at the strait gate of
conversion, and go the narrow way of Ho^^^^^s while they have time: and they
strive not, because they be not awakened to a lively feeling of the ^^^ger they
are in; and they be (...) wakened because they are loath to hear or think of
it; and that is partly through foolish tenderness and carnal self-love, and
partly because they do not well believe the word that threateneth it. If you
will not thoroughly believe this truth, methinks the weight of it should force
you to remember it, and it should follow you, and give you no rest till you are
converted. If you had but once heard this word by the voice of an angel, thou
must be converted, or condemned: turn or die; would it not stick in your mind,
and haunt you night and day? so that in your sinning you would remember it, as
if the voice were still in your ears, turn or die! O happy were your souls if
it might thus work with you, and never be forgotten, or let you alone till it
have driven home your hearts to God, -- But if you will cast it out by
forgetfulness or unbelief, how can it work to your conversion and salvation?
But take this with you to your sorrow, though you may put this out of your minds.
you cannot put it out of the Bible, but there it will stand as a sealed truth,
which you shall experimentally know forever, that there is no other way, but
turn or die.

O what is the matter then that the hearts of sinners be not pierced with such
a weighty truth? A man would think now that every unconverted soul that hears
these words should be pricked to the heart, and think with themselves, this is
my own case, and never be quiet till they found themselves converted. Believe
it, fits, this drowsy careless temper will not last long. Conversion and
Condemnation are both of them awakening things, and one of them will make you
feel ere long, I can foretell it as truly as if I saw it with my eyes, that
either grace or hell will shortly bring these matters to the quick, and make
you say, What have I done? what a foolish wicked course have I taken? The
scornful and the stupid state of sinners will last but a little while; as soon
as they either turn or die, the presumptuous dream will be at an end, and then
their wits and feeling will return.

BUT I soresee there are two things that are like to harden the unconverted,
and make me lose all my labor, except they can be taken out of the way; and
that is the misunderstanding of those two words, (The wicked) and (Turn.) Some
will think to themselves, it is true the wicked must turn or die; but what is
that to me, I am not wicked, though I am a sinner, as all men be: Others will
think, 'it is true that we must turn from our evil ways, but I am turned long
ago, I hope this is not now to do.' And thus while wicked men think they are
not wicked, but are already converted, we lose all our labor in persuading
them to turn. I shall, therefore, before I go any farther, tell you here who
are meant by the wicked; and who they be that must turn or die; and also what
is meant by turning, and who they be that are truly converted: And this I have
purposely reserved for this place, preferring the method that fits my end.

And here you may observe, that in the sense of the text, a wicked man and a
converted man are contraries. No man is a wicked man that is converted; and no
man is a converted man that is wicked; so that to be a wicked man and to be an
unconverted man, is all one; and, therefore, in opening one, we shall open both.

Before I can tell you what either wickedness or conversion is, I must go to
the bottom and fetch up the matter from the beginning.

It pleased the great Creator of the world to make three sort of living
creatures: Angels he made pore spirits without flesh, and therefore he made
them only for heaven, and not for to dwell on earth. -- Brittes were made flesh
without immortal souls, and therefore they were made only for earth, and not
for heaven. -- Man is of a middle nature, between both, as partaking of both
flesh and spirit, and therefore he was made both for heaven and earth. But as
his flesh is made to be but a servant to his spirit, so is he made for earth,
but as his passage or way to heaven, and not that this should be his home or
happiness. The blessed state that man was made for, was to behold the glorious
majesty of the Lord, and to praise him among his holy angels, and to love him,
and be filled with his love forever. And as this was the end that man was made
for, so God did give him means that were fitted to the attaining of it. These
means were principally two: For the right inclination and disposition of the
mind of man. Secondly, the right ordering of his life and practice. For the
first, God suited the disposition of man unto his end, giving him such
knowledge of God as was fit for his present state, and a heart disposed and
inclined to God in holy love. But yet he did not sin, or confirm him in this
condition, but, having made him a free agent, he left him in the hands of his
own free will. For the second, God did that which belonged to him; that is, he
gave him a perfect law, required him to continue in the love of God, and
perfectly to obey him. By the wilful breach of this law, man did not only
forfeit his hopes of everlasting life, but also turned his heart from God, and
fixed it on these lower fleshy things, and hereby did blot out the spiritual
image of God from his soul; so that man did both fall short of the glory of
God, which was his end, and put himself our of the way by which he should have
attained it, and this both as to the frame of his heart, and of his life. The
holy inclination and love of his soul to God he lost, and, instead of it, he
contracted an inclination and love to the pleasing of his flesh, or carnal
self, by earthly things; growing strange to God, and acquainted with the
creature: And the course of this life was suited to the bent and inclination of
his heart; he lived to his carnal self, and not to God; he sought the creature
for the pleasing of his flesh, instead of seeking to please the Lord. With this
nature or corrupt inclination we are all now born into the world; for who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job xiv. 4. As a lion has a fierce and
cruel nature before he does devour: and an adder has a venomous nature before
she stings, so in our infancy we have those sinful natures or inclinations,
before we think or speak, or do amiss; and hence springs all the sin of our
lives; and not only so, but when God has, of his mercy, provided us a remedy,
even the Lord Jesus Christ, to be the Savior of our souls, and bring us back
to God again, we naturally love our present state, and are loath to be brought
out of it, and therefore are set against the means of our recovery, and though
custom has taught us to thank Christ for his goodwill, yet carnal self
persuadeth us to refuse his remedies, and to desire to be excused when we are
commanded to take the medicines which he offers, and are called to forsake
all and follow him to God and glory.

I pray you read over this leaf again, and mark it, for in these few words you
have a true description of our natural state, and consequently of a wicked man;
for every man that is in this state of corrupted nature is a wicked man, and in
a state of death.

By this also you are prepared to understand what it is to be converted; to
which end you must further know, that the mercy of God, not willing that man
should perish in his sin, provided a remedy, by causing his son to take our
nature, and being, in one person, God and man, to become a mediator between God
and man, and by dying for our sins on the cross, to ransom us from the curse of
God, and the power of the devil; and having thus redeemed us, the Father has
delivered us into his hands as his own. Hereupon the Father and the mediator do
make a new law and covenant for man, not like the first, which gave life to
none but the perfectly obedient, and condemned man for every sin; but Christ
has made a law of grace, or a promise of pardon and everlasting life to all
that, by true repentance, and by faith in Christ, are converted unto God; like
an act of oblivion, which is made by a prince to a company of rebels, on
condition they will lay down arms and come in, and be loyal subjects for the
time to come.

But, because the Lord knows that the heart of man is grown so wicked, that,
for all this, men will not accept of the remedy if they be left to themselves,
therefore the Holy Ghost has undertaken it as his office, to aspire the
apostles, and seal up the scriptures by miracles and wonders, and to illuminate
and convert the souls of the elect.

So that by this much you see, that as there are three persons in the trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, so each of these persons have their
several works, which are eminently ascribed to them.

The Father's works were, to create us, to rule us, as his rational creatures,
by the law of nature, and judge us thereby, and, in mercy, to provide us a
redeemer when we are lost, and to send his son, and accept his ransom.

The works of the Son, for us, were these: To ransom and redeem us by his
suffering and righteousness, to give out the promise or law of grace, and rule
and judge the world as their redeemer on terms of grace, and to make
intercession for us, that the benefits of his death may be communicated, and to
send the Holy Ghost, (which the Father (...) does by the Son.)

The works of the Holy Ghost, for us, are these, To indite the holy scriptures,
by inspiring and guiding the apostles and sealing the word, by his miraculous
gifts and works, and the illuminating and exciting the ordinary ministers of
the gospel, and so enabling them and helping them to publish that word; and by
the same word illuminating and converting the souls of men. So that, as you
could not have been reasonable creatures if the Father had not created you, nor
have had any access to God if the Son had not redeemed you, so neither can you
have a part of Christ, or be saved, except the Holy Ghost do sanctify yon.

So that, by this time, you may see the several causes of this work: The Father
sends the Son, the Son redeemeth us, and makes the promise of grace; the
Holy Ghost inditeth and seals this gospel; the apostles are the secretaries
of the spirit ^o write it; the preachers of the gospel to proclaim ^^t, and
persuade them to open it: and the Holy Ghost does make their preaching
effectual, by opening the hearts of men to entertain it. And all this ^o repair
the image of God upon the soul, and to set the heart upon God again, and take
it off the creature and carnal self to which it is revolted, and so ^o turn the
current of the life into an heavenly course, which before was earthly; and all
this by the entertainment of Christ by faith, who is the physician of the soul.

By this, which I have said, you may see what it is to be wicked, and what it
is to be converted; which, I think, will be yet plainer unto you, if I describe
them as consisting of their several parts; and ^or the first, a wicked man may
be known by these three things:

First, He is one that places his chief content on earth, and loves the
creature more than God, and ^his fleshy prosperity above the heavenly felicity;
he favors the things of the flesh, but neither discerns nor favors the
things of the spirit; though he will say, that heaven is better than earth, yet
does he not really so esteem it to himself. It he might be sure of earth, he
would let go heaven, and had rather stay here than be removed thither. -- A
life of perfect holiness in the sight of God, and in his love and praises
forever in heaven, does not find such liking with his heart as a life of
health, and wealth, and honor here upon earth: And though he falsely professes
that he loves God above all, yet, indeed, he never felt the power of divine
love within him, but his mind is more set on the world, or fleshy pleasures,
than on God. In a word whoever loves earth above heaven, and fleshy prosperity
more than God, is a wicked unconverted man.

On the other side, a converted man is illuminated to discern the loveliness of
God, and so fa^ believes the glory that is to be had with God, tha^ his heart
is taken up to it, and set more upon i^ than on any thing in this world. He had
rather s^^ the face of God, and live in his everlasting love and praises, than
have all the wealth or pleasure o^ the world. He sees that all things else are
vanity and nothing but God can fill the soul; and, there fore, let the world go
which way it will, he laye^ up his treasures and hopes in heaven, and for th^^
he is resolved to let go all. As the fire does mou^^ upwards, and the needle
that is touched with the loadstone still turns to the north, so the converted
soul is inclined unto God. Nothing else can satisfy him; nor can he find any
content and rest but in hi^ love. In a word, all that ere converted do estee^
and love God better than all the world, and th^^ heavenly felicity is dearer to
them than their flesh prosperity. The proof of what I have said you m^^ find in
these places of scripture, Phil. iii. 18, 21 Matt. vi. 19, 20, 21. Col. iii. 1,
2, 3, 4. Romans viii. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18, 23, Psalm, lxxiii, 25, 26.

Secondly, A wicked man is one that m^^ (...) the principal business of his
life to prosper ^n the world, and retain his fleshey ends. And though he may
read, and hear, and do much in the outward duties of religion, and forbear
disgraceful sins, yet this is all but upon the by, and he never makes it the
trade and principal business of his life to please God, and attain everlasting
glory, and puts off God with the leavings of the world, and gives him no more
service than the flesh can spare, for he will not part with all for heaven.

On the contrary, a converted man is one that makes it the principal care and
business of his life to please God, and to be saved, and takes all the
blessings of this life but as accommodations in his journey toward another
life, and uses the creature in subordination unto God; he loves an holy life,
and longs to be more holy; he has no sin but what he hates, and longs and
prays, and striveth to be rid of it. The drift and bent of his life is for
God, and if he sin, it is contrary to the very bent of his heart and life, and
therefore he rises again and ^amenteth it, and dare not wilfully live in any
known sin. There is nothing in this world so dear to him but he can give it up
to God, and forsake it for him and the hopes of glory. All this you may see in
Col. iii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Matt. vi. 20, 33. Luke xviii. 22, 23, 29. Luke xiv.
18, 24, 26, 27. Romans viii. 13. Gal. v. 24. Luke xii. 21, etc.

Thirdly, The soul of a wicked man did never truly discern and relish the
mystery of redemption, nor thankfully entertain an offered Savior, nor is he
taken up with the love of the Redeemer, nor willing to be ruled by him as
physician of his soul, that he may be saved from the guilt and power of his
sins, and recovered unto God; but his heart is insensible of this unspeakable
benefit, and is quite against the healing means by which he should be
recovered. Though he may be willing to be carnally religious, yet he never
resigneth up his soul to Christ, and to the motions and conduct of his word and
spirit.

On the contrary, the converted soul having felt himself undone by sin and
perceiving that he has lost his peace with God, and hopes of heaven, and is in
danger of everlasting misery, does thankfully entertain the tidings of
redemption, and believing in the Lord Jesus as his only Savior, resigning up
himself to him for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. He
takes Christ as the life of his soul, and lives by him, and uses him as
(...) salve for every sore, admitting the wisdom and love of God in this
wonderful work of man's redemption. In a word, Christ does even dwell in their
heart by faith, and the life that he now lives is by the faith of the Son of
God, that has loved him, and gave himself for him, yea, it is not so much he
that lives, as Christ in him. For these, see Job. i. 11, 12. and iii. 19, 20.
Romans viii. 9. Phil. iii. 7, 8, 9, 10. Gal. ii. 20. Job xv. 2, 3, 4.1 Cor. i.
20. and ii. 2.

YOU see now in plain terms, from the word of God, who are the wicked, and who
are the converted. Ignorant people think, that if a man be no swearer, nor
curser, nor railer, nor drunkard, nor fornicator, nor extortioner, nor wrong
any body in their dealings, and if they come to church, and say their prayers,
these cannot be wicked men. Or, if a man that has been guilty of drunkenness,
swearing, or gaming, or the like vices, do but forbear them for the time to
come, they think that th^^ is a converted man. Others think, if a man that
ha^^^ been an enemy and scorner at godliness, do but approve it, and be hated
for it by the wicked, as the godly are, that this must needs be a converted
man. And some are so foolish as to think that they are converted, by taking up
some new and false opinion; and falling into some dividing party, as
anabaptists, quakers, papists, and such like. And some think, if they have but
been affrighted by the fears of hell, and had convictions, and gripes of
conscience, and thereupon have purposed and promised amendment, and take up a
life of civil behavior, and outward religion, that this must needs be true
conversion. And these are the poor deluded souls that are like to lose the
benefit of all our persuasions: and when they hear that the wicked must turn or
die, they think that this is not spoken to them; for they are not wicked, but
are turned already. And, therefore, it is that Christ told some of the rulers
of the Jews, who were greater and civiler than the common people, that
publicans and haerlots do go into the kingdom of Christ before them, Matt. xxi.
31. Not that an harlot, or gross sinner, can be saved without conversion; but
because it was easier to make these gross sinners perceive their sin and
misery, and the necessity of a change, when the civiler sort do delude
themselves by thinking that they are converted already, when they be not.

O, sirs, conversion is another kind of work than most are aware of: It Is not a
small matter to bring an earthly mind to heaven, and to show man the amiable
excellencies of God, till he be taken up in such love to him that can never be
quenched; to break the heart for sin and make him fly for refuge unto Christ,
and thankfully embrace him as the life of his soul; to have the very drift and
bent of the (...) and life to be changed; so that a man re^^^^ced that which he
took for his felicity and places his felicity where he never did before; and
lives not to the same end, and drives not on the same design in the world, as
formerly he did: ^n a word, he that is in Christ is a new creature; old things
are past away, behold all things are be^s new. 2 Cor. v. 17. He has a new
understanding, a new will and resolution, new sorrows, and desires and love,
and delight; new thoughts, new speeches, new company (if possible) and a new
conversation. Sin, that before was a jesting matter with him, is now so odious
and terrible to him, that he flies from it as from death. The world, that was
so lovely in his eyes, does now appear but as vanity and vexation; God, that
was before neglected, is now the only happiness of his soul; before he was
forgotten, and every last preferred before him; but now he is set next the
heart, and all things must give place to him; and the heart is taken up in the
attendance and observance of him; and is grieved when he hides his face; and
never thinks itself well without him. Christ himself that was wont to be
slightly thought of, is now his only hope and refuge, and he lives upon him as
on his daily bread; he cannot pray without him, nor rejoice without him, nor
think, nor speak, nor live without him. Heaven itself, that before was looked
upon but as a tolerable ^eserve, which he hoped might serve in turn better than
hell, when he could not stay any longer in the world, is now taken for his
home, the place of his only hope and rest, where he shall see, and love and
praise that God that has his heart already. Hell. that did seem before but a
bugbear to frighten men from sin, does now appear to be a real misery, that is
not to be ventured on, nor jested with. The works of holiness, which before he
was weary of, and seemed to be more ado than needs, are now both his
recreation, and his business, and the trade that he lives upon. The Bible,
which was before to him but almost as a common book, is now as the law of God;
as a letter written to him from heaven, and subscribed with the name of the
Eternal Majesty, it is the rule of his thoughts, and words, and deeds; the
commands are binding, the threats are dreadful, and the promises of it speak
life to his soul. The godly, that seemed to him but like other men, are now the
excellentest and happiest on earth. And the wicked, that were his play-fellows,
are now his grief; and he that could laugh at their sin, is readier now to weep
for their sin and misery, Psalm. xvi. 3. and xv. 4. Phil, iii. 18. In short, he
has a new end in his thoughts, and a new way in his endeavors, and,
therefore, his heart and life is new. Before, his carnal self was his end; and
his pleasure and worldly profits and credit were his way: And now God and
everlasting glory is his end; and Christ and the spirit, and word, and
ordinances. Holiness to God, and righteousness and mercy to men; these are his
way. Before, self was the chiefest ruler, to which the matters of God and
conscience must stoop and give place; and now God, in Christ, by the spirit,
word and ministry, is the chief ruler, to whom both self, and all the matters
of self, must give place. So that, this is not a change in one or two, or
twenty points, but in the whole soul, and the very end and bent of the
conversation. A man may step out of one path into another, and yet have his
face the same way, and be still going toward the same place, but it is another
matter to turn quite back again, and take his journey the clean contrary way,
to a contrary place. So it is here, a man may turn from drunkenness to
thriftiness, and forsake his good fellowship, and other gross disgraceful sins,
and set upon some duties of religion, and yet be sti^^ going to the same end as
before, in tending his carnal self above all, and giving it still the
government of his soul, but when he is converted, this self is denied, and
taken down, and God is set up, and his face is turned the contrary way; and he
that before was addicted to himself, and lived to himself, is now, by
sanctification, devoted to God, and lives unto God; before, he asks himself,
what he should do with his time, his parts, and his estate, and for himself he
used them; but now he as^eth God what he shall do with them, and uses them for
him. Before, he would please God so far as might stand with the pleasure of his
flesh, and carnal self; but not to any great displeasure of them. But now he
will please God, let flesh and self be never so much displeased. This is the
great change that God will make upon all that shall be saved.

You can say, that the Holy Ghost is our sanctifier, but do you know what
sanctification is? Why, this is it that I have now opened to you; and every man
and woman in the world must have this, or be condemned to everlasting misery.
They must turn or die.

Do you believe all this, fir^, or do you not? Surely, you da^e not say, you do
not: For it is past a doubt or denial: These are not controversies, where one
learned pious man is of one mind, and another of another; where one party says
this, and the other says that. Papists and Anabaptists, and every sect among
us, that deserve to be called Christians, are all agreed in this that I have
said, and if you will not believe the God of Truth, and that in a case where
every sect and party do believe him, you are utterly inexcusable.

But if you do believe this, how comes it to pass, that you live so quietly in
(...) verted state? Do you know that you are converted? And can you find this
wonderful change upon your souls? Have you been thus born again and made a new?
Be not these strange matters to many of you, and such as you never felt upon
yourselves? if you cannot tell the day or week of your change, or the very
sermon that converted you, yet do you find that the work is done; and such a
change indeed there is; and that you have such hearts as are before described;
alas, the most do follow their worldly business, and little trouble their minds
with such thoughts. And if they be not restrained from scandalous sins, and can
say, I am no wkoremonger, nor thief, nor curser, nor swearer, nor tippler, nor
extortioner, I go to church, and say my prayers, they think that this is tine
conversion, and they shall be saved as well as any. Alas, this is foolish
cheating of yourselves. This is too much contempt of an endless glory; and too
gross neglect of your immortal souls. Can you make so slight of heaven and
hell? Your corpse will shortly lie in the dust, and angels or devils will
presently seize upon your souls, and every man or woman of you all, will
shortly be among other company, and in another case than now you are; you will
dwell in those houses but a little longer; you will work in your shops and
fields but a little longer; you will set in these scats, and dwell on this
earth, but a little longer; you will see with these eyes, and hear with those
ears, and speak with those tongues, but a little longer, till the resurrection
day; and can you make shift to forget this? O what a place will you shortly be
in of joy or torment! O what a sight will you shortly see in heaven or hell! O
what thoughts will shortly fill your hearts with unspeakable delight or horror!
What work will you be employed in! to praise the Lord with saints and angels,
or to cry out in fire unquenchable with devils; and should all this be
forgotten? And all this will be endless, and sealed up by an unchangeable
decree. Eternity, eternity will be the measure of your joys or sorrows, and can
this be forgotten? And all this is true, sirs, most certainly true: When you
have gone up and down a little longer, and slept and awakened a few times more,
you will be dead and gone, and find all true that now I tell you, and yet can
you now so much forget it! You shall then remember that you heard this sermon,
and that this day, or in this place, you were remembered of these things; and
perceive them matters a thousand times greater than either you or I could here
conceive; and yet shall they be now so much forgotten?

Beloved friends, if the Lord had not awakened me to believe, and lay to heart
these things myself, I should have remained in the dark and selfish state, and
have perished for ever; but if he have truly made me sensible of them, it will
constrain me to compassionate you as well as myself. If your eyes were so far
opened as to see hell, and you saw your neighbors, that were unconverted,
dragged thither with hideous cries; though they were such as you accounted
honest people on earth, and feared no such matter by themselves, such a sight
would make you go home and think of it, and think again, and make you warn all
about you, as that damned worldling in Luke xvi. 28. would have had his
brethren warned, lest they come to that place of torment. Why, faith is a kind
of sight; it is the eye of the soul, the evidence of things not seen: If I
believe God, it is next to seeing: And, therefore, I beseech you to excuse me,
if I be half as earnest with you about these matters, as if I had seen them. If
I must die tomorrow, and it were in my power to come again from another world,
and tell you what I had seen, would you not be willing to hear me? And would
you not believe and regard what I should tell you? If I might preach one sermon
to you after I am dead, and have seen what is done in the world to come, would
you not have me plainly speak the truth, and would you not crowd to hear me,
and would you not lay it to heart? But this must not be; God has his appointed
way of teaching you by scripture and ministers, and he will not humor
unbelievers so far as to send men from the dead to them, and to alter his
established way; if any man quarrel with the sun, God will not humor him so
far as to set him up a cl^carer light. -- Friends, I beseech you regard me now,
as you would do if I should come from the dead to you; for I can give you as
full assurance of the truth of what I say to you, as if I had been there and
seen it with my eyes; for it is possible for one from the dead to deceive you;
but Jesus Christ can never deceive you; the word of God, delivered in
scripture, and sealed up by miracles, and holy workings of the spirit, can
never deceive you. Believe th^s, or believe nothing. Believe and obey this, or
you are undone. Now, as ever you believe the word of God, and as ever you care
for the salvation of your soul, let me beg of you this reasonable request, and
I beseech you deny me not: That you would, without any more delay, when you are
gone from hence, remember what you heard, and enter into an earnest search of
your hearts, and say unto yourselves, It is so, indeed! Must I turn or die!
Must I be converted or condemned! It is time for me, then, to look about me,
before it be too late. O why did not I look after this till now? Why did I
venturously post off or slubber over so great a business? Was I awake, or in my
wits! O blessed God, what a mercy is it that thou did not cut off my life all
this while, before I had any certain hope of eternal life! Well, God forbid
that I should neglect this work any longer. What state is my soul in? Am I
converted, or am I not? Was ever such a change or work done upon my soul? Have
I been illuminated by the word and spirit of the Lord, to see the odiousness of
sin, the need of a Savior, the love of Christ, and the excellencies of God and
glory? Is my heart broken, or humbled within me, for my former life? Have I
thankfully entertained my Savior and Lord, that offered himself with pardon
and life for my soul? Do I hate my former sinful life, and the remnant of every
sin that is in me? Do I fly from them as my deadly enemies? Do I give up myself
to a life of holiness and obedience to God? Do I love it, and delight in it?
Can I truly say, that I am dead to the world and carnal self, and that I live
for God, and the glory which he has promised? Has heaven more of my
estimation and resolution than earth? And is God the dearest and highest in my
soul? Once, I am sure, (...) lived principally to the world and flesh, and God
had nothing but some heartless services, which the world could spare, and which
were the leaving of the flesh. Is my heart now turned another way? Have I a new
design and a new end, and a new train of holy affections? Have I set my hopes
and heart in heaven? And is it not the scope, and design, and bent of my heart,
to get well to heaven, and see the glorious face of God, and live in his love
and praise? And when I sin is it against the habitual bent and design of my
heart? And do I conquer all gross sins, and am I weary and willing to be rid of
my infirmities? This is the state of unconverted souls. And this must be with
me, or I must perish. Is it thus with me, indeed, or is it not? It is time to
get the doubt resolved, before the judge resolves it. I am not such a stranger
to my own heart and life, but I may somewhat perceive, whether I am thus
converted or not: If I be not, it will do me no good to flatter my soul with
false conceits and hopes. I am resolved no more to deceive myself; but
endeavor to know truly, off or on, whether I be converted, ye or no; that if I
be, I may rejoice in it, and glorify my gracious Lord, and comfortably go on
till I reach the crown; and if I am not, I may set myself on, beg and seek
after the grace that should convert me, and may turn without any more delay:
For, if I find it in time that I am out of the way, by the help of Christ I may
turn and be recovered, but if I stay till either my heart be forsaken of God in
blindness or hardness, or till I be catched away by death, it is then too late.
There is no place for repentance and conversion then; I know it must be now or
never.

Sirs, this is my request to you, that you will but take your hearts to task,
and thus examine them, till you see, if it may be, whether you are converted or
not? And if you cannot find it out by your own endeavors, go to your
ministers, if they be faithful and experienced men, and desire their
assistance. -- The matter is great, let not bashfulness, nor carelessness
hinder you. They are set over you, to advise you, for the saving of your soul,
as physicians advise you for the curing of your bodies. It undoes many
thousands that they think they are in the way to salvation, when they are not;
and think that they are converted, when it is no such thing. And then, when we
call to them daily to turn, they go away as they came; and think that this
concerns not them; for they are turned already, and hope they shall do well
enough in the way that they are in, at least if they do pick the fairest path,
and avoid some of the foulest steps; when, alas, all this while they live but
to the world, and flesh, and are strangers to God and eternal life; and are
quite out of the way to heaven. And all this is much, because we cannot
persuade them to a few serious thoughts of their condition, and spend a few
hours in the examining of their states: Is there not many a self deceiving
wretch that hears me this day, that never bestowed one hour, or quarter of an
hour, in all their lives, to examine their souls, and try whether they are
truly converted or not? O merciful God, that will care for such wretches that
care no more for themselves, and that will do so much to save them from hell,
and help them to heaven, who will do so little for it themselves! If all that
are in the way to hell, and in the state of damnation, did but know it, they
durst not continue in it. The greatest hope that the devil has of bringing you
to damnation, without a rescue, is by keeping you blindfold, and ignorant o^
your state, and making you believe that you may do well enough in the way that
you are in. If you knew that you were out of the way to heaven, and were lost
for ever, if you should die as you are, durst you sleep another night in the
state that you are in? Durst you live another day in it? Could you heartily
laugh, or be merry, in such a state? -- What! And not know but you may be
snatched away to hell in an hour! Sure it would constrain you to forsake your
former company and courses, and betake yourselves to the ways of holiness, and
the communion of the saints. Sure it would drive you to cry to God for a new
heart, and to seek hel^ of those that are fit to counsel you. There are non^ of
you sure that cares not for being damned. Well then, I beseech you presently
make enquiry into your hearts, and give them no rest till you find ou^ your
condition, that if it be good, you may rejoic^ in it, and go on; and if it be
bad, you may presently look about you for recovery, as men that believ^ they
must turn or die. What say you, sirs? Wi^^ you resolve and promise to be at
thus much labou^ for your own souls? Will you fall upon this self examination
when you come home? Is my reques^ unreasonable? Your consciences know it is
not. -- Resolve on it then, before you stir; knowing how much it concerns
your souls. I beseech you for the sake of that God that does command you, (...)
whose bar you will shortly appear, that you will no^ deny me this reasonable
request. For the sake o^ those souls that must turn or die, I beseech you den^
me no^; even to make it your business to understand your own conditions, and
build upon su^ground, and know, off or on, whether you are converted or no; and
venture not your souls on negli^ent security.

But perhaps you will say, What if we should find ourselves yet unconverted,
what shall we do then? this question leads me to my second doctrine; which
will do much to the answering of it, to which I shall now proceed.

Doct. 2. It is the promise of GOD, that the wicked shall live, if thoy will
but turn, unfeignedly and thoroughly turn.
THE Lord here professes that this is it that he takes pleasure in, that the
wicked turn and live. Heaven is made as sure to the converted, as ^ell is to
the unconverted. Turn and live, is as certain a truth as Turn or die. God was
not bound ^o provide us a Savior, nor open to us a door of hope, nor call to
us to repent and turn, when once we had cast ourselves away by sin. But he has
free^y done it to magnify his mercy: Sinners, there are ^one of you shall have
cause to go home, and say I ^reach desperation to you. Do we use to shut the
^oor of mercy against you? O that you would not ^hut it up against yourselves!
Do we use to tell you, that God will have no mercy on you, though you ^urn and
be sanctified? When did you ever hear a ^reacher say such a word? You that bark
at the ^reachers of the gospel for desiring to keep you out ^f hell, and say,
that they preach desperation; tell ^e if you can, when did you ever hear any
sober ^an say, That there is no hope for you, though you ^epent, and be
converted? No, it is the clean contrary that we daily proclaim from the Lord;
and whoever is born again, and by faith and repentance ^oth become a new
creature, shall certainly be saved, and so far are we from persuading you to
despair ^f this, that we persuade you not to make any doubt ^f it. It is life,
not death, that is the first part of ^ur message to you; our commission is to
offer salvation; certain salvation; a speedy, glorious, everlasting salvation
to every one of you: To the poorest beggar, as well as the greatest lord: to
the wor^^ of you, even to drunkards, swearers, worldlings, thieves, yea to the
despisers and reproachers of the holy way of salvation. We are commanded by the
Lord our Master, to offer you a pardon for all th^^ is past, if you will but
now at last return and live^ we are commanded to beseech and entreat you (...)
accept the offer, and return to tell you what prep^rations is made by Christ;
what mercy stays for you; what patience waits on you; what though^ of
kindness God has toward you; and how ha^py, and certainly and unspeakably
happy you m^^ be if you will. We have indeed also a message (...) wrath and
death; yea, of a twofold wrath and death but neither of them is our principal
message. W^ must tell you of the wrath that is on you alread^ and the death
that you are born under, for the breach of the law of works, but this is but to
sh^^^ you the need of mercy, and to provoke you to estee^^ the grace of the
Redeemer. And we tell you n^ thing but the truth, which you must know; for wh^^
will seek out for physic, that knows not that he (...) sick? Our telling you of
your misery, is not it th^^ makes you miserable, but drives you out to s^^^
for mercy. It is you that have brought this dea^^ upon yourselves. We tell you
also of anoth^^ death, even remediless, and much greater tormen^ that will fall
on those that will not be converte^ But as this is true, and must be told you;
so it (...) but the last and saddest part of our message. W^ are first to offer
you mercy, if you will turn, and (...) is only those that will not turn, nor
hear the voi^^ of mercy, that we must foretell damnation to. W^^^ you but cast
away your transgressions, delay (...) longer, but come away at the call of
Christ, and (...) converted, and become new creatures, and we ba^^^ not a word
of damning wrath, or death to speak against you. I do here in the name of the
Lord of life, proclaim to you all that hear me this day, to the worst of you,
to the greatest, to the oldest sinner, that you may have mercy and salvation,
if you will but turn. There is mercy in God, there is sufficiency in the
satisfaction of Christ, the promise is free, and full, and universal; you may
have life, if you will but turn. But then as you love your souls, remember what
turning it is that Scripture speaks of. It is not to mend the old house, but to
pull down all, and build anew, on Christ the Rock and sure Foundation. It is
not to mend somewhat in a carnal course of life, but to mortify the flesh, and
live after the Spirit. It is not to serve the flesh and the world, in a more
reformed way, without any scandalous disgraceful sins, and with a certain kind
of religiousness; but it is to change your master, and your works, and end; and
to set your face the contrary way, and do all for the life that you never saw;
and dedicate yourselves, and all you have, to God. This is the change that must
be made if you will live.

Yourselves are witnesses now, that it is salvation, and not damnation, that is
the great doctrine I preach to you; and the first part of my message to you.
Accept of this, and we shall go no further with you; for we would not so much
as affright, or trouble you with the name of damnation, without necessity.

But if you will not be saved, there is no remedy but damnation must take
place. For there is no middle palce between the two: You must have either life
or death.

And we are not only to offer you life, but to show you the grounds on which we
do it, and call you to believe that God does mean, indeed, as he speaks; that
the promise is true, and extended conditionally to you, as well as others; and
that heaven is no fancy, but a true felicity.

If you ask, where is your commission for this offer, Among an hundred texts of
scripture, I will show it unto you in these few.

First, You see it here in my text, and the following verses; and in the 18th
of Ezekiel. as plain as can be spoken: and in 1 Cor. v. 17. xviii. 16. xx. 21. you
have the very sum of our commission, "If any man be in Christ he is a new
creature: old things are past away, behold all things are become new. And all
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given to us the ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing their trespasses to them, and
has committed unto us the word of reconciliation: Now then we are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be
ye reconciled unto God; for he has made him to be sin for us, who know no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." So Mark xvi. 15, 16.
"Go ye into the world, and preach the gospel to every creature; he that
believes, (that is, with such a converting faith as is expressed) and is
baptized shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned." And Luke
xxiv. 3640. Thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day, and that repentance (which is conversion) and remission of sins
should be preached in his name among all nations." And Acts v. 30, 31. "The God
of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him has God
exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins." And Acts xiii. 38, 39. "Be it known unto
you, therefore men and brethren, That through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses." And lest you think
this offer is restrained to the Jews, see Gal. vi. 13. "For in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature." And Luke xiv. 17. "Come, for all things are now ready." And verse
22, 24.

You see by this time that we are commanded to offer life to you all, and to
tell you from God, that if you will turn, you may live.

Here you may safely trust your souls; for the love of God is the fountain of
this offer. Job iii. 16. and the blood of the Son of God has purchased it; the
faithfulness and truth of God is engaged to make the promise good; miracles often
sealed up the truth of it; preachers are sent through the world to proclaim it;
the sacraments are instituted and used for the solemn delivery of the mercy
offered to them that will accept it; and the spirit does open the heart to
entertain it, and is itself the earnest of the full possession. So that the
truth of it is past controversy, that the worst of you all, and every one of
you, if you will but be converted, may be saved.

Indeed, if thou will needs believe that you shall be saved without conversion,
then you believe a falsehood; and if I should preach that to you, I should
preach a lie: This were not to believe God, but the devil and your own
deceitful hearts. God has his promise of life, and the devil has his promise
of life. God's promise is. Return and live. The devil's promise is, You shall
live, whether you turn or not. The words of God are as I have showed you.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. xviii. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. John iii. 3, 5. Without holiness none shall see God,
Heb. xii. 14. The devil's word, You may be saved without being born again and
converted; you may do well enough without being holy; God does but frighten
you; he is more merciful than to do as he says; he will be better to you than
his word. And alas, the greatest part of the world believe this word of the
devil, before the word of God; just as our first sin and misery came into the
world. God says to our first parents, If ye eat ye shall die: And the devil
contradicted him, and says, Ye shall not die; and the woman believed the devil
before God. So now the Lord says, Turn or die: And the devil says, You shall
not die, if you do but cry God's mercy at last, and give over the acts of sin
when you can practice it no longer. And this is the word that the world
believes. O heinous wickedness, to believe the devil before God!

And yet that is not the worst, but blasphemiously they call this a believing
and trusting in God, when they put him in the shape of Satan, who was a liar
from the beginning; and when they believe that the word of God is a lie, they
call this a trusting God, and say they believe in him, and trust on him for
salvation: Where did ever God say, That the unregenerate, unconverted,
unsanctified, shall be saved? Show such a word in scripture. I challenge you if
you can. Why this is the devil's word, and to believe it is to believe the
devil, and the sin that is commonly called presumption; and do you you call
this a believing and trusting in God? There is enough in the word of God to
comfort and strengthen the hearts of the sanctified; but not a word to
strengthen the hands of wickedness, nor to give men the least hope of being
saved, though they be never sanctified.

But if you will turn, and come into the way of mercy, the mercy of the Lord is
ready to entertain you. Then trust God for salvation, boldly and confidently;
for he is engaged by his word to save you. He will be a father to none but his
children, and he will save none but those that forsake the world, the devil,
and the flesh, and come into his family to be members of his Son, and have
communion with his saints. But if they will not come in, it is long of
themselves: His doors are open; he keeps none back; he never sent such a
messenger as this to any of you; It is now too late: I will not receive thee
though thou be converted. He might have done so, and done you no wrong; but he
did not: he does not to this day: He is still ready to receive you, if you were
but ready unfeignedly, and with all your heart to turn. And the fullness of this
truth will yet more appear in the two following doctrines, which I shall
therefore next proceed to, before I make any further application of this.

Doct. 3. God takes pleasure in men's conversion and Salvation, but not in
their death or damnation; he had rather they would return and live, than go on
and die.
I Shall first teach you how to understand this, and then clear up the truth of
it to you: And for the first, you must observe these following things; 1. A
simple willingness or complacency is the first act of the will following the
simple apprehension of the understanding, before it proceeds to compare
things together; but the choosing act of the will is a following act, and
supposes the comparing practical act of the understanding; and these two acts
may be often carried to contrary objects, without any fault at all in the
person.

2. An unfeigned willingness may have diverse degrees; some things I am so far
willing of as that I will do all that lies in my power to accomplish it, and
some things I am truly willing another should do, when yet I will not do all
that ever I am able to procure ^t, having many reasons to dissuade me
therefrom, though yet I will do all that belongs to me to do.

3. The will of a Ruler, as such, is manifested in making and executing laws?
but the will of a man in his simple natural capacity, or as absolute lord of
his own is manifested in desiring or resolving of events.

4. A ruler's will, as law giver, is first, and principally, that his laws be
obeyed, and not at all that the penalty be executed on any, but only on
supposition that they will not obey his people; but a ruler's will, as judge,
supposes the law already either kept o^ broken, and therefore he resolves on
reward or punishment accordingly.

Having given you those necessary distinctions, I shall next apply them to the
case in hand, in these following propositions:

1. It is the gloss of the word and creatures, that in this life we must know
God, and so according to the nature of man we ascribe to him understanding and
will, removing all the imperfections that we can, because we are capable of no
higher positive conceptions of him. 2. And on the same grounds we do, with the
scripture, distinguish between the acts of God's will, as diversisfied from the
respects or the objects, though as to God's essence they are all one. 3. And
the boldlier, because that when we speak of Christ, we have the more ground for
it from his human nature. 4. And thus we say, that the simple complacency, will
or love of God is to all that is naturally or morally good, according to the
nature and degree of its goodness, and so he has pleasure in the conversion
and salvation of all, which yet will never come to pass. 5. And God, as ruler
and lawgiver of the world, had so far a practical will for their salvation, as
to make them a free deed of gift of Christ and life, and an act of oblivion for
all their sins, so be it they will not unthankfully reject it, and to command
his messengers to offer this gift to all the world, and persuade them to
accept. And so he does all that, as lawgiver or promiser, belongs to him to do
for their salvation. 6. But yet he resolves, as lawgiver, that they that will
not turn shall die; and as judge, when their day of grace is past, he will
execute that decree. 7. So that he thus unfeignedly wills the conversion of
those that never will be converted, but not as absolute Lord with the fullest
efficacious resolution, nor as a thing which he resolves shall undoubtedly
come to pass, or would engage all in his power to accomplish. It is in the
power of a prince to set a guard upon a murderer, to see that he shall not
murder and be hanged; but if, upon good reason, he forbear this, and do but
send to his subjects, and warn and entreat them not to be murderers, I hope he
may well say that he would not have them murder and be hanged; he takes no
pleasure in it, but rather that they forbear and live; and if he do no more for
some, upon some special reason, he is not bound to do so by all. The king may
well say to all murderers and felons in the land, "I have no pleasure in your
death, but rather that you would obey my laws and live, but if you will not, I
am resolved, for all this, that thou shall die." The judge may truly say to the
thief, or a murderer, "Alas, man, I have no delight in thy death; I had rather
thou had kept the law and saved thy life; but seeing thou have not, I must
condemn thee, or else I should be unjust." So, though God have no pleasure in
your damnation, and therefore call? upon you to return and live, yet he has
pleasure of the demonstration of his own justice, and the executing his laws,
and therefore he is, for all this, fully resolved, that if you will not be
converted, you shall be condemned. If God were so much against the death of the
wicked, as that he were resolved to do all that he can to hinder it, then no
man should be condemned, whereas Christ tells you, that few will be saved.
But so far God is against your damnation, as that he will teach you, and warn
you, and set before you life and death, and offer you your choice, and command
his ministers to entreat you not to damn yourselves, but accept his mercy, and
so to leave you without excuse; but if this will not do, and if still you be
unconverted, he professes to you, he is resolved of your damnation, and has
commanded us to say unto you in his name, verse 8. O wicked man, thou shall
surely die! And Christ has little less than sworn it, over and over, with a
verily, verily, except ye be converted, and born again, ye cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. xviii. 3. John iii. 3. Mark that he says [ you
cannot.] It is in vain to hope for it, and in vain to dream that God is willing
of it; for it is a thing that cannot be.
In a word, you see then the meaning of the text, that God, the great Lawgiver
of the world, does take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that
they turn and live; though yet he be resolved that none shall live but those
that turn; and as a Judge even delights in justice, and manifesting his
hatred of sin, though not in their misery which they had brought upon
themselves, in itself considered.

2. And for the proofs of the point, I shall be very brief in them, because I
suppose you easily believe it already.

1. The very gracious nature of God proclaimed; Exodus xxiv. 6. and xxvi. 6. and
frequently elsewhere, may assure you of this; that he ha^^ pleasure in your
death.

2. If God had more pleasure in thy death, than in thy conversion and life, he
would not have so frequently commanded thee in his word, to turn; he would not
have made thee such promises of life if thou will but turn; he would not have
persuaded thee to it by so many reasons. The tenor of this gospel proves the
point.

3. And his commission that he has given to the ministers of the gospel, does
fully prove it. If God had taken more pleasure in thy damnation, than in thy
conversion and salvation, he would never have charged us to offer you mercy,
and to teach you the way of life, both publicly, and privately; and to entreat
and beseech you to turn and live; to acquaint you with your sins, and tell you
of your danger; and to do all that possibly we can for your conversion, and to
continue patiently so doing, though you should hate or abuse us for our pains.
Would God have done this, and appointed his ordinances for your good, if he had
taken pleasure in your death?

4. It is proved also by the course of his providence. If God had rather you
were damned than converted and saved, he would not second his word with his
works, and entice you by his daily kindness to himself, and give you all the
mercies of this life, which are his means to lead you to repentance, Romans ii.
4. and bring you so often under his rod to force you into your wits, he would
not set so many examples before your eyes, no, nor wait on you so patiently as
he does from day to day, and year to year. These be not signs of one that
takes pleasure in your death. If this had been his delight, how easily could
he have had thee long ago in hell? How often, before this, could he have caught
thee away in the midst of thy sins, with a curse, or oath, or lie in thy mouth,
in thy ignorance, and pride, and sensuality? When thou were last in thy
drunkenness, or last deriding the ways of God, how easily could he have stopped
thy breath, and tamed thee with his plagues, and made thee sober in another
world! Alas, how small a matter is it for the Almighty to rule the tongue of
the prophanest rather, and tie the hands of the most malicious persecutor, or
call the fury of the bitterest of his enemies, and make them know that they are
but worms? If he would but frown upon thee thou would drop into thy grave. If
he gave commission to one of his guardian angels to go and destroy ten thousand
sinners, how quickly would it be done! How easily can he lay thee upon the bed
of languishing, and make thee lie roaring there in pain, and make thee eat the
words of reproach which thou have spoken against his servants, his word, his
workship, and his holy ways, and make thee send to beg their prayers, whom thou
did despise in thy presumption? How easily can he lay that flesh under gripes
and groans, and make it too weak to hold thy soul, and make it more loathsome
than the dung of the earth? That flesh which now must have what it loves, and
must not be displeased, though God be displeased, and must be humoured in meat
and drink and clothes, whatever God say to the contrary, how quickly would the
frowns of God consume it? When thou wast passionately defending thy sin, and
quarrelling with them that would have drawn thee from it, and showing thy
spleen against the reprover, and pleading for the works of darkness; how easily
could God have snatched thee away in a moment, and set thee before his dreadful
majesty, where thou should see ten thousand times ten thousand glorious
angels waiting on his throne, and have called thee there to plead thy cause,
and asked thee, 'What haft thou now to say against thy Creator, his truth, his
servants, or his holy ways? Now plead thy cause, and make the best of it thou
can? Now, what can thou say, in excuse of thy sins? Now, give account of
thy worldliness and fleshly life, of thy time, of all the mercies thou have
had.' O how thy stubborn heart would have melted, and thy proud looks be taken
down, and thy countenance be appalied, and thy stout words be turned into
speechless silence, or dreadful cries, if God had but set thee at his bar, and
pleaded his own cause with thee, which thou have here so maliciously pleaded
against! How easily can he at any time say to the guilty soul, 'come away, and
live in that flesh no more till the resurrection,' and it cannot resist. A word
of his mouth would take off the poise of thy presen, life, and then all thy
parts and powers would stand still, and if he say unto thee, live no longer, or
live in kell, thou could not disobey.

But God has yet done none of this, but has patiently forborne thee, and
mercifully upheld ^^e^, and give thee that breath which thou did breathe out
against him, and give those mercies which thou did sacrifice to thy flesh;
and afforded thee that provision which thou spentest to satisfy thy greedy
throat: he gave thee every minute of that time which thou did waste in
idleness or drunkenness, or worldliness; and does not all his patience and
mercy show that he desired not thy damnation? Can the candle burn without the
oil? Can your houses stand without the earth to bear them? As well as you can
live and hour without the support of God. And why did he so long support thy
life, but to see when thou would bethink thee of the folly of thy ways, and
return and live? Will any man purposely put arms into his enemies hands to
resist him, or hold a candle to a murderer that is killing his children, or to
an idle servant that plays or sleeps the while? Surely it is to see whether
thou will at last return and live, that God has so long waited on thee.

5. It is further proved by the sufferings of his Son, that God takes no
pleasure in the death of the wicked; Would he have ransomed them from death at
so dear a rate? Would he have astonished angels and men by his condescension?
Would God have dwelt in flesh, and have come in the form of a servant, and have
assumed humility into one person with the Godhead? And would Christ have lived
a life of suffering, and died a cursed death for sinners, if he had rather
taken pleasure in their death? Suppose you saw him but so busy in preaching or
healing of them, as you find him in Mark iii. 21. or so long in falling, as in
Matthew. iv. or all night in prayer, as in Luke vi. 12. or praying, with the
drops of blood trickling from him instead of sweat, as Luke xxii. 44. on
suffering a cursed death upon the cross, and pouring out his soul as a
sacrifice for our sins. Would you have thought these the signs of one that
delights in the death of the wicked!

And think not to extenuate it by saying, that it was only f^^bi^ ^^ct; for it
was thy sin, and the the sin of all the world that lay upon our Redeemer, and
his sacrifice and satisfaction is sufficient for all, and the fruits of it are
offered to one as well as another; but it is true, that it was never the intent
of his mind to pardon and save any that would not by faith and repentance be
converted. If you had seen and heard him weeping, and bemoaning the state of
disobedience in impenitent people, Luke xix. 41, 42. or complaining of their
stubbornness, as Matthew. xxiii, 37. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and ye would not?" Or if you had seen and heard him on the cross,
praying for his persecutors, (Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do,) would you have suspected that he had delighted in the death of the wicked;
even of those that perish by their wilful unbelief? When God has so loved (not
only loved, but so loved) as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, (by an effectual faith) should not perish, but have
everlasting life: I think he has hereby proved against the malice of men and
devils, that he takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but had rather
they would turn and live.

6. Lastly. If all this will not yet satisfy you, take his own word, that
knows best his own mind, or at least, believe his oath; but this leads me
up to the fourth doctrine.

Doct. 4. The Lord has confirmed to us by his oath, that he has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but rather that he turn and live; that he may leave
man no pretense to question the truth of it.
IF you dare question his word, I hope you dare not question his oath. As
Christ has solemnly protested, that the unregenerate and unconverted, cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. xviii. 3. John iii. 3. So God has
sworn that his pleasure is not in their death, but in their conversion and
life. And, as the Apostle says, Heb. vi. 13, 16, 17, 18. "Because, he can
swear by no greater than himself," he says, "As I live, etc." for men verily
swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation, is to them an end of
strife: wherein, God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie we might have
strong consolation, who had fled (...) refuge, to lay hold on the hope before
us, which we have, as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast. If there
be any man that cannot reconcile this truth with the doctrine of
predestination, or the actual damnation of the wicked, that is his own
ignorance; he has no pretense left to question or deny therefore the truth of
the point in hand; for this is confirmed by the oath of God, therefore must not
be distorted, to reduce to other points; but doubtful points must rather be
reduced to it, and certain truths must be believed to agree with it, though our
shallow brains do hardly discern the agreement.

USE.
I Do now entreat thee, if thou be an unconverted sinner that bear these
words, that thou would ponder a little upon the forementioned doctrines, and
bethink thyself a while, who it is that takes pleasure in thy sin and
damnation? Certainly, it is not God; he has sworn for his part, that he takes
no pleasure in it. And I know it is not the pleasing of him that you intend.
You dare not say, that you drink, and swear, and neglect holy duties, and
quench the motions of the spirit to please God. -- That were as if you should
reproach the prince, and break his laws, and seek his death, and say, you did
all this to please him.

Who is it then that takes pleasure in your sin and death? Not any that bear
the image of God, for they must be like minded to him. God knows it is small
pleasure to your faithful teachers to see you serve your deadly enemy, and
madly venture your eternal state, and wilfully run into the flames of hell. It
is small pleasure to them to see upon your souls (in the sad effects) such
blindness, and hard-heartedness, and carelessness, and presumption, such
wilfulness in evil, and such unteachableness and stiffness against the ways of
life and peace; they know these are marks of death, and of the wrath of God,
and they know from the word of God what is like to be the end of them, and,
therefore, it is no more pleasure to them than to a under physician to see the
plague-marks break out upon his patient. Alas, to foresee your everlasting
torments, and know not how to prevent them! To see how near you are to hell,
and we cannot make you believe it and consider it. To see how easily, how
certainly you might escape, if we knew how to make you willing! How fair you
are for everlasting salvation, if you would but turn and do your best, and make
it the care and business of your lives! but you will not do it; if our lives
lay on it, we cannot persuade you to it. We study day and night what to say to
you, that may convince you and persuade you, and yet it is undone; we lay
before you the word of God, and show you the very chapter and verse where it is
written, that you cannot be saved ^^^ept you be converted, and yet we leave the
most of you as we found you: We hope you will believe the word of God, though
you believe not us, and regard it when we show you the plain scripture for it;
but we hope in vain, and labor in vain as to any saving change upon your
hearts. And do you think that this is a pleasant thing to us: Many a time, in
secret prayer, we are fain to complain to God with sad hearts. ("Alas, Lord, we
have spoken to them in thy name, but they little regard us: We have told them
what thou bidst us tell them concerning the danger of an unconverted state, but
they do not believe us; we have told them that thou have protested that there
is no peace to the wicked" Isa. xlviii. 2. and lvii. 21. "But the worst of them
all will scarce believe that they are wicked; we have showed them thy word,
where thou have said, that if they live after the flesh they shall die." Romans
viii. 13. "But they say, they will believe in thee, when they will not believe
thee, and that they will trust in thee, when they give no credit to thy word;
and when they hope that the threatenings of thy word are false, they will yet
call this a hoping in God; and though we show them where thou have said, that
when a wicked man dies all his hopes perish, yet cannot we persuade them from
their deceitful hopes." Prove. xi. 7. "We tell them what a base unprofitable
thing sin is, but they love it, and therefore will not leave it. We tell them
how dear they buy this pleasure, and what they must pay for it in everlasting
torment, and they bless themselves, and will not believe it, but will do as the
most do; and because God is merciful, they will not believe him, but will
venture their souls, come on it what will. We tell them how ready the Lord is
to receive them, and this does but make them delay their repentance, and be
bolder in their sin. Some of them say, they purpose to repent, but they are
still the same; and some say, they do repent already, while yet they are not
converted from their sins. We exhort them, we entreat them, we offer them our
help, but we cannot prevail with them; but they that were drunkards, are
drunkards still; and they that were voluptuous flesh-pleasing wretches, are
such still; and they that were worldlings, are worldlings still; and they that
were ignorant, and proud, and self conceited, are so still. Few of them will
see and confess their sin, and sewer will forsake it, but comfort themselves,
that all men are sinners, as if there were no difference between a converted
sinner and ^n unconverted: Some of them will not come near us, when we are
willing to instruct them, but they know enough already, and need not our
instruction; and some of them will give us a hearing, and do what they list;
and most of them are like dead men that cannot feel; so that when we tell them
of the matters of everlasting consequence, we cannot get a word of it to their
hearts. If we do not obey them, and honor them in baptizing the children of
the most obstinately wicked, and giving them the Lord's Supper, and doing all
that they would have us, though never so much against the word of God, they
will hate us, and rail at us; but if we beseech them to confess, and forsake
their sin, and save their souls, they will not do it. We tell them if they will
but turn, we will deny them none of the ordinances of God, neither baptism to
their children, nor the Lord's supper to themselves, but they will not hear us;
they would have us to disobey God, and damn our own souls to please them: and
yet they will not turn and save their own souls to please God. They are wiser
in their own eyes than all their teachers; they rage and are confident in their
own way, and if we would never so fain we cannot change them. Lord, this is the
case of our miserable neighbors, and we cannot help it; we see them ready to
drop into hell, and we cannot help it; we know if they would unfeignedly turn,
they might be saved, but we cannot persuade them; if we should beg it of them
on our knees, we cannot persuade them to it; if we should beg it of them with
tears, we cannot persuade them; and what more can we do?"

These are the secret complaints and moans that many a poor minister is fain to
make. And do you think that he has any pleasure in this? Is it a pleasure to
him to see you go on in sin, and cannot stop you? to see you so miserable, and
cannot so much as make you sensible of it? to see you merry, when you are not
sure to be an hour out of hell? to think what you must for ever suffer, because
ye will not turn? and to think what an everlasting life of glory you wilfully
despise and cast away i^ Wha^^^sadder thing can you bring to their hearts, and
ho^ can you devise to grieve them more?

Who is it, then, that you pleasure by your si^ and death? It is none of your
understanding go^^ friends. Alas, it is the grief of their souls to (...) your
misery, and they lament you many a time whe^^ you give them little thanks for
it, and when yo^ have not hearts to lament yourselves.

Who is it^ then, that takes pleasure in your sin (...) It is none b^, three
great enemies of God, who^^ you renounced in your baptism, and now are turn^^
falsely to serve.

1. The devil indeed takes pleasure in your (...) and death: For this is the
very end of all his temp^^^tions; for this he watches night and day; you ca^
not devise to please him better than to go on in si^^ How glad is he when he
sees thee going into ^^alehouse, or other sin, and when he hears th^^ curse,
or swear, or rail? How glad is he when (...) hears thee revile the minister
that would dr^^^ thee from thy sin, and help to save thee? The^^ are his
delight. 2. The wicked are also delighted in it, for it agreeable to their
nature. 3. But I know, for all this, that it is not (...) pleasing of the
devil, that you intend, even wh^^^ you please him; but it is your own flesh,
the gre^^^ est and most dangerous enemy that you intend (...) please; it is the
flesh that would be pampered, th^^ would be pleased in meat and drink, and
cloathin^ that would be pleased in your company, and plea^^ in applause and
credit with the world, and plea^^ in sports and lusts, and idleness; this is
the gul^^^ that devoureth all. This is the very God that (...) serve (for the
scripture says of such, that th^^^ bellies are their gods, Phil. iii. 18.) But
I besee^ you stay a little, and consider the business.
1. Quest. Should your flesh be pleased before your Maker? Will you displease
the Lord, and displease your teacher, and your godly friends, and all to please
your brutish appetites, or sensual desires? Is not God worthy to be the ruler
of your flesh? If he shall not rule it, he will not save it; you cannot in
reason expect that he should.

2. Quest. Your flesh is pleased with your sin; but is your conscience pleased?
Does not it grudge within you, and tell you sometimes that all is not well, and
that your case is not so safe as you make it to be; and should not your souls
and consciences be pleased before that corruptible flesh?

3 Quest. But is not your flesh preparing for its own displeasure also? It
loves the bait, but does it love the hook? It loves the strong drink and sweet
morsels; it loves its ease, and sports, and merriment; it loves to be rich and
well spoken of by men, and to be somebody in the world; but does it love the
curse of God? does it love to stand trembling before his bar, and to be judged
to everlasting fire? Does it love to be tormented with the devils forever? Take
all together, for there is no seperating sin and hell, but only by faith and
true conversion; if you will keep one, you must have the other. If death and
hell be pleasant to thee, no wonder then if you go on in sin: But if they be
not (as I am sure they be not) then what if sin be never so pleasant, is is
worth the loss of life eternal? Is a little drink, or meat, or ease; is the
good word of sinners; is the riches of this world to be valued above the joys
of heaven? Or are they worth the sufferings of eternal sire? Sirs, these
questions should be considered before you go any further, by every man that
has reason to consider, and that believes he has a soul to save or lose.

Well, the Lord here swearing that he has no pleasure in your death, but
rather that you would turn and live; if yet you will go on and die rather than
turn, remember it was not to please God that you did it; it was to please the
world, and to please yourselves. And if men will damn themselves, to please
themselves, and run into endless torments for delight, and have not the wit,
the hearts, the grace, to hearken to God, or man, that would reclaim them, what
remedy but they must take what they get by it, and repent it in another manner,
when it is too late! Before I proceed any further in the application, I shall
come to the next doctrine; which gives me a fuller ground for it.

Doct. 5. So earnest is God for the conversion of sinners, that he doubleth his
commands and exhortations, with vehemence: Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?
THIS doctrine is the application of the former, a^ by a use of exhortation,
and accordingly I shall handle it. Is there ever an unconverted sinner that
hears these vehement words of God. Is there ever a man and woman in this
assembly that is y^^ a stranger to the renewing sanctifying work of the Holy
Ghost? (It is an happy assembly if it be not so with the most) hearken then to
the voice of your Maker, and turn to him by Christ without delay. Would you
know the will of God? Why this is his will, that you presently turn. Shall the
living God send so earnest a message to his creatures, and should they not
obey? 2. Hearken, then, all you that live after the flesh; the Lord that gave
thee thy breath and being, has sent a message to thee from heaven; and this is
his message, turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? He that has ears to hear, let
him hear. Shall the voice of the Eternal Majesty be neglected? If he do but
terribly thunder, thou art afraid. O but this voice does more nearly concern
thee. If he did but tell thee, thou shall die tomorrow, thou would not make
light of it. O but this word concerns thy life or death everlasting. It is
both a command and an exhortation. As if he said to thee, ["I charge thee upon
the allegiance that thou owe to me thy Creator and Redeemer, that thou
renounce the flesh, the world and the devil, and turn to me that thou may
live. I condescend to entreat thee, as thou either love or fear him that
made thee; as thou love thine own life, even thine everlasting life, turn and
live; as ever thou would escape eternal misery, turn, turn, for why will thou
die?"] And is there a heart in man, in a reasonable creature, that can once
refuse such a message, such a command, such an exhortation as this! O what a
thing then is the heart of man!

Hearken, then, all that love yourselves, and all that regard your own
salvation; here is the joyfullest message that ever was sent to the ears of
man, "Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die?" You are not yet shut up under
desperation. Here is mercy offered you; turn and you shall have it. O, sirs,
with what glad and joyful hearts should you receive these tidings! I know this
is not the first time that you have heard it; but how have you regarded it, or
how do you regard it now? Hear all you ignorant, careless sinners, the word of
the Lord! Hear all you worldlings, you sensual flesh pleasers; you gluttons,
and drunkards, and whore mongers, and swearers; you railers and back biters,
slanderers and liars, "Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?"

Hear, all you cold and outside professors, and all that are strangers to the
life of Christ, and never knew the power of his cross and resurrection, and
never felt your hearts warmed with his love, and live not on him as the
strength of your souls, "Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?"

Hear, all that are void of the love of God, whose hearts are not toward him,
nor taken up with the hopes of glory, but set more by your earthly prosperity
and delights, than by the joys of heaven; all you that are religious but a
little by the bye, and give God no more than your flesh can spare; that have
not denied your carnal selves, and forsaken all that you have for Christ, in
the estimation and grounded resolution of your souls, but have some one thing
in the world, so dear to you, that you cannot spare it for Christ, if he
requited it, but will rather venture on his displeasure than forsake it: "Turn
ye, turn ye, why will you die?"

If you never heard it, or observed it before, remember that you were told from
the word of God, this day, that if you will but turn you may live; and if you
will not turn, you shall surely die.

What now will you do, sirs? What is your resolution? Will you turn, or will
you not? Halt not any longer between two opinions: If the Lord be God, follow
him; If your flesh be God, then serve it still. If heaven be better than earth
and fleshy pleasures, come away then and seek a better country, and lay up your
treasure where rust and moths do not corrupt, and thieves cannot break through
and steal, and be awakened, at last, with all your might, to seek the kingdom
that cannot be moved, Heb. xii. 28. and to employ your lives on a higher
design, and turn the stream of your cares, and labors, another way than
formerly you have done. But if earth be better than heaven, or will do more for
you, or last you longer, then keep i^ and make the best of it, and follow it
still. Sirs, are you resolved what to do? If you be not, I will set a few more
moving considerations before you, to see if reason will make you resolve.

Consider first, what preparation mercy has made for your salvation: and what
pity it is that any man should be damned after all this. The time was, when the
flaming sword was in the way, and the curse of God's law would have kept thee
back; if thou had been never so willing to turn to God: The time was when
thyself and all the friends that thou have in the world, could never have
produced thee the pardon of thy sins past, though thou had never so much
lamented and reformed them. But Christ has removed this impediment, by the
reason of his blood. The time was that God was wholly unreconciled, as being
not satisfied for the violation of his law: But now he is so far satisfied, and
reconciled, as that he has made thee a free act of ob^ivion, and a free deed
of gift of Christ and life, and offers it to thee, and entreats thee to
accept (...), and it may be thine if thou will. For, "he was (...) Christ
reconciling the world to himself, and has committed to us the word of actual
reconciliation." (...) Cor. v. 18, 19. Sinners, we are commanded to ^o this
message to you all as from the Lord. ( Come, ^or all things are ready. Luke
xiv. 17.) Are all ^^^ings ready, and are you unready? God is ready to ^^tertain
you, and pardon all that you have done against him, if you will but come. As
long as you have ^^^ned, as wilfully as you have sinned, he is ready ^o cast
all behind his back, if you will but come. Though you have been prodigals, and
run away from God, and have staid so long, he is ready even ^o meet you, and
embrace you in his arms, and re^^ice in your conversion, if you will but turn.
^ven the earthly worldling, and swinish drunkard. ^ay find God ready to bid
them welcome, if they ^ill but come. Does not this turn thy heart within ^ee?
O, sinner, if thou have an heart of flesh, ^^d not of stone, in thee, methinks
this should (...) it. Shall the dreadful infinite Majesty of hea^^^, even wait
for thy returning, and be ready to ^^^ive thee, who have abused him, and
forgotten him so long? Shall he delight in thy conversion, that might at any
time glorify his justice in thy damnation, and yet does it not melt thy heart
within thee, and art thou no^ yet ready to come in? Have thou not as much
reason to be ready to come, as God has to invite thee, and bid thee weloome?

But that is not all; Christ has done his part on the cross, and made such way
for thee to the Father, that on his account thou may be welcome, if thou will come. And yet art thou not ready?

A pardon is already expressly granted, and offered thee in the gospel. And yet
art thou not ready?

The ministers of the gospel are ready to assi^^ thee, to instruct thee and
pronounce the absolving words of peace to thy soul; they are ready to pray for
thee, and to seal up thy pardon by the administration of the holy sacrament,
and yet art thou not ready?

All that fear God about thee are ready to rejoi^^ in thy conversion, and to
receive thee into the co^^union of saints, and to give thee the right hand
(...) fellowship, yea, though thou had been one tha^ had been cast out of
their society, they dare not but forgive where God forgiveth, when it is
manife^^ to them by thy confession and amendment; the^ dare not so much as hit
thee in the teeth with thy former sins, because they know that God will not
upbraid thee with them, if (...) had been never so scandalous. If thou
would (...) heartily be converted and come in, they would not refuse thee let
the world say what they would against it. And are all these ready to receive
thee, and yet are th^^ not ready to come in?

Yea, heaven itself is ready; the Lord will ^^ceive them into the glory of his
saints? as vil^ beast as thou have been, if thou will but be cleans^^ thou
maye^^ have a place before his throne, h^^ angels will be ready to guard thy
soul to the (...) of joy, if thou do but unfeignedly come in. And is "God
ready, the sacrifice of Christ ready, the promise ready, and pardon ready? Are
ministers ready, and the people of God ready, and heaven itself ready, and
angels ready?" And all these but waiting for thy conversion; and yet art thou
not ready? What, not ready to live, when thou have been dead so long? Not ready
to come to thy right understanding, (as the prodigal is said to come to
himself, Luke xv. 17.) when thou have been beside thyself so long? Not ready to
be saved, when thou art even ready to be condemned? Art thou not ready to lay
hold on Christ that would deliver thee, when thou art even ready to drown and
sink into damnation? Art thou not ready to be drawn from hell, when thou art
even ready to be cast remedilessly into it? Alas, man! Do thou know what thou
do! If thou die unconverted, there is no doubt to be made of thy damnation:
And thou art not sure to live an hour; and yet art thou not ready to turn and
come in; O miserable wretch! Have thou not served the flesh and the devil long
enough? Yet have thou not enough of sin? Is it so good to thee, or profitable
for thee? Do thou know what it is, that thou would yet have more more of
it? Have thou bad so many calls, and so many mercies, and so many blows, and so
many examples? Have thou seen so many laid in the grave, and yet art thou not
ready to let go thy sins, and come to Christ? What! after so many convictions,
and gripes of conscience, after so many purposes and promises, art thou not yet
ready to turn and live? O, that thy eyes, thy heart were opened to know how
fair an offer is now made to thee! and what a joyful message it is that we are
sent on, to bid thee come, for all things are ready.

2. Consider also, what calls thou have to turn and live. How many, how loud,
how earnest. how dreadful; and yet what encouraging, joyful calls.

For the principal inviter, it is God himself. He that commands heaven and
earth, commands thee to turn; and presently, without delay, to turn: He
commands the sun to run its course, and to rise upon thee every morning; and
though it be so glorious a creature, and many a time bigger than all the earth,
yet it obeys him, and fails not one minute of its appointed time. He
commands all the planets, and the orbs of heaven, and they obey: He
commands the sea to ebb and flow, and the whole creation to keep its course,
and all obey him: The angels of heaven obey his will, when he sends them to
minister to such silly worms, as we on ^^rth, Heb. i. 14. And yet, if he
command but (...) s^nner to turn, he will not obey him: He only ^i^ks himself
wiser than God, and he cavils and ^eads the cause of sin, and will not obey. If
the Lord Almighty say the word, the heavens, and all therein obey him: But if
he call but a drunkard out of an alehouse, he will not obey; or if he call a
worldly, fleshly sinner, to deny himself, and mortify the flesh, and set his
heart on a better inheritance, he will not obey.

If thou had any love in thee, thou would know the voice, and say, "O this
is my Father's call! How can I find in my heart to disobey? For the shee^ of
Christ do know and hear his voice, and they follow him, and he gives them
eternal l^fe," John x. 4. If thou had any spiritual life and sense in thee,
^t l^ast thou would say, This call is the dreadful voice of God, and who dare
disobey? For says the prophet, Amo^ iii. 8. The lion has roared, who will not
^ear? God is no^ a man, that thou should dally, and play with him. Remember
what he said ^o Paul a^ his conversion, It is hard for thee to ^ick against the
pricks, Acts ix^^ Will thou yet go on and despise his word, and resist his
spirit, and stop thine ear against his call? Who is it that will have the worst
of this? Do thou know whom thou disobeyest, and contendest with, and what
thou art doing? It were a far wiser and easier task for thee to contend with
the thorns, and spurn them with thy bare feet, and beat them with thy bare
hands, or put thy head into the burning ire. Be not deceived, God will not be
mocked, G^^. vi. 7. Whoever else be mocked, God will not: You had better play
with the fire in your thatch, than with the fire of his burning wrath. For our
God is a consuming fire. Heb. xii 29. O how unmeet a match art thou for God! It
is a fearful thing to fall into his hands, Heb. x. 31. And therefore it is a
fearful thing to contend with him, or resist him. As you love your own souls,
take heed what you do. What will you say, if he begin in wrath to plead with
you? What will you do, if he take you once in hand? Will you then strive
against his judgment, as now ye do, against his grace, says the Lord, Isa.
xxvii. 3, 6. Fury is not in me; (that is) I delight not to destroy you: I do it
as it were, unwillingly: but yet "who will set the briars and thorns against me
in battle? I would go through them; I would burn them together. Or let him take
hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me. It is an unequal combat
for the briars and stubble to make war with the fire.

And thus you see, who is it that calls you, that should move you to hear his
call, and turn: so consider all "by what instruments, and how often, and how
earnestly he does it,"

1. Every leaf of the blessed book of God has, (...) it were, a voice, and
calls out unto thee, Yurn and live; turn, or thou will die. How ^^nst thou open
it and read a leaf, or hear a chapter, and not perceive God bids thee turn?

2. It is the voice of every sermon that thou hear; for what else is the
scope and drift of all, but to call, and persuade, and entreat thee for to ^urn.

3. It is the voice of many a motion of the spirit, that secretly speaks over
these words again, and urges thee to turn.

4. It is likely, some time, it is the voice of thy own conscience. Art thou
not sometimes convinced, that all is not well with thee? And does not thy
conscience tell thee. that thou must be a new man, and take a new course, and
often call upon thee to return?

5. It is the voice of the gracious examples of the godly. When thou see them
live an heavenly life, and fly from the sin which is thy delight, this really
calls upon thee to turn.

6. It is the voice of all the works of God: For they also are God's books,
that teach thee this lesson, by showing thee his greatness and wisdom, and
goodness, and calling thee to observe them, and admire the creator, Psalm. xiv.
1, 2. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork: Day unto day utters speech -- Night unto night shows knowledge.
Every time the sun rises upon thee, it really calls thee to turn, as if it
should say, "What do I travel and compass the world for, but to declare to men
the glory of their maker, and to light them to do his work? And do I still find
thee doing the work of sin, and sleeping out thy life in negligence? A wake
thou that sleep and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light,"
Ephesians. v. 14. "The night is spent, the day is at hand. It is now high time to
awake out of sleep: Let u^, therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantouness, not in strife and
envying, ^ut put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof," Romans xiii. 11, 12, 13, 14. (This text was
the means of Austin's conversion!)

7. It is the voice of every mercy thou do possess; if thou could hear and
understand them, they all cry out unto thee, turn: Why does the earth bear
thee, but to seek, and serve the Lord? Why does it afford thee its fruit, but
to serve him? Why does the air afford thee breath but to ser^e him? Why do all
the creatures serve ^hee with their labors, and their lives and their health,
but that thou might serve the Lord of them and thee? Why does he give time
and strength, but for to serve him? Why have thou meat, and drink, and clothes,
but for his service? Have thou any thing which thou have not received, and if
thou did receive them, it is reason that thou should bethink thee, from
whom, and to what end and use thou did receive them? Did thou never cry to
him for help in thy distress, and did thou not then understand that it was
thy part to turn and serve him, if he would deliver thee? He has done his
part, and spared thee yet longer, and tried thee yet another, and another year;
and yet do thou not turn? You know the parable of the unfruitful figtree,
Luke xvi. 6, 7, 8, 9. When the Lord had said, Cut it down, why cumbereth it the
ground? He was entreated to try it one year longer, and then if it proved not
fruitful, to cut it down. Christ himself there makes the application twice
over, ver. 3 and 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. How many
years has God tooked for the fruits of love and holiness from thee, and has
found none, and yet he has spared thee? How many a time, by thy wilful
ignorance, and carelessness, and disobedience, have thou provoked justice to
say, Cut him down, why cumbereth he the ground? And yet mercy has prevailed,
and patience has forborne the killing, damning blow to this day. If ^hou had
the understanding of a man within, thou would know that all this calls thee
to turn. "Do thou think thou shall still escape the judgment of God, or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself, wrath, against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render
to every man, according to (...) deeds." Romans ii. 3, 4, 5, 6.

8. Moreover, it is the voice of every affliction, to call thee to make haste
and turn. Sickness and pain, cry, turn; and poverty, and loss of friends, and
every twig of the chastising rod. cry, turn, and yet will thou not hearken to
the call? These have come near thee, and made thee feel; they have made thee
groan, and can they not make thee turn.?

9. The very frame of thy nature, and being itself, bespeaketh thy return: Why
have thou reason, but to rule thy flesh, and serve thy Lord? Why have thou an
understanding soul but to l^arn, and know his will, and do it? Why have thou an
heart within thee, that can love and fear, and desire, but that thou should
fear him, and love him, and desire after him?

10. Yea, thine own engagements, by promise, to the Lord, do call upon thee to
turn, and serve him. Thou have bound thyself to him by a baptismal covenant,
and renounced the world, the flesh and the devil: This thou have confirmed, by
the profession of Christianity, and renewed it at sacraments, and in times of
affliction; and will thou promise and vow, and never perform, and turn to God?

Lay all these together, now, and see what should be the issue. The holy
scripture calls upon thee to turn; the ministers of Christ, do call upon thee
to turn; the spirit cries, turn; the conscience cries, turn; the godly, by
p^rsuasions and examples, cries, turn; the whole world, and all the creatures
therein, that are pr^sented to thy consideration, cry, turn; the patient
forbearance of God, cries turn; all the mercies which thou have received, cry
turn; the rod of God's chastisement, cries, turn; thy reason, and the frame of
thy nature, bespeaks thy turning; and so do all thy promises to God; and yet
art thou not ready to turn?

3. Moreover, poor, hand hearted sinner! Did thou ever consider upon what
terms thou stand all this with him, that calls on thee for to turn? Thou
art his own, and owe him thyself, and all thou have; and may he not command
his own? Thou art his absolute servant, and should serve no other master.
Thou stand at his mercy, and thy life is in his band, and he is resolved to
save thee upon no other terms; thou have many malicious spiritual enemies, that
would be glad if God would but forsake thee, and let them alone with thee, and
leave thee to their will; how quickly would they deal with thee in another
manner? And thou can not be delivered from them, but by turning unto God.
Thou art fallen under his wrath by thy sin already, and thou know not how
long his patience will yet wait. Perhaps this is the last year; perhaps the
last day; his sword is even at thine heart, while the word is in thine ear; and
if thou turn not, thou art a dead and undone man. Were thy eyes but open, to
see where thou stand, even upon the brink of hell, and to see how many
thousands are there already, that did not turn, thou would see that it is
time to look about thee.

Well, Sirs, look inwards now, and tell me, how are your hearts affected with
those offers of the Lord? You hear what is his mind; he delights not in your
death; he calls to you turn, turn; it is a fearful sign if all this move thee
not; or if it do but half move thee, and much more, if it make thee more
careless in thy misery, because thou hear of the mercifulness of God. The
working of the medicine will partly tell us whether there be any bope of the
cure. O what glad tidings would it be to those who are now in hell, if they had
but such a message from God! What a joyful word would it be to hear this, turn
and live: Yea, what a welcome word would it be to thyself, when thou have felt
that wrath of God but an hour! Or, if, after a thousand, or ten thousand years
torment, thou could but hear such a word from God, turn and live, and yet
will thou neglect it, and suffer us to return without our errand?

Behold, sinners, we are sent here, as the messengers of the Lord, to set
before you life and death: What say you? Which of them will you choose? Christ
stands as it were, by thee, with heaven in the one hand, and hell in the
other, and offers thee thy choice, which will thou choose? The voice of the
Lord makes the rocks to tremble. Psalm. xxvi. And is it nothing to hear him
threaten thee, if thou will not turn? Do thou not understand and feel this
voice, turn ye, turn ye, wky-will you die? Why? It is the voice of love, of
infinite love, of thy best and kindest friend, as thou might easily perceive
by the motion, and yet can thou neglect it? It is the voice of pity and
compassion. The Lord sees whither thou art going, better than thou do, which
makes him call after thee, turn. turn. -- He feeth what will become of thee, if
thou turn not: He thinks with himself; Ah! this poor sinner will cast himself
into endless torments if he do not turn: I must in justice deal with him
according to my righteous law. And, therefore, he calls after thee, turn,
turn. O sinner! If you did but know the thousandth part as well as God does,
the danger that is near you, and the misery that you are running into, we shall
have no more need to call after you to turn.

Moreover, this voice that calls to thee, is the same that has prevailed
with thousands already, and called all to heaven than are now there; and they
would not now, for a thousand worlds, that they had made light of it, and not
turned to God. Now what are they possessing that turned at God's call? Now
perceive that it was indeed the voice of love that meant them no more harm than
their salvation, and if thou will obey the same call, thou shall come to the
same happiness. There are millions that must for ever lament that they turned
not; but there is never a soul in heaven that is sorry that they were converted.

Well, sirs, are you yet resolved, or are you not? Do I need to say any more to
you, what will you do? Will you turn or not? Speak man in thy heart to God,
though thou speak not out to me: Speak, lest he take thy silence for denial.
Speak quickly, lest he never make thee the like offer more. Speak resolvedly,
and not waveringly; for he will have no indifferents to be his followers. Say
in thy heart now, without any more delay, even before thou stir hence, "By the
grace of God, I am resolved presently to turn. And because I know my own
insufficiency, I am resolved to wait on God for his grace, and to follow him in
his ways, and forsake my former courses and companions, and give up myself to
the guidance of the Lord."

Sirs, you are not shut up in the darkness of heathenism, nor in the
desperation of the damned; life is before you; and you may have it on
reasonable terms, if you will, yea on free cost if you will accept it. The way
of God lies plain before you; the church open to you, you may have Christ and
pardon, and holiness, if you will. What say you? Will you, or will you not? If
you say nay, or say nothing, and still go on, God is witness, and this
congregation is witness, and your own consciences are witnesses how fair an
offer you had this day. Remember you might have had Christ, and would not;
remember when you have lost it, that you might have had eternal life, as well
as others, and would not; and all because you would not turn!

But let us come to the next doctrine, and hear your reasons.

Doctrine 6. The Lord condescendeth to reason the case with unconverted
sinners; and to ask them why they will die?
A Strange disputation it is, both as to the controversy, and as to the
disputants.

1. The controversy, or question propounded to dispute of, is, Why wicked men
will damn themselves? or, why they will rather die than turn; whether they have
any sufficient reason for so doing.

The disputants are God and man, the most holy God, and wicked unconverted
sinners.

Is it not a strange thing which God does seem here to suppose, that any man
should be willing to die, and be damned, yea, that this should be the case of
the wicked; that is, of the greatest part of the world? but you will say, this
cannot be; 'for nature desires the preservation and felicity of itself; and
the wicked are more selfish than others, and not less, and therefore how can
any man be willing to be damned?'

To which I answer, 1. It is a certain truth that no man can be willing of any
evil as evil, but only as it has some appearance of good; much less can any
man be willing to be eternally tormented. Misery, as such, is desired by none.
2. But yet for all that, it is most true which God here teaches us, that the
cause why the wicked die and are damned, is because they will die and be
damned. And this is true in several respects.

1. Because they will go the way that leads to hell; though they are told by
God and man, whither it goes, and whither it ends, and though God has so often
professed in his word, that if they hold on in that way, they shall be
condemned; and that they shall not be saved, unless they turn. Isa. xlviii. 22.
and lvii. 21. There is no peace (says the Lord) unto the wicked, Isa. lix. 8.
The way of peace they know not; there is no judgment in their goings; they have
made them crocked paths: Whosoever goes therein shall not keep peace. They
have the word, and the oath of the living God for it, that if they will not
turn, they shall not enter into his rest. And yet wicked they are, and wicked
they will be, let God and man say what they will; ^leshy they are, and fleshy
they will be: Worldlings they are, and worldlings they will be, though God has
told them that the love of the world is enmity to God, and that if any man love
the world, (in that measure) the love of the father is not in him, Jam. iv. 4.1
John ii. 15. so that consequently these men are willing to be damned, though
not directly; they are willing of the way to hell, and love the certain cause
of their torment; though they be not willing of hell itself, and do not love
the pain which they must endure.

Is not this the truth of your case, sirs? You would not burn in hell, but you
will kindle the fire by your sins, and cast yourselves into it; you would not
be tormented with devils forever, but you will do that which will certainly
procure it is despite of all that can be said against it. It is just as if you
would say, "I will drink this ratsbane, or other poison, but yet I will not
die: I will ca^^ myself headlong from the top of a steeple, but yet I will not
ki^l myself: I will thrust this knife into my heart, but yet I will not take
away my life: I will put this fire into the thatch of my house, but yet I will
not burn it." Just so it is with wicke^ men, they will be wicked, and they will
live after the flesh, and the world, and yet they would not be damned. But do
you not know that the means do lead unto the end? and that God has, by his
righteous law, concluded that ye must repent or perish? He that will take
poison, may as well say plainly, I will kill myself, for it will prove no
better in the end; though perhaps he loved it for the sweetness of the sugar
that was mixed with it; and would not be persuaded that it was poison, but that
he might take it and do well enough; but ^s is not his conceits and confidence
that will save his life. So if you will be drunkards, or fornicators, or
wordlings, or live after the flesh, you may as well say plainly, we will be
damned, for so you shall be unless you turn. Would you not rebuke the folly of
a thief or murderer, that would say, I will steal, or kill, but I will not be
hanged, when he knows that if he does the one, the judge in justice sees that
the other be done? If he say I will steal and murder, he may as well say
plainly, I will be hanged; and if you will go on in a carnal life, you may as
well say plainly, we will go to hell.

2. Moreover, the wicked will not use these means, without which there is no
hope of their salvation: He that will not eat, may as well say plainly, he will
not live, unless he can tell how to live without meat: He that will not go his
journey, may as well say plainly, he will not come to the end: He that falls
into the water, and will not come out, nor suffer another to help him out, may
as well say plainly, he will be drowned. So if you be carnal and ungodly, and
will not be converted, nor use the means by which you should be converted, but
think it more ado than needs, you may as well say plainly, you will be damned;
for if you have found out a way to be saved without conversion, you have done
that which was never done before.

3. Yea, this is not all, but the wicked are unwilling, even of salvation
itself, though they may desire somewhat which they call by the name of Heaven,
yet heaven itself, considered in the true nature of the felicity, they desire
not; yea, their hearts are quite against it. Heaven is a state of perfect
holiness, and of continual love and praise to God, and the wicked have no heart
to this. The imperfect love and praise, and holiness which is here to be
attained, they have no mind of; much less of that which is so much greater; the
joys of heaven are of so pure and spiritual a nature, that the heart of the
wicked cannot truly desire them.

So that by this time you may see, upon what ground it is that God supposes,
that the wicked are willing of their own destruction: They will not turn, though
they must turn or die; they will rather venture on certain misery, than be
converted, and then, to quit themselves in their sins, they will make
themselves believe that they shall nevertheless escape.

2. And as this controversy is matter of wonder that ever men should be such
enemies to themselves, and wilfully to cast away their souls, so are the
disputants too. That God should stoop so low, as thus to plead the case with
man, and that man should be so strangely blind and obstinate, as to need all
this, in so plain a case; yea, and to resist all this, when their own salvation
lies upon the issue.

No wonder if they will not hear us, that are men, when they will not hear the
Lord himself: As God says, Ezekiel. iii. 7. when he sent the prophet to the
Israelites. ["The house of Israel will not hearken unto thee: For they will not
kearken unto me: For all the house of Israel are impudent and heard hearted."]
No wonder if they can plead against a minister, or a godly neighbor, when they
will plead against the Lord himself, even against the plainest passages of his
word, and think that they have reason on their side: When they weary the Lord
with their words, they say, wherein have we wearied him? Mal. ii. 17. The
priest that despised his name, durst ask, "wherein have we despised thy name?
and when they polluted his altar, and made the tables of the Lord contemptible,
they durst say, wherein have we polluted thee." Mal. i. 6, 7. But, "Woe unto him
(says the Lord) that striveth with his maker! Let the potsherds strive with
the potsherds of the earth; shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What
make thou?" Isa. xiv. 9.

Quest. But why is it that God will reason the case with man?

Answ. 1. Because that man being a reasonable creature, is accordingly to be
dealt with; and by reason to be persuaded and overcome, God has therefore
endowed them with reason, that they might use it for him. One would think a
reasonable creature should not go against the clearest and greatest reason in
the world when it is set before him.

2. At least, men shall see that God did require nothing of them that was
unreasonable; but that what he commands them, and whatever he forbids
them, he has all the right reason in the world on his side; and they have good
reason to obey him, but none to disobey. And thus even the damned shall be
forced to justify God, and confess that it was but reason that they should have
turned to him; and they shall be forced to condemn themselves, and confess that
they had little reason to cast away themselves by the neglecting of his grace
in the day of their visitation.

USE.
LOOK upon your best and strongest reasons, sinners, if you will make good your
way, you see now with whom you have to deal. What say thou, unconverted
sensual wretch? Dare thou venture upon a dispute with God? Art thou able to
confute him? Art thou ready to enter the lists? God asks thee why will thou
die? Art thou furnished with a sufficient answer? Will thou undertake to prove
that God is mistaken, and that thou art in the right! O what an undertaking is
that? Why, either he or you is mistaken, when he is for your conversion, and
you are against it; he calls upon you to turn, and you will not; he bids you do
it presently, even to day, while it is called to day, and think it time enough
hereafter. He says it must be a total change, and you must be holy and new
creatures, and born again: and you think that less may serve the turn, and
that is enough to parch up the old man, without becoming new. Who is in the
right now? God, or you? God calls you to turn, and to live an holy life, and
you will not: by your disobedient lives it appears you will not. If you will,
why do you not? Why have you not done it all this while? And why do you not
fall upon it yet? Your wills have the commands of our lives. We may certainly
conclude, that you are unwilling to turn, when you do not turn. And why will
you not? Can you give any reason for it, that is worthy to be called a reason?

I that am but a worm, your fellow creature, of a shallow capacity, dare
challenge the wisest of you all, to reason the case with me, while I plead my
maker's cause: and I need not be discouraged, when I know, I plead but the
cause that God pleads, and contend for him that will have the best at last;
had I but these two general grounds against you, I am sure that you have no
good reason on your side.

I am sure it can be no good reason, which is against the God of truth and
reason. It cannot be light that is contrary to the sun. There is no knowledge
in any creature, but what it had from God; and therefore none can be wiser than
God. It were damnable presumption for the highest angel to compare with his
Creator; What is it then for a lump of dirt, an ignorant sot, that knows not
himself nor his own soul, that knows but little of the things that he sees,
yea, that is more ignorant than his neighbors, to set himself against the
wisdom of the Lord? It is one of the fullest discoveries of the horrible
wickedness of carnal men, and the stark madness of such as sin, that so silly a
mole dare contradict his maker, and call in question the word of God; yea, that
those people in our parishes, that are so beastly ignorant that they cannot
give us a reasonable answer concerning the very principles of religion, are yet
so wise in their own conceit, that they dare question the plainest truth of
God, yea, contradict them and cavil against them, when they can scarce speak
sense, and will believe them no further than agrees with their foolish wisdom.

2. And as I know that God must needs be in the right, so I know the case is so
palpable and gross, which he pleads against, that no man can have reason for
it. Is it possible that a man can have any reason to break his maker's laws,
and reason to dishonor the Lord of glory, and reason to abuse the Lord that
bought him? Is it possible, that a man can have any good reason to damn his own
immortal soul? Mark the Lord's question, Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? Is
eternal death a thing to be desired? Are you in love with hell? What reason
have you wilfully to perish? If you think you have some reason to sin, should
you not remember, that death is the wages of sin, Romans vi. 23. and think
whether you have any reason to undo yourselves, body and soul forever. You
should not only ask whether you love the adder, but whether you love the sting?
It is such a thing for a man to cast away his everlasting happiness, and to sin
against God, that no good reason can be given for it; but the more any one
pleads for it, the madder he shows himself to be. Had you a lordship, or a
kingdom offered you, for every sin tha^ you commit, it were not reason, but
madness to accept it. Could you by every sin obtain the highest thing upon
earth that flesh desires, it were of no considerable value to persuade you in
reason to commit it. If it were to please your greatest or dearest friends, or
to obey the greatest prince on earth, or to save your lives, or to escape the
greatest earthly misery, all these are of no consideration to draw a man, in
reason to the committing of one sin. If it were a right hand, or a right eye,
that would hinder your salvation, it is the gainfullest way to cast it away,
rather than to go to hell to save it. For there is no saving a part when you
lose the whole. So exceeding great are the matters of eternity, that nothing in
this world deserves once to be named in comparison with them; nor can any
earthly thing, though it were life, or crowns, or kingdoms, be a reasonable
excuse for the neglect of matters of such high and everlasting consequence. A
man can have no reason to cross his ultimate end; Heaven is such a thing, that
if you lose it, nothing can supply the want, or make up the loss; and hell is
such a thing, that if you suffer it, nothing can remove your misery, or give
you ease and comfort, and therefore nothing can be a valuable consideration to
excuse you for neglecting your own salvation: For, says our Savior, What
shall it profit a man to win all the world, and lose his own soul? Mark viii.
36.

O Sirs, that you did but know what matters they are, that we are now speaking
to you of, the saints in heaven, you would have other kind of thoughts of these
things, if the devil would come to them that live in the sight and love of God,
and should offer them a cup of ale, or a whore, or merry company, or sports to
entice them away from God and glory, I pray you tell me, how do you think they
would entertain the motion? Nay, or if he should offer them to be Kings on the
earth, do you think this would entice them down from heaven? O, with what
hatred and holy scorn would they reject the motion! And why should not you do
so, that have heaven opened to your faith, if you had but faith to see it?
There is never a soul in hell but knows, by this, that it was a mad exchange to
let go heaven for fleshy pleasure, and that it is not a little mirth or
pleasure, or wordly riches, or the good will or word of men, that will quench
hell fire, or make him a saver that loses his soul; O, if you had heard what I
believe, if you had seen what I believe, and that on the credit of the word of
God, you would say there can be no reason to warrant a man to damn his soul;
you durst not sleep quietly another night, before you had resolved to turn and
live.

If you see a man put his hand in the fire till it burn off, you will marvel at
it; but this is a thing that a man may have reason for, as Bishop Gramaner had,
when he burnt off his hand for subscribing to popery. If you see a man cut off
a leg, or an arm, it is a sad sight; but this is a thing that a man may have a
good reason for, as many a man does to save his life. If you see a man give his
body to be burnt to ashes, and to be tormented with strappado's and racks, and
refuse deliverance when it is offered, this is a hard case to flesh and blood;
but this a man may have good reason for, as you may see in Heb. xi. 33, 34, 35,
36. and as many an hundred martyrs have done. But for a man to forsake the Lord
that made him, and for a man to run into the fire of hell, when he is told of
it, and entreated to turn, that he may be saved; this is a thing that can have
no reason in the world, that is reason indeed, to justify or excuse it. For
heaven will pay for the loss of any thing that we can lose to get it, or for
any labor which we bestow for it, but nothing can pay for the loss of heaven.

I beseech you now, let this word come nearer to your heart, as you are
convinced that you have no reason to destroy yourselves, so tell me, what
reason have you to refuse to turn and live to God? What reason had the veriest
worldling, or drunkard, or ignorant careless sinner of you all, why you should
not be as holy as any you know, and be as careful for your souls as any other?
Will not hell be as hot to you as to others? Should not your own souls be as
dear to you as theirs to them. Has not God as much authority over you? Why
then will you not become a sanctified people as well as they?

O sirs, when God brings the matter down to the very principles of nature,
and shows you, that you have no more reason to be ungodly than you have to damn
your own souls, if yet you will not understand and turn, it seems a desperate
case that you are in.

And now, either you have reason for what you do, or you have not; If not, will
you go on against reason itself? Will you do that which you have no reason for?
But if you think you have, produce them, and make the best of your matter.
Reason the case a little with me your fellow creature, which is far easier than
to reason the case with God; tell me, man, here before the Lord, as if thou
were to die this hour, why should thou not resolve to turn this day, before
thou stir from the place thou stand in, what reason have thou to deny, or to
delay? Have thou any reason that satisfies thine own conscience for it, or any
that thou dare own and plead at the bar, of God? If thou have, let us hear
them, bring them forth, and make them good. But alas, what poor stuff, what
nonsense, instead of reasons, do we daily hear from ungodly men. But for their
necessity, I should be ashamed to name them.

1. One says, "If none shall be saved, but such converted and sanctified ones
as you talk of, then heaven would be but empty, then God help a great many.

Answ. Why, it seems, you think that God does not know, or else that he is not
to be believed! Measure not all by yourselves: God has thousands and millions
of his sanctified ones; but yet they are few in comparison of the world, as
Christ himself has told us, Matthew. vii. 13.14. Luke xi. 31. It better seems
you, to make that use of this truth which Christ teaches you; "strive to enter
in at the strait gate, for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto life, and few there be that can find it; but wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat, Luke xiii. 22, 23, 24. Fear not little flock (says Christ to his
sanctified ones,) for it is your father's good pleasure to give you that
kingdom, Luke xii. 13.

Object. 2. I am sure if such as I go to hell, we shall have store of company.

Answ. And will that be any ease or comfort to you? Or do you think you may not
have company enough in heaven? Will you be undone for company, or will you not
believe that God will excuse his threatening, because the^ (...) many that are
guilty? All these are unreasonable conceits.

Object. 3. But all men are sinners, even the best of you all.

Answ. But all are not unconverted sinners. The goodly live not in gross sins,
and their very infirmities are their grief and burden, which they daily long,
and pray, and strive to be rid of. Sin has not dominion over them.

Object. 4. I do not see that professors are any better than other men; they
will over reach, and oppress, and are as covetous as any.

Answ. Whatever hypocrites are, it is not so with those that are sanctified.
God has thousands, or ten thousands that are otherwise, though the malicious
world does accuse them of what they can never prove, and of that which never
entered into their hearts; and commonly they charge them with heart sins, which
none can see but God, because they can charge them with no such wickedness in
their lives, as they are guilty of themselves.

Object. 5. But I am no whoremonger, nor drunkard, nor oppressor; and therefore
why should you call upon me to be converted.?

Answ. As if you were not born after the flesh, and had not lived after the
flesh as well as others! Is it not as great a sin as any of these, for a man to
have an earthly mind, and to love the world above God, and to have an
unbelieving unhumbled heart? Nay, let me tell you more, that many persons that
avoid disgraceful sins, are as f^st glued to the world, and as much slaves to
the flesh, and as strange to God, and averse to heaven in their more civil
course, as others are in their more shameful notorious sins,

Object. 6. But I mean no body any harm, nor do no harm; and why then should
God condemn me?

Answ. Is it no harm to neglect the Lord that made thee, and the work for which
thou came into the world, and to prefer the creature before the Creator, and
to neglect grace that is daily offered thee? It is the depth of thy sinfulness
to be so insensible of it, the dead feel not that they are dead. If once thou
were made alive, thou would see more amiss in thyself, and marvel at thyself
for making so light of it.

Object. 7. I think you would make men mad, under pretense of converting them;
it is enough to rack the brains of sinful people to muse so much on matters so
high for them.

Answ. 1. Can you be madder than you are already, or, at least, can there be a
more dangerous madness than to neglect your everlasting welfare, and wilfully
undo yourselves?

2. A man is never well in his wits, till he be converted, he never knows God,
nor knows sin, nor knows Christ, nor knows the world, nor himself, nor what his
business is on earth, so as to set himself about it, till he be converted. The
scripture says, that the wicked are unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 2. and
"that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God," 1 Cor. i. 20. and Luke
xv. 17. It is said of the prodigal, "that when he came to himself," he resolved
to return. It is a wise world when men will disobey God, and run to hell for
fear of being out of their wits.

2. What is there in the work that Christ calls you to, that should drive a man
out of his wits? Is it the loving God, and calling upon him, and comfortably
thinking of the glory to come, and the forsaking of our sins, and loving one
another, and delighting ourselves in the service of God? Are these such things
as should make men mad?

3. And whereas you say, that these matters are too high for us; you accuse God
himself for making this our work, and giving us his word, and commanding all
that will be blessed, to meditate on it day and night. Are the matters which we
are made for, and which we live for, too high for us to meddle with? This is
plainly to unman us, and to make beasts of us, as if we were like them, that
must meddle with no higher matters than what belongs to flesh and earth. If
heaven be too high for you to think on, and provide for, it will be too high
for you ever to possess.

4. If God should sometimes suffer any weak-headed persons to be distracted by
thinking of eternal things, this is because they misunderstand them, and run
without a guide; and of the two, I had rather be in the case of such an one,
than of the mad unconverted world, that take their distraction to be their
wisdom.

Object. 8. I do not think that God cares so much what men think, or speak, or
do, as to make so great a matter of it.

Answ. It seems then, you take the word of God to be false, and then what will
you believe? But your own reason might teach you better, if you believe not the
scriptures, for you see God sets not so light by us, but that he vouchsaved to
make us, and still preserves us, and daily upholdeth us, and provideth for us,
and will any wise man make a curious frame for nothing? Will you make, or buy a
clock or watch, and daily look to it, and not care whether it go true or false?
Surely, if you believe not a particular eye of Providence observing your hearts
and lives, you cannot believe, or expect any particular Providence to observe
your wants and tronbles, or to relieve you; and if God had so little care for
you as you imagine, you would never have lived till now, an hundred diseases
would have striven which should first destroy you; yea, the devils would have
haunted you, and fetched you away alive, as the great fishes devour the less,
and as ravenous beasts and birds devour others. You cannot think that God made
man for no end or use, and if he made him for any, it was sure for himself; and
can you think he cares not whether his end be accomplished, and whether we do
the worst that we are made for.

Yea, by this atheistical objection, you make God to have made, and upheld all
the world in vain: For what are all other lower creatures for, but for man?
What does the earth but bear us, and nourish us, and the beasts do serve us
with their labors and lives, and so of the rest. And has God made so glorious
an habitation, and set man to dwell in it, and made all his servants; and now
does he look for nothing at his hands, nor care how he thinks, or speaks, or
lives? This is most unreasonable.

Object. 9. It was a better world, when men did not make so much ado in
religion.

Answ. It has ever been the custom to praise the times past; that world that
you speak of was wont to say, it was a better world in their forefathers days,
and so did they of their foresathers. This is but an old custom, because we all
feel the evil of our own times, but we see not that which was before us.

2. Perhaps you speak as you think: worldlings think the world is at the best,
when it is agreeable to their minds, and when they have most mirth and worldly
pleasure; and I doubt not but the devil, as well as you, would say, that then,
it was a better world, for then, he had more service, and less disturbance. But
the world is at the best, when God is most loved, regarded and obeyed; and how
else will you know when the world is good or bad, but by this?

Object. 10. Th^re are so many ways and religions, that we know not which to be
of, and therefore we will be even as we are.

Answ. Because they are many, will you be of that way that you may be sure is
wrong None are farther out of the way than worldly, fleshly, unconverted
sinners; for they do nor only err in this or that opinion, as many sects do,
but in the very scope and drift of their lives. If you were going a journey
that your life lay on, would you stop or turn again because you meet with some
cross ways, or because you saw some travelers go the horseway, and some the
foot-way, and some perhaps break over the hedge, yea, and some miss the way? or
would you not rather be the more careful to enquire the way? If you have some
servants that know not how to do your work right, and some that are unsaithful,
would you take it well at any of the rest that would therefore be idle, and do
you no service, because they see the rest so bad?

Object. 11. I do not see that it goes any better with those that are so godly,
than with other men: They are as poor, and in as much trouble as others.

Answ. And perhaps in much more, when God sees it meet. They take not earthly
prosperity for their wages: they have laid up their treasure and hopes in
another world: or else they are not Christians indeed; the less they have, the
more is behind, and they are content to wait till then.

Object. 12. When you have said all that you can, I am resolved to hope well,
and trust in Goa, and do as well as I can, and not make so much ado.

Answ. 1. Is that doing as well you can, when you will not turn to God, but
your heart is against his holy and diligent service? It is as well as you will,
indeed, but that is your misery.

2. My desire is, that you should hope and trust in God: But for what is it
that you will hope? Is it to be saved, if you turn and be sanctified? For this
you have God's promise, and therefore, hope for it, and spare not. But if you
hope to be saved, without conversion and an holy life, this is not to hope in
God, but in satan, or yourselves, for God has given you no such promise, but
told you the contrary; but it is satan, and selflove, that made you such
promises, and raised you to such hopes.

Well, if these, and such as these, be all you have to say against conversion,
and an holy life, your all is nothing, and worse than nothing: and if these,
and such as these seem reasons sufficient to persuade you to forsake God, and
cast yourseives into hell, the Lord deliver you from such reasons, and from
such blind understandings, and from such senseless hardened hearts. Dare you
stand to every one of these reasons at the bar of God? Do you think it will
then serve your turn, to-say, "Lord, I did not turn, because I had so much ado
in the world, or because I did not like the lives of some professors, or
because I saw men of so many minds." O how easily will the light of that day
con^ound and shame such reasonings as these! Had you the world to look after?
Let the world which you served now pay you your wages, and save you if it can.
Had you not a better world to look after first, and were ye not commanded to
seek first God's kingdom and righteousness, and promised that other things
should be added to you, Matthew. vi. 33. And were ye not told, that godliness was
profitable to all things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is
to come? 1 Timothy iv. 8. Did the sins of professors hinder you? You should rather
have been the more heedful, and learned by their falls, to beware, and have
been the more careful, and not to be more careless; it was the scripture, and
not their lives, that was your rule. Did the many opinions of the world hinder
you? Why, the scripture, that was your rule, did teach you but one way, and
that was the right way. If you had followed that, even in so much as was plain
and easy, you should never have miscarried. Will not such answers as these
confound and silence you? If these will not, God has those that will. When he
asked the man, Matthew. xxii. 12. 'Friend, how came thou in hither, not having
on a wedding garment?' that is, what do thou in my Church, among professed
christians, without an holy heart and life; what answer did he make? Why the
text says, he was speechless; he had nothing to say. The clearness of the
case, and the majesty of God, will then easily stop the mouths of the most
confident of you, though you will not be put down by any thing we can say to
you now, but will make good your cause, be it never so bad. I know already,
that never a reason that now ye can give me, will do you any good at last, when
your case must be opened before the Lord, and all the world.

Nay, I scarce think that your own consciences are well satisfied with your
reasons, for if they are, it seems then you have not so much as a purpose to
repent. But if you do purpose to repent, it seems you do not put much
confidence in your reasons which you bring against it.

What say you, unconverted sinners? Have you any good reasons to give, why you
should not turn, and presently turn with all your hearts? Or will you go to
hell in despite of reason itself? Bethink you what you do in time, for it will
shortly be too late to bethink you. Can you find any fault with God, or his
work, or his wages? Is he a bad master? Is the devil, whom you serve, or is the
flesh a better? Is there any harm in an holy life? Is a life of worldliness and
ungodliness better? Do you think in your consciences that it would do you any
harm to be converted and live an holy life? What harm can it do to you? Is it
harm to you to have the Spirit of Christ within you, and to have a cleansed
purified heart? If it be bad to be holy, why does God say, 'be ye holy, for I
am holy! 1 Pet. i. 15, 16. Lev. xx. 7. Is it evil to be like God? Is it not
said, that God made man in his image? Why this holiness is his image: this Adam
lost, and this Christ, by his word and spirit, would restore to you, as he does
to all that he will save. Why were you baptized into the Holy Ghost, and why do
you baptize your children into the Holy Ghost, as your Sanctifier, if you will
not be sanctified by him, but think it an hurt to you to be sanctified? Tell me
truly, as before the Lord, though you are loath to live an holy life, had you
not rather die in the case of those that do so, than of others? If you were to
die this day, had you not rather die in the case of a converted man, than of
the unconverted? of an holy and heavenly man, than of a carnal earthly man? And
would you not say as Baalam, Number. xxiii. 10. 'Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his!' And why will you not now be of the
mind that you will be of then? first or last you must come to this, either to
be converted, or to wish you had been when it is too late.

But what is it that you are afraid of losing if you turn? Is it your friends:
you will but change them: God will be your friend, and Christ and the Spirit
will be your friend, and every christian will be your friend. You will get one
friend that will stand you in more stead than all the friends in the world
could have done. The friends you lose would have but enticed you to hell, but
could not have delivered you; but the friend you get, will save you from hell,
and bring you to his own eternal rest.

Is it your pleasures that you are afraid of losing? You think you shall never
have a merry day again, if once you be converted. Alas, that you should think
it a greater pleasure to live in foolish sports and merriments, and please your
flesh, than live in the believing thoughts of glory, and in the love of God,
and in righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, in which the state
of grace consisleth, Romans xiv. 17. If it be a greater pleasure for you to think
of your lands and inheritance (if you were Lord of all the country) than it is
to a child to play for pins; why should it not be a greater joy to you to think
of the kingdom of Heaven being yours, than of all the riches or pleasures of
the world? As it is but foolish childishness that makes children so delight in
gauds, that they would not leave them for all your lands; so it is but foolish
worldliness and fleshliness, and wickedness, that makes you so much delight in
your houses and lands, and meat and drink, and ease, and honor, as that you
would not part with them for the heavenly delights. But what will you do for
pleasure, when these are gone? Do you not think of that? When your pleasures
end in horror, and go out with a stinking snuff, the pleasures of the Saints
are then at the best. I have had myself but a little taste of the heavenly
pleasures in the forethoughts of the blessed approaching day, and in the
present persuasions of the love of God in Christ; but I have taken too deep a
draught of earthly pleasures, so that you may see, if I be partial, it is on
your side; and yet I must profess from that little experience, that there is no
comparison; there is more joy to be had in a day (if the sun of life shine
clear upon us) in the state of holiness, than in a whole life of sinful
pleasures. 'I had rather be a door keeper in the house of God, than to dwell in
the tents of wickedness. Psalm. lxxxiv. 10.' 'A day in his courts is better than
a thousand any where else.' lxxxiv. 10. The mirth of the wicked is like the
laughter of a madman, that knows not his own misery; and therefore, Solomon
faith of such labor, it is mad, and of mirth, what does it? Eccles. ii. 2. and
Eccles. vii. 2, 3.4, 5, 6. "It is better to go to the house of mourning, than
to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living
will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of
the countenance the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the house
of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth: It is better to
bear the rebuke of the wise, than to hear the song of fools; for as the
crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool." All the
pleasure of fleshly things, is but like the scratching of a man that has the
itch; it is his disease that make him desire it, and a wise man had rather be
without his pleasure, than be troubled with his itch. Your loudest laughter is
but like that of a man that is tickled; he laughs when he has no cause of joy,
and it is? wiser thing for a man to give all his estate, and his life to be
tickled to make him laugh, than for you to part with the love of God, and the
comforts of holiness, and the hopes of heaven, and to cast yourselves into
damuation, that you may have your flesh tickled with the pleasure of sin for a
little while. Judge, as you are men, whether this be a wise man's part. It is
but your carnal unsanctified nature that makes an holy life seem grievous to
you, and a course of sensuality seem more delightful: if you will but turn, the
Holy Ghost will give you another nature and inclination, and then it will b^
more pleasant to you to be rid of your sin, than now it is to keep it: and you
will then say, that you knew not what a comfortable life was till now, and that
it was never well with you till God and holiness were your delight.

Quest. "But how comes it to pass, that men should be so unreasonable in the
matters of salvation? They have wit enough in other matters, what makes them so
loath to be converted, that there should need so many words in so plain a case,
and all will not do, but the most will live and die unconverted?"

Answ. To name them only in a few words, the causes are these:

1. Men are naturally in love with earth and flesh, they are born sinners, and
their nature has an enmity to God and goodness, as the nature of a serpent
has to a man; and when all that we can say goes against an habitual
inclination of their natures, no marvel if it little prevail. 2. They are in
darkness, and know not the very things they hear. Like a man that was born
blind, and hears a high commendation of the light; but what will hearing do,
unless he sees it. They know not what God is, nor what is the power of the
cross of Christ, nor what the spirit of holiness is, nor what it is to live in
love by faith: They know not the certainty, and suitableness, and excellency of
the heavenly inheritance. They know not what conversion, and a holy mind and
conversation is, even when they hear of it. They are in a mist of ignorance.
They are lost and bewildered in sin; like a man that has lost himself in the
night, and knows not where he is, nor how to come to himself again, till the
day light do recover him. 3. They are wilfully confident, that they need no
conversion, but some partial amendment; and that they are in the way to heaven
already; and are converted, when they are not. And if you meet a man that is
quite out of his way, you may long enough call upon him to turn back again, if
he will not believe you, that he is out of the way. 4. They are become slaves
to their flesh, and drowned in the world, to make provision for it. Their
lusts, and passions, and appetites have distracted them, and got such an hand
over them, that they cannot tell how to deny them, or how to mind any thing
else, so that the drunkard says, 'I love a cup of good drink, and I cannot
forbear it." The glutton says, 'I love good cheer, and I cannot forbear.' The
fornicator says, 'I love to have my lust fulfilled, and I cannot forbear.' And
the gamester loves to have his sports, and he cannot forbear. So that they are
become even captivated slaves to their flesh, and their very wilfulness is
become an impotency, and what they would not do, they say they cannot. And the
worldling is so taken up with earthly things, that he has neither heart nor
mind, nor time for heavenly; but as in Pharaoh's dream, Genesis xli. 4. the lean
kine did eat up the fat ones; so this lean and barren earth does eat up all the
thoughts of heaven. 5. Some are so carried away by the stream of evil company,
that they are possessed with hard thoughts of a godly life, by hearing them
speak against it! or at least, they think they may venture to do as they see
most do, and so they hold on in their sinful ways: and when one is cut off, and
cast into hell, and another snatched away from among them, to the same
condemnation, it does not much daunt them, because they see not whither they
are gone; poor wretches, they hold on in their ungodliness, for all this; for
they little know that their companions are now lamenting it in torments. In
Luke xvi. the rich man in hell would sain have had one to warn his five
brethren, lest they should come to that place of torment. Its like he knew
their minds and lives, and knew that they were hasting thither, and little
dreamt that he was there, yea, and would little have believed one that should
have told them so. I remember a passage that a gentleman, yet living, told me
he saw upon a bridge over Severn. M. R. R^^^^y, of Shrewsbury, upon
Acham-bridge.
A man was driving a flock of fat lambs, and something meeting them, and
hindering their passage, one of the lambs leapt upon the wall of the bridge,
and his legs slipping from under him, he fell into the stream; the rest seeing
him, did, one after one leap over the bridge into the stream, and were all, or
almost all drowned; those that were behind, did little know what was become of
them that were gone before; but thought they might venture to follow their
companions; but as soon as over the wall, and falling headlong, the case was
altered. Even so it is with unconverted carnal men. One dies by them, and
drops into hell, and another follows the same way: and yet they will go after
them, because they think not whither they are gone. Oh, but when death has
once opened their eyes, and they see what is on the other side of the wall;
even in another world, then what would they give to be where they were! 6.
Moreover, they have a subtle malicious enemy, that is unseen of them, and plays
his game in the dark; and it is his principal business to hinder their
conversion; and therefore to keep them where they are, by persuading them not
to believe the scriptures, or not to trouble their minds with these matters;
or, by persuading them, to think ill of a godly life, or to think that its more
ado than needs, and that they may be saved without conversion, and without all
this stir: and, that God is so merciful, that he will not damn any such as
they; or, at least, that they may stay a little longer, and take their
pleasure, and follow the world a little longer yet, and then let it go, and
repent hereafter. And by such juggling deluding cheats as these, the devil
keeps the your in his captivity, and leads them to his misery.
These, and such like impediments as these, do keep so many thousands
unconverted, when God has done so much, and Christ has suffered so much, and
ministers have said so much, for their conversion; when their reasons are
silenced, and they are not able to answer the Lord that calls after them, 'Turn
ye, turn ye; why will you die?' Yet all comes to nothing with the greatest part
of them; and they leave us no more to do after all, but to sit down, and lament
their wilful misery.

I have now showed you the reasonableness of God's commands, and the
unreasonableness of wicked men's disobedience. If nothing will serve turn, but
men will yet refuse to turn, we are next to consider, who it is long of, if
they be damned. And this brings me the last doctrine, which is,

Doct. 7. That after all this men will not turn, it is not long of God that are
condemned, but of themselves even their own wilfulness. They die because they
will, that is because they will not turn.
IF you will go to hell, what remedy? God here acquits himself of your blood:
it shall not lie on him if you be lost. A negligent minister may draw it upon
him; and those that encourage you, or hinder you not in sin may draw it upon
them, but be sure of it, it shall not lie upon God, says the Lord concerning
his unprofitable vineyard, Isa. v. i. 2.3.4. Judge I pray you, betwixt me and
my vineyard, what could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done
in it? When he had planted it in a fruitful soil and fenced it and gathered out
the stones, and planted it with the ch^i^^st vines:

What should he have done more to it? He has made you men, and endowed you
with reason: he has furnished you with all enternal nec^^^^ties, all creatures
are at your service; he ^^^h given you a righteous perfect law. When y^ had
broke it, and undone yourselves, he had pity on you, and sent his Son by a
miracle of condescending mercy to die for you, and by a sacrifice for your
sins, and he (...) in Christ reconciling the world to himself.

The Lord Jesus has made ^ou a deed of gift of himself, and eternal life with
him, on the condition you will but accept it and return. He has on this
reasonable condition offered you the free pardon of all your sins; he has
written this in his word and sealed it by his spirit, and sent it you by his
ministers: ^^ey have made the offer to you an hundred an^ an hundred times, and
called you to accept it, and turn to God. They have it his name entreated you,
and reasoned the case with you, and answered all your frivolus objections. He
has long waited on you, and staid your leisure, and suffered you to abuse him
to his face. He has mercifull^ sustained ^ou in the midst of your sins; he
has compassed you about with all sorts of mercies; he has also intermixed
afflictions to remind you of your folly, and call you to your wits, his spirit
has been often striving with you hearts, and saying there, Turn sinner, turn
to him that calls thee: Whither art thou going! What art thou doing! D^st
thou know what will be the end: How long will thou hate thy friends and love
thin^ enemies; When will thou let go all, and turn and d^liver up thys^lf t^
Gods and give thy Redeemer the possession of thy soul! When shall i^ once be!
These pleadings have been used with thee, and when thou have delayed thou have
been urged to make haste, and God has called to thee, To day while it is
called to day, harden not thy heart: Why not now, without any more d^^ay! Life
has been set before you: the Joys o^ heaven have been opened to you in the
gospel; the certainty of them has been manifested; the certainty of the
everlasting torments of the damned has been declared to you; unless you would
have a sight of heaven and hell, what could you desire more? Christ has been,
as it were, set forth crucified before your eyes, Gal. iii. 1. You have been an
hundred times told, that you are but lost men, till you come unto him; as often
you have been told of the evil of sin, of the vanity of sin, the world, and the
pleasures and wealth it can afford: of the shortness and uncertainty of your
lives, and the endless duration of the joy, or torment of the life to come. All
this, and more than this, have been told, and told again, even till you were
weary of hearing it, and till you ^ould make the lighter of it, because you
have to often heard it, like the smith's dog, that is brought by custom to
sleep under the noise of the hammers, and when the sparks do fly about his
ears: and though all this have not converted you, yet you are alive, and might
have mercy to this day, if you had but hearts to entertain it. And now, let
reason itself be the judge, whether it belong of God or you, if after all this,
you will be unconverted and be damned? If you die now, it is because you will
die. What should be said more to you, or what course should be taken that is
likelier to prevail? Are you able to say, and make it good, We would fain have
been converted, and become new creatures, but we could not; we would have fain
forsaken our sins, but we could not; we would changed our company, and our
thoughts, and our discourse, but we could not.

Why, could you not if you would? What hindered you but the wickedness of your
hearts? Who forced you to sin, or who did hold you back from your duty? Had you
not the same teaching, and time, and liberty to be godly, as your godly
neighbors had? Why then could not you have been godly, as well as they? Were
the church doors shut against you, or did not you keep away yourselves, or sit
and sleep, or hear as if you did not hear? Did God put in any exceptions
against you in his word, when he invited sinners to return; and he promised
mercy to those that do return? Did he say, I will pardon all that repent except
thee? Did he shut thee out from the liberty of his holy worship? Did he forbid
you to pray to him any more than others? You know he did not. God did not drive
you away from him, but you forsook him, and run away yourselves, and when he
called you to him, you would not come. If God had excepted you out of the
general promise and offer of mercy, or had said to you, "stand off, I will have
nothing to do with such as you; pray not to me, for I will not hear you; if you
repent never so much, and cry for mercy so much, I will not regard you." If God
had left you nothing to trust to but desperation, then you had had a fair
excuse, you might have said, "to what end do I repent and turn, when I will do
no good?" But this was not your case, you might have had Christ to be your Lord
and Savior; your head and husband, as well as others, and you "would not,"
because you felt yourselves not sick enough for the physician, and because you
could not spare your disease, in your hearts you said as those rebels, Luke xx.
14. W^ will not have this man to reign over us." Christ would have gathered you
under the wings of his salvation, and you would not, Mat. xxiii. 37. What
desires of you: welfare did the Lord express in his holy word? With what
compassion did he stand over you and say, "O, that my people had hearkened unto
me, and that they had walked in my ways! Psalm xviii. 13. lxxvi. 13. O that
there were such a heart in this people, that they would fear me, and keep all
my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and their children
forever! Deuteronomy. v. 20. O, that they were wise, and they understood this, and
that they would consider their latter end!" Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29. He would have been
our God, and all for you that your souls could well desire: but you loved the
world, and your flesh above him, and therefore you would not hearken to him,
though you complimented with him, and gave him high titles, yet when it came to
the closing, you would have none of him, Psalm. lxxxi. 11, 12. No marvel then,
if "he gave you up to your own hearts lusts, and walked in your own counsels."
He condescends to reason, and pleads the case with you, and asks you, "What is
there in me, or my service, that you should be so much against me? What harm
have I done thee sinner? Have I deserved this unkind dealing at thy hand? Many
mercies have I showed thee; for which of them do thou despise me? Is it I, or
is it satan, that is thy enemy? Is it I, or is it thy carnal self, that would
undo thee? Is it an holy life, or a life of sin, that thou have cause to stay
from? If thou be undone, thou procurest this to thyself by fo^saking saking me,
the Lord that would have saved thee, Jer. ii. 7. Does not thy own wickedness
correct thee, and thy sin reprove thee? Thou may see that it is an evil and
bitter thing, that thou bast forsaken me. Jer. ii. 19. What iniquity have you
found in me, that you have followed after vanity, and forsaken me? Jer. ii. 5,
6." He celleth out, as it were, to the brutes, to hear the c^^^troversy he has
against you, "Mic. ii. 3, 4, 5. Hear, O ye mountains, the Lord's controversy,
and ye strong foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a controversy with
his people, and he will plead with Israel. O my people, what have I done unto
thee, and wherein have I wea^ied thee? Testify against me, for I brought thee
up out of Egypt, and redeemed thee, etc. Hear, O heavens, and give car, O
earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me: the ^x knows his owner, and the ass his
master's crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not consider! Ah,
sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, etc. Isa. i.
2, 3, 4. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he
thy father that bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee?"
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. When he saw that you forsook him, even for nothing, and turned
away from your Lord and life, to hunt after the chaff and feathers of the
world, he told you of your folly, and called you to a more profitable
employment," Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3. "Wherefore do you spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor, for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in fatness. Incli^^^ your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your soul
shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found. Call ye upon him,
while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, ver. 6, 7. and so Isa. i. 16,
17, 18. And when you would not hear, what complaints have you put him to,
charging it on you, as your wilfulness and stubbornness. Jer. ii. 12. 13. Be
astonished, O heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, for thy people have
committed two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and
hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water." Many a time
has Christ proclaimed that free invitation to you. Rev. xxii. 17. "Let him
that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely." But you put him to complain, after all his offers; "They will not come
to me, that they may have life, John v. 40. He has invited you to feast with
him in the Kingdom of his Grace, and you have had excuses from your grounds,
and your cattle, and your wordly business, and when you would not come, you
have said you could not come; and provoked him to resolve that you should never
taste of his supper, Luke xiv. 15. to 25." And who is long of now but
yourselves? and what can you say is the cause of your damna^^^ (...) but your
own wills? you would be damned.

The whole case is laid open by Christ, Prove. i. from the 20. to the end.
"Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, she cries in
the chief place of the concourse, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity, and the scorners delight, in scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
Turn ye at my reproof; behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make
known my words unto you. Because I have called, and ye have refused, I have
stretched out my hands, and no man regarded, but you have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproofs; I also will laugh at your calamity. I
will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you,
then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early
but they shall not find me. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord. They would hear none of my counsels: They despise all my
reproof: Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and
the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But whosoever hearkeneth to me shall
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil.' I thought best to
recite the whole text at large to you, because it does so fully show the cause
of the destruction of the wicked. It is not because God would not teach them,
but because they would not learn. It is not because God would not call them,
but beause they would not turn at his reproof. Their wilfulness is their
undoing.

USE.
FROM what has been said, you further learn these following things:

1. From hence you may see, not only what blasphemy and impiety it is, to lay
the blame of men't destruction upon God; but also how unfit these wicked
wretches are to bring in such a charge against their Maker. They cry out upon
God, and say, he gives them not grace, and his threatenings are severe, and God
forbid that all should be damned that be not converted and sanctified; and they
think it a hard measure that a short sin should have an endless suffering; and
if they be damned, they say they cannot help it, when in the mean time, they
are busy about their destruction, even cutting the throat of their own souls,
and will not be persuaded to hold their hands. They think God were cruel, if he
should damn them; and yet they are so cruel to themselves, that they will run
into the fire of hell when God has told them it is a little before them, and
neither entreaties, nor threatenings nor any thing that can be said, will stop
them. We see them almost undone; their careless, worldly, ^^eshly lives do tell
us that they are in the power of the devil; we know if they die before they are
converted, all the world cannot save them, and ^nowing the uncertainty of their
lives, we are fraid every day lest they drop into the sire; and therefore we
entreat them to pity their own souls, and not to undo themselves when mercy is
at hand, and they will not hear as. We entreat them to cast away their sin, and
come to Christ without delay, and to have some mercy on themselves, but they
will have none; and yet they think that God must be cruel, if he condemn them.
O wilful wretched sinners! It is not God that is cruel to you, it is you that
are cruel to yourselves; you are told, you must turn or burn, and yet you turn
not. You are told, that if you will needs keep your sins, you shall keep the
curse of God with them; and yet you will keep them. You are told, that there is
no way to happiness but holiness, and yet you will not be holy. What would you
have God to say more to you? What would you have him do with his mercy? He
offers it to you, and you will not have it. You are in the ditch-of sin and
misery, and he would give you his hand to help you out, and you refuse his
help; he would cleanse you of your sins, and you had rather keep them! you love
your lust, and love your gluttony and sports, and drunkenness, and will not let
them go; would you have him bring you to heaven, whether you would or no; or
would you have him bring you and your sins to heaven together? Why, that is an
impossibility, you may as well expect he should turn the sun into darkness.
What. an unsanctified fleshly heart be in heaven! it cannot be; "there enters
nothing that is unclean, Rev. xxi. 17. For what communication has life with
darkness, or Christ with Belial? 2. Cor. vi. 14, 15. All the day long has he
stretched out his hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people.' Romans x. 25.
What will you do now? Will you cry to God for mercy? Why, God called upon you
to have mercy upon yourselves, and you would not. Ministers see the poisoned
cup in the drunkard's hand-and tell him there is poison in it, and defire him
to have mercy on his soul, and forbear, and he will not hear us; drink it he
must and will; he loves it, and therefore though hell comes next, he says he
cannot help it. What should one say to such men as these? We tell the ungodly
careless worldling, "It is not such a life will serve the turn, or ever bring
you to heaven." If a bear were at your back, you would mend your pace; and when
the curse of God is at your back, and satan and hell are at your back, will you
not stir, but ask, What needs all this ado? Is an immortal soul of no more
worth? O, have mercy upon yourselves! But they will have no mercy upon
themselves, nor once regard us. We tell them the end will be bitter, who can
dwell with the everlasting fire? And yet they will have no mercy upon
themselves. And yet, will these shameless wretches say, that God is more
merciful than to condemn them, when it is themselves that cruelly and
unmercifully run upon condemnation, and if we should go to them with our hats
in our hands, and entreat them, we cannot stop them, but to hell they will go,
and yet will not believe that they are going thither, if we beg of them for the
sake of God that made them and preserved them, for the sake of Christ who died
for them, for the sake of their own poor souls, to pity themselves, and go no
further in the way to hell, but come to Christ, while his arms are open, and
enter into the state of life while the doors stand open, and now take mercy
while mercy may be had, but they will not be persuaded. If we should die for
it, we cannot get them so much as now and then to consider with themselves of
the matter, and to ^uin, and yet they can say, 'I hope God will b^ ^erciful,'
Did you never consider what he says, Isa. xxvii. 11. "It is a people of no
understanding; therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them; and he
that formed them will show them no favor. If another man will not clothe you
when you are naked, and feed you when you are hungry, you will say he is
unmerciful. If he should cast you into prison, or beat and torment you, you
would say he is unmerciful; and yet you would do a thousand more against
yourselves, even cast away both soul and body for ever, and never complain of
your own unmercifulness; Yea, and God that waited upon you all the while with
his mercy, must be taken to be unmerciful, she punish you after all this.
Unless the Holy God of heaven will give these wretenes leave to trample upon
his Son's blood, and with the Jews, as it were again, to spit in his face, and
do despite to the spirit of grace, and make a jest of sin, and a mock at
holiness, and set more light by saving mercy, than by the filth of their
fleshly pleasures; and unless, after all this, he will save them by the mercy
which they cast away, and would have none of, God himself must be called
^merciful by them. But he will be justified when he judges, and he will not
stand or fall at the bar of a sinful worm.

I know that there are many particular cavils that are brought by them against
the Lord, but I shall not here stay to answer them particularly, having done it
already in my Treatise of Judgment, to which I refer them. Had the disputing
part of the world been as careful to avoid sin and destruction, as they have
been busy searching after the cause of them, and forward indirectly to impute
it to God, they might have exercised their wits more profitably, and have less
wronged God, and sped better themselves. When so ugly a monster as sin is
within us, and so heavy a thing as punishment is on us, and so dreadful a thing
as hell is before us, one should think it should be an easy question, who is in
the fault, whether God or man be the principal or culpable cause? Some men are
such favorable judges of themselves, that they are proner to accuse the
infinite perfection and goodness itself, than their own hearts, and imitate
their first parents, that said, "the serpent tempted me, and the woman that
thou gave me, gave unto me, and I did eat." Secretly implying that God was
the cause. So say they, "the understanding that thou gave me was unable to
discern; the will that thou gave me was unable to make a better choice; the
objects which thou did set before me did entice me; the temptations which thou
did permit to assault me, prevailed against me." And some are so l^th to
think that God can make a self-determining creature, that they dare not deny
him that which they take to be his prerogative, to be the determiner of the
will in every sin, as the first efficient immediate physical cause; and many
could be content to acquit God from so much causing of evil, if they could but
reconcile it with his being the chief cause of good, as if truths would be no
longer truths than we are able to see them in their perfect order and
co-herence; because our ravelled wits cannot set them right together, nor
assign each truth its proper place, we presume to conclude, that some must be
cast away. This is the fruit of self-conceitedness, when men receive not God's
truth as a child his lesson, in an holy submission to the omniscience of our
teachers, but as censurers that are too wise to learn.

Object. "But we cannot convert ourselves, till God convert us, we can do
nothing without his grace; it is not him that wills, nor in him that runne^h;
but in God that shows mercy."

Answ. 1. God has two degrees of mercy to show; the mercy o^ conversion first,
and the mercy of salvation (...); the latter he will give to none but those
that will and run, and has promised it to them only. The former is to make
them willing that were unwilling, and though your own w^^ling and endeavors
deserve not his grace, yet your wilful refusal deserves that it should be
denied to you. Your disability is your very unwil^^ngness ^tself, which
excuses not your sins, but mak^th it the greater. You could turn if you were
but truly willing, and if your wills themselves are so corrupted, that nothing
but effectual grace will move them, you have the more cause to seek for that
grace, and yield to it, and do what you can in the use of means, and not
neglect it, and set against it. Do what you are able first, and then complain
of God for denying you grace, if you have cause.

Object. But you seem to intimate all this while, that man has free will.

Answ. The dispute about free will is beyond your capacity; I shall therefore
now trouble you with no more but this about it. Your will is naturally a free,
that is, a self-determining faculty, but it is viciously inclined, and backward
to do good; and therefore we see by sad experience, that it has not a virtuous
moral freedom; but that it is the wickedness of it that deserves the
punishment; and I pray you, let us not befool ourselves with opinions. Let the
case be your own. If you had an enemy that was so malicious that he sails upon
you, and beats you every time he meets you, and takes away the lives of your
children, will you excuse him, because he says, I have not free will, it is my
nature, I cannot choose, unless God give me grace. If you have a servant that
robs you, will you take such an answer from him? Might not every thief and
murderer that is hanged at the assize give such an answer? I have not
free will; I cannot change my own heart; what can I do without God's grace. And
shall they therefore be acquitted? If not, why then should you think to be
acquitted for a course of sin against the Lord?

2. From hence also you may observe these three things together. First, what a
subtle tempter satan is. Second, what a deceitful thing sin is. Third, what a
foolish creature corrupted man is. A subtle tempter indeed, that can persuade
the greatest part of the world to go into everlasting fire, when they have so
many warnings and dissuasives as they have. A deceitful thing is an indeed,
that can bewitch so many thousands to part with everlasting life, for a thing
so base and utterly unworthy! A foolish creature is man indeed, that will be
cheated of his salvation for nothing, yea, for a known nothing, and that by an
enemy, and a known enemy. You would think it impossible, that any man in his
wits, should be persuaded for a little, to cast himself into the fire, or
water, or into a coal pit, to the destruction of his life, and yet men will be
entic^d to cast themselves into hell. If your natural lives were in your own
hands, that you should not die till you would kill yourselves, how long would
most of you live? And yet, when your everlasting life is so far in your own
hands under God, that you cannot be undone till you undo yourselves, how few of
you will forbear your own undoing? Ah what a silly thing is man! and what
bewitching and befooling thing is sin.

3. From hence also you may learn, that it is no great wonder if wicked men be
hinderers of others in the way to heaven, and would have as many unconverted as
they can, and would draw them into sin, and keep them in it! Can you expect
that they should have mercy on others, that have none upon themselves? And that
they should much stick at the destruction of others, that stick not to destroy
themselves! That do no worse by others, than they do by themselves.

4. Lastly, you may hence learn, that the greatest ^nemy to man is himself, and
the greatest judgment in this life that can befall him, is to be left to
himself, and that the greatest work that grace has to do, is to save us from
ourselves, and the greatest accusations and complaints of men should be against
themselves, and that the greatest work we have to do ourselves, is to resist
ourselves, and the greatest enemy that we should daily pray, and watch, and
strive against, is our own carnal hearts and wills, and the greatest part of
your work, if you would do good to others, and help them to heaven, is to save
them from themselves, even from their blind understandings and corrupted wills,
and perverse affections, and violent passions, and unruly senses. I only name
all these for brevity sake, and leave them to your further consideration.

Well, sirs, now we have found out the great delinquent, and murderer of souls,
(even men's selves, their own wills) what remains but that you judge according
to the evidence, and confess this great iniquity before the Lord, and be
humbled for it, and do so no more? To these three ends distinctly, I shall add
a few words more. 1. Further to convince you. 2. To humble you. And 3. To
reform you, if there yet be any hope.


1. We know so much of the exceeding gracious nature of God, who is willing to
do good, and delights to show mercy, that we have no reason to suspect him of
being the culpable cause of our death, or to call him cruel* he made all good,
and ^e preserves and maintains all; the eyes of all things do w^^t upon him,
and he gives them their meat in due season; h^^ opens his hand, and
satisfies the desires of all the living. Psalm. cxlv. 15, 16. He is not only
righte^us in all his ways, and therefore will deal just^y, and holy in all his
works, and therefore not the author of sin, but he is also good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm. xiv. 5, 17, 19.

But as for man, we know his mind is dark, his will perverse, and his
affections carry him so headlong, that he is fitted by his folly and corruption
to such a work as the destroying of himself. If you saw a lamb lie killed in
the way, would you sooner suspect the sheep, or the dog, or wolf, to be the
author of it, if they both stand by? Or if you see an house broken, and the
people murdered, would you sooner suspect the prince or judge, that is wise and
just, and ^^d no need, or a known thief or murderer? I say therefore, us Jam.
i. 13, 14, 15. "Let no (...) a say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of
God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man," to draw
him to sin, but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust,
and enticed. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when
it is finished, brings forth death." You see here, that sin is the brat of
your own concupiscence, and not to be fathered on God, and that death is the
offspring of your own sin, and the fruit which it will yield you as soon as it
is ripe. You have a treasure of evil in yourselves, as a spider bath of poison,
from whence you are bringing forth hurt to yours^lves, and spinning such webs
as entangle your own souls. Your nature shows it is you that are the cause.

2. It is evident that you are your own destroyers, in that you are so ready to
entertain any temptation almost that is offered you. Satan is scarce readier to
move you to any evil, than you are ready to hear, and do as he would have you.
If he would tempt your understanding to error and prejudice, you yield. If he
would hinder you from good resolutions, it is soon done. If he would cool any
good desires or affections, it is soon done. If he would kindle any lust, or
vile affections and desires in you, it is soon done. If he will put you on to
evil thoughts, or deeds, you are so free, that he needs no rod nor spur. If he
would keep you from holy thoughts and words, and ways, a little does it, you
need no curb. You examine not his suggestions, nor resist them with any
resolution, nor cast them out as he casts them in, nor quench the sparks which
he endeavors to kindle; but you set in with him, and meet him half way, and
embrace his motions, and tempt him to tempt you. And it is easy to catch such
greedy fish that are ranging for a bait, and will take the bare hook.

3. Your destruction is evidently long of yourselves, in that you resist all
that would help to (...) you, and would do you good, or hinder you (...)
undoing yourselves. God would help and (...) you by his word, and you resist
it, it is too (...) He would sanctify you by his spirit, and you resist and
quench it. If any man reprove you for your sin, you fly in his face with evil
words; and if he would draw you to an holy life, and tell you of your present
danger, you give him little thanks, but either bid him look to himself, he
shall not answer for you, or else, at best, you put him off with an heartless
thanks, and will not turn when you are persuaded. If ministers would privately
instruct and help you, you will not come at them; your unhumbled souls do feel
but little need of their help; if they would catechize you, you are too old to
be catechized, though you are not too old to be ignorant and unnoly. Whatever
they can say to you for your good, you are so self-conceited and wise in your
own eyes, even in the depth of ignorance, that you well regard nothing that
agrees not with your present conceits, but contradict your teachers, as if you
were wiser than they; you resist all that they can say to you, by your
ignorance, and wilfulness, and foolish cavils, and shifting evasions, and
unthankful rejections, so that no good that is offered, can find any welcome
acceptance and entertainment with you.

4. Moreover, it is apparent, that you are self-destroyers, in that you draw
the matter of your sin and destruction even from the bl^ssed God himself. You
like not the contrivances of his wisdom; you like not his justice, but take it
for cruelty; you like not his holiness, but are ready to think he is such a one
as yourselves, Psalm. l. 21. and makes as light of sin as you: you like not his
truth, but would have his threatenings, even his pretemptory threatenings prove
false. And h^^ goodness, which you seem most highly to approve, you partly
resist, as it would lead you to repentance, and partly abuse, to the
strengthening of your sins, as if you might the freelier sin, because God is
merciful, and because his grace does so much abound.

5. Yea, you fetch destruction from the blessed Redeemer, and death from the
Lord of Life himself. And nothing more emboldeneth you in sin, than that Christ
has died for you; as if now the danger of death were over, and you might
boldly venture; as if Christ were become a servant to satan and your sins, and
must wait upon you while you are abusing him; and because he is become the
physician of souls, and is able to save to the utmost, all that come to God by
him; you think he must suffer you to refuse his help, and throw away his
medicines, and must save you whether you will come to God by him or no, so that
a great part of your sins are occasioned by your bold presumption upon the
death of Christ.

Not considering that he came to redeem his people from their sins, and to
sanctify them a peculiar people to himself, and to conform them in holiness to
the image of their heavenly father, and to their head, Matthew. i. 21. Tit. ii.
14. 1 Pet. i. 15, 16. Col. iii. 10, 11. Phil. iii. 9, 10.

6. You also fetch your own destruction from all the providence and works of
God. When you think of his eternal foreknowledge and decrees, it is to harden
you in your sin, or possess your minds in quarrelling thoughts, as if his
de^rees might spare you the labor of repentance, and an holy life, or else
were the cause of you^ sin and death. If he afflict you, you repine; if he
prosper you, you the more forget him, and are the back warder to the thoughts
of the life to come. If the wicked prosper, you forget the end, that will set
all reckoning straight; and are ready to think it is as good to be wicked as
godly. And thus you draw your death from all.

7. And the like you do from all the creatures and mercies of God to you. He
gives them to you as the tokens of his love, and furniture of his service, and
you turn them against him, to the pleasing of your flesh; you eat and drink to
please your appetite, and not for the glory of God, and to enable you for his
work. Your clothes you abuse to pride. Your riches draw your hearts from
heaven; Phil. iii. 18. Your honors and applause do puff you up; if you have
health and strength, it makes you more secure, and forget your end. Yea, other
men's mercies are abused by you to your hurt. If you see their honors and
dignity, you are provoked to envy them. If you see their riches, you are ready
to covet them. If you look upon beauty, you are stirred up to lust. And it is
well, if godliness be not an eye sore to you.

8. The very gifts that God bestows on you and the ordinances of grace which
he has instituted for his church, you turn to sin. If you have better parts
than others, you grow proud, and self-conceited: If you have but common gifts,
you take them for special grace. You ta^^^ the bare hearing of your duty for so
good a wo^^ as if it would excuse you for not obeying it. Your prayers are
turned into sin, because you "regard iniquity in your hearts," Psalm. lxvi. 18.
and depart not from iniquity when you call on the name of the Lord, 2 Timothy Your
prayers are abominable, because you turn away your ear from hearing the law,
Prove. xxviii. 9. And more ready to offer the sacrifice of fools, (thinking you
do God some special service) than to hear his word and obey it, Eccles. v. 1.
You examine not yourselves before you receive the supper of the Lord, but not
discerning the Lord's body, do eat and drink judgment to yourselves, 1 Cor. xi.
28, 29.

9. Yea, the persons that you converse with, and all their actions, you make
the occasions of your sin and destruction. If they liv^ in the fear of God, you
hate them. If they live ungodly, you imitate them. If the wicked are many, you
think you may the more boldly follow them: ^f the godly be few, you are the
more em^^ldmed to despise them. If they walk exactly, you think they are too
precise; if one of them fall in a particular temptation, you stumble upon them,
and turn away from holiness, because that others are imperfectly holy; as if
you were ^arranted to break your necks, because some others have, by their
heedlessness sprained a ^^ew, or put out a bone. If a hypocrite disco^er
himself, you say, they are all alike, and ^^ink yourselves as honest as the
best. A pro^^ssor can scarce slip into any miscarriage, but ^^cause he cuts his
singer, you think you may ^^ldly cut your throats. If ministers deal plainly
with you, you say they rail. If they speak gently, or coldly, you either sleep
under them, or are little more effected than the seats you sit upon. If any
errors creep into the church, some greedily entertain them, and others reproach
the Christian doctrine for them, which is most against them. And if we would
draw you from any ancient rooted error, which can but plead two, or three, or
six, or seven hundred years custom, you are as much offended with a motion for
reformation, as if you were to lose your life by it, and hold fast old errors,
while you cry out against new ones. Scarce a difference can arise among the
ministers of the gospel, but you will fetch your own death from it. And you
will not hear, or at least not obey the unquestionable doctrine of any of those
that jump not with your conceirs: one will not hear a minister, because he
says the Lord's prayer; and another will not hear him, because he does not use
it. One will not hear them that are for episcopacy, and another will not hear
them that are against it. And thus I might show it you in many other cases, how
you turn all that comes near you to your own destruction: so clear it is, that
the ungodly are self-destroyers, and that their perdition is of themselves.

Methinks now, upon the consideration of what is said, and the review of your
own ways, you should bethink you what you have done, and be ashamed, and deeply
humbled, to remember it. If you be not, I pray you consider these following
truths:

1. To be your own destroyers, it to sin against the deepest principle of your
natures, even the principle of self preservation. Every thing naturally
desires or inclines to its own felicity, welfare, or perfection. And will you
set yourselves to your own destruction? When you are commanded to love your
neighbors as yourselves; it is supposed that you naturally love yourselves.
But if you love your neighbors no better than yourselves, it seems, you would
have all the world damned. 2. How extremely do you cross your own intentions? I
know you intend (...) your own damnation, ev^n when you are procuring it; you
think you are but doing good to yourselves, by gratifying the desires of your
flesh. But alas, it is but as a draught or cold water in a burning fever, or as
the scratching of an itching wild fire, which increases the disease and pain.
If indeed you would have pleasure, profit, or honor, seek them where they are
to be found, and do not hunt after them in the way to hell. 3. What pity is it,
that you should do that against yourselves, which none else in earth or hell
can do! If all the world were combined against you, or all the devils in hell
were combined against you, they could not destroy you without yourselves, nor
make you sin but by your own consent. And will you do that a against yourselves
which no one else can do; you have hateful thoughts of the devil, because he is
your en^my, and endeavors your destruction. And will you be worse than
devils to yourselves? Why, it is thus with you, if you had hearts to understand
it: When you run into sin, and run from godliness, and refuse to turn at the
call of God, you do more against your own souls than men or devils could do
besides, and if you should set yourselves, and bend your wits to do yourselves
the greatest mischief, you could not devise to do a greater. 4. You are false
to the trust that God has reposed in you. He has much entrusted you with your
own salvation, and will you betray your trust? He has set you with all
diligence to keep your hearts, and is this the keeping of them? Prove. iv. 23.
5. You do even forbid all others to pity you, when you will have no pity on
yourselves; if you cry to God in the day of your calamity for mercy, mercy;
what can you expect but that he should thrust you away, and say, "nay, thou
would not have mercy on thyself; who brought this upon thee but thy own
wilfulness?" And if your brethren see you everlastingly in misery, how shall
they pity you that were your own destroyers, and would not be dissuaded? 6. It
will everlastingly make you your own tormentors in hell to think on it, that
you brought yourselves wilfully to that misery. O what a griping thought it
will be for ever to think with yourselves, that this was your own doing! that
you were warned of this day, and warned again, but it would not do: that you
wilfully sinned, and wilfully turned away from God! that you had time as well
as others but you abused it; you had teachers as well as others, but you
refused their instruction; you had holy examples, but you did not imitate them;
you were offered Christ, and grace, and glory, as well as others, but you had
more mind of your fleshly pleasure; you had a price in your hands, but you had
not a heart to lay it out. Prove. xvii. 16. Can it choose but torment you to
think of this your present folly? O that your eyes were opened to see what you
have done in the wilful wronging of your own souls! and that you better
understood these words of God, "Prove. viii. 33, 34, 35, 36. Hear instruction
and be wise, and refuse it not; blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors; for whosoever finds me
finds life, and shall obtain the favor of the Lord. But he that sins
against me wrongeth his own soul: All they that hate me love death."
And now I am come to the conclusion of this work; my heart is troubled to
think how I shall leave you, lest, after this, the flesh should still deceive
you, and the world and the devil should keep you asleep, and I should leave you
as I found you, till you awake in hell. Though in care of your poor souls, I am
afraid of this, as knowing the obstinacy of a carnal heart; yet I can say with
the prophet Jeremy, xvii. 16. I have not desired the woeful day, the Lord
knows. I have not with James and John desires that fire might come from
heaven to consume them that refused Jesus Christ, Luke xi. 54. But it is the
preventing of the eternal fire that I have been all this while endeavoring:
And O that it had been a needless work? that God and conscience might have been
as willing to spare me this labor, as some of you could have been. Dear
friends, I am so loath that you should lie in everlasting fire, and be shut out
of heaven, if it be possible to prevent it, that I shall once more ask you,
what do you now resolve? Will you turn or die? I look upon you as a physician
on his patient, in a dangerous disease, that says to him, though you are far
gone, take but this medicine, and forbear but those few things that are
hurtful, to you, and I dare warrant your life; but if you will not do this, you
are but a dead man. What would you think of such a man, if the physician, and
all the friends he has, cannot persuade him to take one medicine to save his
life, or forbear one or two poisonous things that would kill him? This is your
case. As far as you are gone in sin, do but now turn and come to Christ, and
take his remedies, and your soul^ shall live. Cast up your deadly sins by
repentance, and return not to the poisonous vomit any more, and you shall do
well. But yet if it were your bodies that we had to deal with, we might partly
know what to do for you. Though you would not consent, yet you might be held or
bound, while the medicine were poured down your throats, and hurtful things
might be kept from you. But about your souls it cannot be so, we cannot convert
you against your wills. There is no carrying madmen to heaven in fetters. You
may be condemned against your wills, because you sinned with your wills; but
you cannot be saved against your wills. The wisdom of God has thought meet to
lay men's salvation or destruction exceeding much upon the choice of their own
wills; that no man shall come to heaven that chose not the way to heaven; and
no man shall come to hell but shall be forced to say, I have the thing I chose,
my own will did bring me hither. Now, if I could but get you to be willing, to
be thoroughly and resolvedly, and habitually willing, the work were more than
half done. And alas, must we lose our friends, and must they lose their God,
their happiness, their souls, for want of this? God forbid? It is a strange
thing to me that men are so inhuman and stupid in the greatest matters, that in
lesser things are civil and courteous, and good neighbors. For ought I know, I
have the love of all, or almost all my neighbors, so far, that if I should
send to every man in the town, or parish, or country, and request a reasonable
courtesy of them, they would grant it me; and yet when I come to request of
them the greatest matter in the world for themselves, and not for me, I can
have nothing of many of them but a patient hearing. I know not whether people
think a man in the pulpit is in good sadness or not, and means as he speaks;
for I think I have few neighbors, but if I were sitting familiarly with them,
and telling them of what I have seen or done, or known in the world, they would
believe me, and regard what I say; but when I tell them, from the infallible
word of God, what they themselves shall see and know in the world to come, they
show by their lives they do either not believe it, or not much regard it. If I
met ever any one of them on the way, and told them yonder is a coal pit, or
there is a quicksand, or there are thieves lie in wait for you; I could
persuade them to turn by. But when I tell them that satan lies in wait for
them, and that sin is poison to them, and that hell is not a matter to be
jested with, they go on as if they did not hear me. Truly neighbors, I am in
as good earnest with you in the pulpit, as I am in my familiar discourse: and
if ever you will regard me, I beseech you let it be here. I think there is
never a man of you all, but if my own soul lay at your wills, you would be
willing to save it (though I cannot promise that you would leave your sins for
it.) Tell me, thou drunkard, art thou so cruel to me that speak to thee, that
thou would not forbear a few cups of drink, if thou knew it would save my
soul from hell! Had thou rather that I did burn there for ever, than thou
should live soberly as other men do? If so, may I not say, thou art an
unmerciful monster, and not a man? If I came hungry or naked to one of your
doors, would you not part with more than a cup of drink to relieve me? I a in
confident you would; If it were to save my life, I know you would (some of you)
hazard your own. And yet will you not be entreated to part with your sensual
pleasures for your own salvation? Would thou forbear an hundred cups of
drink man, to save my life, if it were in thy power, and wilt thon not do it to
save thy own soul? I profess to you, firs, I am as hearty a beggar with you
this day for the saving of your own souls, as I would be for my own supply if I
were forced to come a begging to your doors. And therefore if you would hear me
then, heat me now. If you would pity me then, be entreated now to pity
yourselves. I do again beseech you, as if it were on my bended knees, that you
would hearken to your redeemer, and, turn that you may live. All you that have
lived in ignorance, and carelessness, and presumption, to this day; all you
that have been drowned in the care of the world, and have no mind of God, and
eternal glory; all you that are enslaved to your fleshly desires, of meat and
drink, sports and lusts; and all you that know not the necessity of holiness,
and never were acquainted with the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost upon your
souls, that never embraced your blessed redeemer by a lively faith, and with
admiring and thankful apprehensions of his love, and that never felt an higher
estimation of God and heaven, and an heartier love to them than to your fleshly
prosperity, and the things below; I earnestly beseech you, not only for my
sake, but for the Lord's sake, that you go not one day longer in your former
condition, but look about you, and cry to God for converting grace, that you be
made new creatures, and may escape the plagues that are a little before you.
And if ever you will do any thing for me, grant me this request, to turn from
your evil ways and live. Deny me any thing that ever I shall ask you for
myself, if you will but grant me this. And if you deny me this, I care not for
any thing else that you would grant me. Nay, as ever you will do any thing at
the request of the Lord that made you, and redeemed you, deny him not this; for
if you deny him this, he cares for nothing that you shall grant him. As ever
you would have him hear you prayers, and grant your requests, and do for you at
the hour of death and day of judgment, or in any of your extremities, deny not
his request in the day of your prosperity. O sits, believe it, death and
judgment, and heaven and hell, are other matters when you come hear them, than
they seem to carnal eyes afar off; then you would hear such a message as I
bring you with more a wakoned regardful hearts.

Well, though I cannot hope so well of all, I will hope that some of you are by
this time purposing to turn and live; and that you are ready to ask me, as the
Jews did Peter, Acts ii. 37. When they were pricked in their hearts, and said,
"men and brethren, what shall we do? How might we come to be truly converted?
We are willing, if we did but know our duty. God forbid that we should choose
destruction, by refusing conversion, as hitherto we have done.

If these be the thoughts and purposes of your hearts, I say of you as God did
of a promising people, Deuteronomy. v. 28, 29. They have well said all that they have
spoken; "O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep all my commandments always!" Your purposes are good: O that there were but
an heart in you to perform these purposes! And in hope hereof, I shall gladly
give you direction what to do, and that but briefly, that you may the easier
remember it for your practice.

DIRECTION I.
IF you would be converted and saved, labor to understand the necessity and
true nature of conversion; for what, and from what, and to what, and by what it
is, that you must turn.

Consider what a lamentable condition you are in till the hour of your
conversion, that you may see it is not a state to be rested in. You are under
the guilt of all the sins that ever you committed, and under the wrath of God,
and the curse of his law, you are bound slaves to the devil, and daily employed
in his work against the Lord, yourselves, and others; you are spiritually dead
and deformed, as being devoid of the holy life, and nature, and image of the
Lord. You are unfit for any holy work, and do nothing that is truly pleasing
unto God. You are without any promise or assurance of his protection, and live
in continual danger of his justice, not knowing what hour you may be swatched
away to hell, and most certain to be damned if you die in that condition, and
nothing short of conversion can prevent it. Whatever civilities, or amendments,
or ventures, are short of true conversion, will never procure the saving of
your souls. Keep the true sense of this natural misery, and so of the necessity
of conversion on your hearts.

And then you must understand what it is to be converted. It is to have a new
heart or disposition, and a new conversation.

Quest. 1. For what must we turn?

Answ. For these ends following, which you may attain; 1. You shall immediately
be made living members of Christ, and have interest in him, and be renewed
after the image of God, and be adorned with all his graces and quickened with a
new and heavenly life, and saved from the tyranny of satan, and the dominion of
sin, and be justified from the curse of the law, and have the pardon of all the
sins of your whole lives, and be accepted of God, and made his sons, and have
liberty with boldness to call him father, and go to him by prayer in all your
needs, with a promise of acceptance; you shall have the Holy Ghost to dwell in
you, to sanctify and guide you! You shall have part in the brotherhood,
communion and prayers of the saints? You shall be fitted for God's service, and
be freed from the dominion of sin, and be useful and a blessing to the place
you live in; and shall have the promise of this life and that which is to come.
You shall want nothing that is truly good for you, and your necessary
afflictions you will be enabled to bear; you may have some taste of communion
with God in the spirit; especially in all holy ordinances, where God prepares
a feast for your souls; you shall be heirs of heaven while you live on earth,
and may foresee by faith the everlasting glory, and so may live and die in
peace; and you shall never be so low, but your happiness will be incomparably
greater than your misery.

How precious is every one of these blessings, which I do but briefly name, and
which in this life you may receive!

And then, 2. At death you souls shall go to Christ, and at the day of judgmen
both (...) and body shall be justified and glo^^^ (...) into your Maker's joy
where your happi^^^ will consist in these particulars.

1. You shall be perfected yourselves; your mortal bodies shall be made
immortal, and the corruptible shall put on incorruption; you shall no more be
hungry, or thirsty, or weary, or sick, nor shall you need to fear either shame
or sorrow, or death, or hell, your souls shall be perfectly freed from sin, and
perfectly fitted for the knowledge, and love, and praises of the Lord.

2. Your employment shall be to behold your glorified Redeemer, with all your
holy fellowcitizens of heaven, and to see the glory of the most blessed God,
and to love him perfectly, and be loved by him, and to praise him everlastingly.

3. Your glory will contribute to the glory of the New Jerusalem, the city of
the living God, which is more than to have a private felicity to yourselves.

4. Your glory will contribute to the glorifying of your Redeemer, who will
everlastingly be magnified and pleased in you that are the travail of his soul;
and this is more than the glorifying of yourselves.

5. And the eternal majesty, the living God, will be glorified in your glory,
both as he is magnified by praises, and as he communicates of his glory and
goodness to you, and as he is pleased in you, and in the accomplishment of his
glorious works, in the glory of the New Jerusalem and of his Son.

All this the poorest beggar of you that is converted, shall certainly and
endlessly enjoy.

2. You see for what you must turn! Next, you must understand from what you
must turn; And that is, in a word, from your carnal self, which is the end of
all the unconverted. From the flesh that would be pleased before God, and would
still be enticing you thereto. From the world that is the bait; and from the
devil, that is the angler of souls, and the deceiver. And so from all known and
wilful sins.

3. Next you must know to what end you must turn; and that is, to God as your
end; to Christ as the way to the Father, to holiness as the way appointed you
by Christ; and so the use of all the helps and means of grace afforded you by
the Lord.

4. Lastly, you must know, by what you must turn. And that is by Christ as the
only Redeemer and Intercessor, and by the Holy Ghost as the Sanctifier, and by
the word as his instrument or means, and by faith and repentance as the means
and duties on your part to be performed. All this is of necessity.

DIRECTION II.
IF you will be converted and saved, be much in secret serious consideration.
Inconsiderateness undoes the world. Withdraw yourselves often into retired
secrecy, and there bethink you of the end why you were made, of the life you
have lived, the time you have lost, the sin you have committed, of the love and
sufferings, and fullness of Christ, of the danger you are in, of the nearness of
death and judgment; and of the certainty and excellency of the joys of heaven,
and of the certainty and terror of the torment of hell, and eternity of both,
and of the necessity of conversion and a holy life. Steep your hearts in such
considerations as these.

DIRECTION III.
IF you will be converted and saved, attend upon the word of God, which is the
ordinary means. Read the scripture, or hear it read, and other holy writings
that do apply it constantly; attend on the public preaching of the word. As God
will light the world by the son, and not by himself without, so will he convert
and save men by his ministers, who are the lights of the world, Acts xxvi. 17,
18. Matt. v. 14. When he has miraculously humbled Paul, he sends him to
Ananias, Acts ix. 10. and when he had sent an angel to Cornelius, it is but to
bid him send for Peter, who must tell him what he is to believe and do.

DIRECTION IV.
BETAKE yourselves to God in a course of earnest constant prayer. Confess and
lament your former lives, and beg his grace to illuminate and convert you.
Beseech him to pardon what is past, and to give you his spirit, and change your
hearts and lives, and lead you in his ways, and save you from temptation, and
ply his work daily, and be not weary of it.

DIRECTION V.
PRESENTLY give over your known and wilful sins. Make a stand, and go that way
no further. Be drunk no more, but avoid the very occasion of it. Cast away your
lusts and sinful pleasures with detestation. Curse, and swear, and rail no
more, and if you have wronged any, restore as Zaccheus did; if you will commit
again your old sius, what blessing can you expect on the means for conversion?

DIRECTION VI.
PRESENTLY, if possible, change your company, if it has hitherto been bad; not
by forsaking your necessary relations, but your unnecessary sinful companions,
and join yourselves with those that fear the Lord, and enquire of them the way
to heaven, Acts ix. 19.26. Psalm. xv. 4.

DIRECTION VII.
DELIVER up yourselves to the Lord Jesus as the physician of your souls, that
he may pardon you by his blood, and sanctify you by his spirit, by his word and
ministers, by instruments of the spirit. He is the way, the truth and the life;
there is no coming to the Father but by him. John xiv. 1. Nor is there any name
under heaven, by which you can be saved. Acts iv. 12. Study therefore his
person and natures, and what he has done for you, and what he is to do for
you, and what he will be, and how he is fitted to the full supply of all your
necessities.

DIRECTION VIII.
IF you mean indeed to turn and live, do it speedily without delay. If you be
not willing to turn to day, you be not willing to do it at all. Remember you
are all this while in your blood, under the guilt of many thousand sins and
under God's wrath, and you stand at the very brink of hell; there is but a step
between you and death. And this is not a case for a man that is well in his
wits to be quiet in. Up therefore presently, and fly as for your lives, as you
would be gone out of your house if it were all on fire over your head. O, if
you did but know what continual danger you live in, and what daily unspeakable
loss you do sustain, and what safer and sweeter life you might live, you would
not stand trifling, but presently turn. Multitudes miscarry that wilfully delay
when they are convinced that it must be done. Your lives are short and
uncertain; and what a case are you in, if you die before you thoroughly turn!
You have staid too long already, and wronged God too long. Sin gets strength
and rooting while you delay. Your conversion will grow more hard and doubtful.
You have much to do, and therefore put not off to the last, lest God forsake
you, and give you up to yourselves, and then you are undone for ever.

DIRECTION IX.
IF you will turn and live, do it unreservedly, absolutely, and universally.
Think not to capitulate with Christ, and divide your heart betwixt him and the
world; and to part with some sins, and keep the rest; and to let go that which
your flesh can spare. This is but self deluding; you must in heart and
resolution forsake all that you have, or else you cannot be his disciples. Luke
xiv. 26.33. If you will not take God and Heaven for your portion, and lay all
below at the feet of Christ, but you must needs also have your good things
here, and have an earthly portion, and God and glory is not enough for you; it
is vain to dream of salvation on these terms: For it will not be. If you seem
never so religious, if yet it be but a carnal righteousness, and the flesh's
prosperity, or pleasure, or safety, be still excepted in your devoutedness to
God; this is as certain a way to death as open profaneness, though it be more
plausible.

DIRECTION X.
IF you will turn and live, do it resolvedly, and stand not still deliberating,
as if it were a doubtful case. Stand not wavering, as if you were yet uncertain
whether God or the flesh be the better master, or whether heaven and hell be
the better end, or whether sin or holiness be the better way. But away with
your former lusts, and presently, habitually, fixedly resolve: Be not one day
of one mind, and the next of another, but be at a point with all the world, and
resolvedly give up yourselves and all that you have to God. Now while you are
reading or hearing this, resolve; before you sleep another night, resolve;
before you stir from the place, resolve; before Satan has time to take you
off, resolve. You never turn indeed till you do resolve, and that with a firm
and unchangeable resolution.

So much for the directions.

AND now I have done my part in this work, that you may turn to the call of God
and live. What will become of it, I cannot tell. I have cast the seed at God's
command; but it is not in my power to give the increase. I cannot go any
further with my message; I cannot bring it to your heart, nor make it work; I
cannot do your parts for you, to entertain it and consider it; nor I cannot do
God's part by opening your hearts to cause you to entertain it; nor can I show
you heaven or hell to your eye sight, nor give you new and tender hearts. If I
knew what more to do for your conversion, I hope I should do it.

But O thou that art the gracious Father of Spirits, thou have sworn thou
delightest not in the death of the wicked, but rather that they would turn and
live; deny not thy blessings to these prosuasions and directions, and suffer
not thine enemies to triumph in thy sight, and the great deciever of souls to
prevail against thy Son, thy Spirit, and thy Word. O pity poor unconverted
sinners, that have no hearts to pity or help themselves; Command the blind to
see, and the deaf to hear, and the dead to live, and let not sin and death be
able to resist thee. Awaken the secure, resolve the unresolved, confirm the
wavering, and let the eyes of sinners that read these lines, be next employed
in weeping over their sins, and bring them to themselves, and to thy Son,
before their sins have brought them to perdition. If thou say but the word,
these poor endeavors shall prosper to the winning of many a soul to their
everlasting joy, and thine everlasting glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Printed by RICHARD FOLWELL, for MATTHEW CAREY.

BOOKS PUBLISHED BY M. CAREY.
-- 1 -- Columbian Muse.
Containing a choice selection of American poetry, from the works of Barlow --
Dwight -- Trumbull -- Freneau -- Humphreys -- Livingston -- Hopkinson -- James
-- Hopkins -- Lathrop -- Smith -- Dawes -- Ladd Bradford -- Bayard -- Evans --
Dunlap -- Alsop, etc. (Price 75 cents.)

-- 2 -- The Haunted Priory; or, The Fortunes of the House of Rayo,
A Romance, founded partly on historical facts. (Price 80 cents.)

-- 3 -- Charlotte -- A Tale of Truth.
A Novel -- By Mrs. Rowson, of the New Theater, Philadelphia -- Author of
Victoria, the Inquisitor Fille de Chamber, etc.

Extract from the Critical Review, April 1791, p. 468. It may be a Tale of
Truth, for it is not unnatural, and it is a tale of real distress Charlotte by
the artifice of a teacher, recommended to a school, from humanity rather than a
conviction of her integrity, or the regularity of her former conduct, is
enticed from her governess, and accompanies a young officer to America. The
marriage ceremony, if not forgotten, is postponed, and Charlotte dies a martyr
to the inconstancy of her lover, and the treachery of his friend. The
situations are artless and affecting, the descriptions natural and pathetic; we
should feel for Charlotte, if such a person ever existed, who for one error,
scarcely perhaps deserved so severe a punishment. If it is a siction, poetic
justice is not, we think, properly distributed. Price 75 cents.

-- 4 -- The Lady's Pocket Library.
Containing -- Miss More's Essays. Dr. Gregory's Legacy to his daughters. Lady
Pennington's unfortunate mother's advice to her daughter. Marchioness de
Lambert's advice of a mother to her daughter. -- Mrs. Chapone's Letter on the
government of the temper. Swift's Letter to a young lady newly married. More's
Fables for the female sex. (Price 87 cents.)

PREFACE.
"The editor of this publication hopes from the established reputation of the
several tracts of which it is composed, that it will be found a more complete
system for the instruction of the female world, than perhaps any other extant.

"A volume under the present title was lately published in England and Ireland,
and had a most rapid sale, having been purchased by almost every lady of taste
in those kingdoms. To this volume, the American editor has added Miss More's
essays; Mrs. Chapone's letter on the government of the temper; and Swift's
letter to a lady newly married. These have considerably enhanced its value; and
he doubts not, the ladies on this side the Atlantic, will be as generous in
their encouragement of a work intended for their advantage, as those in England
and Ireland have been."

-- 5 -- An Impartial History of the French Revolution,
From its commencement, to the execution of the Queen, and the Deputies of the
Gironde party. -- Price Two Dollars.

Extract from the Critical Review, January 1794. p. 12. "We have certainly
derived much pleasure, and acquired much information from the perusal of these
volumes; and we think them, both for matter and style, worthy the attention of
all who interest themselve, in events which have so justly excited the
curiosity and astonishment of mankind."

-- 6 -- Plowden's History of the British Empire,
From May 1792, to December 1793.

Price a dollar and a quarter.

[This is as interesting and valuable a publication, as has appeared for many
years.]

-- 7 -- Journal Durant un Sejour en France,
Depuis le Commencement d'Aout jusqu'a la mi Decembre; auquel est ajoute un
recit des evenemens les plus remarquables qui ont eu lieu a Paris, depuis cette
epoque, jusqu'a, La Mort du Roi de France. Bound 2 dollars -- sewed, 2 dollars.

-- 8 -- The Inquisitor, or Invisible Rambler.
By Mrs. Rowson, author of Charlotte, etc. Price 87 cents

"Mrs Rowson looked up to Stern as the object of her imitation, but she has
really rivalled one of her own sex, the author of the Rambles of Frankly. The
work is wholly of that kind, and in no respect inferior to it, except in having
adopted a ring, by which the Inquisitor is rendered invisible. The slave in the
beginning of the second volume, is written in the best manner of Stern. There
are many pathetic traits, which speak to the heart, and are drawn from nature.
They are extremely affecting, when we forget the ring. Though the Inquisitor,
like the Rambles of Fankly, consists of independent chapters; yet some
connection is kept up through the whole; and, in that respect, as well as in
pathos, this work may be said to exceed its competitor."

Critical Review, volume 65, p. 568. -- 9 -- Gay's Fables:
In 32 mo. price 31 cents.

-- 10 -- Adventures of Roderick Random.
Two Volumes. Fine paper, one dollar and 75 cents, coarse paper and dollar and
50 cents.

-- 11 -- Jefferson's Notes on the State of Virginia.
Price neatly bound one dollar and a half; with a map, one dollar and three
quarters.

-- 12 -- Beattie's Elements of Moral Science.
Two Volumes, one dollar and three quarters.

"On the various and interesting subjects with which moral science and belles
lettres abound, Dr. Beattie has treated in a summary, but pleasing and
comprehensive manner. The student will seldom find any thing of importance left
untouched; and whatever be the subject, it is illustrated and enforced with Dr.
Beattie's usual eloquence and good sense. No writer is better calculated to
resist the sophistry of modern philosophy; and the deductions which he forms on
subjects of morals, criticism and taste, are generally such as the
understanding acquiesces in without suspicion, and almost without an effort.
The chief beauties of his style are freedom and perspicuity: and the prominent
features of his matter are, sound morals, rational religion, and good sense.

"Our author discusses with his usual ability, the more important duties we owe
the Deity, our fellow creatures, and ourselves.

"In part the second will be found some admirable remarks against slavery; a
subject on which Dr. Beattie expatiates with a warmth of benevolence that does
him great honor.

"Part IV comprises rhetoric also, as forming a considerable part of logic, or
the science of persuasion. On the various, but trite subjects that fall under
Dr. Beattie's discussion, in this general division of his work, we find the
same just taste, accurate distinction, and solid judgment, that characterise
him as a writer. Our extracts have already swelled this article beyond the
usual limits; we must be content therefore with recommending the Elements of
Moral Science to young students in particular, and the public in general, as a
very useful, elegant, and judicious compendium of the various subjects which it
contains."

Critical Review, new Ann. vol. 10. page 403.
