A LETTER, etc. BY JOEL BARLOW.

A LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF PIEDMONT, ON THE ADVANTAGES OF THE FRENCH
REVOLUTION, AND THE NECESSITY OF ADOPTING ITS PRINCIPLES IN ITALY.

By JOEL BARLOW.

Translated from the French by the Author.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AT THE COLUMBIAN PRESS, BY ROBERTSON AND GOWAN, FOR J.
FELLOWS, BOOKSELLER, WATER-STREET. 1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Letter was written at Chambery in Savoy, in December, 1792, at the
request of those members of the National Convention who were then in that
country, for the purpose of organising the department of Mont Blanc. It was
printed in French at Grenoble, and in Italian at Nice, and sent from those
places into Piedmont, and other parts of Italy, during that winter.

It will occur to the reader of the English copy, which now appears for the
first time in print, that the defection of Dumourier, in April 1793, the
violent factions which distracted the Convention, and the subsequent civil
commotions in many parts of France, occupied the attention of the Republicans
the remainder of that year. Their operations against the league of foreign
enemies (which was now augmented by the addition of England, Holland, Spain and
Naples) were confined for that campaign to the defense of the frontiers; and
they were thus prevented from pushing the extensive advantages which they had
gained the year before.

This circumstance relieved the King of Sardinia from the despair in which he
had been plunged. It gave him time to augment his forces and repair his
fortifications. It gave him arguments against the French and the principles of
the revolution, and thus enabled him in some degree to unite his people in
favor of the system of despotism to which they had been accustomed; for it
must be confessed, that the manner in which the French affairs were conducted
that year, had a strong tendency to excite a disrelish to their cause in the
minds of distant or ignorant observers. In addition to all these advantages, he
received a subsidy from England, to enable him to defend his own dominions; by
the aid of which he has since obtained a large body of auxiliary troops from
Tirol, Milan, and Tuscany.

These unexpected events produced a remarkable change in the relative situation
of the French and Piedmontese, from the close of the first campaign to the
close of the second. But the third is now opened with as much advantage to the
French as the most ardent republican could expect. The troops destined for the
invasion of Italy this year, did not amount to more than one tenth of the
military force that they now have in motion on the Continent. Yet these have
already passed the Alps in three different directions, and are at this time
masters of a considerable part of Piedmont. It is probable that this campaign
will establish the revolution in that country, but unhappily with more expense
of blood than was expected from former appearances. Could the same force have
been employed there the last year, under the circumstances that then existed,
we may presume it would have met but little opposition; and the writer might
have had the satisfaction of seeing that his letter had produced some effect in
promoting the cause of liberty and happiness in that interesting part of the
world.

JULY 15, 1794. The notes in this edition were not published in the former
ones.



A LETTER, etc.
Chambery, Dec. 27, 1792. CITIZENS OF PIEDMONT,
YOU occupy one of the strongest frontiers of a country which nature seems to
have destined to be the happiest in Europe. But a number of imperious
circumstances, of which you have been rather the victims than the authors, have
for many centuries inverted the order of things, and deprived you of those
advantages which ought to attend your situation. I am a stranger in this part
of the world; Italy is known to me only from its history, and your present
condition only from distant observation and report. It is not probable that I
shall ever have the pleasure of seeing you or any part of your country. You
must, therefore, acquit me of entertaining any desire to mislead you, as I can
have no possible interest in addressing you this letter, but the interest which
the human heart naturally takes in uttering the truth on a very important
subject. You are my fellow creatures; as such I love you, and cherish the ties
which ought to be mutual between us. You are in a condition which appears to me
to call upon you to burst the bands of slavery; in this view, I am ready to
hail you as brothers, and wish to aid you in your work.

I presume in the first place, and I think I am not deceived, that you are
discontented with your present situation. I believe you are convinced that you
cannot be happy, as a people, while the powers of your government remain as
they now are, as relative to the church, the state; and the army. If this be
true, you must wish for a change; provided such change can be within your
power, and provided you are convinced that it would be for your advantage. Let
us examine these two points: whether you are able to effect a revolution in
your government; and if you are, whether you would be benefited by it. -- For
it is not my wish to hurry you into measures, of which you cannot see the
issue, and for which you are not prepared.

I. Are you able to effect a revolution in your government?
This question need never be asked of any people, when considered with
reference to themselves only, without regard to their neighbors. A whole
people is essentially sovereign. They can at all times do as they please with
their own affairs, unless they are overpowered by surrounding nations. It is
the people who support the government as it now is; and the same sovereign
people can at any time change its form, and support it in whatever manner it
shall please them best. The question has no difficulty in it, but when viewed
with reference to the interest which other governments may have in preventing a
revolution in their neighborhood.

The enquiry, pursued in this connection, becomes more extensive; especially
when applied to a country of small dimensions, and to a nation less powerful
than some of its neighbors. Such is Piedmont. Had you been called upon seven
years ago to look into your affairs, and take the government into your own
hands, you must have considered it as a dangerous experiment. Even supposing
the weight of your sufferings to have been as great then as they are now, and
supposing you had been possessed of the same information which you have since
drawn from the progress of liberty in Europe, it would scarcely have been
prudent for you to have engaged in so daring an enterprise. All the tyrants in
your neighborhood would have brought forward their armies of slaves to crush
the rebellion. The French court would have been, at that time, as much your
enemy as the French nation is now your friend. And the house of Austria, with
all the subdivisions of its power in Italy, posted at your gates, would have
united with that of Bourbon, to have guaranteed your king in every possible
extent of his oppression.

Under these disadvantages your struggles for liberty might have been (...);
they might even have produced a new injury, instead of relieving you from the
old. But the ground is now changed; the duty you owe to yourselves is clearly
pointed out by the natural current of events; and the work you have to do, in
establishing a perfect and undisturbed liberty, is in my opinion much easier
than you imagine. France is at this time, not only the most powerful nation in
Europe, but when engaged, as she now is, in defense of liberty, she is a match
for all the other powers of Europe, when united in defense of tyranny. France
is now your natural friend, the friend of all people and the enemy of all
tyrants. She is indeed the only friend you have as a nation in this part of the
world. France has brought liberty to your doors; and she invites you, in the
name of all that is dear to you as men, in the name of all that can bind you to
the interests of human nature in general, to accept the blessing at her hands.
She has done more; she has taught you and all other people how public happiness
is to be acquired and preserved. She has addressed herself to the great
principles of reason which are common to all men; she has cleared away the mass
of prejudice, of false doctrine, of superstition in the science of morals; a
mass which the complicated abuses of tyranny, continued for many centuries, had
accumulated on the human mind. She has laid down and clearly defined the rights
and duties of man and of citizens, explained the great doctrine of equality,
the true design of government, the nature of the trust to be reposed in public
officers, as servants of the people, by whom they are created and by whom they
are paid. She has taught you a great practical truth, which is too consoling to
be rejected, and too clear to be called in question, that you are the
sovereigns in your own country; that you have not, that you cannot have a
master, unless you choose to give up your reason, and renounce the character of
men; that for any man to call himself your sovereign is a blasphemy against God
the sovereign of nature, and against men the proprietors of the earth.

Obligations of gratitude are due to the French nation from you, and from every
people in Europe. She has conquered liberty for all men, and laid the
foundation for universal public felicity. Other nations have only to build the
superstructure, of which the model is given them in the constitution of this
great republic.

But let us not amuse ourselves with words, nor rest the argument on
theoretical principles, however incontestible they may be. Let us speak of
facts that are passing before our eyes, and call to mind the events of the
great year that is now drawing to a close. You have seen the principal tyrants
and the most formidable armies of Europe, combined and marching in the full
career of promised victory against the liberties of France. These armies, after
sweeping over half Europe and famishing whole countries in their way to the
French frontiers, have there been cut to pieces by a handful of freemen, and
driven out of their country. Liberty has marched on the heels of the fugitives;
the arch tyrant of Austria, at the head of this fatal conspiracy of kings, has
lost the finest part of his dominions; many of the subaltern princes of the
Empire have lost the whole of theirs, and are now beggars abroad among their
brother brigands, who are in expectation of the same inevitable fate. The
standard of liberty has reached the borders of the Rhine by the miscarriage of
the same combination which has brought it to the summit of the Alps.

All the crowned heads in Europe are now covered with thorns. The man of Turin,
who calls himself your king, has been forced to relinquish one half of the
usurpations of his ancestors, and is now menacing you with destruction for fear
you should reclaim the rest. The Duchy of Savoy and the county of Nice, more
fortunate than you, have been the first to cast off his yoke, and are now ready
to assist you with their arms to follow their example. The Pope and the other
Italian despots, are occupied in restraining the spirit of liberty at home; so
that no one of the neighboring powers is in a condition to take any
considerable part in your affairs, except the French; and the French are
wishing to give you every aid that you may ask.

Under these circumstances, we need no longer enquire whether you are able to
effect a revolution; the more natural question is, are you able to resist it?
It is true, the French have renounced all ideas of conquest, and have declared
that they will never make war against the liberty of any people. But you will
observe that this principle contains in itself a declaration of war against all
tyrants who are hostile to the liberty of France; especially against those
whose vicinity renders them dangerous to the internal peace of the new
republic, by fostering its fugitive traitors, and being the center of new
conspiracies against the rights of man. The court of Turin comes under this
description. It is hostile to the liberties of France; it has been so from the
beginning; the nature of its external connexions and of its internal
constitution requires that it should be so to the end. The court of Turin must,
therefore, be overturned; the government of your country must be changed, and
its powers restored to you, to whom they naturally belong.

This is a simple view of facts, which may serve to indicate the present crisis
of your affairs, of which it is proper you should be apprised; that by a due
consideration of the causes you may not be astonished at the effects. I make
known to you my opinion, with all the frankness that the solemnity of the
subject demands; and it seems almost impossible that you should fail to turn
the consequences to your advantage.

II. The more important question to be discussed, is Whether you will be
benefited by a revolution in your government?
Many of you will doubtless consider this enquiry as superfluous, because your
condition can scarcely be rendered worse, and the means of rendering it better
are so obvious that they cannot escape the slightest observation. But those of
you who are accustomed to reflect on the principles of liberty will pardon the
simplicity of the enquiry, in favor of the great mass of the people whom it is
our duty to instruct. There has been so much falsehood and folly imposed on
that class of mankind, in order to debase and brutalize their minds to the
level of their condition, that their ignorance has become preternatural; it is
almost necessary to begin their instruction by informing them that they are
human creatures. But, citizens of Italy, descendants of Brutus and Cato, this
state of degradation is not the condition designed for man. The God of equal
liberty has allotted you a different birthright; you are now invited to reclaim
your inheritance, to take possession of your portion among your brethren, to
enjoy it in peace, and restore harmony to the great family of men.

You have been fatally misinformed with respect to the nature of the French
revolution, and the events that have attended it. Your religious teachers and
your political masters have an interest in deceiving you. They unite their
efforts for this purpose; they blind your eyes, as you blind the eyes of a
mill-horse, that he may not see his harness, nor consider the weight he draws.
If the mill-horse could know that he has only a feeble child for a conductor,
and that he is made to go constantly round in the same small circle, so that he
cannot hope to come nearer his journey's end; especially if he could look into
the neighboring fields and see the other horses enjoying their liberty, he
would soon revolt against his little despot, he would grow discouraged with the
same unpromising round of fatigue, and refuse to do his work. It is for this
reason that you blind his eyes. My friends, the same arts are used with you.
The clergy and the nobles of your country, with a man at their head whom they
call a King, do nothing but live upon your labors. They cannot support their
luxury by any other means than by keeping you constantly at work. They know
that if you were to be informed of their weakness and of your own strength, you
would refuse to be their drudges. They are sensible that the moment you open
your eyes, you will see that they are but men, that all men are equal in their
rights, that they have no more right or power to be kings and lords over you
than you have to be kings and lords over them; and that in consequence of this,
you would immediately overturn that abominable system of public robbery which
they call a government, and establish a new and equal government, which should
secure to every man the fruits of his own labors, protect the innocent, punish
the guilty, and instruct every member of society in his duties and his rights.

This is precisely what the people of France have done; and the performance of
this great work, so necessary to the happiness of mankind, is called the French
Revolution. It is the knowledge of this revolution which your court and clergy
wish to conceal from you, lest you should follow the example. They prevent the
French newspapers from coming into your country; they forbid the reading of
all books that treat of this revolution, and all conversation on that or any
other political subject; they have shut up the popular theaters at Turin, and
left open none but that of the nobility, from which the citizens are excluded;
they have suppressed the great university of that capital, called the
University of the Provinces, which used to bring students from all parts of
Italy, and a considerable emolument to the town; they have doubled the number
of their spies, and increased the powers of the police.

All this is to keep you ignorant of the French revolution, that you may not be
disposed to follow the example. Observe the insult offered to your
understanding. If the example were bad, your good sense would teach you to shun
it; it would need only to be known, to be despised; and it ought to be
explained to all people, that they might learn to avoid such a dangerous
innovation. If it be good, it ought to be taught by your teachers, and imitated
by all the world. But be assured that the very caution they use to prevent your
coming to the knowledge of the fact, is a proof that such a revolution would be
an advantage to you and a disadvantage to them.

But this is not all; they have invented a thousand falsehoods to supply the
place of truth. They have told you lies, in order to excite your enmity against
your best friends, and to rouse you to war against those principles which ought
to be as dear to you as to the French; because they are the principles of equal
liberty and national happiness, applicable to all people. They have told you
that the French nation is a race of robbers, assassins and atheists; that they
have overturned the religion of their country, waged war against all property
and against the lives of its owners. These are impudent falsehoods which never
could have been imposed upon you for a moment, had you been permitted to judge
for yourselves.

With regard to religion, I only request you to look into the first principles
of liberty, as declared by the National Assembly. You will find them
conformable to the system of the Catholic faith, as taught by the Apostles and
recognized in your country, before the church was connected with the civil
government, and before the ministers of the altar became the tyrants of the
state. The French constitution has declared, that all men shall be free to
worship God in their own way, and to follow the dictates of their conscience.
If any man shall tell you that this is destroying religion, he is a liar, and
not worthy to be your teacher. The gospel of Jesus Christ preaches to you in
the strongest language the great doctrine of equality; that all men are equal
in the sight of God, and that you shall call no man your master upon earth.
This is the very language of the French revolution. But its authors have gone
farther; and, to silence all cavillers who could persuade you or others that
they have destroyed the Catholic religion, they have done more to maintain it
than any legislative body ever did before; they have ordained that the priests
and bishops, chosen by the people shall be salaried and paid out of the
national purse.

It is true, they have suppressed those haunts of idleness, hypocrisy and vice,
known by the name of monasteries and convents. This is an advantage to
religion, instead of being against it; for religion teaches men to do good, and
to labor for their living; but these institutions teach them to do nothing,
and live upon the labors of others. Be assured, therefore, that the French
have done nothing to the disadvantage of religion; but, on the contrary, they
have done much to maintain it in its native purity and independence. But I
entreat you in the sincerity of my heart not to receive this fact on the
strength of my assertion, or that of any other man; but to look into their
conduct and judge for yourselves.

You have been likewise taught to believe that the French have violated private
property. This is a malicious calumny, which every step of their revolution
will contradict, the moment you become acquainted with it. In all the decrees
of the National Assembly, in all the irregular movements and insurrections of
the people, whatever was the object, you will find they have paid a most sacred
regard to individual property. Their conduct in this respect has been more
laudable within the last three years than that of any other government in
Europe. The same thing may be observed with regard to the private morals of the
people; they are essentially better than they formerly were. There have been
less instances of theft and robbery in France since the revolution, than at any
former period; and probably less, in proportion to its population, than in any
of the neighboring countries during the same period.

With regard to the National Assembly, I will give you some instances of their
inviolable principle of preserving the property of individuals amidst the shock
of the revolution. The abuses of the ancient government had created thousands
of useless offices in every department of state, in the law, the finance, and
the king's household, -- the same as you see at Turin. These offices were
supposed to have been purchased and paid for by those who held them; though
many of them had been given gratis through favor and intrigue. On the
regeneration of the government and of the nation by the revolution, it was
necessary that these destructive sinecures should be suppressed; and the
Assembly, considering them as the property of the holders, purchased up this
property and paid the proprietors the full prices that they had given, or were
supposed to have given, for their places. This act of justice was certainly not
necessary to the revolution. It must therefore be considered as a mark of that
national dignity which forbids the violation of any kind of private property,
however slender the title by which it is claimed.

Another instance may be observed in the public debt. It is well known that the
public debt of France, as well as that of Piedmont, was contracted by a wicked
and infamous court, the greater part of it for the worst of purposes. It was in
part contracted to support the vices of a horde of men and women at Versailles,
who were a disgrace to human nature, and whom the nation was under no
obligation to maintain; it was in part contracted to carry on foreign wars and
conquests, the express purpose of which was to rivet the chains of the people
at home. But as the creditors in general were not to be blamed for these
things, they were declared to be the proprietors of the debt; and the nation
assumed upon itself the payment, without any diminution. This must ever be
remembered as an act of sovereign magnanimity and of disinterested protection
to the property of individuals; an act to which they were not constrained by
any necessity or previous obligation. A royal bankruptcy might have been
declared, without affecting the future credit of the nation; and the revolution
would have suffered no delay, but would have been facilitated by proceeding on
this principle. Instead of doing this, the people have voluntarily taken an
immense burden on themselves, even under the humiliating circumstance of giving
a sanction to all the extravagance of the two last centuries, and paying at
this day, under the rigid economy of a republic, for those splendid palaces,
gardens, and waterworks, which insult the poverty of millions, and stare the
nation in the face with the unpunished crimes of a race of execrated kings.

The act of the assembly declaring the church lands to be the property of the
nation, the suppression of tithes and other feudal claims, have been often
mentioned as violations of property. Those who really consider them in this
light are weak men, or they have not examined the subject; those who persuade
you to think so, without believing it themselves, are wicked men, and not to be
trusted. As to the church lands, this act of the Assembly did not change the
property of them at all. They belonged to the nation before. What the Assembly
did, was to change the mode of paying the clergy, equalize their salaries, and
reduce the number of ecclesiastics. That laborious and more useful class of the
clergy, who before were starving upon a beggarly pittance, have had their
salaries raised; that idle and overgrown class, who, without doing any duty,
were living in the style of princes and tyrants, have been reduced to a
moderate income. All are now chosen by the people, and all paid by the nation.
With regard to the feudal claims, they were founded in usurpation. The
landlords and nobles, to whom they were attributed, had no right to them or
property in them, any more than the King of Sardinia has a property in you, or
in the people of Jerusalem, of which he likewise styles himself King. These
feudal claims were mere badges of servitude, which the establishment of equal
liberty and the abolition of hereditary titles rendered it necessary to
destroy. The nation has in all instances showed itself able to distinguish
between the empty superstition of pomp, which serves only to debase mankind,
and the solid principles of society on which the revolution is founded.

You have heard it likewise asserted that the French revolution has been marked
with cruelty and murder. This is unfortunately true. But it has likewise been
marked with treachery, with bribery, with perjury, with all the complicated
wiles of expiring despotism. All the cruelty, all the crimes of every name or
denomination, that have attended this revolution, have proceeded from royalty,
the adherents of royalty, and the refractory priests. The court of Versailles
had been for ages a school of falsehood and deceit; and the execution of the
penal laws served as a public exhibition of torture, to familiarise the people
with the most sanguinary punishments. If the court of Turin and the laws of
Piedmont are any better, it is happier for you; you will have the less
wickedness to combat in the course of your revolution. But I fear in some
respects they are worse. These circumstances in France had trained up in all
parts of the kingdom a numerous class of men versed in every art of treachery
and perfidy. In this sitution of things the great mass of the people, who are
naturally honest and good, set themselves seriously to work in the business of
the revolution; which might have been carried on with the greatest harmony; as
it had nothing in view but the welfare of the whole. But these deceitful men,
being enemies of the revolution, and finding that they could not oppose it by
open force, assumed the mask of patriotism, and brought themselves into places
of trust in every department of the legislative and executive power. The effect
of this was that these good people found themselves deceived and betrayed in
every stage of their affairs, from the beginning of the revolution in 1789,
till the tenth of August, 1792. Being surrounded by traitors, and not knowing
whom to trust even with the execution of their own vengeance, it was natural
and sometimes necessary that they should assume this terrible task upon
themselves. In some instances indeed the popular vengeance has been ill
directed, and has fallen on innocent heads. But these instances are rare. This
was written previous to the establishment of the Revolutionary Tribunal. It is
indeed to be re^^^^ted that that institution was deferred to so late a period;
as it was calculated to prevent a more tumultuous mode of exercising popular
vengeance. But it is more to be regretted that such a tribunal became necessary
at all, and especially that it has been sometimes used by the leaders as an
instrument of party rage, without an honest regard to the good of the cause.


The limits, I prescribe to my letter, will not allow of my entering into
details on a subject so intricate and extensive. This, however, may be relied
on as an undeniable truth, that nothing is more humane, generous and just, than
the general spirit of the revolution; and whatever particular acts may seem to
contravene these principles, those acts are chargeable upon its enemies, and
not upon its friends.

But to arrive at the subject the most interesting for your immediate
consideration, let us follow the course of the revolution in a geographical
sense, and pass with it from France to Piedmont. The revolution in this journey
has stopped to winter in Savoy, from whence I write this letter; and before we
mount the Alps, it is natural to make a pause, to contemplate the country where
we are. -- Here is a people who lately made part of yourselves, and who are now
separated from you, rather on account of their vicinity to France, than for any
particular interest different from your own. For, in the great cause of
liberty, the interests of all people are the same. It is the cause of tyranny
that has made them enemies; it is the imposition and falsehood of those who
would live on other men's labors, that have occasioned all the wars of every
nation in the world. The people of Savoy were certainly under no obligation to
be governed by the King of Jerusalem; though they had groaned under his yoke for
many generations. Their late conduct in declaring their own sovereignty and
independence, abolishing hereditary titles, and establishing a government of
their own on the principles of equal liberty, is a subject which must strike
your minds in a very interesting point of view. Your tyrants will represent it
as a crime which ought to excite your indignation; and they will call on you to
take arms and rush headlong into a destructive war, to assist them in reducing
this country again to their obedience. They are now preparing their forces,
augmenting their armies, borrowing money abroad, and extorting it from the hand
of industry at home, for this detestable purpose. You are to be taken from your
farms and your shops, and enrolled in the regiments of death. If you are
unwilling to engage in this new kind of slavery, you are to be seized upon like
so many felons, dragged from your wives and children, and tortured into
discipline under the lash of a military officer. Your families are to be left
to perish in poverty, while you perhaps are slaughtered in the field.

But before you suffer yourselves to be driven to this desperate business, I
entreat you to resort to your own reason, and exercise the right of judging for
yourselves. Consider the nature of the enterprise, and the object you have in
view. Who are the people on whom you are going to let fall this terrible stroke
of vengeance? What is their crime? Are they not your brothers and friends? Have
they not acted as you would have done in their situation? And ought you not
rather at this moment to follow their example, than to be the instruments of
their destruction and your own? Let us attend to this enquiry before it be too
late.

The people of Savoy, as to their local position stand in the same relation to
France as you stand in to Italy. They and you are posted in the marches of
these two great fractions of the Continent. As long as this part of Europe is
governed by tyrants, perpetually contending for dominion on each side of the
Alps, these positions expose you both to the inroads of all parties. You cannot
avoid being insulted by foreign armies in their passage through your country,
although you have no interest in their quarrels. Your history is full of
examples of this kind, from the days of Hannibal, down to that infamous war of
the Spanish succession, which involved your country in blood and held half
Europe in arms for many years together; a war in which you had no other
concern, than that of being the victims of foreign disputes. The face of your
country bears the insulting marks of this unfortunate position in which you are
placed. It is covered with fortifications. As if nature had not thrown rocks
and mountains enough in your way, you have been forced to create them by the
hand of art, to encompass your towns with walls, and disfigure your fields with
towers and castles. Your agriculture has been ill-conducted, your manufactures
neglected; all the useful arts have been forced to yield to a general system of
defense against the enemies of your neighbors, when you had no enemies of your
own.

In this situation, what is to be done? You cannot change the position which
nature has given to your country. Your only resource is to change the policy of
Europe from war to peace. You are more peculiarly interested in the perpetual
peace of Europe than any other people on earth. This is a weighty
consideration, a truth which your tyrants cannot deny. It is the knowledge of
this truth which has influenced the people of Savoy in their late change of
government. It is in this point of view that they have contemplated the French
revolution; with this view they have adopted it themselves, and wish to extend
it to you, whose situation so nearly resembles their own. With this view you
ought to wish to extend it to all the States of Italy, to Spain, and to the
circles of the empire, from whence it would travel through Europe and through
the world.

The principles of this revolution are those of universal peace; and it is
impossible that it should fail to produce the effect, because it takes away
every motive for national hostility, and teaches the people of all countries to
regard each other as friends and fellow-citizens of the world. Establish equal
liberty among the people, and instruct them in the duties that arise from that
situation, as the French are about to do; you will then find that the business
of tyrants has ceased, and the race is forever extinct. Purge the earth of its
tyrants, and it will no more be tormented with war.

The conduct of the people of Savoy in uniting themselves to the French
republic deserves a farther consideration. This was a measure incidental to
their geographical position on the French side of the Alps; and the arguments
which induced them to it, do not apply to you. It is probable that for the
purposes of civil government you will henceforward be two distinct people. But
this step of their's cannot be considered by you as an act of hostility, or a
breach of friendship. They are certainly not less your friends since they have
ceased to be your fellow subjects. It is an essential quality of a French
citizen to be the friend of all people, especially of those in his
neighborhood, whose peace and happiness will always be necessary to his own.

The essence of tyranny is to counteract the economy of nature, the essence of
liberty is to promote it. Nature has said that the French and the Savoyards
should be one people; but tyranny has said that the Savoyards and the
Piedmontese should be one people. Consult your history, and see what torrents
of blood have been shed to cement this unnatural union. Come and view the
condition of this unfortunate people; possessing one of the finest countries in
the world, and deprived of the means of improving it; subjected for ages to a
race of weak and impolitic princes, who, fixing their residence on the other
side of the Alps, have paid no other attention to this part of their dominions,
than to keep the people in poverty and ignorance, in order to secure their
obedience. A military force, sent from your country, has been maintained here
to insult the peaceable inhabitants, by exercising the police in every town and
village. The Senate of Savoy, which was formerly a legislative body, has been
long since reduced to the simple functions of a judiciary tribunal, and its
members appointed by the king. He has prevented the working of the mines of
iron, lead and coals, with which the country abounds; he has prevented the
establishment of any one of the different manufactures to which the inhabitants
are peculiarly invited by the abundance of raw materials, by their numerous
currents of water, by their vicinity to France, and the convenient navigation
of the Isere and the Rhone; he has discouraged their agriculture by the
shackles he has laid upon their commerce, even in the interior of his own
dominions; for the trade between Piedmont and Savoy has been subjected to the
same pernicious regulations and impositions which exist between rival nations
among the most jealous despots of Europe; he has interposed his authority
between parents and the duties they owe their children, by discouraging the
education of youth, so far as to oblige those who are designed for the learned
professions to perform their studies at Turin. There are in Savoy six different
colleges of education, which have existed for several centuries, and have been
exclusively appropriated to those studies which have been known in Catholic
Europe by the name of Theology. This was a necessary precaution of the
government; as, without distributing these institutions in all the principal
towns, and rendering this sort of instruction easy and cheap, it would have
been impossible to have initiated a sufficient number of men to keep the people
in that state of ignorance which was necessary for their continuance in shavery.

Within a few years there has been established in the college of Chambery a
professorship in law, and another in medicine, but under this restriction, that
two years residence here should be reckoned for one year at the university of
Turin. And no man could practice law or medicine within the king's dominions,
until he had taken his degrees at Turin.




It would be tedious to recount to you all the instances of folly and cruelty
exercised by your government against the people of this country. One general
complaint, which appears to be well founded, is, that all your kings,
especially the one from whom they have now revolted, have shown an humiliating
distinction in their treatment of you and them. The Savoyards have been treated
as your slaves, as well as the slaves of your common master. Their hard
earnings have been drained from them, to increase the wealth and population of
Piedmont. You must observe, however, that this was not designed as an advantage
to you, neither has it been so in fact. It was done to facilitate the
collection of the king's revenue. You have been made the instruments of drawing
money from these people, for no other reason than that it was more easy to draw
it immediately from you, than from them, by the tyrants of Turin.

The condition of these people was perhaps no worse than yours. You have in
your country more wealth than they, but you have infinitely more of real
indigence. You were both taxed as high as you could bear The population of the
principality of Piedmont is reckoned at four millions. The amount of the public
revenue arising from that principality is only 22 million livres of Piedmont,
equal to L 1,100,000 sterling, forming an average of 5 s. 6 d. a head. This is
exclusive of dimes and other ecclesiastical taxes, which answer to the tithes
and poor-rates in England. The public taxes in England, exclusive of these,
form an average of about 55 s. a head. Yet the people of Piedmont are, if
possible, more distressed with taxes than the people of England; although their
soil is naturally more fertile, and their country more abundant in materials
for manufactures. Their situation indeed is not so favorable for commerce, but
it is not unfavourable. By this comparison we may judge of the cruel,
uncreating influence of a government which can so completely destroy the native
energy of man.

The Duchy of Savoy, whose population is 424,000 used to pay annually into the
treasury at Turin about three million livres of Piedmont, equal to L 150,000
sterling. This was the utmost that the hand of despotism could collect from a
people whom it deprived of the means of improving the advantages which nature
had given them.


; and your taxes were imposed in the most arbitrary manner. The King could
augment or vary them any day at his pleasure. The Savoyard was poor, but he was
not miserable; he was not insulted by the display of luxury passing before his
eyes, though he was sensible that he supported a set of infamous courtiers
beyond the mountains, who riot on the labors of mankind.

The effect of tyranny has usually been to vitiate the morals of society, and
destroy that energy of mind which is natural to man in a state of freedom. The
people of Savoy exhibit a remarkable exception to this rule. They retain a
singular purity of morals, and a firmness of character, which the weight of a
long and complicated tyranny has not been able to debase. They have long
witnessed the vices and endured the injustice of their masters, without
learning to be vicious or unjust. They have felt the inconvenience of that
unnatural combination of things which cut them off from the country to which
they really belonged, and bound them to a distant lord. But almighty liberty
has at last dissolved the chain, and restored them to nature and to France.

The moral character of this people, which renders them so worthy of our
esteem, has likewise fitted them for the enjoyment of the liberty to which they
have been so suddenly born. No people, rising at once from slavery to a state
of equality and independence, ever conducted themselves with so much dignity
and moderation. They rose, like the infant Hercules, to the vigor of manhood
in a single day. They showed themselves masters of the whole system of
government, the moment they became masters of themselves. They have committed
no blunders; they have taken no retrograde steps; they have lost no time in
idle disputes, and useless etiquette. Their National Assembly, which was the
first representative body that ever was heard of in the country, and consisted
of six hundred and fifty members, organized itself and finished its sessions in
nine days; during which time it did more business than any body of men under
like circumstances could be expected to perform in so many months. But there is
one fact more remarkable than all the rest, a fact which history will announce
to the admiration of the latest ages: the revolution in Savoy has not yet cost
a single drop of blood. It has been attended with no acts of violence, no
tumultuous meetings, no necessity for the intervention of military force. The
force of reason has conducted the whole operation; and the sacred energy of
liberty has proved itself to be the source and guarantee of the moral
attributes of man.

Such is the condition of this respectable people; and such is the point of
view in which you are to consider the late measures they have taken to reclaim
and secure their rights. From this consideration you will naturally turn your
attention to yourselves, and contemplate the duties you are called upon to
perform. For the time is fast approaching when you can no longer be the idle
spectators of the triumphs of liberty. Although the revolution in Savoy is
hitherto free from the violence of war, it depends on you to say whether it
shall continue so to the end of another year. It is in your power at this
moment to declare that the Alps shall never more re-echo the sound of a cannon,
nor their majestic streams be stained with human blood. Your destiny calls you
either to pronounce the sentence of misery and slaughter upon thousands of
yourselves and of your neighhours who will follow your example, or to declare
the immediate emancipation, peace and happiness of all the States of Italy.

This is doubtless a serious commission, as it renders you responsible for the
fate of so considerable a portion of your fellow creatures. But observe the
limits as well as the extent of your power. Though you hold the balance of
great benefits and of great disasters, which the present state of affairs is
ready to offer to your country; though you are able by the assistance of France
to rise as one man and reclaim your own sovereignty, establish your own liberty
and provide for the future tranquillity of this part of Europe; though by a
contrary conduct you may fight the battles of your tyrant against the friends
of your peace; yet remember, you cannot long impede the progress of liberty.
Her cause is that of reason and of God; she will not listen to any capitulation
with despotism; the monster must be driven beyond the Adriatic, and banished
from the face of the earth. Italy must be free; she cannot wear her chains much
longer; it would be glorious for you to be the first in this regeneration of
society in that ancient garden of the world. Such a measure would be an example
of virtue to your children, a consolation to the shades of your ancestors, who
for a long succession of ages have passed away in the clouds of prejudice,
without knowing the means of happiness, or perceiving the dignity of man.

Your king has joined the coalition of despots against the people of all
nations. Their arms are directed against France; but their hostility is really
against their own subjects. What cause of quarrel had the King of Hungary, or
the Elector of Brandenburg with the people of France? None. Their jealousy was
against the people of Hungary, of Austria, of Brabant, and of Brandenburg. They
saw that these nations were about to reclaim the rights of man and to cast off
the yoke of oppression, as the French had done. They, therefore, to retain
their unjust power at home, concluded that it was best to strike the revolution
at its root, and conquer Germany in France. They knew, if they could subdue the
French, and completely vanquish the spirit of liberty in that country, that all
the people of Europe would shrink beneath their chains, and their masters might
probably sleep upon their thrones for another half century.

Such was the policy of your master. You cannot suppose that, as King of
Jerusalem or Prince of Peidmont, he had any ground or color of dispute with
the French nation. That nation had no concern with him, nor with any part of
his dominions. They were occupied in their own affairs, at peace with all the
world, and declared that they meant to remain so. He entered into the war with
them for no other purpose but to keep you in subjection. The war was against
you, and is still to be carried on against you the next campaign. He intends to
make you his soldiers to fight his own battles against yourselves, although he
orders you to point your cannon against the French.

This is the true state of the case. The whole of this war on the part of your
monarch is maintained by deceiving you. Indeed the whole business of monarchy
is deception; kings must govern by deception, as long as they govern at all;
for it is impossible for one man to tyrannise over a whole people, but by
deceiving them. I have no particular dislike to your king, any more than to all
others; he is probably no worse than kings in general. They hold an office that
is perfectly useless in society, and exceedingly destructive to the peace and
happiness of mankind. In this view they ought to be detested by every man, and
rejected by every nation.

France has been forced into the field, to encounter this infamous combination
of robbers, this war of all crimes against the principles of all virtue. She
has undertaken the defense of human nature. She has assumed a new kind of
tactique unknown to the art of war, and irresistible to the armies of kings.
She has armed herself in the panoply of reason; her manifesto is the rights of
man, her sword the pledge of peace. In this species of warfare we need not be
astonished at her success. What people can resist the hand that comes to break
their chains? The armies of liberty are every where triumphant, while their
standards are scarcely stained with blood. Victory completes her work, before
they arrive to celebrate the conquest; and the entrance of the French troops
into the conquered country is regarded by the people rather as the procession
of a civic feast, than as the dreaded violence of war. Their general, instead
of punishing the new recovered citizens with confiscation, imprisonment, and
death, meets them in their Jacobin societies, and invites them to form their
primary assemblies. The forts and garrisons which he erects to secure his
conquests, are printing presses and reading clubs.

Such is the war in which the illustrious monarch of Turin is engaged. These
are the armies he expects you to encounter in the field. If you wish to know in
what manner the combat ought to be conducted, you may learn it from the people
of Savoy, whose example in this respect, as in many others, is worthy to be
followed by every nation. You may learn it likewise from the people of Nice,
from those of Hainault, Flanders, Brabant, Malines, Antwerp, Guelderland, Namur
Liege, Spires, and Mayenee; all provinces, principalities, or independent
states, conquered to liberty within the last three months. As I have kept no
complete register of these conquests, perhaps the above list may be incomplete.
But it matters not; if it were complete for to day, perhaps it would not be so
for tomorrow. This advice is intended for the instruction of the people; if
your king should deem it inconsistent with his warlike character to follow the
same advice, he can take a lesson from the battle of Gemmappe.

The French army destined for your deliverance will probably not pass the Alps
till the spring. You have the remainder of the winter to deliberate on the part
you have to act. You can by that time decide whether you will receive them as
enemies or as friends. -- In the latter case, you have only to study the
principles of republican government, send away your tyrants, and prepare
yourselves to give lessons of liberty to all the Italian States. The troops of
Austria, which are now about to enter your territories from Milan and Tuscany,
under pretense of aiding you against the French, will flee before them, as they
have done in the Low Countries, the moment you manifest your intention of doing
your own business in a peaceable way.

But, after a due consideration of the circumstances which I have endeavored
to detail, should you conclude to regard the French people as your enemies, and
to meet their armies in the field, I shall tremble for the consequences of your
unfortunate decision. Thousands among you must fall the victims of the infamous
cause of your tyrant, which cannot be supported. On that day, I beg you would
call to mind the honest advice of a stranger, who now speaks to you the words
of truth; who has been a steady observer of the rise and progress of liberty in
America and in France; and, who, from these advantages is able to estimate the
force of its principles, and predict the triumph of its arms.

I advise you above all things to be cautious of the troops in the pay of
Austria, who are marching to join your army. You cannot be so blinded by your
leaders as to suppose that this band of ruffiians is brought into your country
to render service to you. They are designed to keep you in subjection, and to
take from you the freedom of your choice in the great question, Whether you
will adopt the principles of the French revolution? They will be posted in your
rear, to act against you, if you should refuse to act against the French. Your
position may seem a critical one, placed in the interval between two contending
powers; but, remember that one is an army of freemen, the other a horde of
slaves; on one side is the permanent force of a nation, whose means are
inexhaustible, on the other the accidental hireling of a despot whose scepter
is falling from his hands; from one you have the offer of equal liberty and
perpetual peace, from the other a continuance of your slavery, augmentation of
your burdens, and a certainty of future wars.

Italy is destined to form one great republic. The boundaries which nature has
given it are peculiarly suited to this purpose; and as long as we follow
nature, in politics as well as morals, we are sure to be in the right.
Politicians, who have not well considered the effects of liberty, are alarmed
at the extention of the French republic, fearing it will become too powerful
for its neighbors. For this reason the union of Savoy is mentioned as a
subject of jealousy to other nations. The enemies of your liberty will not fail
to make use of this circumstance to excite your fears and provoke your
resentment. Men who reason in this manner have formed their maxims on those
despotic systems of government to which they have been accustomed. They are
maxims which can no longer apply to nations, when masters of their own actions,
and at liberty to govern themselves by the collected wisdom of the great body
of the people. A nation in this condition will never disturb the peace of its
neighbors in any manner whatever. Its interest, on the contrary, will be to
promote the peace and prosperity of every country in the world.

When a nation is governed by one man, like Piedmont, or by a few families,
like the ancient aristocracy of Rome, and several modern ones in Italy, the
interest of those who govern, is to extend their dominions; because it augments
their personal revenue and adds to the weight of their influence over the
people, whom they consider as their property. -- For this reason they make war;
for this reason they form treaties of alliance to guarantee each other in their
conquests, and in the property which they have in the people. -- In pursuance
of this policy, the Prince of Piedmont, in the course of that long Spanish war
which I have mentioned, purchased with the blood and treasure of your nation,
the title of King of Sardinia; and at the close of the war, he obtained from
the Houses of Austria and Bourbon, and from the King of England, a guarantee of
the possession.

It is easy to conceive that a system of robbery and murder of this kind,
carried on through all Europe for centuries together, must be reduced to some
certain rules. These rules by a misapplication of terms, are called the law of
nations. We may hope soon to see the law of nations established on different
principles; that is, on principles as different from what it has been, as the
interest of nations is different from that of those persons who have usually
governed them.
It is rather the law of despots, who know no law but their own fears. It has
likewise been necessary to establish some general ideas of what is called the
balance of power among the states of Europe, requiring that each state should
be restrained to certain fixed limits. On this principle, when any particular
power endeavors to extend its limits, it is natural to tax that power with
ambitious views, and to regard it as an object of jealousy. This reasoning is
perfectly just when applied to regal and aristocratical dominions; but under
the reign of liberty the argument has lost its ground; dominion itself is at an
end; all the technical terms in the science of politics have changed their
meaning; and as we must begin the science anew, it is to be regretted that we
are not furnished with new words, to express our ideas with more precision than
we can with the old.

If all the nations of Europe were as free as the French, and every individual
member of society were equally independent of every other individual, the
question respecting the boundaries of any particular government would become in
a great measure indifferent, both to the people of that government and to all
their neighbors. No person would have any interest in extending or contracting
the territorial limits of a state. They would be established purely on the
principle of convenience for the administration of the interior concerns of the
people, and by the free consent of all parties. And whenever it should be found
more convenient to change them, they might be extended or contracted on the
same principle, without injury to any person, and without exciting the jealousy
of any nation.

I could cite you many instances from the United States of America, in which
this theory has been carried into practice; which would prove to you that the
doctrine I here advance, as one of the effects of liberty, is not chimerical.
But an instance more striking to you, and which will form an epoch in the
history of Europe, is the conduct of the National Convention of France on the
proposition of Savoy to be united to that republic. Here we see a sovereign
people, uninfluenced by any fears, hopes, or connections from abroad,
deliberating in the most solemn manner, whether they will extend their
territorial boundaries, by the admission of seven new provinces, inhabited by
four hundred thousand freemen who had sent their deputies to solicit an union.
The seven provinces which formed the Duchy of Savoy, now united to France,
under the name of the department of Mont Blanc, were Savoy proper, Genevois,
Carouge, Chablois, Fauchigny, Tarentaise, and Maurienne.
To raise a question on a proposition of this kind is certainly a new thing in
politics. Louis XIV. would have carried on a war for half a century, and
sacraficed twice that number of his own subjects, to have made such an
acquisition to his dominions. But the members of the Convention who deliberated
on this question had no personal interest to serve, no ambition to gratify. It
was merely a question of national convenience, whether the frontiers of the
republic should remain fixed on the limits of Dauphiny and Lyonnois, or be
extended to the Alps which appear to be the natural boundary of France.

The latter opinion prevailed; but it was rather on account of the present
circumstances of Italy than of France. Italy is still governed by despots; and
it is to be expected, that as long as they remain in power, they will continue
the war they have undertaken against the French. To prevent their incursions,
it was necessary to oppose them the barrier of the Alps. But if Italy were as
free as France, all causes of hostility between them would be for ever removed.
It would be scarcely possible in the course of human events, that they would
ever more have any ground of contention. In that case it would be perfectly
indifferent, as to personal interest, both to the French and the Savoyards,
whether they should form one people, or two, or ten. -- And whatever resolution
they should take, as most convenient to themselves, would never excite your
jealousy or resentment.

No people has more to gain by this pacific system than those of Piedmont. You
inhabit a fertile country, productive of all the most necessary articles of
life; several of which are in great demand among your neighbors. All that is
wanting to render you happy is to be masters of the fruits of your own labors
at home, to be secured against war, and to have a free circulation of the
objects of commerce.

These three things are now within your reach; they would follow as a necessary
consequence of adopting the principles of the French revolution, and
establishing the liberties of Italy.

With the most ardent wishes to render you service, in the present solemn
crisis of your affairs, I have written you this letter. If it should answer no
other purpose, it will at least serve as a testimony to my conscience, that I
have endeavored to do my duty, and to merit the title which I claim, that of
your sincere and disinterested friend,

Joel Barlow.

A few Copies of the following Works may be had of the Publisher of this
Pamphlet, which comprehend all Barlow's Writings on Political Subjects.
ADVICE TO THE PRIVILEGED ORDERS in the several States of Europe; resulting
from the Necessity and Propriety of a general Revolution in the Principles of
Government, as it will Effect the following principle Objects, which make up
the Affairs of Nations in the present State of Europe, viz. The Feudal System
-- The Church -- The Military -- The Administration of Justice -- Revenue and
Public Expenditure.

The 2d Part of the above Work is printed in a separate Pamphlet, and treats
entirely on Revenue and Public Expenditure. In which the various Modes of
collecting Revenue by Impost, Excise, and Taxation on Property are impartially
examined.

A LETTER to the National Convention of France on the Defects of the
Constitution of 1791. -- Many of the Observations in this Letter are peculiarly
applicable to the Constitution of the United States.

THE CONSPIRACY OF KINGS -- A POEM.

To every Person of discernment, who has Read the foregoing Letter to the
Inhabitants of Piedmont, any Encomiums on the other Writings of the Author will
appear unnecessary.


