Doctor BARNARD's DUDLEIAN LECTURE SERMON, SEPTEMBER 3, 1795.

A DISCOURSE ON NATURAL RELIGION, DELIVERED IN THE CHAPEL OF THE UNIVERSITY IN
CAMBRIDGE, SEPTEMBER 3, 1795, AT THE LECTURE FOUNDED BY THE Honorable PAUL
DUDLEY, Esquire.

BY THOMAS BARNARD, D. D. Minister of the North Church in SALEM.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1795.

ACTS XIV. 14 -- 17.
-- Which when the Apostles Paul and Barnabas heard of, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye
these things? We are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye
should turn from these vanities unto the Living God, which made Heaven, and
Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are therein: Who in times past suffered
all nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without
witness, in that he did good; and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

A DISCOURSE upon Natural Religion in an university professedly under christian
instruction, and by a minister of Christ, appears to some, if not criminal, yet
highly improper. They have an idea that Natural and Revealed Religion are
opposed to each other, and mutually destructive. It is a mistaken idea: They
are to be conceived rather as different rays of light from the Great Source of
Understanding, which conjoin to promote the same most valuable design -- the
information, virtue, and happiness of mankind. The honorable Founder of this
Lecture had this conception when he established it. The Trustees, who carry
into effect his will, and the University, who introduce the lecturer to their
chapel on this occasion, mean not thereby to weaken religion, but yield her
support.

WE have in the Christian Apostles Paul and Barnabas a noble instance of zeal
in maintaining a belief in the being and government of God, the most essential
principle of Natural Religion. They were now in Lystra in Lycaonia, indifferent
to their ease and personal safety, could they but be the instruments of
enlightening the ignorant in the nature and obligations of religion and virtue,
more fully taught and established by Jesus Christ, the most eminent preacher of
righteousness who had ever visited mankind. Endued with divine power, that they
might the more successfully effectuate the important ends of their mission,
they exerted it "on one impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's
womb." They said to him with a loud voice, "stand upright on thy feet: And he
leaped and walked." The inhabitants seeing what Paul had done, were affected
with lively admiration; and conceiving the fancied beings above, whom they
adored, only capable of such astonishing acts, "they said one to another, the
gods are come down to us in the likeness of men." This idea made so deep an
impression on their minds, "that they called Barnabas Jupiter; and Paul,
Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker. Then the priest of Jupiter, which
was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have
done sacrifice with the people." Vain and ambitious men would have been most
highly gratified with the honor of being esteemed the supreme God, or the
interpreter of his will. Yielding to the flattery, they would cheerfully have
been crowned with garlands, and permitted hecatombs of beasts to have been
slain in sacrifice to their glory. But these primitive preachers of
christianity were uneasy and sad with the proposal of honors which became only
the great Creator and supreme Governor of the Universe. Moved with pity and
indignation, when they were acquainted with their design, "they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, sirs, why do ye these things?
We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you, that ye should
turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and
the sea, and all things that are therein: Who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without
witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness."

To represent what Reason, when uncultivated or highly improved, says upon the
important subjects of religion and morals; and if possible, brighten and
confirm our faith in its instructions, is the duty to which I am appointed on
this occasion. In pursuit of this design, I ask your patience and candor. I
fervently entreat, above all things, the guidance and benediction of the Father
of Lights!

UPON the just idea of Natural Religion, and the consequences which flow from
its maxims, I shall make several remarks, which I hope will be pertinent and
instructive. I would observe however before I begin, that there is no
probability I shall advance a new conception upon these topics. The most I can
do is to collect within the compass of a single discourse, some of those
sentiments relative to them, which have the most powerfully affected my own
mind, arranged in a different manner, and expressed in different language.
These truths have been collecting ever since men began to think; they have
enlarged as they have continued to think; they would fill volumes were they all
properly detailed. Moreover, they form a common fund, from which any one may
take the truths he understands, and can intelligibly explain, assured he makes
no further use of the opinions of his predecessors and contemporaries, than
they have made of theirs. Indeed it may be truly said, there is scarcely a
question in Natural Religion, which does not frequently arise in the minds of
well educated, and thinking persons, to which they do not return some of those
different answers which are diffused through innumerable books.

WHAT IS NATURAL RELIGION? To this inquiry, answers will be made, differing
with the characters of those who make them. The improved part of mankind,
during modern periods most famed for literary excellence, has been divided
into two grand sects, the friends and the opposers of Revelation. According to
this distinction, they have given opposite explanations of Natural Religion.
The friend of Revelation asserts that a complete code of this Religion contains
all the truths relative to GOD, his nature, perfections, and government -- to
man, his nature, duty, and expectations, which may be illustrated and confirmed
by rational inquiry and argumentation. Nor does he think himself chargeable
with impropriety in calling this collection of truths Natural Religion, though
many of its important principles have been made known to him by Revelation;
principles, which have enabled him to think to an extent, and write with a
strength of conviction upon these interesting subjects, which, if he had been
left to his own unassisted reason, would have been impossible. In his opinion,
the doctrines of Revelation, when explained and rendered more credible by the
efforts of the human mind, become parts of Natural Religion.

IMPRESSED with these ideas, many who deserve the style of the friends of
Revelation, have applied their time, and all the energy of great abilities, to
confirm by rational argumentation the principles of piety, virtue, and moral
obligation; as well as the propriety of expecting a future state of existence
and retribution. The Lecture founded in England by Sir Robert Boil, the
ornament of his age, of religion, philosophy, and literature, brought forth a
large list of eminent writers, who in their immortal performances explained and
defended the truths of Natural and Revealed Religion.

THE present Lecture was established, no doubt, by Judge Dudley, our
respectable countryman, in imitation of the one which has been mentioned. A
proof, amongst a multitude of others agreeable to our feelings, that Americans
have beeen ready to follow, in laudable and beneficial institutions, the elder
and more wealthy inhabitants of Europe!

THE most celebrated Ministers of Christianity have, in their more private
discourses, exerted their ingenuity and learning to promote the ends of these
public institutions. Several in civil life, and in the other learned
professions, have employed fine powers of mind in the promotion of the same
good cause. To this meritorious service they have been animated, not only by
their unfeigned regard to sacred truth, but by the prejudice of unbelievers
against Clergymen, as the hired supporters of religion. However ill-founded and
ungenerous the imputation, yet it has ever deserved the attention of the
friends of religious truth universally. Those of them, who paying it the
respect they ought, have laid aside their more peculiar offices, and employed
some of their time, and the vigor of their abilities, in a design so truly
valuable, deserve the sincere thanks of the wise and good.

AMONGST those of this class, who have appeared within a few years past,
Monsieur Necker, the great Financier of France, is highly to be esteemed and
admired. He saw, with deep regret, that the principles of an impious
philosophy, rendered persuasive with the graces of good composition, and all
the ingenuity of which the cause was capable, threatened serious evils to that
beautiful and powerful empire. Its latent venom had already weakened in many
persons the firmness of their religious faith, and its powerful motives to
useful and excellent conduct in every relation of life. Yea, it threatened that
general dissoluteness in principles and manners, which, unless counteracted,
threatens the body politic with terrible convulsions and gradual destruction.
Removed from the business and pleasures of court by one of those revolutions
not unusual in that situation, and amidst the tranquillity and gloom of
retirement, he does not meanly resign himself to the sad feelings of
mortification, but nobly resolved to apply a remedy to the growing infidelity
of the nation in which he had been so much distinguished. He gave to the world
his thoughts "ON THE IMPORTANCE OF RELIGIOUS OPINIONS;" a work of the first
celebrity on the most interesting questions; which, with all the strength of
powerful reasoning, has those charms of language and fancy which affect the
heart, and render it peculiarly adapted to persuade, as well as instruct. The
young and gay, together with those who move in the higher circumstances of
life, cannot be under better human guidance, than when, with teachable
dispositions, they are attentive to his instructions.

THE opposers of Revelation, though they do not agree amongst themselves in
their explanation of Natural Religion, yet agree in rejecting the
representation of it which has now been made. Some of their most respectable
writers assert Natural Religion to be an inheritance which mankind receive
equally from the God who made them; that their Creator and sovereign Lord has
enlightened their understandings universally with a complete system of religion
and moral obligation, and therefore that they need no further divine or human
instruction on the subject. If this account were just, we might reasonably
expect in the department of religion, that we should be neither dependent on
instruction nor study for information in any of its branches. We might, without
hesitation, conclude we should, as we met together, without any distinction of
character, converse with as much readiness and precision upon its doctrines,
precepts, and motives, as well-taught natural philosophers do upon the laws
which govern this division of creation. In our studies, we may form in our
conception a consistent plan of this nature, and support it with arguments,
which we esteem honorable to God, and flattering to man. Is not God, say we,
impartially just and good? Will not his creatures then of the same rank equally
participate of his bounties? How can He, with any propriety of character, make
distinctions between them, pleasing on the one side, and painful on the other?
Is not the knowledge of religion a common concern of mankind; equally as
necessary to the improvement, honor, and happiness of all our race, as of any
particular nations or persons? Must it not then, under his equal and beneficent
government, be communicated alike to all? But when we enter the world, and
compare the real state of man with what this scheme of thought would lead us to
conclude it must be, we shall be convinced it is altogether unsubstantial. For
the more we observe, the more indubitable it will appear to us, that our
improvement in this, as in other kinds of knowledge, depends upon natural
abilities, situation, and the means we enjoy of information; with respect to
which circumstances, the children of men greatly differ from each other. Do we
ever find that those who have been denied the blessings of education, of
instructive books and conversation, or have had no leisure from the necessary
business of life for application and study, can conceive so extensively upon
the subjects of religion, and converse so correctly upon them, as those who
have been favored with these advantages? No; there is, and ever will be, a
remarkable difference between them. Is it not ridiculous to say, the priest of
Jupiter had as enlarged sentiments and well-informed notions of God, and the
services due to him, who would have paid divine honors to deified men, as the
christian apostles, who taught that they should turn from idolatrous worship
unto the living God, who made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all things that
are therein? That Cicero, who applied his admirable powers of mind to gain the
most extensive and correct knowledge of religion and laws he was able, had no
fuller and better ideas of them than the most uninstructed Roman? That Dr.
Clarke, with his penetrating mind and laborious study applied to the subjects
of religion and morals, was not better acquainted with them than a Hottentot?

MANY sensible men of this class, convinced that this idea of Natural Religion
is untenable, have adopted the following; that Natural Religion consists of all
those divine and moral discoveries which man is able to make by the unassisted
efforts of his reason alone. The reply made to this scheme is, that it is
impossible to know, amidst the variety of religious and moral truths which man
conceives, in the great variety of situations in which he is placed on earth,
what number of them have their source from unaided reason; consequently,
whether in this view there is any such thing as Natural Religion. Were we to
employ ourselves to separate those truths of a religious nature, which derive
to us from tradition, remote revelation, or the hints and direct conversation
of others grounded ultimately upon these, from those decidedly otherwise, we
should find ourselves engaged in a difficult and unsatisfactory task. We should
by this process be fully convinced, that we could not certainly affirm of any
of them, that they were the offspring of our intellectual exertions alone, that
our apprehension of them was not owing more nearly or remotely to suggestions
and aids from God. Mankind begin to learn of each other from infancy. Nations
learn of nations. One age is instructed by another age. There is a most
intimate connection between men, and dependence upon each other with respect to
religious and moral discoveries, as there is in almost every thing else.
Perhaps of any object of this kind of knowledge, after a due consideration, and
with a proper spirit of inquiry, we should be unwilling to say, this is a truth
for which I am solely indebted to my own understanding, without any obligation
to revelations from God. It will have an influence upon our minds favorable to
truth, when in this course of thought, to inquire, why some of the most
celebrated ancient philosophers traveled to the regions where, in the opinions
of Jews and Christians, divine revelation began to display its light, if they
felt not the need of instruction beyond the unaided efforts of their own minds?
Why, after the publishment of Christianity, the heathen writers appear to have
more consistent ideas of God, and the worship which we owe him; and of morals,
together with a future state of existence and equal retribution, than they ever
published before? Why, since the introduction of the Jewish and Christian
scriptures, into the world, with liberty to read them without distressing pains
and penalties, our religious knowledge has been so much more increased, and our
motives to worthy and good conduct so much more strengthened and improved?

Is not this then the only consistent and defensible definition which can be
given of Natural Religion? NATURAL RELIGION consists of all those truths,
relative to God, his being, perfections, and government; to man, his duty, his
motives to action, and expectations, let the first suggestion of them to our
minds arise from whatever source it may, which we can in any degree apprehend,
illustrate, and confirm by rational argumentation. I know not how the opposers
or the friends of Revelation can object to this definition completely. It meets
in part with the conception of both of them. The first say, Denying wholly the
idea of any religious light from God but by the exercise of our intelligent
powers, that all the truths of religion and morality with which we are
acquainted, become known to us, as soon as we arrive at the age of mature
thought and manly action, without any incidence to mistake; or, that the most
excellent instructions of religion and virtue are only principles, which have
been discovered in one period of time by the human mind, and improved upon in
another, until they have arrived to their present degree of perfection.
Christian writers take the principles of Revelation, enlarge upon them,
illustrate and confirm them by long chains of reasoning in their writings, and
style them Natural Religion.

PERMIT me now to make several observations which have an intimate connection
with this subject. The first is,

I. WE may be fully persuaded of truth in subjects, which far exceed our
adequate comprehension. We assume it as a principle with respect to all effects
within human power, that they must have a cause equal to their production.
Experience and observation so early, so constantly, and powerfully teach us
this principle, that it seems to us as a self-evident maxim of reason and
truth. To the same principle we recur with confidence when we would rationally
account for the existence and preservation of the universe of being. Yet when
we contemplate the cause of these greater effects, we are convinced he
essentially differs from the inferior causes with which we are more familiarly
acquainted. To the inquiry, Who created, and upholds the things which are seen,
and believed by us to exist, though not seen? We answer, An intelligent being,
self-originated and independent, uncaused himself, and yet the cause of every
thing else. But why, you ask, are we obliged to embrace a conclusion so
incomprehensible to our minds, and which confounds our most convincing modes of
reasoning? The reply is, After the fullest investigation of the subject of
creation and preservation, this seems the most satisfactory method of
accounting for them. Till we have arrived to this grand and singular Being, we
have not in our conception obtained the ultimate and sufficient cause of all
things; for though in our ascent to Him, we pass through a long series of
causes, yet each one of them requires a cause of its own origin, and
subsistence. In Him alone do our minds rest easy as the universal Parent, the
constant Preserver of all things, "who is from everlasting to everlasting, the
same yesterday, today, and forever, without any variableness or shadow of
turning." Says an inquirer to an Indian philosopher, upon what rests the world?
He answers, upon an elephant. But upon what, asks the inquirer, stands the
elephant? He replies, upon the back of a tortoise. But upon what, continues the
inquirer, stands the tortoise? He made no further reply; nor was it worth
while; for if he had mentioned ten thousand supporters, which needed support
themselves, still the inquirer would have asked, but upon what stands this? Nor
would he have ceased asking the same question, until he had mentioned something
which had appeared to his mind a substratum, equal to the support of every
thing else.

THAT the ultimate and supreme Cause of all things should be conceived
intelligent, is most reasonable. For wherever we look, we see means connected
with ends; simplicity and art; order, beauty, and magnificence. These our
observation and experience convince us are not the offspring of undirected
motion, or of chance and necessity, but of an intelligent and designing Mind.
From this Being we take all the imperfections, weaknesses, and corruptions of
man, and ascribe to him almighty power, perfect intelligence, omnipresence,
omniscience, insinite benevolence, and immutable rectitude. Our minds are too
small-sized to admit an adequate idea of these perfections, which form his
supreme excellency. Yet we are led to believe them attributes of his divine
nature by short and powerful reasonings.

WHAT can restrain his power through the whole course of possibilities, who
gave to intelligent and inanimate causes throughout the universe their whole
energy, who controuls, suspends, and enervates them at his pleasure? What
addition can be made to that Mind, which is the parent of all other minds, from
the feeblest to the most exalted? Is not the assertion, that a being can act
where he is not, most absurd? Must not He then be every where present, who
animates and sustains universal nature? Have we not decided evidence that the
Author of our existence is good? With but few exceptions, our race have more
health than sickness, and more ease than pain. The evils they suffer are
frequently medicinal, and in event blessings. They may, by discretion and
well-directed labors, render their situation much more eligible and happy than
it sometimes proves. Still it is imperfect, and abounds with sorrows. We can
conceive it within the power of God to grant us worth and pleasure far superior
to what we possess here. We see no reasons in his character which should
disincline him to an improvement of our circumstances, agreeable to our wishes,
in coming periods of existence: When we think most soberly, we find many
probabilities, which serve to convince us he will. A conception that a Being
thus perfect can ever be mistaken, ill-disposed, or sail doing in every
situation what is absolutely best, is groundless.

THESE principles have been enlarged upon by many acute writers in our own, as
well as foreign languages: and have produced a firm belief of the prime truths
of Natural Religion in minds not less penetrating than their own. I observe,

II. THE UTILITY of the principles of Natural Religion is a considerable
confirmation of their truth. Utility, it is acknowledged, when partial, may be
no proof of truth in principles, or propriety in actions. Principles the most
indefensible and pernicious, may aid our success at times in the acquisition of
honor and profit; and preserve us easy and cheerful within, when we ought to
feel all the sadness of remorse, and the affliction of guilt. But when
principles and motives have a permanent good influence on our worth and
enjoyment on the whole, they then have the utility, which we should prize as
invaluable; they then have the approving seal of the Author of Nature upon
them, teaching us they are principles which he would have us esteem his sacred
will, and reverence and obey as his edicts. Is not this most evidently the case
with the maxims and motives of Natural Religion? Do not legislators, who have
the most seriously contemplated the causes of national safety and prosperity,
point out obedience to them as the best calculated means of public security,
reputation, and honor? Do they not with assurance foretell the gradual
declension and ruin of those states and empires, which with obstinate
perseverance despise and violate them? Our reason, experience, and observation
prove that we cannot as private persons too highly venerate, too carefully
cultivate and obey these principles, if we wish our rectitude and happiness.
They solemnly warn us against disobedience to them as a fruitful source of
painful remorse and probable ruin. Sober-minded and sensible individuals,
together with enlightened and virtuous politicians, have ever declared with the
Jewish prophet, "the work of righteousness is peace; the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance sorever." I observe,

III. THE capacity of religious knowledge which belongs to human creatures. All
mankind, no doubt, wherever their habitations are appointed them on earth, have
some degree of this capacity. But in this respect there is a great difference
between them; a difference, which will be smaller or greater in proportion to
the combined influence of three different causes -- the natural strength of
their minds, the industry with which they improve them, and the favorableness
of their situation for such investigations. There can be no doubt that men
differ greatly from each other in the natural strength and capaciousness of
their minds, in consequence of which, though they are equally industrious, they
will make a different degree of progress in their acquaintance with religious
truth. How opposed in strength of intellect, and their circumstances of
improvement in divine and moral science, are those in the most uninstructed and
disadvantageous circumstances of human nature, when compared with those who
have high mental abilities, united with the best advantages of education,
conversation, and books, to render them acquainted with the doctrines of piety
and virtue? Between these extremes, there is, as in light, a gradual change
from a small degree of illumination to the full splendour of day. Moreover,
there is an observable difference of capacity between those in the same general
situation: And, amongst those who are in like circumstances, some improve their
abilities far better than others.

THE only answer we can make those who inquire, why this constitution of things
has taken place, is, "It is so, O Father, because so it has seemed good in thy
sight." Existence is his free and undeserved gift, which he may grant to any
number of beings at the time he pleases, accompanied with more or fewer
abilities of worth and enjoyment. All the claim his creatures have upon him is,
that he should not appoint them an overbalance of suffering, without voluntary
ill behavior and guilt upon their side. Further, the future state of life,
which we hope for, and which the reasonings of our minds render probable, give
room for the most perfect adjustment of any inequalities which have taken place
in this condition of existence. "The judge of all the Earth will do right." I
observe,

IV. THAT Natural and Revealed Religion are so far from being opposed, that
they mutually strengthen each other. REVELATION is strictly a system of
dogmatical instruction in those points which relate to our faith, duty, and
future expectations. Its authority does not depend upon any reasonings
interspersed with its declarations, but upon the evidence we have that God
himself has thus taught us, and commanded us. For example: When we are
instructed in the Christian scriptures, that we shall rise from the dead
hereafter, and live in a state of perfect retribution, if we believe the
information upon the ground of Revelation, we do not believe it because of any
argumentations which may attend it, for we should be bound to believe the same,
was it unattended with them. We believe only upon this ground, because God has
taught us our future existence and accountability. As mere natural
religionists, our conduct is different. In this character we receive no
assertion as an object of faith, or direction as a command of duty, which we
are not able by rational process to prove so, either probably or indisputably.
Yet in these two characters, notwithstanding we are firm believers in
Revelation, and enjoy its best advantages, we always exist in this state. Hence
we may clearly perceive how Natural Religion and Revelation should be friendly
in their influence upon each other. The firmest believer in Christianity seeks
to render his faith more firm, than the evidence of testimony can alone render
it, by rational illustration and argument. When by analogies, facts, and
inferences from allowed premises, he can explain, and corroborate the doctrines
or precepts of his religion, his doubts lessen, and he esteems it more worthy
his cordial acceptance and steady support. In this way there has been a most
respectable display of human abilities, by the friends of Revelation, in answer
to its opposers.

WHAT unbeliever, who has read their writings with the candor and attention
they deserve, but will acknowledge his prepossessions against the religion of
Christ are much less than they were before? Where is the Christian who will
refuse to own his mind has been instructed, and faith strengthened by their
labors? The direct influence of Revelation to illustrate and confirm the truths
of Natural Religion none can dispute; for in plain terms it teaches all its
great doctrines and precepts; and establishes them by evidence which it had not
before, but which is in itself powerful evidence.

THESE observations I have thought fit to make upon the subject of Natural
Religion. I hope they will be esteemed pertinent to the subject -- and may be
useful. I shall say no more, but conclude with an address to the young
gentlemen, the students, in this UNIVERSITY.

YE are here placed in a healthy and delightful situation by the care and
indulgence of your parents. The Governors and Instructors of this Society
afford you excellent means of acquiring the habits of regularity and order, and
of laying a foundation for useful and eminent progress in divine and human
knowledge. Ye are indeed like trees planted by rivers of water, in a climate
most favorable to their nourishment and growth. How disgraced must ye be, and
deserving of neglect and punishment, if ye fail to be richly laden with the
invaluable fruits of useful and ornamental literature, of religion and virtue;
of abilities actively improved to increase public and private security and
happiness!

BUT upon this occasion, and peculiarly in our circumstances, I would entreat
you by motives the most sacred and interesting to yourselves, and the society
of which you will soon be active and important members, most seriously to study
the evidences of Natural Religion, and the obligations of virtue, the influence
of which, when steadily believed, must be highly beneficial.

WE who have passed the meridian of life, and have entered upon the evening of
our days, must soon close them. Ye will arise in our stead; and take our
places! The principles of Religion, when firmly believed, form not only an
active cause of that integrity which rewards us personally with peace of mind,
and prepares us for better scenes of being hereafter; but of all that promotes
public tranquillity, order, and felicity, of all that adorns and improves
society.

IT is particularly observed by writers on the causes of the rise and
declension of states, their prosperity and sufferings, that states under such a
form of government as ours, and which need so great a degree of temperance,
order, and industry, to set all the causes of national prosperity and splendour
in successful motion, must be indebted for them principally to the
dissemination of useful knowledge, and the lively influence of a religious
faith, productive of genuine fruits. When they contemplate us irreligious,
intemperate, ignorant, disorderly, and idle, they exclaim in tones of extreme
grief, Alas, our country! Thou art lost to whatever is good, and great. Thou
art degraded, and making continual progress toward overthrow and destruction!

IN these principles, we who have lived before you, were early educated.
Instruction and general example tended to give them the deepest impression with
us at the period of life, when human creatures are taught with the most ease
and success. Not have distinguished events happened in the world, which might
render them less venerable in our view, and less efficacious on our conduct,
till since we have arrived to an age not given to change.

THE case is different with you at the most hazardous time of your lives, when
you are most apt to learn, and receive impressions. The subjects of religion
are now more freely conversed upon -- it has ceased to be highly disreputable
to attack them -- it has become, in a degree, fashionable to treat them with
less reverence, and to disregard the strictest commands of piety and virtue, as
precise and superstitious. The Rulers of France, even to whose errors we are
indulgent, have, in an eager pursuit after Civil Liberty, seen fit to humble
Religion to a very degraded state. Yield not your understandings or hearts to
either of these causes, notwithstanding all the charms of novelty, and the
persuasions of inclination! Such loose and immoral sentiments, propagated and
embraced here, would disfigure the structures of Natural and Revealed Religion,
which have been hitherto so highly revered by us, and so justly esteemed the
ornament of our country, our inestimable blessing. They would introduce habits
and manners, which would be exceedingly hurtful to individual virtue and
excellence, to the rising strength and glory of our REPUBLIC!

BESEECH the inspiration and guidance of the great Source of truth, purity, and
love! Live under the constant influence of the sacred principles of religion
and virtue, which you enjoy in the highest state of improvement! Recommend them
by your instructions and examples, after you have entered the world, to all
around you! These principles, when duly cherished by you, will reward you with
esteem and honor from the wisest and best of mankind! They will bless you with
approbation and peace of mind, more precious than rubies, and every thing else
you can desire! They will afford you the sweetest consolation in the dark hours
of adversity, and lighten up the valley of the shadow of death! They will
introduce you to the patronage and blessing of the great Creator and Lord of
the Universe: To whom be glory and honor, forever and ever.

AMEN.

