AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE; JULY 4 th, 1795.

BY JOSEPH ALLEN, JUN.

WORCESTER, ( Massachusetts:) FROM THE PRESS OF ISAIAH THOMAS, jun. 1795.

AN ORATION: PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, JULY 4th, 1795.
THE ANNIVERSARY of a DAY, which ushered into being the INDEPENDENCE of a
powerful nation, must ever be held in religious remembrance by those who
participate its blessings. Gratitude, the first of virtues, however discarded
by the policy of courts, has ever found a hospitable reception in the
republican bosom. Influenced by the divine principle, WE are assembled my
FELLOW CITIZENS to commemorate the era of our political salvation. An event,
which to AMERICA at the same time united the pitiful period of royalty with the
epoch of national dignity. An event, which shall command the admiration of
distant ages, and challenge oblivion itself to wipe from the page of fame.

THE history of this Western World affords some of the most surprising
phenomenon which have ever astonished mankind. Its discovery arose from the
most noble spirit of enterprise and its settlement from the most persevering
fortitude that ever incited the human breast. It would be an outrage on your
patience to rehearse the often recounted toils which were the lot of our
forefathers; WE have all been told and WE have all read, the gradual
cultivation of the wilderness and the advancement of the Arts and Sciences. Let
us hasten then to the vicinity of that important moment, which roused into
exertion the latent spirit and finally sealed the happiness of our country.

THE subjects of AMERICA by their industry and economy, were rising into all
the consequence which the circumscribed condition of dependant colonies could
admit. Faithful to the servile allegiance, which superior power prescribed, and
to which their feeble situation obliged them to assent, they were devotedly
attentive to the injunctions of their mother country. Submission to her
commands was a deep rooted idea in the prejudices of the old, and inculcated in
the infant mind, as the first of political maxims, and the test of a religious
creed. The military force of the country, if such it might be termed, was but
partially equipped, and totally undisciplined. Thus depressed and enervated,
the watchful eye of Britan beheld us and to debase our already degraded
situation, exerted the last effort of despotism. To pamper her venal pride,
additional burdens were imposed on our weary backs; and the cup of misery was
replenished with more bitter potions. Petitions, framed in the humble style of
beggary and distress, were presented with a trembling hand at the footstool of
the throne. Unavailing were the prayers, and neglected were the remonstrances,
of this injured people. Here, the dormant spirit of AMERICANS awoke into
energy, the down cast eye of submission sparkled with animation, and the timid
features of debasement gave (...) to the daring front of resolution. To the
sword was assigned the argument, and to heaven was left the decision, of the
important contest. At the crisis, when even the most veteran advocates of
FREEDOM trembled at the event, the immortal declaration of our INDEPENDENCE was
trumpeted to the world. To carry this claim into effect, the military force of
the country was summoned to action: Unequal had been the conflict, and doubtful
indeed the decision, had not our generous allies extended the friendly arm. By
the assistance of France, our haughty foes soon found an equality at sea and a
decided superiority on land. The same madness, however, which deluded them in
the attempt, infatuated them in the hope, of success. So long had AMERICA been
considered as the puny dupe of power, and so contemptible in the eyes of
Britain was held the prowess of gallic arms, that an insulting defiance was bid
to our united efforts. The melancholy scene of carnage ensued, and all the
complicated horrors of war burst on our devoted country. The flames, that wrapped
our villages, the currents of blood, that empurpled our plains, the anguish of
the hapless widow, and the artless tears of the friendless orphan personified
misery in its most haggard form. -- Here should WE pause! And, while grateful
memory still cherishes the idea of martyred patriots, while pensive
contemplation assures us the blessings WE enjoy, flowed from the veins of
departed heroes, let us swear an eternal remembrance of their virtues. Let not
their children search in vain for the marble sculpture, which records the fame
of their fathers. And if to etherial inhabitants be exposed the view of this
lower world, may their bending glances catch the towering monuments of their
glory. Various were the successes, and various the defeats, which cheequered
the prospect. At length, the decisive die was cast; and Britain, after seven
years opposition to the decrees of heaven, after having impoverished her
treasures, and disaffected her subjects, with a reluctant hand subscribed our
INDEPENDENCE.

To regulate the economy of government, now required the collective wisdom of
the nation. As yet, intoxicated with the novel draughts of LIBERTY, and
strangers to the practice of our established theory, a continuation of that
confederacy, which had united us in the perils of war, was adopted, as an
experiment in the security of peace. But experience soon taught that a
government of more energy was necessary, and the FEDERAL CONSTITUTION, under
which we now so happily exist, received the sanction of the people.

THUS have we been conducted through scenes of peril, to a situation, which
commands the envy of every nation on the globe. INDEPENDENCE has brought in her
train to this happy clime, every blessings, which can add a charm to society.
With a government, which for the political wisdom it exhibits, has commanded
universal admiration, the rights of each individual are equally secured. Merit
is the only avenue to distinction, and the offices of government are ever at
the disposal of the great body of the people. The impartiality of our laws,
which with the same watchful eye protect the pittance of the beggar, and the
treasures of the opulent, affords sufficient inducement to the acquisition of
property.

THE military force of the country has acquired a respectability, which it
never before attained, and which will be a sufficient safeguard against the
encroachments of any hostile power. At the head of this government, is a MAN,
in whom are happily blended those talents, which have alike immortalized his
name in the cabinet and the field. Long may he continue to enjoy the united
affections of his country -- May that period be yet far distant, that shall rob
the world of its ORNAMENT, and AMERICA of its SAVIOR.

To the INDEPENDENCE of this country, in a great measure, may be attributed the
noble exertions of our friends the French. That nation had for ages been galled
with the yoke of servitude, and sunk in the depths of ignorance. The despotism
of the court, and the power, united with the bigotry, of the priests gave birth
to every species of oppression and cruelty, that could disgrace humanity. From
AMERICA they caught the animating ray of FREEDOM, and with divine enthusiasm
furled her sacred standard. The world has witnessed, and humanity has lamented
the excesses of France. But, is not a temporary delirium to be expected, when
twenty four millions of people emerge from the midnight gloom of slavery, and
meet the noontide beams of LIBERTY? Shall the rigid rules of prudence, in this
distracted hour exact a scrupulous conformity to her laws? Shall not justice
herself relax her iron brows, and give to madness a momentary jubilee? Far be
it from us, to countenance deliberate acts of wanton cruelty; but let France be
weighed in the equal scales of impartiality, and her calumniators, even in this
country, shall blush at the balance. To what temptations have they not been
exposed, to revenge on their internal enemies the depredations of a foreign
hord of DESPOTS. -- The monarchs of Europe, trembled at the consequence of
Gallic Liberty. -- The tottering pillars of their own thrones were the
monitors, which urged them to this war of principles. As yet, the arms of
France have carried with them the victorious trophies of brilliant success. May
the GOD of Heaven speed their glorious career, till the TEMPLE OF LIBERTY SHALL
BE ERECTED ON TOMB STONE OF TYRANTS.

WHILE the nations of the elder world are combating the tempests, and suffering
the devastations of war, AMERICA reposes on the tranquil bosom of peace. While
famine and the sword are desolating Europe, this is the land of plenty and of
happiness. To secure the blessings WE now enjoy, and to remain the most envied
nation on earth, is a task by no means difficult. The citizens of this country
are sufficiently enlightened, to preserve their rights in native purity. A
general diffusion of knowledge is the greatest security to the existence of a
nation. Let the doors of instruction, therefore, be widely opened to the rising
generation. Teach them the genuine principles of patriotism, which inspired
their fathers, and they, in return, shall hand the hallowed lesson to latest
posterity. Ere long the system, which we have established, so far from
appearing visionary, will bear "conviction strong." The light of reason is
illuminating the world, and the relics of monarchy are on the last wave of
fortune's ebbing tide. Already, in the language of Shakespeare. UNEASY LIES THE
HEAD, THAT WEARS A CROWN.

MAY THE SCORPION STING OF REMORSE GOAD THE BOSOMS, AND THE SPECTER OF HORROR
HAUNT THE PILLOW OF ROYALTY, till the rights of man shall be established
through the world, and this Globe become one UNIVERSAL REPUBLIC.

FINIS.

