AFFECTION FOR THE HOUSE OF GOD RECOMMENDED. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT YARMOUTH,
JANUARY 1, 1795. Occasioned by the opening of a New Meeting House in the south
part of that town. BY TIMOTHY ALDEN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN YARMOUTH.
Published at the desire of the hearers.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY THOMAS HALL, STATE STREET. MDCCXCV.

MR. ALDEN's SERMON.
2 CHRONICLES vi. 41. " Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting
place, thou and the Ark of thy strength: Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be
clothed with salvation, and let thy Saints rejoice in goodness." And,
JOHN iv. 21 -- 23. " Jesus says unto her, woman, believe me, the hour comes
when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth: For the Father seeks such to
worship him."
THE great design of religious worship, as instituted by the Most High, for the
benefit of a revolted world of mankind, is, under its enlightening and
transforming influence, to impress upon the mind a proper sense of the glorious
Deity; to assimilate mankind to a nearer resemblance of the perfections of God,
and hereby to qualify them for the final enjoyment of him.

Divinely instituted worship, may be considered as a medium of intercourse
between the Supreme Author of all being, and his intelligent creatures; in and
by which they manifest a sense of their dependence upon him, their love, esteem
and veneration for him; and by which the devout worshipper on the wings of
faith and prayer, ascends to the throne of his grace, and receives the tokens
of divine love and favor, by an increase of the knowledge of him, and fervor
of affection toward him.

The selected passages of inspiration may properly direct our view and inquiry,
with respect to the proper object and institutor of all religious worship.

The manner in which acceptable worship is to be performed, both as it respects
the Jewish religion, under the law, and the Christian religion, under the
gospel; as also the powerful motives afforded to the devout worshipper.

Answerable to the interesting and important ends of religious worship, are the
apprehensions thereof manifested in my text.

Although these passages of inspiration are separated, at a distance, in the
sacred pages, yet they have a near relation to each other, as to the important
object to which they refer. The former passage contains the pious breathings of
King Solomon, who was the wisest of all men: The latter are the words of one,
greater than Solomon, the Prince of the kings of the earth, the Son of God, the
Savior of the world. The former passage directs our views to that religious
worship, enjoined by the God of Israel, upon his people, under the Jewish
dispensation. The latter, to the more spiritual worship, enjoined upon all
Christians, under the gospel.

I am, first, led to some observations respecting the religious worship,
enjoined by God, upon his people, under the Jewish dispensation. In order to
enable us, the better to understand the true meaning, and great propriety of
the expressions, made use of by Solomon, in his invocation of the God of
Israel, it is to be observed that the temple built by Solomon (which, with
regard to its curious workmanship, the richness of the materials of which it
consisted, the overlayings of gold with which it was adorned, and the use and
design for which it was, in all respects adapted) was the most extraordinary
and magnificent structure, ever effected by human art. This temple being built
by Solomon, according to divine appointment, at Jerusalem, was to succeed the
former use of the Tabernacle, which according to divine directions, given to
Moses, he had caused to be erected in the wilderness: In which were deposited
the Ark of God, the two tables of the law, Aaron's Rod, and the pot of manna.
In this Tabernacle the great Jehovah was pleased to vouchsafe his gracious
presence, in the visible tokens and manifestations thereof, to Israel in the
wilderness; guiding and directing their courses and movements, by a pillar of
cloud by day, and a pillar of fire, by night, which manifested itself over the
Tabernacle, in which was the Ark of God. The motion and the rest of the cloud
gave the signal, when the children of Israel were to march forward, and when
they were to pitch their tents. And we have it observed, that "when the Ark set
forward, Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let
them that hate thee flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, return, O
Lord, unto the many thousand's of Israel. Numb. x. 35, 36.
The Tabernacle was a moveable tent, while Israel journeyed in the wilderness;
and was, as it were, the Palace of the Most High, the dwelling of the God of
Israel; in which the Israelites performed the chief of their religious
exercises, offered their sacrifices and worshipped God. But the solemn worship
of God was, for the future, to be performed at Jerusalem." "For the Lord has
chosen Zion" He has desired it for his habitation: This is my rest forever:
Here will I dwell, for I have desired it;" Psalm cxxxii. 13, 14;
Referring to the city Jerusalem, where was mount Zion, and mount Moriah, on
which the Temple of Solomon was erected; in which for the future, the Ark of
the God of Israel was to be fixed. The Ark was the symbol of God's powerful and
glorious presence, from which he was wont to put forth, and manifest his
strength, on the behalf of his people, when desired, or needed by them. The
above observations may enable us the better, to apprehend the meaning, and
great propriety of the expressions made use of, by Solomon, in the text.

Solomon having, at immense expense, and with exquisite art, finished and
adorned the Temple, according to the directions of the Most High, to be the
stated place for the solemn worship of God; he proceeds to notice the goodness
of God, manifested in the promise made to David his father, and in the
fulfillment thereof with respect to himself; in his being seated in the kingdom,
and having erected an house to the name of the Lord, and having put therein the
Ark, wherein was the covenant of the Lord which he made with Israel. After
this, king Solomon goes on to present his excellent prayer, as expressed in the
preceding part of the chapter; at the conclusion of which, he says, as in my
text: "Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou and the
Ark of thy strength." As if he had said, O Thou who sit in the heavens,
arise from the throne of thy glory, and come down into this place, which thou
have appointed for thy constant and fixed habitation; from which thou will not
any more remove, as formerly thou have done, from place to, place: Thou and the
Ark of thy strength; or thou in the Ark of thy strength, as it may be rendered.

The greatest glory of the Temple was those extraordinary marks of the divine
favor with which it was honored; viz.1. The Ark of the covenant, in which
were put the two Tables of the Law; and the Mercy-Seat, which was upon it; from
whence the divine Oracles were given out, by an audible voice, as often as God
was consulted in behalf of his people. 2. The Shechinah, or the divine
presence, manifested by a visible cloud, resting over the Mercy-Seat. 3. The
Urim and Thummim, by which the High Priest consulted God, in difficult cases,
relating to the public interest of the nation. 4. The Holy Fire, which came
down from heaven, at the consecration of the Temple. Such were the signal, and
visible marks of the divine presence in the Temple, for the bestowment of
which, Solomon presented his servent petition, at the consecration of it. In
answer to which, we have it expressed, as follows "Now when Solomon had made an
end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burntoffering
and the sacrifices, and the glory of the Lord filled the house."

From what is related, we learn the exalted apprehensions of the glorious
Deity, which inspired the breast of King Solomon, and should animate the
devotion of all true worshippers.

The glorious Deity is the only proper object of all religious worship: And his
people are forbid to worship any other God: And all true and acceptable worship
is instituted by him." "In vain do ye worship me, says our Savior to the
Pharisees, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." Matt. ^ v. 9.


Man who receives being and continual support from the agency and pleasure of
the Most High, is obligated to perform all acts of religious worship to him,
only in the manner which he has prescribed; in obedience to his commands, and
to promote his glory. And it is pertinent to observe, that the external mode
prescribed for the worship of God, has been different, in different periods of
the church, under the Law, and under the Gospel. The religious institutions
enjoined upon the Jews, relating to the Temple service, all their religious
rites, had reference to the glorious Deity, as just and holy; and to mankind,
in his lapsed state, as sinful and polluted. They represented God as
reconcilable to sinful man, who had broken covenant with God, his Maker; and
that God becomes reconcilable, only, through a Mediator, agreeably to what was
comprised in that early promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise the
Serpent's head. The rich blessings, included in this promise, have been
gradually unfolding, and ripening for complete fulfillment, from the early days
of the Church. From the promise being first given out to Adam, this promise has
engaged the faith, and animated the devotion of God's true Israel, in all ages
of the Church. As men have ever been under an obligation to acknowledge the
supreme dominion of God over them, and whatever belongs to them; and as there
have always been found persons, who have conscientiously acquitted themselves
of this duty, it is probable that there have always been sacrifices in the
world. Adam and his sons, Noah and his descendants, Abraham and his posterity,
Job and Melchizedec, before the Law, have offered to God real sacrifices. But
the Law ascertained the quality, the number, and other circumstances of the
sacrifices, which, before, were arbitrary. A great variety of laws, termed
ceremonial and judicial, were given to Moses, to be observed by the Israelites,
in addition to the moral Law, which were limited, as to their obligation, to
the Jewish Economy; all of which had their uses, and were wisely adapted, by
the righteous Lawgiver, to answer the ends designed; many of which laws
respected sacrifices and pollutions, were typical, pointing out the pollutions
of human nature, and the necessity of atonement. Thus the Temple itself, and
the Ark, with other things contained in the Temple, the Mercy-Seat, the Altar,
etc. together with many of the sacrifices and services thereof, were typical of
Christ and the Gospel Church, which they were to precede and represent. All
these sacrifices were no other than prophecies and figures of Christ Jesus, the
true Christian sacrifice; containing the whole substance, of which the ancient
sacrifices were but shadows and representatives. Thus the Jewish Dispensation,
although more obscure than that of the Gospel, was such as the wisdom of God
saw fit to appoint, to go before, and prepare the way for the latter; and was
sufficient to fix the faith of the true worshipper, in the promise of God, for
pardon, justification, and eternal life, through Christ, the promised Messiah,
of whose appearance here upon earth, they had longing expectation. "God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect." (...). xi. 40.


Which leads me to shift our views from the Jewish Dispensation, to that of the
Gospel, to the opening and commencement of which happy era, the last branch of
my text has a special reference.

"Jesus says unto her, woman believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall,
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. But the
hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him."

The time having now arrived, when, according to the eternal purpose of grace,
the types and prophecies which pointed out the coming of Christ, the true
Messiah, should have their fulfillment, by his actual advent; when all the
ceremonial rites should cease, under the spiritual reign of Christ's kingdom;
when the typical worship of the Jews should be shifted, under Christ the great
Antitype, to the more pure and spiritual Christian worship: At the appointed
time, and for these glorious purposes, Christ made his personal appearance here
up on earth. Not with that external pomp and grandeur which the Jews were led,
vainly, to expect; but in the low and humble form of a servant. Not in a manner
adapted to attract the admiration of the world, and gratify the ambitious
expectation of the Jews, by freeing them from the Roman yoke, and conferring
upon them the richest honors and splendors of this world; but as was
prophesied of him, he appeared meek and lowly, to humble the pride of men, and
to set up his spiritual kingdom in their hearts. To effect the benevolent
design of his coming into the world, Christ frequently introduced and mingled
himself with persons of different classes and characters; timing his discourses
and observations, as occasion presented, in such a manner as was best adapted
to excite their attention, and fix their faith in him, as the promised Messiah.

In the prosecution of the benevolent design, for which Christ came into the
world, the Evangelist informs us, that, leaving Judea and going to Galilee, he
took occasion to pass through Samaria; that he came to a city of Samaria, which
is called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph,
where was Jacob's well; and that he, being wearied with his journey, sat upon
the well; unto which there came a woman of Samaria, to draw water; which gave
occasion to the conference between her and our Savior, which proved the
occasion of her faith in him, and also the faith of many others: Our Savior
introduces his discourse, by asking her to give him to drink. She asks him,
why he, being a Jew, asked drink of her, being a woman of Samaria? Adding, that
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Jesus answered and said unto
her, if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give
me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and the would have given thee
living water. Upon the conversation which followed she was led to conceive of
him to be a prophet, and makes, to him, the following observation, by way of
question; our Savior's answer to which, is contained in my text.

"Our Fathers, says she, worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship." The mountain referred to,
was an exceeding high mountain, called Gerizim, near Sychem, near to which
Jacob had, formerly, made an altar, Genesis xxxiii. 20; and from this mountain
Moses pronounced the blessings, Deuteronomy. xxvii.12. Mention is made, in the book of
Nehemiah, that, according to the covenant expressed in Ezra x.3, of separating,
from the Israelites, those who had married strange wives, one of the sons of
Eliashib, the High Priest, who had married a daughter of Sanballat the
Horonite, then Governor in Samaria, was therefore driven out from the
congregation of Israel: But that by Sanballat's influence, he obtained liberty
to build a Temple at mount Gerizim; of which he was afterward High Priest. To
this Temple those priests, and other Israelites, who had married strange wives,
or had been otherwise criminal, after that, resorted. This Temple, standing the
space of two hundred and twenty years, was afterward destroyed. This was the
place, where the Samaritans performed their religious worship, while the Temple
was standing, and also after it was destroyed; looking upon the ground as holy,
they still resorted there for their devotion. With reference to this
superstitious practice, the woman of Samaria says, "our fathers worshipped in
this mountain." And the Jews held, that none might worship God, by sacrifice,
any where but at Jerusalem, according to the law, Deuteronomy. xii. 14, 26. "Jesus
says unto her, woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall, neither in
this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." The import of our
Savior's words may be understood as follows. Thou ownest me as a prophet,
whose office it is to reveal the will of God unto men. It is therefore thy duty
to give credit to what I shall reveal to thee, about the true and right way of
worshipping God. The time is coming, yea, nigh at hand, when ye shall, neither
in this mountain, Gerizim, where your fathers have so long worshipped God
superstitiously, without any direction from him, nor yet at Jerusalem, which is
the place he made choice of for his worship, worship of the Father. God is
putting an end to both these places, and to all that worship which I shall not
institute, under the gospel. The hour was coming, when all difference of
places, for God's worship, should be taken away; ere long the service of God
should not be confined to one place, more than another. "The hour comes, and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him." Our Savior here instructed
her concerning the worship itself; that the ceremonial worship, which the Jews
and Samaritans had used, should shortly be abolished, and instead thereof, a
more spiritual form of worship should be established; more suitable to the
spiritual nature of the Deity, and containing in it, the truth and substance of
all that, which the Jewish ceremonies prefigured and shadowed forth.

The true worship of God, under the gospel, does not consist in the external
pomp of any outward ceremonies. No worship is acceptable to him, who is the
Father of Spirits, but that which is truly spiritual.

From the above comment upon these passages of inspiration, several
observations are suggested, for instruction and improvement.

1. The glorious Deity is the only proper object of all religious worship;
whose perfections are, unchangeably, the same, and equally merit the supreme
love and veneration of his worshippers, in all ages of the church.

2. That manner of worship only, is obligatory upon man, and acceptable to the
Deity, which he himself has instituted. God's prerogative, wisdom and
goodness, is manifested in instituting and prescribing the means and manner by
which he esteems himself glorified, and to which the promise of his blessing is
annexed. This is equally true, and to be acknowledged, as it respects those
laws termed ceremonial, under the Jewish administration, which were temporary,
and that worship which is more spiritual, under the gospel, which is to
continue, during the state of the church militant, here upon earth. And it is a
daring affront to the divine Majesty, to pay religious homage to any creature,
or to worship God in any other way than he has appointed. This is offering an
insult to his wisdom.

3. It will be the earnest desire, and prayer of the true worshippers of God,
that he would bless his people, in his own appointed way. This is a natural
inference from the prayer of Solomon, in my text. "Arise, O Lord God, into thy
resting place, thou and the Ark of thy strength. Let thy priests, O Lord God,
be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness." In this
prayer of Solomon, saints are particularly mentioned. Being clothed with
salvation, may be understood as a figurative expression, alluding to those
priestly garments, appointed, for beauty and glory, to Aaron and his successors
in the priesthood, under the law; pointing out the ornaments of righteousness
and true holiness; that so their persons and services might be accepted by God,
both for themselves and for the people of God, that they may be encompassed on
every side, with the divine protection and benediction. And let thy people have
cause, at all times, to rejoice in thy goodness, imparted to them, in the ways
of thine appointment. Such may be understood to be the language of this prayer
of Solomon. The pious desires of which his prayer is expressive, will agree
with that spirit of benevolence, which the gospel inculcates; and to the
apostolic direction of doing good unto all men, as we have opportunity,
especially to them who are of the household of faith. Such a temper is strongly
recommended by the instructions and example of our savior, who prayed for his
crucisiers, saying, "Father forgive them, for they know not what they do." And
before his crucifixion, we find him putting up a prayer for his Apostles in
particular, and after that, for all such as should believe on him, through
their word. See John 17.
With such a temper, will correspond the prayers and desires of all true
worshippers. They will seek for a blessing, in God's appointed way, by
attending upon instituted worship, in a regular way and manner, looking to God,
through the Mercy-Seat, that is, through the mediation of Jesus Christ, the
giver of every good and perfect gift: Like new born babes, desiring the sincere
milk of the word, that they may grow thereby: Seeking it from the priests'
lips, which are to preserve knowledge; who are honored with the title of
Christ's ambassadors, proclaiming the glad tidings of salvation, and publishing
the gospel of peace.

Among the enlargement of privileges, under the gospel, beyond those, enjoyed
under the Jewish Dispensation, one to be noticed by us is, that the religious
difference of places is now taken away, and the worship of God not confined to
any one particular place or nation. According to the dictates of human wisdom,
such places for religious and social worship, are now to be preferred, as, on
account of local situation, and comfortable accommodations, afford the greatest
convenience for attending, with frequency and regularity: that the public
worship, in which all are equally interested, may be by all enjoyed, with equal
convenience, as far as it can be effected. Both the dictates of reason and the
precepts of the gospel point out this rule, for the government of our conduct
in appointing places, and erecting convenient buildings for public worship.

And I charitably conceive that such have been the governing motives for the
voluntary expense of erecting a house for public worship, in this place. May
Christian edification, peace, and advancement in every Christian virtue, be the
happy fruits and effects both to them and their posterity. In order to which,
let every one labor to be of such a character as the Father seeks to worship
him. From spiritual principles; with sincere love, and filial reverence; for
spiritual ends, to please him, and to promote his glory, with the whole heart,
mind, and soul. The Jewish ceremonial worship was abolished, to promote the
spirituality of divine worship. Yet it is not to be understood, as if God
rejected all bodily worship, because he requires spiritual, under the gospel.
For Jesus Christ, the most spiritual worshipper, worshipped God with his body.
God has appointed some parts of worship, which cannot be performed without the
body; such as sacraments. In a word, God has created the body as well as the
soul; and Christ has redeemed the body as well as the soul; therefore it is our
duty, to worship and glorify God, with our body and spirit which are his.

May we all be led to greater advancement in the knowledge of God, and our
duty, and to worship him, in a more acceptable manner; be formed into a nearer
resemblance of his moral character; experience an increase of love and
veneration toward him, and become qualified for the full enjoyment of him, in
the mansions of eternal glory. Let us all, in our approaches to God in the way
of worship, divest ourselves of all unworthy thoughts and apprehensions of the
Deity, as consisting of any corporeal parts, or any such passions or affections
as indicate change or imperfection; and consider him as a pure, intelligent
spirit, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, who is ever present with us,
and searches the inmost recesses of our hearts, who cannot be deceived, and
who will not be mocked; who, though perfectly independent of any of our
services, yet is graciously pleased to view with apapprobation the devout
worshipper, who worshippeth him in spirit and in truth; but views with
disapprobation and abhorrence, the false adulation of the hypocrite. "He that
offers praise, glorifieth me, says the Lord, by the mouth of the Psalmist,
and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God." Let us in all acts of religious exercise, consider with whom it is we
have to do -- an infinitely holy God. And as we are conscious in ourselves, of
being sinful and guilty, and thereby unworthy the presence of an holy God, let
us approach him, in the worthy name of Christ, the only mediator, with adoring
apprehensions of the divine goodness, in the gift of his son Jesus Christ; in
whose name we are encouraged to come, with boldness, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in every time of need. Ample encouragement is given to
the devout worshipper of obtaining grace here, and glory hereafter. Let his
saints therefore rejoice in goodness. May we, each one, have our hearts filled
with gratitude, and our tongues with praise; and with sincerity of heart, may
we say, with the Psalmist, "I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into
the house of the Lord: Our feet sahll stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem."

May this house, devoted to religious worship, be always approached with joy
and gladness, and with proper solemnity, remembering that this is none other
than the house of God, and the gate of heaven. Let every unhallowed thought,
word, and action be strictly guarded against and suppressed remembering that
holiness becomes God's house forever. The glorious Deity, the proper object of
all religious worship, is present in worshipping assemblies, to notice with
what hearts his people approach him; and will command his blessing upon the
devout worshipper who worshippeth him in spirit and in truth, even life
forevermore. If you thus seek and serve the Lord, he will be found of you; but
if you forsake him, he will cast you off forever.

When Solomon had ended his prayer, at the consecration of the temple, the Lord
appeared to him, by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and have
chosen this place to myself, for an house of sacrifice. And God graciously
promised, that upon their seeking and serving him, in a right manner, he would
hear the prayers which should be made in that house, and judgments should be
removed. "If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves,
and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear
from heaven, and will forgive their sins, and will heal their land. But if ye
turn away and forsake my statues, etc, then will I pluck them up, and this
house shall be a proverb, and a byword among all nations."

May we not then, my hearers, with transports of joy, anticipate the blessings
which may be derived from the Father of mercies, to the true worshippers, in
this house of the present and future generations? For which end, may the
worship of God ever be duly performed, and attended to, in it: Peace and
concord be ever promoted and cultivated in every heart, and the religion of the
Redeemer here flourish. Then may the blessing be experienced as expressed, in
Psalm 133rd, "I will abundantly bless her provision; I will fill her poor with
bread: I will also clothe her priests with salvation and her saints shall shout
aloud for joy."

By way of conclusion. As we have begun the year this day, with religious
exercise, may we, each one, perserve in religious virtue: that so it may prove,
indeed, a happy year to each of us. For which end, let us unite in our
petitions at the throne of grace, in the language of Solomon, in my text..

"Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and the Ark of
thy strength; Let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let
thy saints rejoice in goodness."

AMEN.
AFFECTION FOR THE HOUSE OF GOD RECOMMENDED. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT YARMOUTH,
JANUARY 1, 1795. At the opening of a New Meeting House, in the south part of
that town. BY JOHN MELLEN, jun. A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN BARNSTABLE.
Published at the desire of the hearers.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY THOMAS HALL, STATE STREET. MDCCXCV.

MR. MELLEN's SERMON.
PSALM xxvi. 8. " Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor dwells."
THE Psalmist, in this psalm, is pleading his integrity before God, and
strengthening his heart with the consciousness of his upright endeavors to
walk in the way of piety and righteousness.

He appeals to the Searcher of hearts, for the sincerity of his affection
toward him, and desire to please him. "Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try
my reins and my heart; for thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have
walked in thy truth." He proceeds to declare that he had made use of prudence
and caution, to preserve himself pure, and keep himself out of the way of
temptation, in avoiding intimacy with those, whose example might be ensnaring.
"I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers; I
have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked."
The duties of piety and devotion he considered as an important part of the
service due from a man to his Maker, without attention to which the human
character must be essentially defective. He was sensible on the other hand,
that devotion without purity and moral virtue, could never be acceptable to a
holy God; and that an outward compliance with the duties of religion, without
the homage and affection of the heart, is but like a body without a soul, a
shadow without the substance. These ideas appear to be suggested by the
following expressions. "I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I composs
thine altar, O Lord; that I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and
tell of all thy wondrous works. I have loved the habitation of thy house, and
the place where thine honor dwells. The meaning and reason of the expressions
made use of in the text, may be explained by the following observations.

The house of the Lord, to which the psalmist refers, must be the Tabernacle,
erected originally according to the particular directions of God himself, in
the wilderness, but rebuilt, as it seems, by David, in the city of Jerusalem,
after the Ark of the Convenant, which had been taken by the Philistines, was
returned, and with solemn pomp placed in that city. For we read that "they
brought in the Ark of the Lord, and set it in his place, in the midst of the
tabernacle that David had pitched for it. 2 Samuel vi.17.
This was called the habitation of God's house, because it was erected for his
worship, and because it was the place where the chosen people were taught to
expect his peculiar presence; the place where he graciously vouchsafed to
dwell. Thus it is said, "The Lord has chosen Zion; he has desired it for his
habitation: This is my rest forever; here will I dwell." Psalm cxxxii. 13, 14.
And again, "In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion."
Psalm lxxvi. 2.
Accordingly the Psalmist further describes the Tabernacle, or the house of the
Lord, by the following words in the text, the place where his honor dwells. It
was there that the Lord occasionally manifested, in a visible manner, his
glory; and thence he regularly gave forth his oracles. It was before the Ark
that the priests were to inquire the mind of the Lord, and receive their
directions from him. As God was in a peculiar sense the King of the Jews: As he
was their immediate Sovereign; so the Tabernacle was considered as his Palace,
the place of his stated residence, and the Mercy-Seat as his Throne. Therefore
he is said to dwell between the Cherubims. But as he was their God, as well as
their king, so the Tabernacle was a Temple as well as a Palace, and here the
people offered their worship to him, as well as received their orders and
directions from him. And it is in this latter view especially, that houses now
dedicated to the service of God, resemble the Tabernacle or Temple of old.

The example of David in his affection for God's house, is most worthy our
imitation. Let us now consider, I. What his example implies. II. The obligation
which lies upon us to imitate it.


I. When we speak of his example as applicable to ourselves; loving the
habitation of God's house, is loving the public worship of God, wherever it may
be performed. His worship is not now confined to a particular house, or a
single city; but wherever sincere worshippers assemble, there is a house for
God. This is the nature and genius of the dispensation under which we live;
(...) to what our Lord said to the Samaritan woman: "The hour comes, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." The
period in which a less confined, and more spiritual worship was to take place.
For he proceeds to say, by way of explanation: The hour comes, and now is,
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth."
John iv.21 and 23.


It is true however, in the Christian world, as well as among the Jews, that
worshipping assemblies are ordinarily held in houses erected for the purpose;
and which, though not entirely confined to this use, are so much devoted to it,
that it may, without impropriety or superstition be said, that they are
dedicated to God.

The Temples of the Heathens, as well as the Temple of the Jews at Jerusalem,
were magnificent, costly buildings: And they were held in a kind and degree of
veneration, which is not common, and which we do not say would be proper, among
Christians. Christians indeed are far from being all alike in this respect.
Churches in some parts of Christendom, are built and ornamented with a
profusion of expense, which humanity might well wish had been bestowed, in part
at least, for supplying the wants of the poor, and alleviating the distresses
of the miserable. They have owed much of their magnificence to superstition;
yet still I may say, they have owed not a little of it to a natural and
rational veneration of the Deity, worshipped therein. If it be an error to
bestow great labor and expense on buildings dedicated to God, it seems to be
an error not unnatural or unpardonable. The mind will not readily oppose, or
attempt to confuse such reasoning as follows. Should not mankind serve and
honor the Deity with their best? Should not every thing be great and noble, or
excellent in its kind, that is dedicated to the service of the greatest and
best of beings, the INFINITE MAJESTY OF HEAVEN? What building should be more
firm and durable, than that which is erected to the honor of the ETERNAL GOD?
Or what can the labors of the most ingenious artists; the highest efforts of
human skill, be more worthily bestowed, than on the Temples of the SUPREME
ARCHITECT, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working? Why the
beauty and elegance of houses dedicated to the worship of God, should not keep
pace with the increase of wealth and refinement among a people, and their
ability to improve and ornament their own houses, perhaps no good reason, can
be given. This at least may be said, that reason, if not religion, teaches us
to render houses for religious assembling, commodious and comfortable. To spare
the pains and expense necessary for this, would betray a want of due regard to
ourselves, our own case, health, and convenience, or an unbecoming
indifferenceas to the public worship of God; and show, either, that we were
willing to be needlessly incommoded in God's house, or be furnished with an
excuse for absenting ourselves from it.

But to return. To love the habitation of God's house, you will readily
conceive is not merely or principally to take delight in, or set our hearts
upon the building itself, however commodious or elegant, but to love the
worship which is performed there. It is to take pleasure in drawing near to God
in a public, social manner, and coming before him as his people come. It must
herefore imply an uniform desire and endeavor to be present at, and join in
the solemnities of public worship. They who love the habitation of God's house,
may be so circumstanced that they cannot frequently join the assembly of his
people therein: But they who can, and yet do not, ever, or but very seldom,
attend, can hardly be supposed to have that affection for his house and
worship, which the Psalmist expressed. If men's hearts be there, they will
endeavor to be there also. Providence may often disappoint their wishes; but
if they seek excuses for absenting themselves, or are satisfied with such as
are very trifling, there is too much reason to fear that their hearts are not
right, and that they are either indifferent to, or averse from the public
worship of God.

It is true, that persons may attend, and love, or be attached to, the worship
of God's house for reasons that have nothing to do with religion. It may
therefore be observed that the love which the Psalmist's example recommends, is
founded on pure and worthy principles. The good man does not love God's house,
or attend his worship therein, merely because he is accustomed to such
attendance, though this may be the means of strengthening his attachment to it.
He attends, not because it is reputable, and exhibits a good example; though I
do not say it would be best for a man to absent himself, if he had no higher
views than these, since, to say nothing of the possibility of his being
personally benefited by the appointed means of grace, his attendance might be
beneficial to others: Not that he may have an opportunity for transacting
worldly business with his neighbors; for this is by no means the design of our
meeting together: Not that he may have agreeable exercise on the day of rest,
or avoid the tediousness of confinement at home; though it reflects honor on
the divine institutions, and illustrates their wisdom and benevolence, to
observe, that one part of the duty of the Lord's day has a tendency to render
the others more agreeable. But he loves, and visits, when in his power, the
house of God, because he conceives that there men ought to worship, that
assembling for social worship is a very important part of the duty of the
Lord's day; and the giving of opportunity for it, a very distinguished end in
separating, and hallowing the day. He conscientiously attends, because he
considers it as an appointed and valuable means of moral and religious
improvement, and hopes to be benefited, and contribute to the benefit of
others, by joining them in doing homage to their common Lord, praising their
common Benefactor, seeking to increase their religious knowledge, and in having
their various duties explained to them, or inculcated upon them.

2. That he thinks justly: That attending public worship is a duty incumbent on
Christians; or that we are under obligation to imitate the Psalmist's example,
we shall have no reason to doubt if we duly consider the design of the
institution, the advantages of it, or what the scriptures teach us relative to
this subject.

It is an almost undisputed dictate of reason that we ought to worship God:
That we should acknowledge our dependence upon him; thank him for his favors;
commit ourselves to his protection, and seek his favor and blessing. The
external worship of him is no more than expressing and acting out, those
sentiments of fear, love, reverence, gratitude, confidence, and hope, which are
manifestly fit in beings, related to him, and dependent upon him as we are. As
we are social beings, social or united acknowledgements are properly offered to
him. We have common and public blessings to be thankful for, as well as common
wants to be supplied; and therefore it seems right and becoming that we should
give thanks, and offer up our petitions, in a public, as well as in a private
manner. Besides, in the former way only can we so clearly manifest to others,
our regard and reverence for the Deity. In this way he is more highly honored
as the Almighty Sovereign, Lord of heaven and earth. We most effectually do him
homage, and show forth his glory, when we praise him in the great congregation,
and in the sanctuary, talk of all his wondrous works.

But the propriety of public religious assemblies, and our obligation to attend
them, will further appear, if we consider that the design of them is, not
merely that we may pray and praise, but that we may hear the truth of God's
word; may be instructed and exhorted, and by preaching have our minds
enlightened or quickened in the knowledge of divine things. The importance and
advantage of the public stated teaching of religion and morality will hardly be
denied by any serious, considerate person; by any who attend to themselves, or
to the state of the world around them. The manifest utility of such an
institution, would afford a rational inducement to all those who wish well to
the interests of mankind, cheerfully to comply with it, were it only of human
origin. But its origin is divine. Revelation confirms our reasoning on this
subject; and in the scriptures we may clearly read our obligation to frequent
and love the habitation of God's house, and the place where his honor dwells.
Although we are not bound to obey the directions and commands given to the
Jews, as such, and which were of an appropriate or local nature, yet from its
being enjoined on them by God, to worship him in a social, public manner, and
the form of their worship being so particularly prescribed, we may at least
justly infer that public worship is fit and proper in itself, and agreeable to
the will of the Deity; for else he would never have enjoined it, in any form,
upon any people. Nor can it be truly said that we have no warrant for it in the
New Testament, and under the Christian Dispensation. Our Savior frequented the
synagogues, and thus gave his countenance to that kind of worship, before his
own kingdom was so established as to supersede or abolish it. He prayed with
his own disciples: He preached himself: He sent them out to preach: And he
said, "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them." Matt. xviii. 20.
We find that the disciples, after Christ's ascension, worshipped together:
That they "all continued, with one accord, in prayer and supplication:" Acts i.
14.
That "they continued steadfastly in the apostle's doctrine and fellowship, and
in breaking of bread, and in prayers." Acts ii. 42.
We find also that when the number of the disciples was increased, and the
gospel spread into various regions, particular societies were formed in
different places, for the convenience of assembling and performing the several
acts of Christian worship and communion. These were styled Churches, and had
Elders ordained in them respectively. That it was the practice, in those early
times, for Christians to meet together, for religious purposes, at leasst on
the first day of the week, or Lord's day, we are taught by the two following
expressions made use of by the apostle, taken in connection with the passages
afterward mentioned. "If therefore the whole church be come together in one
place;" 1 Cor. xiv. 23.
and "when ye come together in the church." ii. 18.
We read of the collection for the poor being made on the first day of the
week, which is justly supposed to imply the assembling of the church on that
day. See xvi. 1, 2.
More expressly, we read of the disciples coming together on the first day of
the week, to break bread, as of something well known and customary, and of
Paul's preaching among them on the occasion. Acts xx. 7.
And finally, that this meeting together for public worship, was considered as
a matter of great importance, and not lightly to be dispensed with, we are
taught by the exhortation given to Christians, not to forsake the assembling of
themselves together, as the manner of some was. Heb. x. 27.
From the connection in which this caution or exhortation stands, we are led to
conclude that thus forsaking the public assemblies was viewed as a virtual
giving up their profession, and apostatizing from the faith. This doubtless we
may set down for a truth, that to the institution of public religious
assemblies, and its having been generally complied with in the Christian world,
the preservation of Christianity to the present day is, under God, to be
especially attributed.

General inferences from, and reflections upon what has been said, must give
place to such occasional observations as have an aspect on the reason and
circumstances of our present assembling.

It is with a view especially to the convenience of meeting together for public
worship, not only that particular churches consist of such as inhabit the same
vicinity, but that the civil divisions into towns and parishes have been
established among us. In forming and proportioning the latter more
particularly, it has been an object to have them contain no more people than
might conveniently assemble at the same house. As the inhabitants of our
country have become more numerous, new towns and parishes have been erected,
and old ones divided, as the increased numbers and ability of the people, or
other changes in their situation, have dictated. And sometimes, even before the
population and wealth of a parish is judged adequate to the constant support of
two worshipping assemblies, and two public teachers of religion, the local
circumstances of a large portion of the society may be such, as to render an
imperfect division expedient. Such circumstances have prompted to the building
of this house, in which for the first time, a worshipping assembly is held this
day. A considerable part of the inhabitants of Yarmouth, not far from one
third, live near the fourth shore of the town, at the distance of four miles
and upwards from the meeting house, on the north side, where they have hitherto
attended public worship. By their success in the fishery, which is flourishing
and increasing among them, they have been enabled and encouraged to each the
house referred to; in which it is their expectation, in consequence of previous
arrangements made, that the present minister of the town, will preach a certain
proportion of the time, to be agreed upon by the inhabitants at large.
We hope and trust that they for whose benefit it is more especially intended,
have been actuated in building it by a sincere regard to the honor of that
God, to whose service it is now dedicated. Is it not because they have loved
the habitation of God's house, and the place where his honor dwells; because
they wish to have it in their power more frequently to tread his courts, than
otherwise they could, that this commodious edifice now stands, thus far
complete, in the midst of themselves? We know not of any reason to suppose that
party views, or any unbecoming spirit, have operated to produce what we see
this day. We do not consider it as setting up altar against altar, but as a
peaceable and well meant attempt more fully to accommodate one and the same
religious society: desirous to continue the same, unless Providence should in
some future time, point out the propriety of a complete separation, and forming
two distinct worshipping assemblies.

We congratulate you on the prospect which is now presented, of your being able
more generally and conveniently, with your families and your little ones, to
appear before the Lord in his house of prayer. And if your pastor, with a view
to your convenience and greater edification, is willing to be in labors more
abundant than he had reason originally to expect, must not his people esteem
him more highly in love, for his work's sake, and cheerfully minister to his
support and comfort, as reason and equity shall dictate?

And now, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation. Take heed unto yourselves,
as well as duly regard him who is over you in the Lord. Forsake not the
assembling of yourselves together. Expose not yourselves to the imputation of
undervaluing an important privilege, because the enjoyment of it may be
procured with less difficulty and exertion than heretofore. Be thankful unto
him who gives the power to get wealth, that, by prospering your in that
business which seems to be assigned to you by Providence, he is enabling you,
with greater case and convenience, to enjoy the benefit of public worship for
yourselves and your families. It is to your honor that your have been disposed
to dedicate to the service of your heavenly Benefactor, such a portion of the
fruits of your increase. But forget not the indispensible obligation you are
under to give your ownselves also unto the Lord. The pure and holy heart is the
temple in which he especially delights to dwell. Let your neal for the worship
of God, be rendered acceptable to him by your sincere and assiduous obedience
unto all his commands. Let justice and charity, sobriety and temperance, be
firmly united with piety in your characters. And while you exercise christian
candor toward those who differ from you in some of their religious sentiments
and modes, labor to convince them by your conduct, that true religion is not
confined to any particular sect of Christians; at least that it has, in
reality, imparted of its spirit unto you. Permit me to add a servent, wish,
that Christians of every denomination among us, would, in their feelings and
conduct toward each other, conform to the spirit of their common religion, and
imitate the liberality of the constitution under which they live: And as this
establishes no particular form of Christianity, but views all persuasions
conducting peaceably and inoffensively, with an equal eye, so their mutual
competitions for superiority and pre-eminence, might consist only in striving
to excel the rest in the knowledge of truth, and the practice of virtue and
goodness.

The leading object of the discourse which you have heard, (I now address
myself to this whole assembly,) has been, to recommend an affectionate and
rationally zealous regard to the worship of God's house. And let us all take
heed, that neither the scoffs of the infidel, the example of the profane and
wicked, nor our own indolence or worldliness, or the employment and mode of
life in which (...), any of us, be engaged, lessen our respect for the divine
institutions; tempt us to profane the Lord's Day, or render us indifferent to
the worship of the Sanctuary. But let us not forget, that the strictest
attendance on the public worship of God, and the most scrupulous observance
even of all the external parts of religion, will not alone for the neglect of
those virtues which are styled, by our Lord himself, the weightier matters of
the law; will not avail us without a vital principle of religion and goodness
in our hearts, which shall manifest itself in a holy life and conversation. If
while we apparently delight to draw nigh unto God in the ways of his
appointment, we really disregard his authority, and cast his laws behind us, we
may well expect that he will turn away, with abhorrence, from our hypocritical
oblations, and, severely remonstrating, say unto us, as to the perverse and
wicked among his people of old, "What have thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my covenant into thy mouth?" Let all be persuaded
seriously to recollect and consider how they have received and heard, hold fast
that which is good, and repent of all their past misimprovement of the
privileges which they have enjoyed.

To such self-examination, should we not be led, not only by the occasion, but
by the time of our present assembling? Through the goodness of our almighty
Preserver and Benefactor, we are brought to the beginning of another year; a
division of time which bears no inconsiderable proportion to the life of man,
when protracted to its greatest length; and which includes the whole earthly
existence of great multitudes that are born into the world. Those
congratulations, and wishes for each other's happiness, which mark this first
day of the year, are not more common, than they are natural. But is it less
natural or proper to distinguish this day, by offering the tribute of
heartfelt gratitude to him who is the length of our days, the health of our
countenance, and the author of all our mercies? Ought it not also to be a day
of solemn recollection? While we pause to consider how many of the years,
commonly allotted to man, are, with respect to us, passed and gone, shall we
not at the same time inquire in what manner they have passed, and how far they
have been improved to moral and religious purposes, or in forwarding the great
and all-important and of our existence? While we erect our monument of
gratitude, and say "hitherto the Lord has helped us," shall we not be abased
before him on account of our former neglect, our follies and vices; and filled
with shame and regret that so much of our lives has been spent in vain, or
worse than in vain, humbly, yet stead fastly resolve that, for the time to
come, we will conduct ourselves in a manner more becoming our professions, our
obligations, and our hopes?

By delaying to secure the favor and friendship of the Supreme, we risk the
loss of every thing, that, comparatively speaking, deserves our care,
affection, or pursuit. We know not what a day, much less what a year, may bring
forth. The present time is all that we can justly call our own. Today,
therefore, while it is called today, let us all attend to the things of our
everlasting peace. From henceforth let us labor to glorify God, in body and in
spirit, which are his; and by practically loving him, as well as his house, and
sacredly regarding his will, at all times, and in all places, earnestly and
with perserverance, seek preparation for, and a final introduction to THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CHURCH OF THE FIRSTBORN, WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN HEAVEN.

THE END

