DISSERTATIONS ON THE Character, Death and Resurrection OF JESUS CHRIST, AND
THE EVIDENCE OF HIS GOSPEL; WITH REMARKS ON SOME SENTIMENTS ADVANCED IN A BOOK
ENTITLED "THE AGE OF REASON."

BY JEREMY BELKNAP. Minister of the Church in Federal-Street, Boston,

FROM THE APOLLO PRESS, IN BOSTON, BY JOSEPH BELKNAP, No. 8, DOCK-SQUARE.
MDCCXCV.

PREFACE.
IT is not pretended that any new arguments are advanced in this performance;
nor does the author suppose that there is any need of referring to particular
books which he has frequently consulted, when engaged in studies of this kind.
If the reader should find any of these sentiments, in the works of Ditton,
West, Lardner, Stackhouse, Doddridge, Butler, or other eminent writers, he will
there see the same subjects treated with more learning and energy, than in this
compendium; which is designed for those who have not leisure or opportunity to
look into more voluminous works.

Boston January 1, 1795.
CONTENTS.
DISSERTATION I. ON the nature of that evidence by which the gospel is
supported. DISSERTATION II. On the incomprehensibility of some things in the
system of nature, and its analogy with some truths of divine revelation.
DISSERTATION III. On the time fixed, in the book of Daniel, for the appearance
of the Messiah, the expectations of the Jews concerning him, and their division
on this subject. DISSERTATION IV. On the character of Jesus Christ, and the
writers of his life. DISSERTATION V. On the testimony of the Roman Centurion,
to the character of Jesus Christ. DISSERTATION VI. On the circumstances
attending the resurrection of Jesus Christ. DISSERTATION VII. On the question,
why the evidence of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, rests entirely on the
testimony of his own disciples. DISSERTATION VIII. On the consequences of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and the truths deducible from the certainty of
that event.
Dissertation I.
ON THE NATURE OF THAT EVIDENCE BY WHICH THE GOSPEL IS SUPPORTED.
IT has been the fate of many great and illustrious characters, to be
misrepresented; and to have different opinions formed of them by persons of
different parties and prejudices; but there never was a person on earth who
has, for so long a time been a subject of controversy as JESUS CHRIST. The
controversy has assumed various forms, and has been stimulated by various
passions and interests; but it has never been discontinued, or, if silent
awhile, it has broken out again from its restraint.

The opposition to the gospel at this time, appears in a different form from
that in the early days of christianity. Then the followers of Christ, were
accused before magistrates, or insulted by mobs, or anathematized by synagogues
and councils; now, our persons are safe, and our religious worship is
undisturbed; but we hear our master defamed, and the writers of his life
abused. The extraordinary facts which they have recorded, are either
represented as incredible; or made the subject of profane wit. A species of
vulgar infidelity, founded partly in pedantry, partly in debauchery and partly
in ill manners, is insinuating itself into the minds of the thoughtless; and
the most sacred truths are rejected and ridiculed, without an examination of
their evidence, or a consideration of their importance.

Among other ebullitions of this species of infidelity lately presented to the
"Citizens of America" by a popular writer, I find the following. Age of reason*
p. 14. American Edition.


"THOMAS did not believe the resurrection; and would not believe, without
having ocular and manual demonstration himself. So neither will I; and the
reason is equally as good for me, and for every other person, as for Thomas."

It is true that Thomas did not believe the report of the resurrection from his
brethren; but it is equally true that when he had satisfactory evidence of its
truth he did believe it. At the same time that Jesus condescended to give him
all the "ocular and manual demonstration," which it was necessary for him as an
apostle to have, he accompanied the condescension with this memorable
declaration. "Thomas, because thou have seen me thou have believed, blessed are
they who have not seen and yet have believed." John 11.29.
Plainly giving him to understand that the actual sight which he demanded, and
with which he was indulged, is not equally necessary for all, as for him; but
that there may be a true faith without it; that persons who have not enjoyed
it, and who cannot enjoy it, may have such evidence offered to them as will be
a sufficient ground of faith, and give them a title to true blessedness. What
this evidence is, may be learned from the remark of the evangelical historian
immediately following.

P. 30, 31.
"Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this book; but these are written, that ye might believe, that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life,
through his name."

Whilst the apostles lived, their testimony delivered in their public or
private discourses amounted to credible evidence of this great event; but as
they knew themselves to be mortal, they were directed by the same influence
which conducted them through all their evangelical labors to commit to writing
such things as were necessary to be a proper foundation for faith. Though they
did not record every discourse, or every sign, or action of their master, yea
though they might omit some circumstances of those things which they have
recorded; yet there is enough written to convince every serious and candid
inquirer, that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God and therefore that there is
a sure foundation for the hope of salvation by him.

The gospel, and particularly that capital part of it, the resurrection of
Jesus, is proposed to us, not barely as an object of faith; but as containing
the hope of eternal life. It is set before us, not merely to be believed as a
matter of fact; but to be trusted in as a matter of importance to us; as that
on which our everlasting interest depends. This is a just view of the gospel,
and we cannot rightly estimate its value, without taking both these ideas into
the account. For if the gospel, or the resurrection of Jesus, were proposed
merely as an object of belief, without any consideration of our interest in it,
some person might say, "What is this to me? It may be true, or it may not be
true. I have no leisure for inquiries, but into those things with which I have
some concern. I must attend to my business, and leave subjects of speculative
inquiry to men who have time and genius to pursue them." Or, on the other hand,
if it were proposed to us, as a ground of expectation, without any rational
evidence of its truth, some might say, "How can I entertain hope, without some
evidence which satisfies my mind? I cannot place my expectation, where I can
see no reason for confidence. My eternal interest is an object too precious to
be committed to any person as a savior, but to one, concerning whose character
and qualifications I can be satisfied on reasonable evidence."

To prevent objections of either kind, the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
particularly the doctrine of his resurrection, is proposed to us in a twofold
view; as an object of faith, and therefore supported by proper evidence; and as
an object of vast importance to us and therefore deserving attention. It is an
object of so much importance, that if we do not inquire into its truth with a
view to entertain the hope which it contains, we are criminal in the highest
degree; and cannot escape the severest reprehension of our own conscience in a
solemn hour. If the gospel be of any importance, it is of the highest; it not
only gives us directions for our conduct in this life; but it points the way to
immortality. It proposes to us as a most serious truth, that this life is but
the first stage of our existence, and that though we must die and return to the
dust, yet that there shall be a resurrection. It proposes to us immortality, as
the reward of well doing; and this immortality is said to be a state of the
highest enjoyment which rational beings can expect or desire; an eternal
enjoyment of the chief good, and an eternally increasing conformity to God as
the basis of that enjoyment; and the resurrection of Jesus shows us in the
clearest light, how we are to arrive at this immortality.

Now, what can be of more importance to mankind than such a doctrine? Is there
any higher or nobler truth with which we have any concern? Is there any thing,
about which we can or ought to be more solicitous than to secure our happiness
in the future state? And can we have any satisfaction concerning this most
important of all considerations, equal to what is given to us in the gospel?

As the gospel professes to have in view our eternal interest; there is
something to excite our inquiry. We cannot look upon it with indifference; if
it be true, it deeply and intimately concerns us. We must feel ourselves
interested in the inquiry, whether it be true or not; and this consideration
ought to lead us to a serious and thorough inquiry into that evidence, by which
it is supported. Men will not put themselves to the trouble of inquiry, without
some prospect of advantage: They must be persuaded that there is some good to
be obtained, before they will enter on any thing which has the appearance of
labor. He who constituted our minds knew this; and therefore he has adapted
his gospel to our moral constitution: He has proposed to us, the highest good
to be obtained, by a due regard to the revelation which he has given; that our
attention might be excited toward it as a valuable and important object

But he has not only given us a proper motive to make the inquiry; he has also
afforded us such evidence as is sufficient to convince us of the truth, that
is, of such kind of truth as is thus highly interesting to us. If physical
truth were the object of our inquiry, we might look for such kind of evidence
as is equal to mathematical demonstration. But our search is after moral truth,
and therefore we must admit moral evidence. What I mean, is, that we must admit
such evidence as we do in other cases, where our interest is concerned; such
evidence (...) we think it prudent to admit and to depend on in matters which
we esteem of great importance to us. Let us take an example.

Let us suppose, (as most people really do) that the acquisition of wealth is
one of the most desirable and important things in the world; and that it is
the part of wisdom to obtain as much riches as we can by our own industry; and
at the same time, that there is a necessity of trusting to other men, for their
information and assistance to accomplish our desires. Do we not think it
rational and prudent to put this confidence in them? Do we not depend on their
abilities, their veracity, their fidelity? And what reason have we to think it
safe for us so to do.?

Suppose there is a report of a newly discovered country, containing abundant
supplies of merchandise, the means of wealth; and that by adventuring our
substance thither, there is a great prospect of advantage; what evidence do we
require as a ground of that conduct which is prudent and rational? Must we
actually see that country with our own eyes? No. Must we see the persons who
have been there, and hear the story from their own mouths? No. Must we examine
their invoices and count the gains which they have made? No. We content
ourselves with an inferior kind of evidence: We depend on testimony, which we
think credible. If there are books or letters written by persons of proper
information and credit, we depend on that evidence: We believe that such a
country exists; and that there is such a way of getting wealth; and we take the
most prudent methods to obtain it. We put our confidence in such persons as are
best acquainted with the business; and, venture our substance on the credit of
their abilities and information. Who does not think this, rational and prudent
conduct?

Well, just such kind of evidence is exhibited to us to support our hope of
immortality! Evidence, on which it is rational and prudent to build our
expectations, and form our conduct. I say, such kind of evidence, because it is
the evidence of testimony; but it is much higher in its degree. For, the one is
subject to some deduction, because the most probable means have sometimes
failed: The adventurer has in some instances been disappointed: His confidence
has been misplaced, or his opportunities lost: Some accident has intervened to
blast his expectations however well grounded; but the other can suffer no
deduction from any such circumstances: No instances can be produced, that any
have failed of salvation, if they have fought it, in the way pointed out in the
gospel; and, therefore, there is no counter evidence to detract from the
credibility of the gospel hope. It ought then to have that place in our minds
which belongs to the highest degree of moral evidence. It is said that "faith
Heb. xi, 1.
is the evidence of things, not seen; the substance of things hoped for." Here
are the same ideas held out, a prospect of advantage to be a ground of hope; as
well as evidence of truth, to be a ground of faith. Where there is a prospect
of advantage, and of such vast unspeakable advantage as the happiness of a
future state; a subject which has engaged the attention of good men in all
ages; surely, it is rational to admit that degree of moral evidence, which is
founded on credible testimony; on testimony which cannot be contradicted by any
testimony of equal credibility; and, from the certainty of which, no deduction
can be made by any reasonable evidence of a contrary truth.

Such is the kind of evidence; and such is the degree of that kind of evidence
on which the facts which involve the gospel hope of eternal life are grounded.
It is the evidence of testimony; the testimony of Jesus Christ and his
apostles. Jesus Christ came from heaven into this world and pointed out to us
the path of life by his doctrine and example. Having delivered his testimony
and confirmed it by a series of the most wonderful and beneficial works, which
were ever seen and known in this world; having voluntarily yielded himself to
the power of death and submitted to be laid in the grave; he has resumed his
life and returned to heaven. Of all this, there is sufficient evidence; there
is written evidence; there is evidence from the written testimony of credible
witnesses who could not be mistaken, because they did not believe it
themselves, until after doubting, they were convined by the most infallible and
demonstrative proof; and who could have no interest in deceiving us, because
they have ventured their own happiness, on the credibility of the same truths.
If then, we have any idea of the benefit, which is proposed to us, by believing
in Jesus Christ, and obeying his gospel; if we have any value for that
salvation, which is there revealed; ought we not to attend to this evidence?
And if it appears reasonable, and we have no contrary evidence, to detract from
its credibility, is it not wise and prudent for us to admit the truth of the
facts, and the importance of the consequences deducible from them: And when we
have admitted it, to build our hope and expectations on it? Ought we not to
exercise the same judgment, and caution on this subject, which we do every day
on things of less consequence? And at the same time, to place that confidence,
and entertain that hope which shall animate us to exertion? Hope is the life of
all business; and what nobler hope can we have than the hope of eternal life?
Being persuaded of this truth and possessed of this hope, we shall pursue with
vigor the path of duty, and the farther we advance in the way of gospel
obedience the more comfort and satisfaction shall we find; "the righteous shall
hold on his way and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger."
Job xvii.9^


If what is said should fall into the hands of any who are yet wavering and
unsettled in their belief of christianity, let me say to them; that the middle
state you are in, between a full belief of the gospel and a total disbelief of
it. lays you a strong obligation to pay a strict regard to the evidence by
which it is supported. For why do you doubt, unless you have some idea of the
importance of the gospel and that your interest may be involved in it? Had you
no apprehension of its value, you would not think it worthy of a doubt. But
your present state of suspense, implies a persuasion that if the gospel be
true; it is of the utmost consequence to you. Let this persuasion operate as a
strong motive, to examine it, with the same attention that you would bestow on
books or letters which direct you how to secure your most valuable interest. Be
sure to admit the same kind of evidence for the truth of christianity which you
would admit for the truth of those facts, upon which you would ground that
conduct, which in other cases would be thought rational and prudent. You can by
no means be excused from the duty of making the most serious inquiry. In such a
case, negligence is criminal. Indifference will have the same consequence as
actual infidelity. When you have evidence presented to you in support of the
most momentous truth, and you do not believe it because you will not examine
it, who must bear the blame? When you acknowledge the importance of
christianity and yet remain in doubt of its truth, you are guilty of a criminal
disregard to your own interest, and a want of reverence to the authority of
your maker, who has a right to require this of you. If christianity should
finally prove to be true, and you should be found among those who have had a
price put into their hands, and have neglected to improve it, what can you
expect but the fate of the unprofitable servant who hid his Lord's talent in
the earth? "Bind him hand and foot and cast him into outer darkness!"

Dissertation II.
ON THE INCOMPREHENSIBILITY OF SOME THINGS IN THE SYSTEM OF NATURE; AND ITS
ANALOGY, WITH SOME TRUTHS OF DIVINE REVELATlON.
IF the book of nature and the book of scripture be the work of the same hand,
we may expect to find the same marks and characters in both. Among human
artists, there is a similarity in the style and manner of books written by the
same pen, of pictures drawn by the same pencil, and of buildings erected by the
same architect. May we not then expect to find in the works of the divine
author, a style and manner peculiar to himself? And, if he has impressed the
peculiar mark of incomprehensibility on some of his works, is it not reasonable
to expect that the same mark should be found, on some of the truths of his
word? "Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? How small a portion is
known of him!"

We find by experience that we are unable to solve many of the appearances in
the natural world, to trace their causes and discover the connection between
the the cause and the effect. Let us look over a few objects with which we are
familiarly acquainted, and see how imperfect our knowledge is, of those things,
which of all we should think most obvious.

If we attempt an inquiry into the properties of inanimate matter, we shall
find some things beyond our comprehension. Why does the needle touched by the
magnet point to the poles? Why is the lightning conducted in a harmless stream
through a small wire, when it rends the firmest oak, and breaks the rock in
pieces?

If we view the (...) serve the various in (...) of the brutal creation; we may
ask, why is one ferocious and destructive, whilst another is mild and docile?
Why is one faithful and another deceitful? Why is one artful and another
stupid? Why is one provident and industrious, whilst another is indolent and
torpid? Look at "the spider, which takes hold with her hands, even in kings
palaces;" the ant, "which prepares her meat in the summer;" the be, which
gathers liquid sweets from every flower; the silkworm, which weaves a delicate
web, and encloses itself within a shroud of its own construction; the beaver,
which stops the current of rivers, and makes them subservient to his domestic
purposes; the birds of passage, which traverse oceans and continents on the
wing, and explore the remotest regions for their summer and winter residence.
Look on these, and say, why are they thus endowed, and why do they thus labor
and toil, when others live at their ease and scarcely move from the spot where
they first came into being?

If we look up to the superior regions and behold the shining glories of the
heavens; what countless myriads of wonders present themselves to our view! why
does the sun shine by his own luster, and the moon and planets borrow their
light from him? How immensely swift and universally diffused are his rays! but
what connects the particles of them together, or what force drives them to the
utmost limits of heaven? What power confines the celestial globes to their
orbits? What hinders them from rolling at large in the etherial space? Or keeps
them from falling into the Sun, the center of their attraction?

To descend from this elevation into ourselves; what enlivens and animates this
portion of matter? Why does an act of the mind give motion to a limb or a joint
of the body? Why does a ray of light falling on the eye, present to us a
distant object? And why when the eye is shut do we retain the impression? Why
do we on certain occasions, recollect ideas which had been long forgotten? Why
do some disorders of the body deprive the mind of memory, reflection and
judgment? And why are these faculties at some times more lively and active,
than at others?

When we ask such questions, what answer can we give, but, such is the will of
God. Or, if we take the intermediate step, and say, such are the laws of
nature, such is the constitution of the material world; what is this, but in
other words to say the same thing? For if we ask who framed the laws of nature?
Who settled the constitution of the material world? The answer is, GOD. Here we
are at a stand: We cannot proceed a step farther in our inquiry. If it be
asked, why did he thus ordain the frame of nature? Why did he choose this,
rather than any other possible system? We are puzzled and lost in the depth of
the subject; and we can only say, that this appeared best to divine wisdom, but
for what reasons, we know not. God gives no account, and his ways are past
finding out.

Thus, the incomprehensibility of GOD is the end of all our inquiries into his
works. And if we presume to examine his essence; or the mode of his
subsistence; or his way of operating on matter, or on intelligent minds, we are
absorbed and confounded; our faculties are totally unequal to the subject; and,
we must lay aside the inquiry as too deep for human penetration.

Ought we not then, to learn modesty and humility in our inquiries into the
works of God? True philosophy always tends to make us humble. The more we
search into the works of God, the more do we discover of our own weakness and
imperfection, and of our incapacity to penetrate the mysteries of nature. The
true philosopher often finds himself at a nonplus; and is never ashamed to
confess his ignorance. And why should he? What is the language of such a
confession, but this, that God is wiser than man?

May we not also trace the analogy between the works and word of God, and learn
the same modesty in judging of the latter as of the former? And, if we find the
peculiar mark of incomprehensibility on some of the truths which are delivered
to us as divine, is it rational to reject them on this account? If there were
no appearance of this peculiar distinction, attending the truths which claim a
divine original, we might say, "all this we are able to discover by our own
faculties; we need no divine revelation to bring this to our knowledge." But
when the revelation is attended with this mark, that some parts of it are at
present impenetrable, how can we consistently reject it? Must we not for the
same reason reject all that knowledge of God which is derived from the works of
nature? For there are impenetrable depths in both. To be consistent, therefore,
such persons must join with the fool who says in his heart "there is no GOD."
But if we acknowledge that God is incomprehensible in his works, why should we
scruple to admit, that he is equally incomprehensible in his word?

By this, it is not meant, that all the truths of God's word are past finding
out, any more than that all the works of nature are so. There are many things
in nature of which we know the use, though we are ignorant of the cause; and if
we knew the cause, we should receive no more benefit from the things themselves
than we do now. We know the use of the magnetic needle and its variation, and
can guide ourselves through the pathless ocean, by means of it; though we
cannot solve the question, why does it point toward the poles? Or why does it
deviate from the true meridian? But if we were to find out the true mechanical
cause of its polarity or its variation, either by the exercise of our own
faculties, or by information from above, what greater benefit could we derive
from the needle than we now have? So there are many truths contained in the
scriptures of which we know the practical use, though we may be ignorant of
their metaphysical relations and connections. They may be founded in principles
abstruse and remote from human comprehension, and yet may be very useful and
necessary to us in a practical view; and the testimony which accompanies them
may be a sufficient reason for our belief and practice.

Besides, though they be at present incomprehensible to us, that is no reason
why they will always be so. And, here we have also the analogy of nature to
support the argument, even in the instance just now mentioned. For how many
ages was the magnetic needle unknown, and the mariner afraid to venture out of
sight of the land? Had any person then foretold, that the time would come, when
men might steer their ships, not only out of sight of the land, but without
sight of the sun, moon and stars; in the darkest night, and in the most
tempestuous weather, by means of a candle and a card, doubtless some would have
derided the prediction as an impossibility. For how many ages was it supposed
that the torrid and frigid zones were uninhabitable? But now it is known, that
the human body is capable of bearing the utmost extremes of heat and cold, to
which our globe is subject. Less than half a century age, it was deemed
impossible to circumnavigate the globe, without losing great numbers of seamen
by the scurvy; but now methods have been found to preserve the lives and health
of this useful class of men in the longest voyages, and in all climates,
subject only to the common casualties of human life.

These discoveries have been made in the book of nature: What was once deemed
impossible, is now known to be true. And, why may not discoveries be made in
the volume of divine inspiration? Why may not close study and devout and humble
inquiry, bring to light many things which have been deemed inscrutable? For how
many ages did the Bible itself lie neglected and unknown in the dark recesses
of monastic libraries, till the active zeal of Luther brought it to light? How
many advantages do we now enjoy since the discovery of the art of printing,
which were before unknown? How many illustrations of different parts of
scripture have been made by inquiring into the genius, manners, arts and
sciences of the people among whom the sacred writers lived; and into the
natural and political histories of those countries, the scene of those events
which they relate! And how much more might we have known, if it had not been
for the destruction of ancient books and their repositories by the barbarous
policy of conquerors, and the mouldering hand of time! When all these things
are considered, is it strange or incredible, that in a book of great antiquity,
and which claims the honor of containing divine communications, there should
be some things, which at present are beyond the reach of human comprehension,
but, which ought to be believed on such testimony, as is deemed sufficient to
support other truths, which are confessed to be advantageous to mankind, though
we may not be able to comprehend some of their causes and relations? Or, is it
agreeable to our maxims of prudence to reject such a book, or any part of it,
on account of certain sublime and impenetrable things contained in it; when it
evidently appears to be calculated for our benefit, and to contain other
things, which we do understand and to which we can conform our hearts and
lives? Does it not rather become us, with modesty and humility to admit the
whole for truth, because it bears the same marks of the divine author as do the
works of nature, which are evidently the workmanship of an almighty hand?

Here, we know but in part; and this imperfection of our knowledge is one of
those modes of trial, which God has appointed for us in the present state. The
reason that we have any opportunity and advantage for acquiring divine
knowledge is that we may reduce that knowledge to practice, and thus improve
ourselves in true virtue. All the knowledge which we shall gain in this or the
future world is intended to make us wiser and better. Let us then study to
employ our minds in acquiring as much knowledge of God and divine things as we
can obtain; and improve our hearts and lives in those virtues and graces which
will form our preparation for the most sublime degrees of intellectual and
moral perfection in the regions of eternal felicity.

Dissertation III.
ON THE TIME FIXED, IN THE BOOKS OF DANIEL AND HAGGAI FOR THE APPEARANCE OF THE
MESSIAH, THE EXPECTATIONS OF THE JEWS CONCERNING HIM, AND THEIR DIVISION ON
THIS SUBJECT.
NOTWITHSTANDING all the confidence with which it has been asserted, that "the
word prophet was the bible word for poet, and that the word prophesying meant
the art of making poetry, and setting poetry to music;" Age of Reason, page 30.
yet, nothing is more certain, than that, a prophet, in the Hebrew Church, was
understood to mean a person commissioned by God, to deliver truth, and to
predict future events; otherwise the distinction between a true and a false
prophet would have been impertinent, and the rules for distinguishing them
useless. See Numbers, xii.6. Deuteronomy. xiii.1, 3. xviii.21, 22.
Their discourses were delivered, either in poetry or prose; often in the
hieroglyphic style, but sometimes with remarkable perspicuity and even
mathematical precision. The reader who would have a just view of the prophetic
writings, is reffered to SHERLOCK'S use and (...) of prophecy, and HURD's
introduction to the study of the prophecies.


Of this last kind is the prediction in Daniel, (chap. ix.24,) respecting the
time of the appearance of the Messiah, which limits it to " seventy weeks,"
from the time when the decree was given, for the restoration of the Jewish
government, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, after the expiration of the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon.

That such a person as the Messiah, was the subject of many predictions,
delivered to the Jewish Church, by the ministry of their prophets, is a truth
in which both Jews and Christians agree. He was predicted under different
titles; all of which were expressive of the dignity of his person, the
characters which he should assume, and the benefits which he should confer. He
was called the seed of the Woman, the seed of Abraham, in whom all the families
of the earth should be blessed, the Son of God, the Son of Man, the Son of
David, a prophet like Moses, a priest after the order of Melchisedec, a king in
Zion, a redeemer, a deliverer, a savior and the desire of all nations.

As the time of his advent approached, the predictions became more clear and
distinct; and the series of prophecy was not closed, till he was so
particularly described, and the time of his appearance was so distinctly fixed,
that unless JESUS CHRIST were the Messiah, no such person has yet appeared in
the world.

The name by which he is familiarly known fully expresses the character, in
which he appeared; JESUS signifies a Savior, and CHRIST, the anointed; THE
ANOINTED SAVIOR, or the person commissioned by GOD to be the savior of the
world.

"The ancient Jews were led by their prophecies, as interpreted by themselves,
to expect that they would be completed at the time in which, the christians
say, they were completed; and it was not till after the coming of Christ that
they began to interpret them differently, and to look out for another
completion of them. Judge then, if they, or we, are likely to have erred most;
through prejudice, in expounding and applying the prophecies. Judge, if the
natural and proper sense, is not that, in which we take them; for that sense
occured first to themselves, and was their sense before we adopted it. I mean,
especially in respect to the time which they had fixed, for the accomplishment
of the prophecies concerning the Messiah." Hurd's introduction, page 147.


It is well known, that the Jews numbered not only weeks of days but weeks of
years. Not only every seventh day was a sabbath, or day of rest; but, every
seventh year was a sabbatical year, or year of rest. Besides these, every seven
times seven years there was a grand sabbatical year, called the jubilee, in
which liberty was proclaimed through the land, and every man returned to the
possession of his paternal inheritance. See Leviticus, Chap. x^^.
The weeks spoken of by Daniel are weeks of years, each containing the space of
seven years; which, being multiplied by seventy, will give four hundred and
ninety years, and if to these we add the nine years of jubilee which
intervened, the period will be five centuries. It is very remarkable, that
notwithstanding the (...) scar^^ty of ancient chronology, and the different
opinions of the most learned men, respecting the beginning and ending of these
seventy weeks* yet there is no greater difference in their reckonings than
thirteen years.

The questions which have been agitated among them are these.

1. Whether the years are (...) or solar? The difference (...) this question is
between six and seven years.

2. Whether the weeks are to be computed from the (...) given to Ezra in the
seventh year of Artaxerxes? [Ezra (...) Or from that given to Nehemiah in the
twentieth year of (...) same reign? [Neh. ^^ 1.] The difference (...) thirteen
years.

3. Whether the reign of Artaxerxes began when (...) took him as a partner of
the throne? Or (...) father^ death

The difference is nine years. These questions are (...) debated in Sir I.
Newton on the prophecies, Dr. (...), and Dr (...) commentary on (...).




In addition to this chronological prediction, the coming of the Messiah, is
limited by the prophet Haggai, to the time in which the second temple should be
standing. For whilst the aged Jews who had returned from the captivity in
Babylon, saw the erection of the second temple, and compared it with the
magnificent structure which had been built by Solomon, they could not refrain
from weeping at the disproportion. Besides the gold and other rich furniture,
several things were wanting in the second temple, which were accounted part of
the glory of the first; viz. the ark of the covenant, the shekinah or visible
token of the divine presence, the perpetual fire, the sacred oil, the Urim and
Thummim; but notwithstanding the absence of these, it was predicted by Haggai,
[chap. ii.7, 8, 9,] for the consolation of his countrymen, that "the glory of
the latter house, should be greater than the glory of the former; because the
desire of all nations should appear in in it, and by him it would be filled
with glory." These predictions limited the appearance of the Messiah, by the
expiration of the fifth century, from the restoration of the Jews, and by the
existence of the temple which they rebuilt after their return from Babylon.
Nothing could be to them, more certain and definite, than such predictions.

Accordingly it is evident, from the books of the new testament, that in the
latter part of the fifth century, there was a general expectation of the
appearance of an illustrious person among the Jews. Wise men came from the east
to inquire "where is he that is born King of the Jews, for we have seen his
star and are come to worship him." Matthew. ii.
Simeon was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and it was revealed to him,
that he should not see death, till he had seen the Lord's Christ. Anna the
prophetess was in the same expectation, and spoke of him to all them who looked
for redemption in Jerusalem. Luke, ii.25.
When John the baptist, began his ministry, the Priests and Levites sent
messengers to him, to inquire whether he were the expected Messiah. John, i.19.
The same expectation prevailed among the Samaritans, John, iv.25.
as is evident from the conference which Jesus had with a woman of that
country. Several impostors taking advantage of this general expectation, "drew
away much people after them," and one of them Judas of Galilee, "in the days of
the taxing," when Jesus was born. Acts v.36.37.
These instances I trust are sufficient to prove that there was a general
expectation, among the Jews, and the neighboring nations, of the appearance of
the Messiah, about the time when Jesus was born and lived; and this expectation
was grounded on the predictions above mentioned, which they could not but
understand in their most obvious and literal meaning. Jesus began his ministry
by saying " the time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is at hand." Mark i.15.
In his discourse, of the destruction of the city and temple of Jerusalem, Mat.
xxiv.15.
he quoted a part of the prediction of Daniel; and in a remarkable parenthesis
(" whosoever reads let him understand") plainly intimated that the whole was very
intelligible and worthy of their attention, as containing one of the plainest
of the signs of the times.

It is also to be considered as one corroborating proof, that in all the cavils
and objections, which the Jews brought against Jesus, to invalidate his claim
to be the Messiah, they never once pretended that it was not the proper time
for his appearance. The truth is, that there was then no controversy; but, all
were agreed on that point. We may then safely conclude, that the time limited
for the appearance of the Messiah has elapsed, and that it must have elapsed
before the destruction of the Jewish temple by the Romans.

The great difference between those of the Jews who rejected Jesus, and those
who received him, was respecting the nature of that redemption or salvation, of
which the Messiah was to be the author. The former regarded it in a political
sense; they had been redeemed from the Egyptian bondage by the ministry of
Moses and Aaron; and from the Babylonish captivity, by the mediation of Ezra
and Nehemiah; they were then in subjection to the Romans; and they looked for
the Messiah, as their national redeemer, from that yoke; as one who should be a
temporal prince, like David, and raise their nation to the same degree of
independence, wealth and honor; but they saw no traits of such a character in
Jesus, and therefore rejected him. The latter were induced by various degrees,
to overcome the national prejudice, in which they had been educated, and to
regard the salvation of the Messiah in a moral and spiritual sense; not as
respecting this world but extending to the future ages; not as confined to the
Jews, but comprehending all mankind. "The Jews in rejecting a spiritual sense
of those prophecies (which yet is admitted by them on other occasions) have
been driven to the necessity of supposing a twofold Messiah, a new conceit,
without warrant from their scriptures and against the ideas and expectations of
their fathers; the christians by the help of that moral and spiritual sense,
which they have put on the same prophecies, are able to explain them, of one
and the same Messiah, conformably to the event, and to the time which the
ancient Jews had prefixed for the completion of them." Hurd, page 148.


The conduct of the ruling part of the Jewish nation, toward those of their
brethren who embraced the doctrine of Jesus, in the first age of the christian
church shows the force of prejudice over the human mind in a most affecting
view. They had been subjected by the Romans; but had expected a Messiah to
redeem them, and the time limited by the prophets had elapsed. Instead of being
able to recover their own independence, to subdue all the nations who had
oppressed them, and to reign as sovereigns over the whole earth; they not only
continued tributary to the Romans, but saw a number of their own nation, under
the full persuasion that Jesus whom they had crucified was the Messiah,
traveling over the world, teaching this doctrine, and inviting all men to
partake of the blessings of God's kingdom, without first becoming Jews; or
being proselyted to the laws of Moses. They saw the apostles and ministers of
Jesus submitting to the Roman government, teaching obedience to it, as a moral
duty; endeavoring to make people easy in their subjection, and promising the
rewards of heaven to their patience and meekness. This was more than the temper
of the Jews could bear. They were the most restless, uneasy people in the world
i These. ii.15.
; and were frequently exciting sedition and rebellion against the Romans. On
the contrary, the christians taught quietness, obedience and the payment of
tribute. The Jews were looking for temporal dominion, but the christians were
expecting no kingdom but what was moral and spiritual and would extend to the
future invisible world.

The posterity of those Jews have lived to see, not only that they as a nation
were never delivered from the Roman yoke; but that the Roman empire, which
subjected their fathers, is itself broken to pieces; and yet that they are not
redeemed nor restored. They are however preserved as a distinct people
notwithstanding their dispersions; and this preservation is one of the
strongest, visible evidences of the truth, both of the Jewish and christian
revelations.

Dissertation IV.
ON THE CHARACTER OF JESUS CHRIST AND THE WRITERS OF HIS LIFE.
AMIDST the wit and ridicule which have been played off against christianity,
there is sometimes an appearance of respect to the character of Jesus Christ;
which, however plausible at first view, yet is accompanied with such other
sentiments, as render the sincerity of it very questionable. We are gravely
told "that such a person as Jesus Christ existed, and that he was crucified;
that he was a virtuous and amiable man; that he preached most excellent
morality; that the morality which he preached and practiced was of the most
benevolent kind; and that the grand trait in his character was philanthropy."
Age of Reason, p. 12, 15, 36.
But, at the same time, it is said, that "he wrote nothing himself; that the
history of him is altogether the work of other people; that his historians
brought him into the world in a supernatural manner, and were obliged to take
him out again in the same manner; that the story of his resurrection is a
wretched contrivance, which has every mark of fraud and imposition upon it;
that it is now impossible for us to know who were the authors of it, or to be
assured that the books in which the account is related were written by the
persons whose name they bear." Ibid p. 13, 15.
Thus, by flattering us into an idea that they are friendly to the moral
character of Jesus, they would destroy the grand evidence of the real character
in which he appeared in the world, and sap the foundation of that hope of
immortality which we derive from his death and resurrection.

To expose the weakness and inconsistency of such an attack on christianity,
let us attend to the following considerations.

1. If it be allowed that there was such a person as Jesus Christ, that he was
virtuous and amiable, that he preached the most excellent morality and
practiced the virtues which he taught, from what source is the knowledge of
this derived? How do we know that there was such a person, and that his
doctrine and life were so good? Must not this knowledge be derived from the
testimony of ancient authors? And are not those authors most to be depended on,
who were eye witnesses of the facts and events of his life, and ear-witnesses
of the discourses and instructions which he delivered? Though something
credible might have been said by persons at a distance who had known him by
report and hearsay, who were not his contemporaries, but had received their
knowledge by tradition, and who did not profess to write his life, nor to be
his disciples and who were far from being particular in their accounts of him;
yet, is not greater credit due to those who personally knew him, who frequently
conversed with him, and who could not mistake in their testimony concerning
him? This is a rule which holds good in all other cases, and why should it not
be allowed equally good here? We cannot violate this rule without supposing
that the nearest friends of a virtuous and amiable man were the greatest liars;
and that those who knew him only by a distant report, were the only honest and
credible historians. This supposition would not be admitted in any other case;
because it is contrary to the nature of testimony and the rules of evidence
universally acknowledged among mankind.

2. If Jesus Christ taught the purest morality and practiced what he taught,
who were more likely to learn of him and to imitate his example than his own
disciples? And would not the morality which they learned of him induce them to
speak the truth concerning him? Socrates was an eminent teacher of moral
philosophy among the Greeks, but he wrote nothing himself; Plato and Xenophon
were his disciples and wrote memorable things concerning him. Does any person
suspect them of insincerity in their relations of their master? Why then should
the disciples of Jesus be less worthy of credit? What kind of morals can we
suppose they had learned of Jesus? What kind of morals do they recommend in
their own writings? Do they not enjoin the same virtues and duties as did their
master? and would not candor lead us to suppose that they practiced what they
taught? Are there not evident marks of simplicity and sincerity in their
writings? Do they not give us the most plain and undisguised accounts of the
actions and sayings of their master? Of their own faults and imperfections? Of
their own absurd reasonings, vain expectations and false prejudices, and of the
manner in which they were led to correct them? Do they not relate the most
grand and solemn events, in a style as simple and unaffected, as they relate
the most common occurrences? Do they not plainly show that they had no fondness
for embellishing their narratives? But that they aimed only at giving a simple
history of such facts and events as fell under their observation? And, are
there any seeming disagreements in their narrations but what may be reconciled,
by the exercise of the same candor which we should use in reconciling other
writers of equal antiquity, who agree in the most material points? Why then are
not the disciples of Jesus entitled to our credit in what they have related
concerning him?

3. If Jesus taught and practiced the best morality, and if he accounts given
of his life and character, by his biographers, be true, then it must be
allowed, that he was a person of strict integrity, one who spoke the truth and
had no intention to deceive. Admitting this, let us attend to what is related
by them respecting his miracles. A question arose among the disciples of John
the Baptist, whether Jesus were he that should come or they should look for
another? With this question John sent them to Jesus; and at the time of their
arrival, Jesus was employed in healing the sick, giving sight to the blind, and
performing other miraculous and benevolent works. Instead of giving any direct
answer to their inquiry, he said. "Go and show John the things which you hear
and see: The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,
the deaf hear, the dead are raised and the poor have the gospel preached to
them." Matthew xi. Luke vii.
Was not this an appeal to the miracles which he wrought? Did he not rest the
proof of his divine mission on that evidence? And wherein consisted the force
of the evidence? It had been foretold by the ancient prophets, that this should
be one of the characters of the Messiah; Isaia. XXXV, LXI.
John was acquainted with these prophecies; the answer therefore was pertinent
and the argument conclusive. And would a person of a truly virtuous character
have used an unfair argument on so solemn an occasion?

4. In the same manner did he appeal to his resurrection, as a proof of his
divine mission. When the Jews asked him, "what sign showest thou to us, seeing
thou do these things?" He answered, "destroy this temple, (meaning his body,)
and in three days I will raise it up." John ii.19
If at first they did not understand the figure contained in this answer, yet
they did afterward; for at his burial, they told Pilate, "Sir, we remember that
this deceiver said while he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again."
Mat xxvii, 63.
The resurrection of Jesus was an event which he foreknew, which he foretold,
to which he appealed, and to which his apostles appealed as a decisive proof of
his divine character and mission. If he were a truly virtuous man, he would not
have foretold such event, unless he had a well grounded faith that it would
come to pass; and if his disciples learned their morality of him, they would
not have related such an event, unless they had known it to be true. To pretend
that the story of his resurrection was fabricated by his disciples as a
counterpart to the story of his miraculous conception is a reproach as weak and
malicious as the old calumny of the Jews, "that his disciples came by night and
stole him away;" to pretend, at the same time, a respect to the character of
Jesus as virtuous and amiable, is a palpable inconsistency; and, to insinuate
that the authors of the story are unknown, and that the time when it was
invented, is unknown; is nothing more than "a wretched contrivance," to
palliate a false and groundless pretense.

It is in vain to attempt to separate things which are so intimately connected
as the virtuous character of Jesus, and the truth of his miracles and
resurrection. They rest on the same evidence and must stand or fall together.
It is impossible to believe that Jesus was virtuous and good, and yet that he
wrought no miracles and did not rise from the dead; for a good man would not
have appealed to such facts, and to such an event, as the proofs of his divine
mission, unless they had been realities.

If therefore we would be consistent with ourselves, and treat those ancient
and venerable historians, who have written the life of Jesus, with the same
candor and respect, as other historians of equal antiquity; we must not only
believe, that such a person as Jesus Christ did exist, and that he bore a
virtuous and amiable character; but we must believe that he was sent by God, to
be the Savior of the world; that he answered in all respects the characters
which had been given of the Messiah, in particular, that he went about doing
good; and though he was put to death, yet that he rose from death to
immortality. Why should not these facts be believed on the same testimony with
that which supports the virtue and goodness of his character? Were not his
miracles one part of the proof of his benevolence? And did they not gain him
the love as well the veneration of the people? Those works were, to the people
who saw and received benefit by them, the most demonstrative proofs of the
goodness and power of the person who wrought them; they proved that he was a
prophet sent from God. To us, these miracles have (...) that same direct and
intuitive evidence; but still they are of use. The relation of them is
credible; the nature of them was beneficial; they were a fulfillment of ancient
prophecy; and, they serve to confirm our faith in the virtuous and amiable
character of the person who wrought them. If we believe that he was virtuous,
certainly he was not the less virtuous for doing so much good, as the
evangelists have reported of him.

His resurrection may be considered in one view, as the reward of his virtuous
and amiable conduct, and of the patience with which he endured his last
sufferings. Is it not credible, that virtue should be rewarded with immortal
life and happiness? Why should it be thought incredible, that God should raise
the dead? But there is a farther use to be made of this great event. For as
Jesus has set us an example of virtue, which we are bound to imitate; so God
has, by the resurrection of his Son, given us an assurance, that our virtue
shall be rewarded, in the same manner. And what is the design of this, but to
encourage us to persevere in a close imitation of the character of Jesus
Christ, trusting in his promise, "because I live, ye shall live also?"

Upon the whole, let every one who is acquainted with history and chronology,
or who may be easily informed, if he thinks it worthy his inquiry, be asked
these questions. Do you believe that there was such a person as Jesus Christ?
That he was born and lived in Judea, in the latter part of the fifth century,
after the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity? In the reigns of
Augustus and Tiberius, Emperors of Rome? that he was a person of a virtuous
character, that he practiced what he taught, and that the writers of his life
learned their morality of him? If he answers these questions in the
affirmative, he must, to be consistent with himself, be a christian: He cannot
reasonably doubt the truth of the miracles, nor the resurrection of Jesus
Christ; he cannot reasonably doubt of the doctrines, the duties nor the
tendency of the whole gospel system through time and eternity.

Dissertation V.
ON THE TESTIMONY OF THE ROMAN CENTURION TO THE CHARACTER OF JESUS CHRIST.
IN any matter of consequence, which engages our attention, it is very
desirable to have the opinion of sensible, observing and judicious persons in
our favor. This serves to keep as in countenance, and give an additional
satisfaction to our minds. For when those, who have no interest to serve and no
prejudice to gratify, give their judgment on any matter of importance,
according to reason and evidence, it is probable that they will judge right.

There is no question of more importance to us, than whether the Christian
religion be true or not; and there is no human being who is unconcerned in this
question. But a person may be really concerned in a matter on which he is to
give an opinion, and yet not know it, at the time. The case of David is full to
the point. When Nathan delivered the parable of the rich man who had taken away
the poor man's lamb, David knew not that he was the person, but he gave a just
decision, on the merits of the cause. The Centurion who attended the
crucifixion of Jesus, did not know that he had any other concern in the
transactions of the day, than that he was to do his duty as the officer of the
guard. He was not a Jew; and therefore had no tincture of the prejudice which
the Jewish nation had against Jesus. Nor was he one of his disciples and
therefore had no expectation of honor and preferment in his kingdom, as the
best of them, at that time had. He was to all intents an impartial,
unprejudiced person. Yet, from the observations, which he had opportunity of
making on that singular event, the death of Jesus Christ, and its attendant
circumstances, he deliberately and voluntarily pronounced him to be the SON of
GOD; and the soldiers of the guard joined with him in the same testimony.
Matthew xx^ii.54.


This testimony is of great weight and importance in the cause of christianity
(...) that we may view it in its just light, we should examine, what were the
circumstances in which this man was placed, and what advantages he had for
making observations at that time.

The Centurion with his company were appointed by Pontius Pilate the Roman
Governor of Judea, to attend the execution of Jesus and the two thieves. Mark
says that he "stood over against him;" Mark, xv.39.
a situation extremely favorable for his observations; being within sight and
hearing of all things that occurred, or were said or done on that occasion.
Hence it appears, that (...) must have been a witness to the following facts
and occurrences.

1. The cruel hatred and enmity of the Jews to Jesus. It is not usual among any
people, who make pretenses to civilization, to treat a person with insult, when
he is going to suffer death by a judicial sentence; be his crimes ever so
odious and detestable and his sentence ever so just. Those who have any degree
of humanity will, on such an occasion, be satisfied with leting the law take
its course; and though they acquiesce in the execution as lawful and just, yet
they will have compassion on the suffering criminal, and view his exit with a
solemn silence. But here, the case was far otherwise. Jesus was accused of no
crime, which the Centurion could judge deserved death. Nor, did any thing
appear in his character or conduct which merited outrage and violence. But the
Jews had wrought themselves up to a furious passion, and vented themselves in
the most bitter, scornful, reproaching and insulting language. This was not
done by the common people only, from whom no better treatment could be
expected; but by the priests, the elders and the scribes; the ecclesiastical
rulers, the most sacred and dignified characters.

2. He must also have observed, the mild, meek and patient behavior of Jesus;
"who when he was reviled, reviled not again;" and, instead of showing any
displeasure against them for their cruel and abusive treatment, pitied his
persecutors, and in his last agonies prayed for them, "Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do."

There was a most surprising contrast between the temper of the persecutors and
of the sufferer. The former was harsh, unreasonable, abusive and insolent in
the highest degree. There was nothing in him which appeared to deserve it; and
if there had been, still it would have been base and ungenerous to insult a
person when he was in their power, and they were inflicting on him the extreme
punishment of the law: No brave, candid mind could approve such conduct. On the
contrary, the temper of Jesus was all meekness, patience and benevolence; not
an angry resentful word or look proceeded from him; but he manifested a calm,
composed, resigned, dignified deportment, and a tender concern for his enemies
when they were loading him with reproaches. This contrast could not but have
been observed by the Centurion and his company.

3. Another circumstance was the uncommon darkness, which overspread the land,
at the time of the crucifixion. The account of this darkness, given by the
evangelical historians, like all their accounts of extraordinary facts, is very
short and simple. "From the sixth hour, there was darkness over all the land,
till the ninth hour." They relate the event, but not the secondary causes,
which produced it; for their writings were designed, not to solve phenomena in
the natural world, nor to teach us philosophy; but to give us a true account of
the christian religion and the means by which it was introduced into the world.

4. The darkness, having continued three hours, was succeeded by an earthquake.
"The earth did quake, and the rocks rent," i. e. the rocks of mount Calvary,
where the Centurion and his company were performing their duty. An earthquake
naturally excites terror; and this event must have given an additional
solemnity to the scene, and made a deep impression on the minds of the
Centurion and his company. Accordingly it is remarked by the historian, that
when they "saw the earthquake" and its effects, "they feared greatly."

5. Another circumstance as remarkable as any, was the conversation which Jesus
had with the penitent thief, and which passed within the hearing of the
Centurion. Jesus was crucified between two thieves, one of whom joined with the
Jewish priests, in reviling him, and was reproved for it by the other, who
said; "Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we
indeed justly, but this man has done nothing amiss." Having thus borne his
testimony to the innocence of Jesus, he turned himself to him and said, "Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom." To which Jesus answered, "
Amen, I say to thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise." Luke
xxiii.43. (Greek)
Both these persons were then apparently going out of this world, into the
invisible state, yet the thief had an idea, that Jesus was a King, and was
going to the possession of his kingdom; and though dying, he prayed that Jesus
would remember him, when he should come into his kingdom. What kind of a
kingdom must this have been? Not a kingdom of this world, but a spiritual and a
heavenly kingdom. The thief therefore, might be supposed to pray to Jesus for
an admission into a state of happiness after death. This prayer was immediately
answered by Jesus, with a voice full of majesty and dignity, promising him
admission into Paradise. What must an impartial spectator think of such a
conversation? Must he not conclude that Jesus really had a power over departed
spirits, to appoint them to a state of happiness, and that the thief had a full
persuasion of this truth, and ventured his salvation upon it?

6. Another circumstance was the cry which Jesus uttered as he was expiring.
"Father, into thy hands, I commend my spirit." Luke xxiii.46.
These words it is said, he cried with a loud voice; which was an evidence of
the inward strength and vigor, both of his body and mind, notwithstanding his
pain and and the loss of blood from his wounds. It was also an indication, that
he died at his own time, that no man took his life from him, but that he laid
it down of himself, and resigned his spirit into the hands of his father. It is
observed, by one of the historians, that when Joseph of Arimathea, begged of
Pilate, the body of Jesus, "Pilate marvelled if he were already dead," and
would not believe it, till he had called the Centurion, and was assured of it
by him; Mark 2^, 44.
whence it appears that Jesus died much sooner than it was usual for persons in
those circumstances to die; and indeed sooner than the companions of his
sufferings.

This loud expiring cry, joined with the other circumstances abovementioned,
drew from the Centurion and his company that honest confession. Ver. 38.
"Truly this man was the Son of God." The penetration and sensibility which
were discovered by these military characters, did them much honor. They were
greatly affected with the singularity and solemnity of the scene; their
confession was the result of conviction; it was voluntary and sincere, and they
could have no inducement to make it, but the force of truth.

The Centurion's expression as given by Luke is, "certainly this was a
righteous man;" Luke xxiii.47.
which amounts to what the penitent thief had said, "This man has done nothing
amiss," or to what Pilate had said before, "I find no fault in this man." These
are full and sufficient proofs of the innocence of the character of Jesus; but
the testimony, "that he was the SON of GOD," rises still higher and proves that
the Centurian did believe him to have been a person of extraordinary dignity,
honored with a special commission from God. He had doubtless learned this
phrase from his acquaintance with the Jews, it being one of the names, by which
they were used to call the Messiah, whom they expected. Psalm ii.7.
He probably knew that Jesus was put to death, for assuming this character; he
had heard him repeatedly pray to God, on the cross, calling him Father;
"Father, forgive them." "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit;" and he
had reason to believe from the extraordinary behavior of the sufferer, and the
solemn appearance of the face of nature, on that memorable day, that Jesus was
sincere in these addresses, and that God had heard him; whence it was natural
for him to conclude, that there was some special union and relation between God
and him, as between a father and a son; that he was invested by the father,
with a power over death and the future state; that he had a kingdom beyond the
grave, in the unseen world, and could dispose of departed souls at his
pleasure. Such a testimony, coming from such a person, at such a time, reflects
the highest honor on the character of Jesus, and is a striking evidence in
favor of the christian revelation. Could any person more deservedly receive
such unsought, unbiassed testimonies? Can we wonder that his disciples loved
him, when those who had no particular connection with him, but to assist in his
execution, have expressed such a full conviction of his dignity and glory and
the spotless purity of his character? Who, judging only by the light of nature,
and attending to the evidence before their eyes, were fully persuaded that his
pretensions were just and his character divine?

Permit me, here to introduce a fine passage, from the late excellent Bishop
Sherlock; where he compares and examines the different characters of Jesus and
Mahomet; both of whom are believed by their respective followers to have been
messengers from GOD. Sermons vol. 1. No. 9.


"Go to your natural religion. Lay before her MAHOMET and his disciples,
arrayed in armor and blood; riding in triumph, over the spoils of thousands
and ten thousands who fell by his victorious sword. Show her the countries
which he ravaged and destroyed; the cities which he set in flames; and the
miserable distress of all the inhabitants. When she has viewed him in this
scene, carry her into his retirement; show her the prophet's chamber, his
concubines and wives; let her see his adultery, and hear him allege revelation
and a divine commission, to justify his lust and oppression. When she is tired
with this prospect, then show her the blessed JESUS, humble and meek, doing
good to all the sons of men; patiently instructing both the ignorant and the
perverse. Let her see him in his most retired privacies; let her follow him to
the mountain and hear his devotions and supplications to GOD. Carry her to his
table, to view his poor fare and hear his heavenly discourse. Let her see him,
injured but not provoked. Let her attend him, to the tribunal, and consider the
patience, with which he endured the scoffs and reproaches of his enemies. Lead
her to his cross and let her hear him pray to his enemies. "Father forgive them
for they know not what they do." When natural religion has viewed both; ask,
which is the prophet of GOD? But her answer we have already; when she saw part
of this scene through the eyes of the Centurion who attended at the Cross; by
him, she spoke and said, "Truly this man was the Son of God."

Dissertation VI.
ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST.
THE dignity and solemnity of this grand event, and the infinitely momentous
consequences of it to us and to all mankind, may justly strike our minds with
awe and reverence; yet if we would entertain a just idea of it, we must enter
familiarly into all its circumstances; and even into the affections, the
weaknesses and the prejudices of those who were first acquainted with it; for
they were human beings like ourselves, having reason and passion in exercise at
once; and the tumult of both produced those effects; which we are now to
contemplate.

It is impossible to read the history of the life and death of Jesus Christ,
without observing the constant, zealous and respectful attention of his female
friends. We find among them singular instances of attachment to a worthy and
amiable character in the most distressing scenes. They gave the strongest
proofs of their love to him, even when most of his chosen disciples forsook
him; they kept as near to him as the circumstances he was in would allow; and,
they would gladly have ministered to him and comforted him in his last moments,
had they been permitted.

Among the friends of Jesus were two persons who had hitherto kept themselves
concealed; but an occasion of his death appeared openly and boldly in the
character of disciples. These were Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus both
members of the Jewish council, but who had not been concerned in the
proceedings against him. The providence of God so directed the manner of their
expressing their regard to Jesus, as to make them instrumental of fulfilling
two remarkable prophecies respecting the Messiah. One was that he should not
"see corruption;" Psalm xvi.10.
the other was that he should "make his grave with the wicked and with the
rich". Isaiah liii.9.
The two thieves were doubtless buried in Golgotha, the common burying ground,
in or near the place of crucifixion; but the body of Jesus, after Joseph had
obtained leave of Pilate, was conveyed into his own garden, nigh at hand, in
which was a new sepulcher hewn out of a rock; and because it was the day of
preparation before the Sabbath, and it was near night, he thought it best to
deposit the body in that new sepulcher. To preserve it in the most decent
manner which circumstances would then admit, Joseph and Nicodemus who were both
men of wealth, brought fine linen with a large quantity of myrrh and aloes.
"Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in the linen cloth, with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews was to bury." Thus by means of the rich drugs
applied to the wounded body, and the linen wrapped around it, together with the
coolness of the rock in which the sepulcher was hewn, the body of Jesus was
effectually preserved from corruption, during the time appointed for its
continuance in the grave. The entrance of the sepulcher was closed with a great
stone; and the body being thus secured by his friends, they retired and "rested
the seventh day according to the commandment."

But his enemies could not rest. They remembered what his disciples had
forgotten, that he had foretold his own resurrection on the third day; and they
were afraid that something might take place which should give countenance to
such a report. They feared that those of his disciples who had buried him, with
the assistance of others, would come by night and take away his body and would
so effectually conceal it, that there would be sufficient ground to say that he
was risen from the dead; and thus "the last error would be worse than the
first." i. e. the people would be more ready to profess their regard to him
after the report of his resurrection than they were during his life. Filled
with this idea, they assembled on the Sabbath and went in a body to Pilate,
desiring that the sepulcher might be secured till the third day. He granted
them a guard which they placed in Joseph's garden, to watch the sepulcher.
Having as may well be supposed, first looked into it to see that the body was
there, they closed the entrance and sealed the stone; and it is probable that
their design was to keep the body till after the third day, and then publicly
expose it to view; that they might at once ruin the credit of the prediction
and the character of Jesus.

Thus it appears that divine providence overruled the designs of his enemies,
as well as the endeavors of his friends, to give the utmost strength to the
proof of his resurrection. All possible care was taken to preserve and secure
his body; by his friends, to preserve it from corruption* and by his enemies,
to secure it from removal. It became necessary then for a special divine agency
to be manifested, in accomplishing that glorious event; on which the truth of
the gospel and our hope of salvation essentially depend.

The space of time in which Jesus had foretold that he should lie in the grave,
is in one place, said to be "three days and and three nights;" Matt. xii.40.
in other places, the prediction is that he should rise "on the third day." Chapter
xvi.21. and xx.19.
According to the Jewish mode of reckoning the, evening belonged to the day
which followed it, and not to the day which preceeded it. The day ended at the
setting of the sun; and then the next day began. The day on which Jesus died,
according to our mode of reckoning, was Friday at three of the clock in the
afternoon. The remaining part of that day, viz. from that hour to the setting
of the sun, the Jews would call the first day of his death. Then the next
twenty four hours, which ended at sunset on the Jewish Sabbath, was the second
day; and the following night and day, belonged to the third day. The several
phrases "three days and nights," or "after three days," or "in three days,"
signify the same as, "on the third day;" and thus the Jews understood it. For
they went to Pilate on the second day, which was the Sabbath, and asked for a
guard to watch the body till the third day, lest his disciples should come by
night and take him away. It is evident then that they understood the first day
of the week, to be the day limited by Jesus for his resurrection; and if he
rose on that day then the prophecy was completed. The space of time between the
death of Jesus and his resurrection may be thus computed.

First day, From the ninth hour (3 o'clock P. M.) of the day which we call
Friday to sunset 3 Hours. Second day. The whole of Saturday, or the Jewish
Sabbath, 24 Hours. Third day. From the end of the Sabbath at sunset, to the
dawn of the first day of the week about 11 Hours. 38 Hours.



The friends of Jesus were so far from intending such a thing as the removal of
his body, to favor the supposition of a resurrection, that they neither
understood nor believed what he had several times told them of his rising from
the dead. They had so deeply imbibed the Jewish idea of a Messiah, who should
"abide forever," that when Jesus was dead, all their hopes were dead also. They
had seen that he did not deliver himself from the power of his enemies; but was
fallen a sacrifice to their malice; and with the ideas of temporal dominion
which they entertained, what could they think of his being the king of Israel?
As they knew his pious, humble and benevolent character, it must have filled
them with perplexity to account for his being put to death as a criminal. As
the Jews had gratified their malice against him, it was natural to expect that
the same vengeance would be executed on his followers. The terror of this, made
them at first desert him; it caused Peter to deny him; and it operated so
strongly on all, that when they came together, to confer on the strange things
which had happened, they shut themselves up for fear of the Jews. Such was the
state of their minds; and hence it is easy to conclude that the apprehension of
the Jews, lest these men should steal the body of Jesus, and then raise a
report of his resurrection, was entirely groundless. All which the most zealous
and forward of them intended, was to embalm it, in the most respectful and
honorable manner, on the day following the Sabbath. For this, they had begun
their preparations in the evening, and with an attempt to put this design in
execution, the morning of the third day was opened. But the providence of God
disappointed that design and introduced a new, surprising and magnificent
scene, of which they had not any idea or expectation. The particular
circumstances of it, I shall now recite, in the order, in which, from a
comparison of the four Evangelists, I conceive them to have happened.

When the Sabbath was past, i. e. in the evening following the Sabbath, Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, with Salome and Joanna and other
women, bought sweet spices that they might anoint the body of Jesus, in the
preparation of which they employed themselves during a part or perhaps the
whole of the night. Very early in the morning, just as the dawn began to
appear, Mary Magdalene went from home, with the other Mary and Salome, to see
the sepulcher, leaving Joanna and the other women to bring the spices. As they
were proceeding toward Joseph's garden, near Mount Calvary, they said among
themselves, "who shall roll away the stone from the door of the sepulcher? For
it was very great." It is evident from this conversation, that some of them had
seen the stone placed there by Joseph and Nicodemus, two evenings before; and
the removal of this stone, was the only difficulty, of which they had any
apprehension; the guard having been placed there in the evening preceding,
without their knowledge. But, when they approached the sepulcher, they saw the
stone removed; and it had been removed in a manner of which they had not the
least expectation. For, about the time of their setting out from home, there
was an earthquake; the noise of which would probably have awakened the guard,
if they had been asleep; and an angel of the Lord had descended from heaven,
and came into the garden, and removed the stone from the door of the sepulcher,
and sat upon it. "His countenance was like lightning," flashing around him;
"and his raiment white as snow; and for fear of him" the guards trembled and
became as dead. At the instant of this majestic appearance of the angel, and
the terror of the guards; Jesus, being awakened from the sleep of death,
probably by another angel, arose and came out of the sepulcher; his body being
transformed in such a peculiar manner, as to be visible or invisible at his
pleasure; and, the same peculiarity attended the angels also. It is probable
that the guards, as soon as they had recovered from their surprise, and seen
the sepulcher open, fled from the garden; for there is no account, that any of
them were seen by the friends of Jesus, at their approach.

As soon as Mary Magdalene, who was the foremost of the company, perceived that
the stone was taken away, and the sepulcher open, she left her companions, and
ran to inform Peter and John, of what she had discovered; and said to them,
"they have taken away the Lord, out of the sepulcher, and we know not where
they have laid him."

Whilst she was gone on this errand, the other women advanced to the sepulcher,
and went in; where they saw an angel in the likeness of a young man, sitting on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were affrighted. But
he said to them, "be not affrighted, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was
crucified; he is risen, he is not here; behold the place where they laid him.
But go your way, tell his disciples, and Peter, that he goes before you into
Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said to you." Having distinctly heard
these words, they went out and fled; and it is remarked, that they said nothing
to any person whom they met by the way; though probably they met some of their
own friends.

After they were gone, Peter and John, who had heard the report of Mary
Magdalene, came running to the sepulcher. John out ran Peter and came first;
and stooping down, he looked in and saw the linen cloths, in which the body of
Jesus had been enclosed, but he went not in. When Peter came, he went in and
made a further discovery; that the napkin which was about his head did not lie
with the other linen, but was wrapped together in a place by itself. Then John
went in and saw the same, and he believed, i. e. he was the first of the
disciples who believed the resurrection of his Lord. For as yet, the others
knew not the meaning of the scripture, and of his own prediction* that he
should rise from the dead. These two disciples having examined all the objects
presented to their view, went away and probably called together the rest of the
eleven, to tell them what they had seen.

But Mary Magdalene, who had come back to the sepulcher, with, or soon after
Peter and John, stayed without, at the door, weeping; and as she wept, she
stooped down, and saw two angels, who had been invisible, whilst Peter and John
were there. They were clothed in white, and were sitting one at the head, the
other at the feet of the place were the body of Jesus had lain. They said to
her, "Woman, why weepest thou?" She answered, "Because they have taken away my
Lord, and I know not where they have laid him." When she had said this, she
turned herself back and saw Jesus, but knew not that it was he. Jesus said to
her, "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou?" She supposing him to be the
Gardener, said, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence tell me where thou have laid
him, and I will take him away." Observe, she did not name the person, for whom
she was looking, but concluded that the keeper of the garden must know whom she
meant. Jesus then assuming his usual familiar voice, called her "Mary!"
Instantly, she knew the joyful sound, and flew to embrace him, crying "Rabboni!
or my Master." But Jesus said "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father." The meaning was, do not now spend time in embracing me, I shall not
yet leave the world, and go to my father; you will have opportunity to see me
again; "but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my father and your
father, to my God and your God." This was the first appearance of Jesus.

His next appearance was to the other Mary and Salome, and, probably the other
women, Joanna and her company who were bringing the spices and had turned back
also. For as the women were going to deliver to the disciples the message which
the angels had given them: Jesus met them, saying "All hail!" And they, came
and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then said Jesus to them, "Be not
afraid, go tell my brethren, that they go before me into Galilee and there
shall they see me."

Should any difficulty arise from the account given by Luke of the women's
visit to the sepulcher; where he speaks of two men in shining garments who gave
them a message to the disciples of the same import, though not precisely in the
same words, as that which Matthew and Mark have recorded; candor will oblige
us to solve it, by supposing, either that some of them saw but one, and others
both the angels; who might make themselves visible at one time and not at
another, to one person and not to another or else, that different women came in
succession to the sepulcher and that the angels, repeated the message to them.

When these women came into the city, they went to the eleven, who had met
together. To them they reported what they had seen and heard; but their words
seemed as idle tales and they believed them not. This observation must be
applied only to the major part of the eleven; for John had been to the
sepulcher, and had observed so much, as induced him to believe the resurrection
of Jesus; and Peter was wondering in his heart at the things which had
happened. On this report of the women, who said that they had seen a vision of
angels, Luke says that "Peter arose and ran to the sepulcher." This is supposed
to have been a second visit, which he made; but, at this second visit, he saw
no angels; he only looked in, and saw the linen cloths lying as they were
before. Either with Peter or soon after, some others of the eleven went thither
and found the sepulcher in the same situation; but they saw not the angels, nor
their risen Lord.

About this time, Cleopas and another of the disciples departed from the city
to go to Emmaus; in which journey they had an interview with Jesus, which
completely satisfied them that he was risen from the dead. The design of this
appearance of Jesus was to impress on the minds of these two disciples, an
argument for the truth of his being the Messiah which had not been considered
by any of them as it ought to have been, I mean the argument from prophecy.
That they might understand this argument properly and exercise their reason in
judging of it, he did not discover himself at once; but disguised himself in
the habit of a traveller and entered into familiar conversation with them, on
the subject. Having thus in a rational way prepared their minds for the belief
of his resurrection, of which they had heard some report; but were in doubt and
sadness on account of it, her presented himself before them as their risen
Lord, and gave them sensible evidence of the truth of what the women had
reported.

On their return to the city, they found that the evidence of this great event
had gained ground during their absence, by an appearance of the Lord to Simon,
the particulars of which are not recorded; but neither the report of this
appearance nor of his being seen of them at Emmaus was satisfactory to the
eleven, until Jesus himself came into the midst of them, and did eat and drink
before them; and made them handle him and judge on the most sensible and
demonstrative proof, that, the same body which had been crucified, dead and
buried was alive again. The same kind of demonstration was given to Thomas at
their next meeting, and thus the whole number were fully satisfied by the most
infallible evidence.

It is now proper to turn our attention to the enemies of Jesus, and see what
effect this extraordinary event had on them. It is said by Matthew, that " some
of the watch came into the city, and told the chief priests all things that
were done," as far as they were acquainted with them. These soldiers doubtless
told the truth, and probably others of them might tell the same truth to other
people. Such an event was an occasion of surprise and concern to the Jewish
priests, whose interest it was to ruin the credit of the miracle. When they had
assembled and consulted among themselves, they found no other means in their
power to do this, but to bribe the soldiers with a large sum of money, to tell
this lie, "that the disciples of Jesus had come by night and stolen him away,
whilst they slept," and when the soldiers objected, that they should be
punished for breach of duty, they gave them this assurance, "if it come to the
Governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you." This argument
prevailed; they took the money, and did as they were commanded. This report
became current among the Jews, and continued so till the time when the gospel
of Matthew was written, in which their artifice was detected, and exposed.

Such were the circumstances attending the resurrection of Jesus Christ; and
from the whole, we may fairly deduce this observation; that if there had been
such a pre-concerted plan among the disciples, as the Jews pretended, we should
have found them watching for the event, and seizing the first report as
incontrovertible evidence. But in fact, it was a matter of prophecy, which none
of them understood or expected. The news was received by them with surprise;
and it was a long time before they could overcome their prejudices. Their
incredulity in such a case, is the strongest evidence, that there was no fraud,
no design, no artifice. Nothing but the most demonstrative proof could convince
them; and when this was offered, they finally yielded themselves to its force,
and believed, that they had seen not a spectre as at first they imagined; but
the real risen body of their beloved master.

Dissertation VII.
ON THE QUESTION, WHY THE EVIDENCE OF THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST RESTS
ENTIRELY ON THE TESTIMONY OF HIS OWN DISCIPLES.
AMONG the objections which the wisdom of this world has made to the system of
christianity, it has been alleged that the resurrection of Jesus Christ was
witnessed by none but his own disciples; and the credibility of the fact has
been supposed to be greatly injured by this circumstance. It is said, that "the
resurrection, supposing it to have taken place, admitted of public and ocular
demonstration, to all Jerusalem at least. A thing which every body is required
to believe, requires that the proof of it should be equal to all, and
universal. Instead of this, a small number of persons are introduced as proxies
for the whole world, to say that they saw it; and all the rest of the world are
called upon to believe it." Age of Reason page 14.


In answer to this objection, I will now endeavor to show why this great and
capital fact is attested in this particular manner; or, why the apostles and
other disciples of Jesus Christ were the only witnesses of his resurrection. To
vindicate this part of the conduct of divine providence let the following
things be considered.

First. The Jewish priests and rulers had sufficient evidence of his
resurrection without being eye witnesses of it. They were persons endowed with
consummate art and policy: They were fully aware of the consequence of what
Jesus had foretold concerning his own resurrection: They saw that the cause of
christianity would be successful if this point were to be believed; and, they
took all imaginable care to prevent all which they expected could or would be
done to favor such a report. They procured a guard and placed it at the
sepulcher, and sealed the stone, to prevent the disciples from coming by night
to steal the body. There was but one night in which there could be any
apprehension of such an event, and that night consisted of not more than ten
hours, from the close of one twilight to the dawn of the next. Now, who can
believe that a company of Roman soldiers, in such circumstances, would not do
their duty, for one night? Or if they had not done their duty, who can, believe
that they would not have been punished for their negligence? What the Roman
discipline was in such cases we may learn from a similar circumstance. Peter
was imprisoned by the command of Herod, and was miraculously delivered in the
night by the ministry of an angel. Acts xii.18, 19.
"As soon as it was day there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was
become of Peter; and when Herod had sought for him and could not find him, he
examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death." This was
agreeable to the martial law of the Romans; and can any person believe that the
Jewish priests would have behaved, with so much tenderness and delicacy toward
these soldiers, as not to have complained to the governor and had the martial
law executed upon them, if they had been really guilty of sleeping on guard?
The acknowledged fact is, that the sepulcher was opened and the body gone. Had
there been really a suspicion that it was stolen, they would have argued, that
it must have been done either by force or by fraud. The guard was set to
prevent force, and there would have been resistance made, the evidence of which
would have appeared on trial, in vindication of the soldiers. The seal on the
stone was to prevent fraud; which could not have been practiced without
connivance; and in this case, the broken seal would have been evidence against
them. Sleeping on guard was a breach of trust, and if urged as an excuse, could
not have acquitted them. But the truth is, that the soldiers were not brought
to a trial, and therefore had no opportunity to justify themselves by declaring
what they knew to be fact, and the reason of their not having been brought to
trial was that no complaint was made against them; nor did it consist with the
policy of the Jewish rulers to make such a complaint, because it would have
brought the truth to light and defeated their own design.

That such a report, viz. of the stealing the body of Jesus by his disciples
was current among the Jews, is allowed; it is equally true, that the apostles
knew how it came to be current. Should it be asked, how could such an artless
set of men as the apostles are represented to be, have penetrated this secret?
It may be answered; we are informed by Luke, the writer of the Acts of the
apostles Chap, vi.7.
that after some time "the word of God increased and the number of the
disciples was greatly multiplied in Jerusalem, and a great company of the
priests were obedient to the faith." These priests were probably acquainted
with the artifice, the fiction and the bribery which had been practiced by
their brethren; and upon their conversion would naturally communicate it to the
apostles, of which number Matthew was one, who published it in his gospel. The
Jewish rulers had no means in their power to contradict what was thus
published. They did not attempt to prove, that the body was stolen; nor to
account for its being missing; nor to produce it from its concealment, though
they had sufficient power to make a search and sufficient inducement to detect
the fraud, if any had been really suspected.

The conclusion then is, that they were conscious to themselves of the truth of
the resurrection of Jesus. They knew that they had bribed the soldiers to make
a false report, and why should they have done this, if they had not been
convinced that Jesus was risen? Let any one who is acquainted with the motives
and principles of human actions judge, whether, if the charge of bribery and
forgery thus brought against the Jews by the christians, had been false, the
Jews would not have taken some method to vindicate themselves. There was an
open controversy between the christians and the Jews on that question, whether
Jesus were risen from the dead. The christians boldly and publicly asserted it,
and declared themselves witnesses of it. And how did the Jews manage their part
of the controversy? They contradicted and blasphemed: They threatened and
persecuted: They did all which power and malice could do, to hinder the
doctrine from being propagated. And what kind of proof is this? It is a species
of argument which has often been used in a bad cause; but never produced
conviction in the mind of any sincere inquirer. Since no other argument but
violence was by them opposed to the christian doctrine, we may safely conclude
that they had no other to use; and there is sufficient ground for us to believe
that the Jewish rulers knew that Jesus was risen; but endeavored to conceal
the truth and substitute a falsehood in its place.

Secondly. It will follow, then, that they were of all men most unworthy to be
indulged with any other evidence or mode of conviction. They had discovered the
greatest enmity and malice against Jesus Christ, his person, his doctrine, his
miracles and the success of his public ministry: Their prejudice against him
was so strong; that they were disposed to resist the plainest evidence, which
could be offered. To what purpose then would have been any other evidence than
what they already had? Would it have produced an alteration in their temper or
behavior? What was their conduct toward Lazarus, after Jesus had raised him
from death?" "They gathered a council, and said, what do we? For this man does
many miracles, if we let him alone, all men will believe on him. And they
consult-that they might put Lazarus to death, because that by reason of him,
many of the Jews believed on Jesus." John xi.47, 48, and xii.10.
Now would not the same enmity have operated in the same way against Jesus
himself? Would not the same malice, which put him to death once, have attempted
to kill him again? Should it be said, that Jesus might easily have escaped out
of their hands, as he did several times, during his life and before his hour
was come; suppose he had, what use would such malicious enemies have made of
this circumstance? They would have said, that it was a ghost or spectre, which
appeared, and not the real risen body of Jesus: They would have said that the
senses of the people were imposed upon by magic; that they were deluded with a
fictitious appearance, and thus they would have evaded the proof of his
resurrection. Did they not treat his miracles in this manner? These were open
and public. The witnesses were so many, that the facts could not be denied; but
how did the enemies of Jesus evade this proof of his divine mission? "He
casts out devils, by Beelzebub prince of the devils." If such was their
malicious disposition, how easy would it have been for them to invent some such
reason for the appearance presented to the view of the people, and ascribe it
to some infernal artifice?

Thirdly. It may be inquired, if Jesus had appeared openly and publicly to the
Jews, his enemies, after his resurrection, what additional evidence could we
have derived from it? How should we have known that he thus appeared? If the
Jews were so full of malice as to try all in their power to destroy
christianity, is it probable that they would have given their testimony and
left it on record, that they had seen Jesus alive again, after his death? Such
a thing could not have been expected. If they had left no such testimony, then
we must have received it from his friends and disciples, as we do now: We must
have depended on their credibility as we do now; and what addition could have
been made to the evidence from their testifying that he had appeared to his
enemies?

Besides, the malice of his enemies might have induced them to deny that they
had seen him: They were certainly wicked enough to have done this. And, what if
it had been recorded by some Jewish historian; that the priests and rulers of
his nation, had openly denied that they had ever seen the risen Jesus, when the
apostles had testified the contrary? Here would have been a clashing of
evidence, and the proof would have been weakened by it. For, if one witness
appeals to another for the truth of any fact, and that other person denies it,
the appeal is so far from helping, that it injures the evidence very
materially, because it will naturally be concluded, that one or the other is in
the wrong. It is plain then, that the credibility of this fact could not have
been better established, but might have been essentially injured, if the
apostles had said that the enemies of Jesus had seen him after his resurrection.

The truth is, that not the number, but the character of the witnesses is most
to be regarded. If a few men can make it sufficiently appear that what they say
is true, there is as full evidence to a reasonable inquirer, as if the number
were ever so great. And, the case before us is of such a nature, that we could
not reasonably expect any evidence, but what is given us by the friends of
Jesus; nor is there the least necessity for any other. For the further
illustration of this point, let it be considered.

Fourthly. That the disciples of Jesus were competent witnesses of his
resurrection; both in regard to number and character.

The number of the apostles was eleven; the number of disciples who kept
together in a body at Jerusalem, was one hundred and twenty; Acts, i.15.
and the number by whom Jesus was seen at once, was above five hundred; of whom
the greater part were alive at the time when Paul wrote his first epistle to
the Corinthians. 1 Cor. xv.6.
Had there been any doubt of the fact, by any serious inquirer, during the
first age of the church, how easy would it have been to find one or more living
witnesses, of whom satisfaction might have been obtained? Suppose there were
now, any doubt respecting an event, which happened in this country, forty or
fifty years past; would it not be an easy matter to inquire, who is now living
that remembers it, and was then of sufficient age to notice it, who had seen
and heard what was the foundation of the report? And could not full
satisfaction be gained by such an inquiry? Would an event thus established by
the concurrent testimony of several witnesses, lose its credit with the next
generation* when all those who had been eye and ear witnesses should be dead?
Especially, if care had been taken by them, to commit the story to writing and
thus preserve the memory of it? And, more especially, if there had been a
particular day set apart to celebrate the event and perpetuate the remembrance
of it? Let us take an example, familiar to ourselves. Do not we know, that on a
certain day, in a certain year, of the present century, the delegates of these
American states, in Congress assembled, declared them independent? Should any
person now, or within a few years hence doubt this fact, may not an appeal be
made to those persons who were then living and acting in that great affair? Or,
should any doubt be made a century, or several centuries hence, when all the
present generation will be in their graves; may not an appeal be made to public
records, or to approved histories, or to the annual celebration of the day on
which the act was passed? And, will not this be reasonable and convincing
evidence? Just such evidence we have that Jesus rose from the dead. It was a
fact, seen and known, witnessed and believed, by persons who could not have
mistaken the fact; by numbers, by great numbers of them. There has been an
authentic history of it written by eyewitnesses, and preserved by their
successors, There has also been a familiar monument of it preserved among them;
the first day of every week is regarded as a day of religious rest and worship;
it has been, for almost eighteen centuries, invariably kept, and understood to
be kept sacred, in memory of that great event. If any person in this age of the
world should doubt the resurrection of Jesus Christ, let him seek some other
reason for the observation of the Lord's day: Let him tell us when it began to
be kept, and by whom, and for what purpose; and if he can give no other, or no
more satisfactory account of it, than is given in the books of the evangelical
historians, let him be ashamed of doubting or hesitating to admit the truth of
that account.

As to the character of the witnesses, let it be observed, that they not only
had full opportunity to know the truth and satisfy themselves of it; but it was
a matter which they did not at once believe. They did not understand the
predictions of the prophets nor of Jesus himself; and therefore did not expect
and were by no means prepared to believe the resurrection of their Lord before
it happened. It was as new and surprising to them, as if there had not been a
word spoken concerning it. And, when the evidence of it was presented to them,
it was a long time before they were all convinced. They needed the most
sensible, demonstrative proof: They exercised their senses and their reason in
examining it; and after the most full and critical inquiry, they were convinced
by "many infallible proofs."

The evidence seems to have been communicated to them, in proportion to the
respective strength and capacity of their minds. The first appearance of Jesus
was to Mary Magdalene; the second, which immediately followed it, was to the
other Mary and her companions. These women were the most zealous and
affectionate friends of Jesus; and the first discovery of himself to them was
doubtless intended as a reward for their faithful attention to him in his last
hours before his death. But, there might be another reason for it. The female
mind is well known to be sudden in its decisions: It does not stay to inquire,
to combine and compare ideas, and deduce conclusions from various premises; but
it seizes its object at once, or in want of it, falls into agony and distress.
In condescension to this habit of acquiring truth, Jesus did not leave his
female friends in doubt, but satisfied them immediately of the truth of his
resurrection; and they received it with a transport of joy. Not so was it with
his other friends. John, the beloved disciple was indeed the first who believed
the resurrection; but he was left to draw his conclusion from several premises:
He saw no angel, he heard no voice, he had no actual sight of the risen Jesus;
but, from comparing the state in which he found the sepulcher, with what he
remembered to have read in the scriptures, and with what Jesus had spoken when
he was alive, he drew his conclusion in favor of the resurrection of his
master. Others had their doubts removed by degrees, and by different
representations of the evidence to their minds. Thus there was an exercise of
reason in judging of the evidence, and the result was conviction and faith.
This is the right way of becoming true believers.

If it be admitted that they believed the resurrection and could not have been
deceived in gaining this belief, the next inquiry is, what reason could they
have for propagating the knowledge of it? Was it conducive to their temporal
interest? No, they were poor before, and they had no prospect of making
themselves rich, by opposing the general sentiment, of the ruling party among
their nation. Was it calculated to make them famous and respected in the eyes
of the world? For enough from this! Their doctrine was to the Jews a
stumbling block* and to the Greeks, foolishness. Was there any hope of their
enjoying ease and tranquillity? No, their apostolio character exposed them to
labor and travel; to be persecuted and imprisoned; to endure all kinds of
sufferings, to which human nature submits with the utmost reluctance. Were they
overheated with enthusiasm? No men were more prudent and cautious and took more
pains to avoid giving offense. Indeed their doctrine was contrary to the lusts
and passions of mankind; and the spirit by which they were animated, obliged
them honestly and boldly to maintain their principles and testify what they
knew to be the truth; and by these means much opposition was excited against
them. The fault however lay not in them, but in their enemies. The religion
which they preached and practiced was full of love and good will to men; but it
tended to disturb and overthrow the false opinions, the idolatrous worship and
the licentious morals, which had been long established in the heathen world; as
well as the formality and hypocrisy which reigned in the Jewish nation; and
therefore, all the policy and power of the priests and rulers, first among the
Jews, and afterward among the Gentiles were opposed to it. In these
circumstances, what inducement could these men have to undertake such a mighty
work as to preach the gospel to all nations? What, but a full conviction of its
truth and importance, and a full expectation of receiving their reward, not in
this but in a future state? That they had this expectation, and this alone to
support and comfort their minds in the midst of their apostolic labors and
sufferings, we have the testimony of one of the most indefatigable of them, who
in his admirable discourse on the resurrection, says of himself and his
brethren, "If in this life only, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable." ^. Cor. ^^.^9.


If the apostles were competent and credible witnesses of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, we have only to inquire.

Fifthly. In what manner and with what degree of credibility is their testimony
handed down to us? In answer to this inquiry, it may be observed in general,
that there is as good historical evidence of the truth of what is delivered to
us on this subject, as there is of any fact or went whatever, and he who
scruples to admit this truth must deny all history and all testimony respecting
any past event.

1. There is sufficient evidence from Roman historians, that there was such a
person as Jesus Christ; that he lived and died in the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
and under the administration of Pontius Pilate Governor of Judea; that the
religion which he taught was maintained by his followers; that it spread first
in Judea, where if it had contained any error or imposture it must have been
soonest and most easily detected; that it was propagated in Rome; the most
learned and enlightened city then in the world; that the believers of this
religion were despised and persecuted; but, that the opposition which they met
with, instead lessening, increased their numbers. There is therefore, as good
evidence of the existence of the christian religion, as of any fact or event of
equal antiquity. There is evidence that it began in the reign of Tiberius; and
there is no evidence that it began sooner. Thus far the Roman and Christian
histories agree.

2. The books which are handed down to us as the wirtings of the first
disciples of Jesus Christ, bear as evident marks of genuine antiquity as the
books of Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny and other Roman historians of the same age.
They give the chronology of the events which they relate; they tell us in whose
reign they happened, and who were Governors of the Roman Provinces, and they
are found to agree in these circumstances with contemporary writers, as far at
least, as those writers agree with each other.

3. If the evangelical historians have testified things which no other
historians have testified, it was because no other historians had the same
opportunities and advantages to examine and be convinced of such facts. That
such facts and events are possible, no one who believes the wisdom and power of
God can doubt; and if they were real, and were transacted in such an age and
such a part of the world as they are said to have been, by what other, what
better evidence could they have been supported than the testimony of persons
who were themselves eyewitnesses of them? If then, we give any credit to
ancient history; if we believe any facts or events of equal antiquity with the
death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, how can we reject the evidence of these
great and important facts without being chargeable with inconsistency and folly?

The same thing may be said respecting the gospel, which Moses said concerning
the law; "Set your hearts to all the words which I testify to you, for it is
not a vain thing, it is your life." Our eternal life depends on the truth of
the gospel of Jesus Christ, of which the grand decisive proof is, his
resurrection from the dead. If Jesus be not risen from the dead, then we have
no other assurance of immortality than Socrates or Cicero had, whose best
expectations were founded on conjecture and probability; and whose hope
extended no farther than to the future existence of the soul, in a state of
separation from the body, of which they had but vague and indistinct
conceptions. But, if Jesus be risen, then "immortality is brought to light," we
have a clear and definite idea of it, and a well grounded hope of its certainty
in God's due time. To prepare us for the enjoyment of this blessedness, we must
believe in this savior, and our hearts and lives must be conformed to his
precepts and example. Though we have not seen him, yet we may love him and
follow him; and we shall then partake of that blessing, which he has pronounced
on them" who have not seen and yet have believed."

Dissertation VIII.
ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST, AND THE TRUTHS
DEDUCIBLE FROM THE CERTAINTY OF THAT EVENT.
JESUS Christ appealed to his resurrection as the decisive proof of his divine
mission and his apostles followed his example. They were so sure of the truth
of this fact and so fully persuaded of its importance, that they scrupled not
to risque the whole credit of their religion upon it. They believed it, on the
best evidence; they exhibited that evidence to others; they required the belief
of this extraordinary fact as a necessary term of discipleship; and, they had
such a view of the connection between this and the other doctrines of
christianity, that they scrupled not to allow, that if this were false, all the
rest was not worthy of regard. "If Christ be not risen, (said Paul ^ Cor. ^
v.14.
) then is our preaching vain and your faith also is vain." These words fairly
imply that if the doctrine of the resurrection of Christ be true, then the
preaching of the gospel and the faith of christians are of the highest
importance, connected with and conducive to our eternal salvation.

Having stated and vindicated the evidence of this illustrious fact, let us
attend to the consequences which follow from it.

I. If the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus Christ be true, then he was
the promised Messiah, the Savior of the world.

In the same books which contain the evidence of his resurrection, we have many
of his discourses, in some of which he declared in the most solemn manner, that
his doctrine was not his own, but his who sent him; that he spoke to the world
those things which he had heard of the father; that as the father had taught
him so he spoke; and in his last prayer with his disciples he appealed to the
father in these words "I have given to them the words which thou gave me."
Not only was his doctrine delivered but his miracles were wrought by the same
divine commission. "The works which I do, bear witness of me that I came from
God." These miracles were wrought to prove the truth of his doctrine: They were
direct appeals to the senses of mankind. Those who saw them, and especially
those who experienced the benefit of them must have been forcibly convinced,
that the person who wrought them was endowed with more than human power; and
must have been induced to attend to his teaching as the most serious and
important truth.

If we regard the death of Christ as that of a martyr, confirming his testimony
with his blood, this must be admitted as a weighty evidence of the truth of
what he taught; especially when we take into view his holy and exemplary life,
and the wisdom, meekness and humility which he discovered in his whole conduct.
We cannot believe, that such a person as he appears to have been would have
ventured to die, in any cause but that of truth; and if we had no other
testimony than what arises from his miracles and his death, yet that would have
been sufficient to give credibility to the doctrines which he delivered; but
when in addition to this, we are assured that God did, by a special act of his
power, raise this extraordinary person from death to life, exactly as he
himself had predicted, we have the highest possible evidence, that he was sent
by God to enlighten and reform the world both by his doctrine and his example.

But there was something beyond this in the design of his death; something
which was prefigured in the Levitical sacrifices, where an innocent creature,
without spot or blemish, was offered to God in behalf of trangressors. In
allusion to this he is said to have been offered to God, to be sacrificed for
us and to die for our sins. It is certain that he did not die for any sin of
his own; and it is equally certain that no man could have taken away his life,
and that death could have had no power over him, without his own consent. But
he offered himself to God, that he might so take away sin, as that God might be
"just and yet justify the sinner who believes in him."

This great event, the death of Christ, and the particular purpose for which he
died* were foreknown and predetermined by God, before the world was made. This
eternal purpose was revealed as early as the days of Adam; it was the substance
of the Levitical sacrifices; it was the subject of several direct prophecies;
it was as capital and essential a truth in the scriptures of the old as it is
in those of the new Testament. It may therefore be truly said "that Christ died
for our sins, according to the scriptures."

Among the enemies of Christ and his religion, his death was reckoned a
disgrace to the christian cause. That the founder of a religious system, who
professed that he was sent from God, should be put to death as a malefactor,
was a thing which in their opinion disgraced his character and overthrew the
merit of his pretensions. This cavil of the enemies of christianity had such an
effect on some weak professors, as to induce them to deny the death of Christ,
and to invent some fabulous and absurd interpretations of that part of the
gospel history, to remove the scandal, which they imagined was cast on their
religion by that event. But the apostles, who were perfectly instructed in the
religion of their divine master, were so far from wishing to deny or evade this
matter, that they established the fact, and openly preached that Christ died,
and that he died for our sins; without this, there could not be any foundation
for the pardon of them; and without the ignominy of the cross, there could be
no foundation for the glory of the resurrection.

The crucifixion and death of Jesus then are to be considered as the direct way
to his exaltation. "Because he humbled himself and became obedient to death,
even the death of the cross therefore God has highly exalted him and given him
a name which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, and every tongue confess him Lord, to the glory of God the father."

II. It follows from the truth of our Lord's resurrection, that his apostles
were divinely commissioned, to preach the gospel through the world. The same
books, which contain the evidence of his resurrection, give us an account of
the commission which he gave to his apostles; by which he provided in the most
proper and effectual way for the continuance of his religion in the world. It
was not intended that his visit to this world should be of any longer
continuance than was necessary to establish and confirm the truth of his divine
mission, and lay a sure foundation for our hope of enjoying the benefits of
pardon and immortality. It was fit and right that his voluntary humiliation
should be rewarded with the highest honors, and that he should return in
triumph to that glorious world from whence he came. But it was equally
necessary that his religion should be propagated in this world. His personal
ministry was confined to "the lost sheep of the house of Israel;" but he had
"other sheep which were not of that fold," and it was necessary that "they also
should be brought in, that there might be one fold and one shepherd."
Accordingly when he spoke of the effect of his death he said, "If I be lifted
up from the earth, I will draw all men to me." The commission given to his
apostles was expressed in the most universal terms, "Go ye into all the world
and preach the gospel to every creature." "Go ye and teach all nations." "As my
father has sent me so send I you." The apostles understood their commission in
this extensive sense and accordingly each one took his district and traveled
over that part of the world which fell to his lot. Whence we may conclude, that
it was the will of Christ, that during the first and purest age; the knowledge
of the truth should be propagated through the world, accompanied with the same
evidence which was exhibited before the eyes of the Jews. The impartial regard
which God had to all men would not suffer him to confine these "glad tidings of
great joy" to any particular nation. As he is no respecter of persons, and
would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, so the
messengers of truth were sent forth to command all men every where to repent

Different people treated the gospel differently. To some it was a "savor of
life to life; to others of death to death." Some have preserved some parts of
the religion of Jesus pure, whilst they have corrupted other parts; some have
preserved what others have corrupted, and some have lost both the name and the
power of it. These differences are to be ascribed to various causes; ignorance,
superstition, imposture, bigotry, covetousness, pride, invasion, persecution
and tyranny have in their respective degrees contributed to mar the glory of
the christian religion and deface the purity of its institutions; but
notwithstanding the combination or prevalency of these causes, yet we may rest
assured that as the christian religion has not been lost, so "the gates of hell
shall never prevail against it."

III. From the truth of the resurrection of Jesus Christ we deduce the divine
authority of the books of the new Testament. The apostles were mortal as well
as other men. Had there been no provision for a succession of teachers, nor any
authentic standard of doctrine, preserved and established in the christian
church, the religion of the gospel would not have survived the first age; but
it was intended for a durable religion; not to be worn out or disused, but to
last forever. It was not designed for any one age or place, or for any one
particular class or denomination of men; but for mankind universally. It has
its foundation in the rational nature of man: It applies to his understanding,
judgment, conscience, will and affections; and it regards all men equally. It
is a religion which has produced converts from heathenism and judaism; from
every species of idolatry and superstition in the world: It is adapted to all
countries and to all climates: It teaches mankind every where, the same truths
to be believed; the same duties to be practiced; the same examples to be
imitated; the same motives to influence their conduct; and, it sets before them
the same hopes and prospects to animate them in doing and suffering the will of
God.

This being the nature and design of the religion of Christ it was highly
proper and necessary that it should be committed to writing; and that copies of
what was written should be preserved; so that succeeding ages might enjoy the
benefit of what was delivered by Christ and his apostles.

Accordingly we find that there are books preserved and handed down to us,
which have been acknowledged as authentic by christians of ancient and modern
times; by christians of different sects and parties; who, though they have
differed widely in their sentiments, respecting some of the doctrines taught in
these writings, yet have constantly appealed to them as the standard of truth;
and their mutual jealousy has made them so watchful of each other, that no
material alteration could have been introduced into these books, without being
detected, by one party or another. Since the art of printing has been
discovered, the most scrupulous care has been taken to have these books
correct; and whilst there is a spirit of inquiry prevailing and opportunity
given to all, to search, and judge for themselves, there can be no danger of
any person being imposed upon, with regard to the sense of scripture.

From these considerations, we may be satisfied on good grounds, that the books
delivered to us as the writings of the apostles and evangelists are genuine and
authentic; written as they were directed by the spirit of truth; which Jesus
Christ promised to send into the world after his ascension to the right hand of
the father.

It is not however pretended that the inspiration by which the new Testament
was written extended to particular words and phrases, and modes of speech.
There is a diversity of style among the sacred writers, according to each one's
natural gift and particular genius and disposition. But what is meant by
inspiration is, that there was such a superintending divine influence with the
sacred writers as brought to their remembrance what they had seen and heard of
our Lord's discourses and of his life and actions; and preserved them from
committing any material error in the representation which they have given us of
the truths of christianity. Nor is this idea of divine inspiration to be
understood as if every matter or thing which is occasionally mentioned in the
writings of the apostles, were guided and governed by the divine spirit. It is
evident that sometimes the apostles give their own private opinions, on certain
points; at other times they introduce salutations to their friends; or give
directions about common affairs; as particularly where Paul directs Timothy to
bring the cloak which he left at Troas, with the books and parchments; and
advises him to drink wine with water for the sake of his health. These things
are brought in incidentally, in familar epistles, and show that the apostles
were men in similar circumstances with other men; having the same infirmities
and wants as ourselves. But these small matters do not detract from the value
and importance of those dignified sentiments, and sublime descriptions which
are given in other parts of the same writings; of which there is one of the
most noble specimens in the 15th chapter of the 1st, Epistle to the
Corinthians. No person can read this chapter, with any proper degree of
attention, without being forcibly struck with the singularity and sublimity of
the subject, and the eloquence and pathos of the language; all which together
strongly mark it as a discourse written under the direction of that holy spirit
which searches the deep things of God; which unveils the glories of the future
state; and penetrates into those things which eye could not have seen, nor ear
heard, nor could have entered into the heart of men, unless God had taught them
to us by the ministry of his Son and his spirit.

IV. Another deduction which we make from the doctrine of the resurrection of
Jesus, is, that the scriptures of the Old Testament contain divine revelations.

If there were no other proof of this, it would be sufficient to rest the truth
of it upon the credit of Jesus Christ and that of his apostles. For if it be
allowed that he came with a divine commission to declare the truth of God, and
that he commissioned them to propagate the same truth; and if it be certain
that both he and they appealed to the writings of Moses and the prophets, as
sacred, authentic books, acknowledged as such by the Jewish church; if he and
they quoted the predictions therein contained, and applied them to occasions
and events, in that age in which they lived; then we have the highest authority
for believing that those books contain revelations of the mind and will of God,
who spoke at sundry times and in diverse manners, to the fathers, by the
prophets. These predictions refer to a multitude of events, some of which are
so singular and unexampled, that no human penetration could have foreseen or
even imagined them; but yet we have the most credible evidence of their exact
fulfillment. One of them is that great event, the resurrection of Jesus Christ;
for the language of the New Testament is, that he rose again, according to the
scriptures. If therefore he rose from the dead, then the prophecies of the Old
Testament, which foretold this among other great events, were written by
inspiration of God. Besides this, it is to be observed, that there is such a
connection between the christian and the Jewish religions, that if one be true
the other is true also. They are both parts of one plan, the one contains the
shadow and the other the substance; one is the letter and the other the spirit.
The Jewish religion cannot be properly understood without the christian; which
shows the fulfillment of many things, predicted and typified, under that ancient
dispensation; as any one may be fully satisfied by perusing the epistle to the
Hebrews, written by a learned Jew, brought up in the school of Gamaliel, but
better instructed by Jesus Christ.

V. It also follows from the resurrection of Jesus Christ, that the
resurrection of the dead is the only true doctrine of immortality.

The heathen world had no clear ideas of futurity. Some of their wisest men had
a notion of the immortality of the soul, considered as separate from the body
or of its passing into and animating other bodies; but they had no idea of the
resurrection of the body to life. So ignorant were the wisest of them on this
point, that when Paul preached Jesus and the resurrection at Athens, they
called him "a setter forth of strange Gods," supposing Jesus to be the name of
one, and Anastasis (the Greek word for resurrection) to be the name of another.
And even with respect to the immortality of the soul, their notions were
confused, and their proofs vague and inconclusive. Socrates, though he used a
variety of arguments in support of this doctrine yet told his disciples, "that
if the proofs which he offered, should appear insufficient, it would be
necessary for them to search for others that would be more satisfactory."
Cicero, though he endeavored with all the force of his genius to assert the
doctrine of immortality, yet declared "that his belief of it was founded more
on the pleasure of the prospect, than on the conviction of his mind from the
arguments used in its favor." Blacklock's Paraclesis, page 297.
The truth is, they had some sublime ideas of God, and of the nature of the
human soul; and they could not bear to think that God would create such a noble
being, to live only a short time, in this world and then die with the body.
Hence they were led to frame arguments and conjectures, respecting the
probability of the soul's future existence and immortality, which they wished
might prove true; and it is said that Plato intimated his expectation that God
would some time or other make this matter certain, by a revelation to mankind.
Such were the ancient Deists; "they set themselves to prove the reality of a
future state; and caught at every thing which had the shadow of probability;
they were sensible of the need of such a doctrine, and gave a degree of
plausibility to the arguments in its favor." Yet it is certain that the true
doctrine, of immortality was never brought to lights, but by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ. By that great event we are instructed, that the gospel hope of
immortality is a resurrection of the body from death; and a reunion of the soul
to it, never more to be separated; "that this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality and then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, death is swallowed up in victory."

The gospel indeed does not give us a circumstantial and particular detail of
the employments and entertainments of the future state, as did some of the
ancient poets who believed the soul's immortality, and as did Mahomet; who
framed his system agreeable to the taste and disposition of the people who were
to receive it for truth. Divine revelation gives us an assurance and a pledge
of immortality, by which the certainty of it is established; but its blissful
scenes are so transcendently sublime and glorious as to surpass the power of
description, and therefore we are only told "it does not yet appear what we
shall be, but when he, who is our life, shall appear, we shall be like him; for
we shall see him as he is!"

Our business then is not to pry into the secrets of the future state, but to
prepare for it; to imitate those graces and virtues which appeared in Christ,
if we expect to have "our bodies fashioned like his glorious body," and to
comfort ourselves, and one another with the blessed hope of being "changed into
his image from glory to glory." Amen.

FINIS
District of Massachusetts: -- To wit:
L.S.
BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the twentieth day of January, in the nineteenth year
of the Independence of the United States of America, JOSEPH BELKNAP, of the
said District, has deposited in this office, the Title of a Book, the right
whereof he claims as Proprietor, in the words following, to wit:

"Dissertations on the Character, Death, and Resurrrection of Jesus Christ, and
the evidence of his Gospel; -- with remarks on some sentiments advanced in a
book, entitled "The Age of Reason," by JEREMY BELKNAP, Minister of the Church
in Federal Street, Boston."

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled "An
Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts
and books to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times
therein mentioned."

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District of Massachusetts.

A true copy of Record -- Attest. N. GOODALE.


