INCIDENTS OF THE INSURRECTION IN THE Western Parts of Pennsylvania, In the
Year 1794.

BY HUGH. H. BRACKENRIDGE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by JOHN M'CULLOCH, No. 1, North (...) -- 1795.

INCIDENTS, etc.
CHAP. I.
WHAT I write is with a view to explain my own conduct, which has not been
understood. It is possible I may not be able to remove the misconception of
every one. I am aware how difficult it is to change opinion, even with the best
cause on my side: But I may support those who have undertaken my defense in
conversation; and it may satisfy others, who are disposed to find men innocent
rather than criminal.

ON the evening of the 14th of July, David Lenox, marshal of the district of
Pennsylvania, was introduced to me at my house. I had heard that he had been,
on his way, serving process, on delinquent distillers, in the intermediate
counties from Philadelphia to the western country; and in the western country
itself. The conversation turned on this subject; and the marshal expressed,
with great sensibility, his satisfaction, in having met with no insult, much
less injury, in the execution of his duty. My impression was that of surprise,
that he should have apprehended any. For, though the people had been in the
habit of thinking it no inconsistency with the reputation of a good citizen, to
insult or abuse an excise officer; yet I had considered them as distinguishing
between these, and other officers of government. For though outrages had been
committed on excise officers, yet no sheriff, nor constable, had been opposed
in arresting the offenders. They had been brought in upon process, and
prosecuted at the court. There was no reason in the distinction; but it was
made. It was owing to this; that the excise law was odious, and the public
voice against the officers; but the office of sheriff, or constable, carried
with it the authority of law, which the people had been in the habit of
respecting; and the opposing which would be considered infamous, in public
opinion. I had supposed they would have considered the marshal in the light of
a sheriff, or judicial officer, and would not molest him. However, it so
happened, that I was mistaken in my confidence of his security; for the evening
of the next day, having been out in company with the inspector of the revenue
for the district, John Neville, serving some remaining writs upon distillers,
in the county of Alleghany, he returned with an unfavourable account of his
reception. He had served the last writ he had to serve, in that quarter, and
had just quitted the house of a distiller, of the name of Miller, when a number
of men were observed to be in pursuit of them, and a gun was discharged. The
marshal conceiving it not to be with a view to injure, but intimidate, turned
and expostulated. But observing a sullenness of countenance, and advised by the
inspector, who knew their disposition better, he thought proper to ride off,
and escape from them; and had come to town. The inspector had gone to his own
house, about 7 miles from Pittsburg, and about the sam^ distance from the house
of Miller.

The next morning, after daybreak, the inspector having just got out of bed,
and opened the door, discovered a number of armed men, about the house; and
demanding of them who they were, and whence they came; the answer was such, as
induced him to consider their intention to be hostile; and on their refusing to
disperse, he fired on them. The fire was returned, and a contest ensued. The
negroes, from some adjoining small buildings, fired upon the flank of the
assailants, and they were repulsed, with six wounded; one mortally. The
inspector or his family received no injury; his house, which was a frame
building, was perforated with the balls.

Toward the middle of the next day, the son of the inspector, Presley Neville,
who resided in the town of Pittsburgh, read a letter from his father, written
at his house in the country, informing, that a large number were said to be
collecting at a place known by the name of Couche's fort, about four miles
distant from his house. The son expressed to me his apprehensions for the
situation of his father. It was asked by me, What he understood to be their
object? It was answered, To demand of his father, to deliver up his commission.
Deliver it, said I. It was answered, No.

My idea was, to put by the tempest for the present, until the civil authority
could interpose, and bring to account individually, those who had disturbed the
peace. If the mob who burned the house of lord Mansfield, in the riot in
London, could have been put off by his delivering his commission, I presume he
would have delivered it. Another could easily have been made out for him.

It may be said, that it would have occurred to a good citizen, to give
assistance to the inspector, and to help him to defend his house: and that the
gallant and successful defense, which had been made the preceding morning, gave
ground of resolution to attempt defense against a farther force. But I easily
distinguished between the surprise of an unexpected resistance, and the
deliberation where it is expected. It was also understood, from the letter of
the inspector, that a much more considerable force, perhaps five hundred men,
were said to be collecting. I easily conceived, that, as the disaster of the
first attack had brought a second, the repulse of a second would bring a third;
and the numbers, and the rage, would increase. I am not a fighting man; and it
was most natural for me to think of policy, and the giving the rioters the
piece of paper which they had their minds upon, and let the justices of the
peace, the constables, the sheriffs, the grand juries of the courts, settle it
with them afterward. It may be said, they could not have been brought to
justice. That might have been the case; but I thought at the time they could.

In the afternoon of the day, John Wilkins, junior, of Pittsburgh, a brigadier
general of the militia, calling upon me, informed me, that a demand by Neville
the younger, on behalf of his father, had been made of John Gibson, major
general of the militia, and of himself, as brigadier general, to call out the
militia, in order to suppress the rioters; and wished to have my opinion, as to
their authority to call them out. Having given the question a short
consideration, I thought they had not the power. The governor, under an article
of the constitution, has, constructively, the power: "He shall take care that
the laws be faithfully executed." And by an act of the legislature, of April
11th, 1783, he is expressly empowered, "to call into actual service, whenever
it may be necessary, part of the militia, in case of rebellion, or of an
actual, or threatened invasion." But it appeared to me, that the constitution,
and the act, constitutes the governor the judge of the occasion; and that it is
not in his power to delegate this discretion, or constitute another the judge
of it. But if he could, on enquiring of general Wilkins, I found the fact to
be, that he had not delegated this discretion, or constituted these officers
the judges of the occasion of calling out the militia; no provisional
instructions, as in the case of an Indian invasion, having been given, that
respected an opposition to the laws, or a rebellion A letter from the governor,
to major general Gibson, of the 25th of July, when the account of the attack
upon the house of the inspector had reached the government, contained no orders
for calling out the militia. It evident, from the report of his secretary, Mr.
Dallas, to the legislature of the state, of February 13th, 1795, that the
governor had not thought himself justifiable, on this emergency, in calling out
the militia. The following is an extract from that report: "No positive law
existed, under the authority of the state, defining the emergency that could
justify an appeal from the judicial to the military power; o^ regulating, or
prescribing the evidence, that should prove the occurrence of the exigency.
Whatever, therefore, might eventually b^ the obligation, resulting from the
constitutional injunction, to take care that the laws be faithfully executed,
it was thought, that not only the non execution of the laws, and the
incompetency of the courts of justice to punish offenders, should first be
authoritatively declared, by the judicial magistra^^; but that the act of
interposing the aid of the military power, should likewise be founded upon
their requisition."
.

General Wilkins returned to me a short time afterward; and said, that Neville
the younger had called upon John Gibson and himself, as judges of the court, to
raise the posse of the county, and he wished my opinion with respect to their
power in this case. Giving it a short consideration, I was of opinion, that
they had not the power. By the constitution, the judges of the court are
justices of the peace, so far as relates to criminal matters. A justice of the
peace, on information given, can direct his warrant to the constables, to
apprehend offenders; or, on an affray in his presence, can command assistance
to suppress it. But it did not appear to me, that he could raise the posse of
the county. But, said I, the sheriff can. -- He is in town; let him be called
upon.

Judge Wilkins left me; and in a short time returned, and said, the sheriff
doubted his authority. Judge Wilkins wished me to explain it to him. I said I
was ready. He left me, and in a short time I received a note from him,
requesting my company at the public house, whence the note was dated. I
attended instantly, and found there judge Gibson, judge M'Dowel, and the
sheriff of the county. I was requested by judge Wilkins, to explain to the
sheriff his authority. I did so, fully. The sheriff appeared alarmed at the
task of raising the posse, and thought it not practicable. I was asked my
opinion. I do not recollect from whom the question came. I gave it decidedly,
that it was not practicable: All concurred.

But, said I, this can be done; -- ride out without arms, and address the
people. Persuasion will avail more than force. If this is adopted, I will be
one to go. It was agreed; and in a few minutes, I had returned to my house, was
on horseback, and at the river, to cross with the company; who were all ready
with the same expedition.

At the moment we came to the river, we fell in with Neville the younger,
marshal Lenox, and a young man of the name of Ormsby, a son of John Ormsby of
Pittsburgh, a family for whom I had regard; but knew the young man to be
inconsiderate and rash; and was persuaded, that on this occasion he acted
without the knowledge, or at least the approbation of his parents: All three
were armed, which I thought imprudent. I felt concern for them; and taking that
liberty with the young man, which I could not take with the others, I addressed
him abruptly: -- What! said I, armed? Yes, said he. You will not ride with us
armed. You may ride as you please, said he, I am armed. Neville the younger,
who was mounted on a gay horse, with pistols in his holsters, spoke: -- We are
not all born orators, said he: we are going to fight; you to speak. I thought
him a better chevalier than a judge of the occasion.

But I did not know, at the time, that arrangements had been made, on their
part, for a defense; tha^ major Kirkpatrick, and ten or a dozen soldiers from
the garrison of Pittsburgh, had gone to the house of the inspector.

At the river, we found two boats. They took one, and we took the other.

Crossing the river, being many in the boat, and crossing rather high, we
stranded the boat on the bar, the water being low; and this circumstance being
likely to give some delay, to lighten the boat, I leapt my horse overboard, and
rode the remainder of the bar, and swam the channel on the other side. One or
two of the gentlemen in the boat, followed me, I mention this circumstance, as
marking our anxiety to reach the people.

Ascending the hill on the other side of the river, I reflected, that I had
heard, that the roads to Pittsburgh were guarded* and that persons, that day,
had been stopped, and interrogated, who were on their way to the town, or from
it. It struck me, that we might be thus stopped, or delayed, or prevented
altogether from going forward. Mentioning this to the sheriff, who was some
distance ahead with me, I enquired of him, if, riding through the country in
the execution of his office, he did not know of any less public road, equally
near, or not much less so, than the main road, which we could take, and avoid
the out parties of which I spoke. The sheriff said, he knew the old road to
Couche's ^^^t, which was the place; and that he frequently took it going that
course: It was equally near, or not much less so, than the new road. We waited
at the fork of the road for the company, and suggesting these reasons, it was
agreed to take the old road. It may seem trifling to mention this circumstance;
but it becomes material, when it is known, that it has been alleged that we
quitted the main road, with a view to avoid the very object which we proposed,
which was, that of falling in with the body of the people.

Couche's fort was about 9 miles distant: As we rode, which was with all the
expedition possible, we observed the harvest fields deserted by the men; women
only to be seen. Stopping at a house, and enquiring, with a view to gain
intelligence of the movements of the country, the woman of the house, as we
took her to be, appeared alarmed at seeing us, and knowing the sheriff, asked
him, Are you of Neville's party? This impressed me, as showing the popular
idea, that the country was on one side, and the revenue officer on the other.

Reflecting on the best means of introducing our intention to the body, who
were supposed to be in arms, it struck me that seeing the sheriff and the
judges of the court coming forward, the first impression would be, that it was
with a view to take cognizance as civil officers of what was done, and this
might make our situation dangerous. It was proposed, and agreed therefore, that
these gentleman should remain, and that I, who was the only one of the company
who was not a civil officer, should ride forward, and acquaint them with our
views in coming: That it was to dissuade and prevent, and not to take
cognizance.

Coming to the house of a certain Hulse, where these gentlemen had proposed to
stop, and which was half a mile off Couche's fort, we were informed that the
body had marched for Neville's house.

We set out to overtake them, and rode with haste. Coming within a mile and a
half of Neville's, at the house of a doctor Adams; we learned from some who had
been spectators, that all was over, and the house burned; that the people were
returning, and in great rage at the loss of their leader: This was a James
M'Farlane, who, it seems, commanded on that occasion. It was not thought
advisable for us to go forward as things now were; nor even safe to remain, and
be in their way, as they would misconstrue our intention in coming; and
supposing it to have been with a view of assisting the excise officer, make us
objects of their passion. We set out therefore, for Pittsburgh, and rising the
hill, above the house where we had been, we saw the failing flame of the
burning, and heard the firing and the shouts of the parties on their way home
from it.

Riding about two miles, we stopped at a public house kept by a man of the name
of Shochan, and understood that the tavern-keeper had rode toward Neville's
house to learn or observe what was to be done. After some time he returned, but
having observed only at a distance, he could give us no particular information.
We had intended to remain at his house until we received some farther account;
but the people appearing, the woman especially, uneasy at our being there, lest
it should be heard afterward, and injure them, we set out, and came to
Pittsburgh. I mention the uneasiness of these people, as showing the fear which
was impressed of seeming to have had any thing to say to any one, that might be
disposed to take a part on behalf of the excise officer: And as officers of
government, and from the town, that suspicion might ly against some of us.

CHAP. II.
THE opinion which I gave with respect to the power of the judges of the court,
in calling out the posse, may be questioned; and from thence it may be
inferred, that I was favorable to the designs of the rioters. This would be
unfair, as at the same time, it was part of my opinion that, with the sheriff,
they had power; and the sheriff was at hand, who independent of his official
character, was known to be a man of great personal intrepidity, and of a solid
and extensive popular influence.

But though, on a rapid consideration of the question, I may have been mistaken
with regard to the power of the judges independent of the sheriff, yet on
examination, it will be found, there is such ground in the question as might
lead to a mistake.

By the constitution, the judges have no more power "as to criminal matters,"
than a justice of the peace. The question then will be, Has a justice of the
peace, power to raise the posse?

The office of justice of the peace was not known to the common law. It was
first instituted by 1. Edward 3. chap. 16. with power under the general term,
"assigned to keep the peace."

By 4. Edward 3. chap. 2. Farther power is given.

By 18. Edward 3. chap. 2. Still farther power.

By 34. Edward 3. chap. 1. Power is given, which, by implication, may seem to
authorize to raise the posse.

By 17. Richard 2. chap. 10. The power is thought to be expressly given under
the term " ministers," which may include a justice of the peace.

13. Henry 4. chap. 7. is the last statute that respects the power of the
justices in raising the posse. -- It is in these words: If any riot, assembly,
or rout of people against the law, be made in parties of the realm, the
justices of peace, three, or two of them at the least, and the sheriff, or
under sheriff of the county, where such riot, assembly or rout shall be made
hereafter, shall come with the power of the county, if need be to arrest, and
shall arrest them; and the same justices, and sheriff, or under sheriff, shall
have power to record that which they shall find so done in their presence
against the law, and that by the record of the same justices and sheriff, or
under sheriff, such trespassers, and offenders, shall be convict in the manner
and form as is contained in the statutes of forcible entries.

Whether the power of justices, without the sheriff, or under sheriff, to raise
the posse, is taken away by this statute, is the question. There would seem
reason in not leaving it to a single justice of the peace, to alarm and raise
the county at his discretion, on information of an affray, at a distance. And
yet it may be said, and probably is the just construction of the statute, that
the power of the justices is not restrained in raising the posse, but enlarged
to a farther act, which two, or more with the sheriff, or under sheriff, may
exercise; that is, make a record of the riot, which shall have the force of an
inquisition by a jury, or a presentment, or indictment at the court.

Be this as it may, in the opinion I gave judge Wilkins, I certainly pointed to
the safest, and most effectual means, which was, that of proceeding with the
sheriff.

The sheriff is himself, by the common law, the great conservator of the peace
of his county. He may apprehend, arrest and commit to prison all affrayors, and
all such as within his jurisdiction, and in his presence, shall in any sort,
break, or attempt to break the king's peace: and may command the aid and force
of others to arrest such offenders, and may cause them to find sureties for the
peace; and when any Rebellion, Insurrection, or riotous assembly of people
shall be within land, the sheriff may raise the power of his county, to
apprehend such malefactors. Dalton's office of sheriffs, page 26.

The sheriff, as keeper of the peace, both by common law, and special
commission, is the first man in the county, and superior in rank to any
nobleman therein, during his office. 1. Roll: reports 237.

To these authorities Blackstone refers in his commentaries, and recognizes the
law. Volume 1. page 342.

But it may be said, that the opinion which I gave that an attempt to raise the
posse was not expedient, indicated a disposition favorable to the views of the
rioters. Let it be observed, that I gave no opinion, in the case, until the
question was put to me. I had confined myself strictly to the legal points
proposed. Also before my opinion was given, the sheriff had declared his
opinion. It appears also that before our conference, judge Gibson* and judge
Wilkins had declared the same opinion The testimony of Neville the younger, in
the case of the United States v. Miller.
. At all events they instantly concurred with me. I did not at all wonder that
Neville the younger, or any other of the immediate connections, should have
been sanguine with regard to the practicability of raising the posse. The
passion which they felt, promoted them to overlook the difficulty; and whether
practicable or not to any great extent, it was natural for them to wish the
attempt made. It would give them company; it would make those equally obnoxious
who did attempt it; or at least who did obey; and wounded pride and self-love
was not ready to indulge a proper concern for the safety of others; or make a
proper calculation of the effect, which a concern for his own safety, in the
then temper of the country, must leave upon every mind. Besides, they could not
know, so well as others, the general rage of the cou^^ry, against the excise
law, and its officers. Some things that regard themselves, will always be
concealed from men; and persons may appear moderate in their transactions with
them who have the most hostile sentiments. They did not even know the
disposition of the town of Pittsburgh; I speak of the affections of the people
personally toward them. They counted more upon the attachment of the people,
as is natural for men, than could be depended on.

But the fact was, had they been the greatest favorites, the people would not
have be^^ commanded, in a cause of that nature. From the country they could
not. A sentiment of opposition to the law was universal; and though force had
been heretofore used with some concealment, yet it was thought laudable to use
it; and the example being set of using it openly, the general bent would be to
follow.

From the town, the people could not have been commanded. Many of them had
connections in the country, and would not submit to an order of taking arms
against them. Besides, they had, themselves, a good deal of the same spirit of
opposition to the law; not so much from any consideration of the law, or its
effects, but be^^use it was the patriotic and fashionable language. Others, as
is natural, wished for something new; and would rather have joined them, than
fought against them. It is a fact, that some influential men, and commissioned
in the militia, were heard to say that day, that if they were ordered out, and
were to fight at all, it would be with the people. Thus, the cause of the
people, and that of the government, were thought to be very different things.

But, with the best disposition in the town of Pittsburgh, a concern for their
general interest, as mechanics, or shopkeepers, would render them reluctant to
enter into a contest with the country, from whence a great part of their custom
came: And a concern for their immediate safety, would prevent them altogether.
They would reflect, the most ignorant of them, that the militia of the town,
about 250 men, were they unanimous, and spirited in support of government,
would be nothing to the country; which would, in the next instance, after an
attack on the excise officer, turn itself against the town. It could starve
them out, and the garrison with them, by an interdict of provisions; or, as was
threatened afterward, it could plunder and burn. It would have been extreme
cruelty, to force the inhabitants to this danger. It would have been extreme
impolicy; and would have answered no other end, than to show the rioters the
strength they had even in the town, either from those who really were, or from
self-preservation would affect to be, with them. It was safest to let the
matter rest unknown. Persuasion, for the moment, and the steady, and accustomed
step of civil authority, by the known officers, afterward, were the only means
that were eligible. The raising the posse of the county, as a legal act, was a
thing unknown to the people, and would not be understood. It would be
considered as the party of the excise officer, disposed to try their strength
with the friends of liberty. It would have been a most rash act. I will trace
what would have been the consequence. -- The posse could have been raised, or
it could not. If it could not have been raised, the weakness of the government,
and the strength of the rioters, was discovered by the experiment. If it could
have been raised, and brought forward, a contest would have taken place, and
lives have been lost. The victory must have been on the side of the rioters;
for the strength of the country was with them. The plundering, and destruction
of the town of Pittsburgh, would have ensued. The garrison would have been
starved out, or taken; for there was not, at that time, more than a day's
provision in it. The whole country would have been involved instantly.
Desperation would have led to prompt, and decisive measures. These would be, to
cross the mountains, and receive accession of force, and procure the means, and
occupy the ground of war in the midland country. On the circumstances that
afterward took place, it was what I was afraid they would do; as will be seen
by and by, when I come to explain a letter that I wrote to the government.

But in order to rebut still farther the presumption, that I gave my opinion
against raising the posse, from motives favorable to the rioters, let it be
observed, that if the posse had been raised, I should have passed unnoticed in
the crowd, and could have excused myself, by alleging the compulsion of the
law; but, in taking upon me to interfere in so ostensible a manner, as I was
disposed to do, in addressing them on the unlawful, and atrocious act which
they were about to perpetrate, I showed a readiness to sacrifice popular favor
for the public good. And that I would sacrifice whatever I did possess of it,
if I did possess any, I knew to be the consequence; and expressly mentioned
this view of the result as to myself, to the company as we rode. I had just
before suffered my name to be introduced, or if any one would choose to have it
so, had managed to have it introduced, as a candidate, for the Congress of the
United States, for the district of Washington and Allegheny counties; and my
pride was now engaged, to carry my election. Was it the way to carry it, to
oppose myself to a strong popular passion, and obstruct the accomplishment of a
favorite object? It may be said, I would have obtained credit afterward with
the people themselves, for preventing what on co^^ reflection they would see
would have been dangerous. With some I might have obtained credit, but with the
far greater part, I would not. Even those that approved it, would affect to
condemn it, and leave me to bear the odium. If at a future day, I might have
obtained general credit, which probably would have been the case, it would have
been too late to serve me in (...) object at that time.

But if any one should still insist, that the experiment ought to have been
made, and that the probability is, that the posse could have been raised, I
will give them a farther presumption to the contrary. The Neville family is
numerous, and wealthy: The inspector himself, with the advantage of an office,
which though it brings general odium, yet secures particular dependents: His
son a member of Assembly, brigade inspector, and surveyor of the county: His
son-in-law, Isaac Craig, deputy quarter master, with the care of the military
stores, and the constructing public buildings, and the employment of mechanics
which this gives: His brother-in-law, Abraham Kirkpatrick, with money, and
means of assisting his neighbors. What is more, Neville the elder, not
disliked personally; Neville the younger, generally popular; and both the
father and the son hospitable, remarkably; and the son-in-law, Craig,
sufficiently so; and the brother-in-law, of late, for certain reasons, lavishly
so; -- and yet, with these advantages, and the influence consequent, nor to be
able to engage the voluntary aid of more than the inconsiderate young man whom
I have mentioned, must prove the general sense, that the assisting an excise
officer was too obnoxious an act for any to undertake, and live in the country.

CHAP. III.
GREAT pains were taken, at Couche's fort, by an aged and venerable clergymen,
the reverend John Clark, to dissuade the people from the object they had in
view. It was to no purpose. They considered him as in his dotage; or as having
skill in spiritual affairs; but not in the temp^ral interests of the country.
It may be thought from hence, that dissuasion from no one, could have had
effect. That does not follow. Regard might have been paid to the
representations of those who were supposed to know the law, and to be able to
calculate the probable consequences of the act.

A certain James Lang, of Brownsville, formerly of Philadelphia, was on his way
to Pittsburgh, and halted some time, and conversed with M'Farlane, and used
much endeavor to dissuade him from the act. M'Farlane fairly owned, that, on
reflection, he had become sensible of the rashness of it; but that they had
gone too far to retreat. That was, I presume, he could not find a reasonable
pretense of receding; and could not, with a good grace, draw off, after having
used activity in exciting the people.

If this was the case, it will prove the use of our having gone forward to
dissuade. It would afforded a reasonable pretense of relinquishing the
enterprise: The leaders, that is, those who had been most active in collecting
the multitude, would say, that a light had been thrown upon the matter, by a
lawyer, and judges, which had not before struck them; and that, all things
considered, it might be advisable to relinquish it. They would not have been
ashamed to have it thought, that they were better informed, by men of greater
opportunities of legal knowledge; and especially by one whose profession was
the law itself.

M'Farlane had been in Pittsburgh that day, and purchased a quantity of flints.
He informed the people in the rendezvous, that they might count upon a force
from the town of Pittsburgh; that the sheriff was sent for to raise the posse;
and that soldiers had gone out from the garrison to Neville's house. This
information seemed to animate: They had no idea of an opposition that could be
formidable.

In arranging the measures of the enterprise, a committee was appointed; with
power like that of the national commissioners with the French armies. This
committee offered the command to a Benjamin Parkison; who excused himself, as
not being a man of military knowledge. James M'Farlane was then nominated, and
accepted it. This was a major M'Farlane of the militia, who had served with
reputation, in the rank of a lieutenant, in the war with Great Britain, from
the beginning to the end of it; and was a man of good private character; and
had acquired a very handsome property, by industry in trade, after the
expiration of the war.

The body having marched, and approached the house of the inspector, the horses
were left with a guard; and arrangements made for an attack, should it be
necessary. A flag was sent from the committee, with a demand of the inspector
to deliver up his papers. This appears to have been the ultimate object of the
rioters. The inspector had withdrawn from the house; having seen the force that
was advancing: conceiving, I presume, that a demand might be made of his
person; and that, in consequence of the encounter of the preceding morning, and
the loss sustained by the assailants, his life would be in danger. In this
case, he must have counted on the not being able to defend the house. Why then
not have given direction to those whom he left in the house, not to attempt a
defense? Perhaps he did it; but his brother-in-law, Kirkpatrick, a major in the
service last war, judging less prudently, entertained the idea of being able to
defend it.

It being communicated, on the return of the flag, that the inspector had left
the house, a second flag was sent, and a demand made, that six persons should
be admitted into the house, to search for his papers, and take them. This was
refused; and notice was then given, by a third flag, for the lady of the
inspector, and any other female part of the family to withdraw. They did
withdraw; and the attack commenced. About fifteen minutes after the
commencement, a flag was presented, or was thought to be presented, from the
house; upon which, M'Farlane stepping from a tree, behind which he stood, and
commanding a cessation of the firing, received a ball in the inside of his
thigh, near the groin, and instantly expired. The firing then continued; and a
message was sent to the committee, who were sitting at some distance, to know
whether the house should not be stormed: But, in the mean time, fire had been
set to a barn, and to other buildings adjoining the mansion house; and in a
short time, the intenseness of the heat, and the evident communicability of the
flame to the house, had struck those in the house, with a sense of immediate
danger of life; and they began to call for quarter: on which the firing ceased,
and they were desired to come out, and surrender themselves. They came out; and
the soldiers, three of whom are said to have been wounded, were suffered to
pass by, and go where they thought proper. Major Kirkpatrick himself, had
nearly passed through, when he was distinguished from the soldiers, and
arrested; and ordered to deliver his musket. This he refused; when one
presenting a gun to his breast, was about to fire; he dropped upon his knee,
and asked quarter. The man took the major's hat from his head, and put it on
the muzzle of his gun; but did him no other damage. -- I depict these
incidents, merely to give an intimate idea of the manners and spirit of the
people.

Fire had been put to an end of the mansion house, before the fire communicated
from the barn and other buildings. All were consumed; one small building
excepted; to which fire was not put, but a guard set over it, at the suggestion
of the negroes, that it contained their bacon.

As soon as the house was on fire, the undisciplined of the troops, if I may be
allowed the expression; or, as they themselves would say, the unprincipled
amongst them, entered, and began to plunder. The cellar was broke open, and
wine and other liquors rolled out, and drank.

Major Kirkpatrick, after being carried some distance under guard, was taken up
by David Hamilton, behind him on horseback; when, thinking himself protected,
he began to answer those who came up occasionally, with indignant language:
when Hamilton, addressing him, said, You see I am endeavoring to save you, at
the risk of my own safety; and yet you are acting a part, that makes it still
more dangerous for me. On this he was silent; and being carried some distance
farther by Hamilton, and getting into the bushes of the wood, he was advised to
make his escape; and he effected it.

Neville the younger, marshal Lenox, and the young man of the name of Ormsby,
had arrived at the outguard, about the time the firing had begun at the house.
They were arrested, and put under guard. Neville solicited greatly to go
forward; and would engage, that every demand, short of life, should be complied
with. In the then state of things, he could not be permitted. In a short time,
he had the pain to see the buildings on fire; and to be uncertain of the fate
of his father and family; whether they were in the house, or out of it.

On the termination of the business, and the return of the people from the
house, Neville and the Marshal were carried along, and in great personal danger
from the multitude, many of whom, by this time, had become intoxicated. Young
Ormsby being known to many of them, after being treated with some indignity,
was dismissed.

The marshal also, after some time, having stipulated to serve no farther
process on the west of the mountains, and to surrender himself when demanded;
and Neville the younger having become sponsor for the fidelity of this
engagement, was dismissed from the main body: Neville also went with him. They
had insisted on an engagement from the marshal that he would not return his
processes which had been served. He told them with candor, that this was not
in his power, being under an oath of office to return them. The firmness of the
marshal in having the candor to make this acknowledgment, even though at the
manifest risk of life, deserves great commendation. It won it, and had it from
them, as some of them have acknowledged to me. I have heard all speak, with
great admiration of the manly, and composed behavior of the marshal: Nothing
against Neville; but that he exhibited a little too much of the chevalier at
the first. Coming up to the out-guard on his first advance, "If there is a
gentleman amongst you," said he, "let him come out and speak to me." This was
considered as an affront to the whole; and several raised their pieces, and
were disposed to fire. But with presence of mind, changing his voice to greater
softness, and calling out that he was not armed, they advanced, and made him
prisoner. His pistols had not been drawn from the holsters, and therefore he
might say, he was not armed.

After being dismissed from the body, they fell in with an out party, the
greater part, greatly intoxicated. The marshal, taken afresh by these, was
carried toward Couche's fort, to which they were returning. He was in danger
of life. The result must have appeared to him on this occasion very doubtful.
He was for some time under the care of a James M'Allister, who had rescued him
from great danger, but given his word to the more violent, not to suffer him to
escape. M'Allister, who had every disposition to save him, did not to dare to
let him go. After some time, he surrendered him to a Colonel David Philips, who
advancing some distance before the crowd, with the marshal, was entreated by
the marshal to be suffered to escape. Philips told him that his own life would
answer for it. However he was at last prevailed upon, just as they approached
the main body who had advanced to Couche's fort, with the corpse of M'Farlane,
to show him a road in a certain direction, and suffer him to escape. He got
into the main road toward Pittsburgh, and about 2 o'clock that morning came to
the town.

There is one thing that may have struck the reader: Why it was, that the
judges, the sheriff and myself, when within a mile or two of Neville's house,
the evening it was burned, knowing the marshal to have gone forward, we did
not, on his account at least, as being a stranger to the people, and having no
personal friends, which the Nevilles, notwithstanding this outrage on their
property, certainly had, we did not go forward also, to use our influence to
save him from injury. I had a perfect sense of his danger from the moment that
I saw him on horseback to go out that day; and on the occasion to which the
query refers, I could not be less apprehensive than I had been. As
circumstances then were, it was a different case, from what it was when we set
out to Couche's fort, and when the idea would be, that we were not interesting
ourselves, for an officer, or for government, but for the safety of the people
themselves, in giving them good advice. Yet I would have ventured to have gone
forward, provided two gentlemen of the company would remain; these were judge
Gibson, and judge Wilkins, both of whom I knew to be, at that juncture,
obnoxious; judge Wilkins especially.

Judge Gibson, on account of his supposed intimacy with the Neville family; and
judge Wilkins on account of an advertisement in the Pittsburgh Gazette, calling
for whiskey that had paid duties "Whiskey will be purchased with cash by the
subscribers at Pittsburgh; but to accomplish the object of trade for which it
is intended, it is necessary any whiskey offered for sale to them, should have
paid, or secured the duties, and be accompanied with the marks and certificates
from the inspector, or inspectors, according to law. John and Charles Wilkins,
and Company."
. This was considered as a scheme to introduce the excise law: It was supposed
he was in subordination to the inspector, and the rage against him, was at that
time great. He had been before that time the most popular man in Allegheny
county: but the single circumstance of the advertisement had reduced him to
that situation in the opinion of the people, that I thought it necessary to use
some delicacy in presenting myself with him.

We deliberated some time, whether we should go on to Neville's house. I
mentioned to sheriff Gralt expressly, my apprehensions with regard to Gibson
and Wilkins; and hinted it to the gentlemen themselves, with as much delicacy
as possible; and expressed a willingness to go forward myself, to bring
intelligence, if they would remain where they were. Judge Wilkins appeared to
me to understand his situation perfectly; but though not thinking it safe to go
forward himself, yet did not like the idea of any else going, and himself not
to go. This was not expressly said, yet I could sufficiently discover it; and I
knew it was a delicate conflict between his safety and his honor. It was the
general opinion, that all should go, or none. This put an end to all thought of
any going.

These sentiments of my mind, at the time, with regard to judge Gibson and
judge Wilkins, have never been fully communicated to those gentlemen to this
hour, and perhaps they have never understood them perfectly; but this situation
in which they were with regard to the people, will show the absurdity of
supposing, that they could have called out the posse comitatus. The attempt
would have been the signal of their own immediate destruction. They would not
have lived on the west of the mountains twenty-four hours.

The particulars I have stated, with regard to the attack upon the house, the
treatment of the marshal, and Neville, etc. it will be understood, are as I
have collected them; and they may not be perfectly correct. I can answer with
more confidence for the exactness of particulars where I was myself present.

CHAP. IV.
THE day after, in the evening, a David Hamilton, a justice of the peace, and
John Black, came to Pittsburgh; with authority, in writing, to demand of the
marshal, a surrender of his writs which had been served; agreeably to his
engagement, as they said, for which Neville the younger had become sponsor. A
conference with the marshal, and with Neville, took place. It was denied, on
the part of the marshal and Neville, that the engagement was, to deliver, or
even not to return the writs; but only to make no farther service. It was
understood otherwise on the part of Hamilton; who thought it but of small
account to make no farther service, as it could be of no use to those on whom
the process had been served. This led to the question, Whether the marshal was
bound to return; and what would be the effect of the return? ^^ether judgment
could be taken, which would bind the lands here; so that they could be sold in
Philadelphia?

The marshal conceived it, from what he had understood, to be but an initiatory
process; and that judgment could not be taken; that there must be another writ,
and service of it, in order to found a judgment: He referred them to my
opinion, which he conceived must be to that effect. John Black waited upon me;
stating his question, and explaining the circumstances which led to his putting
it. I felt all the delicacy of having any conversation with persons, who I
conceived had involved themselves in the guilt of high treason; much less, of
giving any counsel on a collateral question. I answered him, by saying, it was
a delicate point, and I would talk with the marshal. I went out, and found the
marshal, and stated to him the circumstance; and wished to know his wish,
whether I should consider the case, and give an opinion. He said he would speak
with Neville. A short time afterward, he came to me, with Neville, (I speak of
Neville the younger), and expressed his willingness that I should give an
opinion; that he thought it must be as he had stated, viz. that it was but an
initiatory process, and that judgment could not go by default, upon it.
Declaring myself unacquainted with the practice of the federal court, though
admitted in it; and that I could form my opinion only by analogy, and from the
face of the writ itself, I undertook the consideration of the question that
evening, and proposed giving an answer in the morning. With a view to this, the
marshal furnished me with one of his writs; the only one, I understood, which
had not been served. Neville the younger, furnished me with a copy of the laws
of the United States; my own being, at that time, out of my office. I state
these things minutely, to show, that no presumption exists, in the circumstance
of having been consulted by these people, or in giving an opinion in this case,
that I was in confidence, in any of their transactions.

Consulting the judiciary laws of the United States, I found nothing relative
to the practice of the courts, or the nature of the process. Nor did I much
expect it; as this can be devised and regulated by the courts themselves. I
found nothing in the revenue law itself; and was left to a consideration of the
writ from the words of it, and the analogy to the practice of other courts. It
appeared to me, as the marshal had conceived, to be but in the nature of a
summons, to show cause why process should not issue. I presume, it had been
devised by the court, for the greater mildness in carrying into operation the
excise law. It was analagous to the subpoena from the court of chancery; in
disobedience of which an attachment issues. My answer therefore, which I gave
in writing, and which I gave to serve the marshal, for it was without see from
any one, was to this effect, viz. That the marshal was on oath to make return
of his writs; but that judgment could not be taken on these returns, which
would be final, and bind their lands in this country, or sound proceedings to a
sale. Of this opinion, I made out two copies; and gave one to Hamilton and
Black, and one to the marshal.

Hamilton was apprehensive that this would not satisfy the committee: that if
the people had known the marshal was bound to return his writs, he doubted much
if he ever would have got off the ground. I communicated this to the marshal;
and he appeared, as there was reason, much struck with it* He saw the
impossibility of satisfying these people, and the difficulty of getting out of
the country, should he attempt to go without their consent: It would be leaving
Neville the younger also, in a disagreeable situation, who had become surety,
that he would not go away, until the people were satisfied as to the fulfillment
of what he had engaged.

I have since ascertained it, as I have stated in my narrative, that the
marshal expressly refused to engage not to return his writs: but it had been
understood otherwise; or, on reflection, they had seen, that this was the
principal matter, and they were determined to in^^st upon it.

I made the marshal's case my own, with as much sensibility as the human heart
could feel: and devising an expedient to relieve him, communicated it to him;
viz. That I would propose going forward to the committee, and offer to appear
for them in the federal court, as counsel, and have the writs quashed, or the
service set aside; or if I did not accomplish this, pay the penalties myself:
that I knew the court, under these circumstances, would not exact the
penalties. But, that it would not be necessary to make this offer, but in the
last resort. The marshal thought so.

I had understood, that the committee were then sitting, at the distance of
four miles, at the public house that has been mentioned; Shochan's. The idea of
a number of men being there, had been held out by Hamilton and Black, for their
own safety in the town. Being now about to return, they mentioned the going by
the battle ground, as they called it; that is, by the late house of the
inspector; in order to look for the body of a man that was missing, and
supposed to be killed; and they expressed a wish, that I, and some others of
the inhabitants, would go with them. I saw they were under some apprehensions
for their safety, in going by themselves; either from those who might way-lay
them on the road, or from the negroes on the farm. The last only was suggested.
I consented to go, provided some others could be got to go; and more
especially, as in that case, I would go on to the committee, which would be in
my way, on another road, on my return* I mentioned this to the marshal, who
approved of it: To Neville also, if I recollect right. I had understood, that
several gentlemen proposed to go: I was ready on the Monongahela bank, at the
ferry, at the time proposed. Hamilton and Black were there. Two of the
gentlemen came down, and mentioned, that they had not found it convenient to
go. I saw a delicacy on their part; and this made my going the more delicate. I
had determined not to go. But at that instant, a Mr. Johnstone, a deputy excise
officer, came up, who wished to go to his residence, at the house of Neville
the younger, just by the late residence of the inspector. He had been a tenant,
for some time, to Neville the younger. I thought I might go, at least that
distance, having him with me: and I spoke to Hamilton and Black, to wait until
he could get his horse, and go. We waited a long time, and then proposed to
cross the river, and wait for him on the other side. We did so; and crossing
after us, he joined us there.

In the course of our conversation on the way, I understood from Hamilton,
that, agreeably to his orders from the committee, he had been with the
inspector, and demanded of him a resignation of his office; that Neville the
younger had wished him to resign, and that the inspector himself had agreed to
resign it, and had written something to that effect, which he had offered to
them, to carry to the committee; but that it was conditional and not absolute,
and they could not accept it: that they thought it probable the consequence
would be bad, and there would be no restraining the people from coming into
Pittsburgh, to take him; that he was apprehensive also, they would come in to
demand the marshal, and at least detain him prisoner, so that he could not be
able to return his writs. I meditated on the strange inconsistency, of setting
the government at defiance, and yet fearing the return of the writs.

I understood also, from Hamilton, that the return of the marshal himself,
without the consent of the people, was impracticable; as there was not a single
road from the country, which was not that day guarded, for the express purpose
of preventing him. Hamilton, at the same time, expressed himself with humanity,
for the marshal; and said, that it was to prevent mischief, that he had
proposed coming into Pittsburgh: For, that the people assembled at the
interment of M'Farlane were in a rage, and had proposed marching into
Pittsburgh, to take the inspector and the marshal; that it was the language of
the people, with regard to the marshal, that it was better one man should die,
than so many persons, with their families, lose their plantations. He also gave
me to understand, that there would not be, that day, a single office standing
in the whole survey. I conceived from this, that measures of an extensive
nature had been taken.

On the way, I understood that, in fact, there was no committee sitting nearer
than at the distance of 14 miles, near the place of the interment of M'Farlane.

Arriving at a house where the family of the deputy excise officer had retired,
and near the late house of the inspector, we stopped; and the deputy making out
his resignation, delivered it, to be carried to the committee. He wished
Hamilton to give him a certificate, that he might be safe. Hamilton said he had
no authority to do this; he could only bear his resignation: But that he
thought he would be safe, provided he published a copy of his resignation in
the Pittsburgh Gazette. The deputy said he would do it: and I subjoin it, in a
note, as it was, and as it appeared in the gazette Finding the opposition to
the revenue law, more violent than I expected; regretting the mischief that has
been done, and may, from the continuation of measures; seeing the opposition
changed from disguised rabble to a respectable party; think it my duty, and do
resign my commission. ROBERT JOHNSTON.
.

We went, the deputy accompanying us, to the late house of the inspector, and
found the negroes in some cabbins adjoining, which the fire had not reached. It
was out of these they had fired upon the first party, under Holcroft. I
understood also, that notwithstanding the attention of the negroes to secure
the bacon, some of it had been carried off.

We rode over the adjacent ground, but found no dead body. It was found, a few
days afterward, by the negroes; and buried.

Having finished our survey, I was urged by Hamilton and Black, to ride with
them, at least to a road which led to Pittsburgh, and was in their way: I
excused myself, and returned with the deputy. The deputy returned with me to
the lower ferry, on the Monongahela, opposite the town of Pittsburgh. That
being his ferry, and not mine, I rode on to a higher. A violent gust of wind
and rain, such as I have seldom seen, coming on, I remained in the ferry-house,
during the storm. Crossing the river, and arriving at my house, I was informed,
that the marshal had been frequently there that day, enquiring with great
solicitude for my return. I would have called upon him instantly, but it was
late; and a town-meeting, in the affair of a market house, to which I was
summoned, engaged my attention. Neville the younger, and Craig the son-in-law,
and Kirkpatrick, were present, and joined in the deliberation. I had no idea^
that, in the mean time, and in the middle of the terrible tempest that had
fallen, the inspector and the marshal had embarked, and descended the river.

In my return from accompanying Hamilton and Black, I had projected in my mind,
the plan of rescuing the marshal. It was to acompany him instantly to the town
of Washington, and put him on the honor and good policy of the Democratic
Society of that place. I had thought he would have been safe there; as the idea
of being guardians of the constitutional principle, would have led them to
protect him. I thought of having him accompanied thence to Union-town, in
Fayette county; and to have got general Douglass of that place, and other
gentlemen, to have escorted him to the Maryland or Virginia line, where he
would have been out of danger; escaping the Pennsylvania counties, in which he
had served process.

Early next morning, I went to the public house where the marshal lodged, and
enquired for him; was told he had lodged at the garrison: enquired frequently
in the course of the forenoon; but the rumor spreading, that he was gone, and
the inspector with him, the preceding evening, I found it was so; but was led
to believe, he had ascended the Allegheny river. I had supposed, he had taken
the course by Fort Franklin, and the back parts of Pennsylvania; and thought it
a judicious course. The course that he did take was the best.

The question has been asked, why it was the magistrates did not issue
warrants, and arrest Hamilton and Black, when they came to Pittsburgh? They did
not dare to do it: They were ^^ag officers from a great power. There was no
person so inconsiderate as to break a thought of it. After the burning of
Neville's house, the rumor was that another body was assembling to come to
Pittsburgh, to demolish the inspection house kept there; and it was dreaded
that they would proceed to other enormities. It was the cry of the inhabitants
that rather than provoke the country, and bring mad people upon us, it would be
best to pull the office down. The evening that Hamilton and Black came to town,
the report of two having come, had in half an hour swelled to two hundred; and
it was said there was a thousand on the hill, on the other side of the river.
The people were gazing every where, and every one thought he saw some, and that
they had hunting shirts. Application was made to Hamilton and Black in my
presence, stating that the ladies, those of the Neville family particularly,
were uneasy, and requesting one of them to cross the river and ascertain the
truth of the circumstance. Black gravely answered, that there might be six or
eight hundred on the hill, or not far off; but that he would cross over, and
give orders to disperse: He crossed the river, and came back with an account
that there had been none there.

Craig, the son-in-law of the inspector, after the departure of the inspector,
had so just an apprehension of danger from the country, that he took down the
paper on the inspection office, and called a gentlemen to witness, that it was
down. This gentleman was James Lang, of Brownsville. He also offered the
fragments of it to this gentleman, to bear to the country, to convince them
that it was down. These circumstances show the absurdity of talking of
arresting Hamilton and Black.

CHAP. V.
ON Monday, the 21st of July, being the fourth day after burning the house of
the inspector, and the second after the departure of the marshal, in the
afternoon of the day, a young man came to my office, and delivered me a note
from David Hamilton, informing me, that the committee was to sit at the Mingo
meeting house, on the Wednesday following, and expressing a wish that I would
be present. I conceived, that it was with a view to the object he understood me
before to have, in proposing to go to the committee; viz. the explaining to the
people the effect of the return of the writs, and inducing them to be
satisfied, and not to arrest or detain the marshal. Nevertheless, I was greatly
alarmed, at the idea of having any correspondence with one involved in the
guilt of treason. I tore the note, and threw it by in the lower part of a
closet in my office, amongst useless papers, meaning never to make farther
mention of it.

The next day, Neville the younger came to my office, and asked me, if I had
not received a note from David Hamilton? I have, said I; but how have you come
to the knowledge of it? The young man, said he, that brought it, mentioned it.
I had never intended to have mentioned it, said I; but here it is; opening the
closet, and taking up the pieces, and putting them together, and giving them to
him to read. I wished to have him as a witness of the contents. Do you mean to
go* said he. No, said I; this is high treason that has been committed; and in
treason there are no accessaries, before (...) after the fact, all are
principals; and I am aware of the delicacy, of having any thing to say to
people in the predicament in which these are. I have reflected on the subject,
and think it not safe to go. I would wish you to go, said he; it might answer a
good end. Connecting in my mind, his engagement on behalf of the marshal, who
had gone, and his responsibility in that case, I understood him, to wish me to
go to reconcile the people with the circumstance, as far as might be; and also
to counsel moderation in general. Not a word passed with regard to my object in
going; but I conceived it to be sufficiently understood, what the object was. I
was still disposed to decline it; but was solicited; and finally said, I will
go, provided you will vouch with what sentiments I go. I will, said he. And
provided, said I, some person can be got to go with me, to bear testimony of
what I shall say, or do, on the occasion. It was agreed, that I should speak to
some, and he should speak to others. He did speak to some, and I spoke to
others. The persons that agreed to accompany me, were, the chief burgess of the
town, George Robinson; the first assistant burgess, Josiah Tannehill; one of
the regulators of the town. William H. Beaumont; Peter Audrain, and colonel
William Semple, formerly of Philadelphia, merchants.

Setting out on the day, and arriving at the meeting, I was struck, with
finding, not a committee, as I had expected, of those persons who had been
concerned in burning the house of the inspector, but a large convention of
others, with these, from a considerable distance. I conceived, that these
persons had come with the view of counselling moderation, and devising the best
means of healing what had been done: Yet, from the delicacy of the situation,
there was a distance and silence amongst all of us, as we reclined upon the
grass, or strolled about, prior to the assembling of the meeting. I was upon
terms of intimacy with many; and yet do not recollect to have exchanged a
single word with a man. Every countenance discovered a strong sense of the
solemnity of that occasion: Those who had been involved, not more than those
who were afraid to be involved. It will be asked me, How came any there who
were afraid to be involved? I have accounted for my being there; but how came
David Bradford James Marshall, Edward Cook, and Craig Richey there? I select
these as instances. As to Marshall and Bradford, I am a loss to say any thing,
by way of opinion, or deduction. I can only state what I have understood from
others, or what ^s within my own knowledge. Not having had the least
communication, by word or writing, with Marshall or Bradford, prior to that
day, or on that day, relative to the subject, I have nothing of my own
knowledge. I have understood from others, that after the first attack upon the
house of the inspector, when the adjacent country was about to be roused to a
second attack, persons went to the town of Washington, and called on Marshall
and Bradford to come forward, on that occasion. They declined it. The
expression of Bradford, reported to me, is, "I cannot act; you may do as you
think proper." He alluded, as was understood, to his being the prosecuting
counsel for the commonwealth; and, in that case, not at liberty to do what
others might.

After the destruction of the house, persons went to Marshall and Bradford,
demanding of them to come forward, and support what was done, or they would
burn their houses. They had a claim upon them, as having been conspicuous in
the deliberative committees, with regard to the excise law; and alleged, that
Bradford had encouraged them to what they had done, by his words, when urged to
take part before the burning. I encourage, said he: Good God! I never thought
of such a thing. Yes you did encourage, said they; and if you do not come
forward now, and support us, you shall be treated in the same, or a worse
manner, with the excise officer. He found himself under the necessity of coming
forward; and that being the case, he would seem, from that time, to have
adopted the most violent counsels. Marshall was obliged also to come forward;
and thought it necessary, having come forward, to adopt violent counsels. I am
of opinion, that both these men acted, in the first instances, under a
subordination to popular influence. Be this as it may, it is not from a
solicitude to make an apology for them, that I state this; but from the wish
that I have to show the truth of the transactions. Edward Cook also came
forward, probably, at the solicitation, and under the fear of the people. Craig
Richey, and many others, I know did. They had, with great difficulty, avoided
the going to the burning the house of Neville; but could not avoid, at least
the appearance of being with the people now. I have introduced the names of
these persons, because they were conspicuous at this meeting. It was opened, by
putting Cook in the chair, and making Richey secretary.

A letter was produced, and read, from Neville the younger, which had been sent
by a gentlemen of our company, stating, that his father and the marshal had
left the country; that the marshal had not considered himself bound by that
part of his engagement, which was to surrender himself when demanded, and of
which engagement he (Neville) had become sponsor; because, after the engagement
made, and the marshal dismissed upon it, he had been again arrested, and was
indebted to himself for his escape. I did not think Neville had been so good a
casuist. However, the people thought it subtilty, and were not satisfied.

He stated, that, with regard to what had been done by them, they had burned
his father's house, and they might burn his; but he had enough beyond their
reach.

As men of honor, he conceived, so far from blaming, they could not but
approve the intrepidity of Kirkpatrick, in defense of the house of a friend.

The fact was, they did not dispute the courage of Kirkpatrick; but they
accused his obstinacy, in obliging them to do what they had done.

On the whole, the letter of Neville was not well couched, to answer the
occasion. It gave great offense; and was considered as an insult.

This, and other letters, being read, and discussed a little, Benjamin
Parkinson addressed the chair: "You know, said he, what has been done: we wish
to know, whether what has been done is right or wrong; and whether we are to be
supported in it, or left to ourselves." These were the words: They impressed me
with an agony of mind. There was silence for some time. Marshall coming
forward, observed, that it was not necessary to say, whether what was done was
right or wrong; but what is now to be done? I was relieved at this, and thought
him in the right train.

Bradford now spoke: and to my great astonishment declared his approbation of
what had been done, and called upon the meeting to pledge themselves to support
it. His declamation was of considerable length, and extremely violent. Yet from
my knowledge of the man, I doubted whether he spoke according to his wish, or
harangued according to the humor of the people, and from a fear of them.

After he had spoken there was a dead silence. The question would be taken;
Support, or not support? My situation was delicate. There was but a moment
between treason on the one hand, and popular odium on the other: popular odium
which might produce personal injury before I left the ground. To withdraw would
be the same thing as to oppose.

Marshall came to me, a thing which I suspected from him, or some one else, and
solicited me to speak. I had been planning the scheme of an harangue. Having
settled some outline^ in my mind, I addressed the chair.

I gave them a narrative of what had taken place at Pittsburgh, since Hamilton
and Black had been there: That the marshal with the revenue officer had left
the country; and as was supposed, had ascended or descended the river. That the
inspection office was shut up, the label which announced it taken down, (and
here I related the circumstance of Craig taking it down, painting it with some
humor, and making them laugh at his expense.) This with a view to impress the
idea, that I was diverted with the catastrophe of the office, and this as a
substitute for saying any thing directly to approve what had been done. Putting
them in good humor, I ventured to touch upon the subject more seriously. To
avoid the giving any vote upon the question, I stated "That we were not
delegated for the purpose of giving a vote, but simply to give a narrative of
what had taken place there, with respect to the excise office, in order to calm
the minds of the people, and render it unnecessary for any force to come and
take it down." It will be seen that I introduced the idea of a delegation, as
an apology for not giving any vote.

"As an individual, however, I was willing to give advice: what had been done,
might be morally right, but it was legally wrong. In construction of law it was
high treason. It was a case within the power of the President to call out the
militia." I saw this struck them greatly: They had entertained no idea that it
would be cognizable otherwise, than in the county courts. But, said I, "the
President will reflect upon the difficulty of getting the militia to march.
They will be reluctant from the midland parts of Pennsylvania, from the upper
parts of Maryland and Virginia. It will probably be necessary to bring them
from Jersey and the lower parts of the states. For this reason the President
may be disposed to give an amnesty." Here I stated the amnesty which had been
given by the state of Pennsylvania, in the case of the riot at Wilson's house
in Philadelphia, in 1779, as an example.

I continued to observe, "That in order to obtain amnesty, an application must
be made to the executive; that it would come with a better grace, and with more
support from those not involved, on behalf of those that were, than from those
that were involved; that it was not the interest of those involved, to involve
others; but to let them remain as they were, in order to act as mediating men
with the government." Here I discovered rage in the countenance of Benjamin
Parkinson, and others. They considered me as evading the support which was more
agreeable; viz. the coming fairly in with them in the transaction, and making
it a common cause. I saw that they distrusted the certainty of an amnesty, and
did not relish the idea of asking it. I had therefore to impress two things
strongly; the necessity of asking an amnesty, and the probability of obtaining
it.

In order to impress the first, I enlarged upon the want of power to support
what was done; the small basis on which they had to stand; a small part of a
small country, not even the whole country west of the mountains, with them;
unprovided at the same time time with arms, ammunition, and resources of war.

In order to impress the last, the probability of obtaining an amnesty, I
stated, "the evidences which the executive had already given, of a disposition
to avoid war; even to a degree that was blamed, or perhaps, blameable; in the
case of the spoilations on our commerce, by the British, and in the case of the
Indian tribes. Here I introduced the countermand of the Presqu^isle
establishment, at the interference of the executive of the United States, in
consequence of threats from Cornplanter, a Seneca Indian; and, in order to put
them in good humor, and at the same time lead to the point I had in view, the
practicability of obtaining an amnesty, I indulged a good deal of pleasantry at
the expense of the executive, on the subject of Indian treaties: I introduced
general Knox on the one side, and Cornplanter on the other; and made them make
speeches. Now, said I, if Indians can have treaties, why cannot we have one
two? Returning gradually to seriousness, I concluded, by proposing a larger
meeting, perhaps co-extensive with the survey; and sending delegates to the
executive, on the subject of an arrangement with regard to what had been
rashly, and, in legal construction, criminally acted: that if this measure was
adopted, though it would be inconvenient for me, and not agreeable in the heat
of that season, to take such a journey; yet I was willing to be one, to go to
the executive."

I have been the more particular in giving the substance of my speech on this
occasion, and the clue to understand it, because it has been misconceived; and
the pleasantry which I indulged on the subject of Indian treaties, construed
into a contempt of the executive. If the President himself had been present,
perceiving my drift, he would have excused me. However, depositions were taken
of this part of my speech, and considered as an evidence of a male men's, a bad
disposition toward government.

In the course of my speech, I had perceived different impressions, on the
different descriptions of those present. Those not involved, were greatly
relieved, and satisfied; and manifested this by the countenance, and by the nod
of the head: Those involved, the more discerning of them, were dissatisfied;
and manifested this by the countenance, and by the shaking of the head.

After I had done speaking, there was a total silence; and the greater part
left their seats: a considerable part left the house. I went out, and walked
about; waiting to learn what the general impression was. My company from
Pittsburgh, communicated to me, that numbers of the people were dissatisfied,
and there appeared to be a murmuring amongst them. Daniel Hamilton, who had
been at the burning of Neville's house, but who was personally well disposed to
me, came to me, and informed me, that there was a considerable dissatisfaction
at what I had said: that Benjamin Parkinson, and that man, said he, pointing to
a man in a blue coat, with a black scarf on his arm; and who, I have since been
told, whether truly or not I do not know, was a brother of M'Farlane that had
fallen, are stirring up the people against you. On this ^ stepped in, to
observe what was doing there. I observed the chairman, Edward Cook, James
Marshal, David Bradford, and others, in a knot, or globe, in the center of the
house, conversing with their heads together, in a low voice. I passed by, in a
slow walk, along the entry of the meeting house. I was not asked to stop, or
join in the deliberation. I walked back; and, as I passed, just spoke to James
Marshal, and asked what they were concluding on. He said he did not know. I
thought myself not trusted, and withdrew.

I have since engaged Alexander Addison to make enquiry, and to find from
Marshal, or Cook, what was the subject of deliberation at the time. He informs
me, that they cannot recollect that there was any thing material. I can only
say, that the language of James Marshal, on the motion of Parkinson, and the
conduct of Cook, in nodding from the chair, with an appearance of assent to me,
in my proposing, that those not involved, should remain so, had impressed me
with an idea, that they were averse to violent measures. However, I was so
alarmed with what I then saw, and what I had heard out of doors, that I
immediately went out, and found some of my company, and gave the hint to get
off as speedily as possible. They collected, and set off. Mixing amongst the
people, I made an apology that my company were going, and no^ wishing to lose
my company, I was about to go. I set off, and met John Cannon, who wished me to
stay. I said it was immaterial, for that not being delegated, I could give no
vote on any question. Getting off to some distance, we were called upon: but we
hastened our pace. Coming to the house where we had left our horses, and having
got them from the pasture, and dined, which might take up an hour; it was
suggested by some of the company, that we had come off abruptly, and we might
be accounted spies; and it might be well if I would go back, and show myself,
and make some apology. I had felt an impression of the kind myself; and taking
my horse, I rode back, and dismounting, and leaving him in a bottom at a
stream, at some distance, I walked up, as if I had not been at all away. I
found that a great number of the people had gone, and some were going away.
Those remaining, were engaged in hearing some man, who was making the amend
honorable, or explaining some conduct, or some expressions, which had
indicated a disposition to comply with the excise law.

Having just shown myself, I withdrew, returned, and joined my company. Before
we set out, the master of the house where we were, an old gentleman, returned,
and informed, that nothing had been done, but a large meeting agreed upon, at
another day.

CHAP. VI.
IN the Pittsburgh Gazette, of the 26th of July, appeared a recommendation,
from the meeting at Mingo creek, to the four counties of Pennsylvania, and the
western counties of Virginia, to choose representatives "By a respectable number
of citizens, who met, on Wednesday, the 23d instant, at the meeting house on
Mingo creek, it is recommended to the townships of the four western
Pennsylvania counties, and the neighboring counties of Virginia, to meet, and
choose, not more than five, nor less than two, representatives, to meet at
Parkinson's ferry, on the Monongahela, on Thursday, the 14th day of August
next, to take into consideration ^he situation of the western country.

24 th July, 1794.
, to meet at Parkinson's ferry, on the Monongahela, on the 14th of August next,
to take into consideration the then situation of the western country.

When I saw it, I was not alarmed; I conceived that what I proposed had been
adopted; the instituting a negotiation with the government, for the purpose of
composing the disturbance. The taking in the counties of Virginia, did not
appear to me inexpedient, inasmuch as outrages on deputies under the excise
law, had been committed in some part of them. A Convention would seem the best
means, on the one hand, to establish principles of acquiescence with the law,
until it could be constitutionally changed; and on the other, to prevail with
the government, on such assurances coming from the whole country, to pass over
what had taken place. I had no idea that the government would give an amnesty,
on any other principle, but that of gaining, for the future, a general
acquiescence; and that for this reason, an application from the individuals
involved would avail little, because they could promise but for themselves
only. However, conversing with general St. Clair, who happened to be at
Pittsburgh at this time, I was struck with his observing, that such a
Convention would be dangerous. I had not seen it in that point of view; not
supposing that any other object would be contemplated, than simply rescuing the
men who had involved themselves in a capital offense, by putting it in the
power of government to cover it with oblivion.

A letter from David Bradford, written immediately after this meeting, to
leading characters in the counties of Virginia, and which has been since
published in the gazettes, evinces an adherence to the principles of his
declamation, at the meeting; and of course, it would appear from thence, that,
though the hint which I had given, of an extensive meeting, had been used, it
was not with the same view, at least in his mind, with which I had suggested it
Copy of a Letter from David Bradford, of Washington, in Pennsylvania, to the
Inhabitants of Monongaheta.
Washington, August 6, 1794. Gentlemen,
I presume you have heard of the spirited opposition given to the excise law in
this state -- matters have been so brought to pass here, that all are under the
necessity of bringing their minds to a final conclusion. This has been the
question amongst us some days: "Shall we disapprove of the conduct of those
engaged against Neville, the excise officer, or approve? Or, in other words,
Shall we suffer them to fall a sacrifice to a federal prosecution, or shall we
support them?" On the result of this business we have fully deliberated, and
have determined, with head, heart, hand, and voice, that we will support the
opposition to the excise law. The crisis is now come: Submission or opposition
-- We are determined in the opposition -- We are determined in future to act
agreeably to system; to form arrangements, guided by reason, prudence,
fortitude, and spirited conduct. We have proposed a general meeting of the four
counties of Pennsylvania; and have invited our brethren in the neighboring
counties in Virginia, to come forward, and join us in council and deliberation,
on this important crisis; and conclude upon measures interesting to the western
counties of Pennsylvania and Virginia. A notification of this kind may be seen
in the Pittsburgh paper. Parkinson's ferry is the place proposed, as most
central, and the 14th of August the time.

We solicit you, by all the ties that an union of interests can suggest, to
come forward, to join with us in our deliberations. -- The cause is common to
us all; we invite you to come, even should you differ with us in opinion; we
wish you to hear our reasons influencing our conduct.

Yours, with esteem, DAVID BRADFORD.



.

An act which was perpetrated the third day after the meeting, and of which
Bradford was the author, still further evinces it. But this act was projected
before the meeting at Mingo creek. I speak of the intercepting the mail. My
information of the source of this, is a letter from Alexander Addison, of which
the following is an extract: 18 th January, 1795. Sir,
I have been pursuing the plan for robbing the mail, and can trace it no higher
than Bradford. It was proposed by him to Marshal, on their way to Mingo
meeting house; Baldwin and David Hamilton were in company, and it was put on
them to execute it. The object to be obtained was, to know the opinions of the
people on the business carried on. The post to be robbed, was the post from
Washington to Pittsburgh; and it was only when Baldwin and Hamilton sent word,
that they could not perform their part, and when it was then too late to
intercept the mail to Pittsburgh, that the plan was changed to what was really
executed. Bradford sent his cousin William, and Daniel Hamilton, I believe,
sent John Mitchell, who executed the business. My information is from a good
source, and may be depended on. The matter, I believe, was not talked of at
Mingo creek meeting house, nor did Edward Cook know any thing of it.




I have since seen Baldwin, and gave him to understand what I had heard: he
blushed, and his expression was, "How things will come out." He did not seem to
wish to give me the particulars himself, and I could not, on principles of
delicacy, urge. I have taken an opportunity of introducing the subject to
Hamilton, but he waved it. I had a desire to know how it was, that the first
undertaking failed.

The post was interrupted on the 26th of July, on the way from Pittsburgh, and
near Greensburgh. The packet from Washington and Pittsburgh was taken out. It
was carried by Benjamin Parkinson to Washington, and from thence it was
accompanied, by Bradford and Marshal, and others, to Cannonsburgh, a village
seven miles distant. It was there opened. No letter, on the late affairs, from
any individual of Washington: There were letters from individuals of
Pittsburgh; these letters gave great offense, and made the writers objects of
resentment.

The result of the convention at Canonsburgh, at the opening of the mail, was
the issuing circular letters to the officers of the militia, proposing a
rendezvous at Braddock's field, for the purpose of a march to Pittsburgh. The
object of the march was, the taking the magazines of the garrison, and any
military stores that might be found in the town. It was also contemplated, to
take the writers of the letters, and imprison them in the jail of Washington.
These were the objects contemplated, according to the information given me: It
may not be correct.

What was the object of intercepting the mail, is questionable. Bradford was a
weak man; but yet it seems hardly probable, that he could be so weak as to
think it any object to know what people would think of what had taken place. He
might easily know what individuals would write from his town, knowing what they
were used to speak in it. Knowing characters, he might know opinions. It is
more probable, what has been suggested by men of that town, viz. that knowing
what some would write, if they wrote at all; and expecting these might write,
and being an enemy, and wishing an advantage, he hoped to have it in his power
to turn the rage of the people on them. If this was his object, he was
disappointed in it: nevertheless, he was sufficiently incensed against the
writers of the letters; and whether it was this resentment, that gave rise to
the idea of a march to Pittsburgh, for the purpose of arresting these men, and
this drew with it the idea of taking the magazine; or whether the taking the
magazine was the primary object, and this incidently brought in, I am not
sufficiently informed. It would seem probable, that the march to Pittsburgh,
and the taking the magazine, would have been, at all events, attempted, as a
necessary act to furnish means of defending what had been done, the
intercepting the mail. For it is to be presumed, if we suppose the actors in
this affair to have had reflection, that they had made up their minds, to set
the government at defiance: In that case, it became them to arm themselves with
the means of war.

The circular letter The CIRCULAR LETTER.
Canonsburgh, 28 th July, 1794. Sir,
Having had suspicions that the Pittsburgh post would carry with him the
se^timents of some of the people in the country, respecting our present
alarming situation; and the letters by the post being now in our possession, by
which certain secrets are discovered, hostile to our interest, it is therefore
now come to that crisis, that every citizen must express his sentiments, not by
his words but by his actions. You are then called upon, as a citizen of the
western country, to render your personal service, with as many volunteers as
you can raise, to rendezvous at your usual place of meeting, on Wednesday next;
and from thence you will march to the usual place of rendezvous, at Braddock's
fields, on the Monongahela, on Friday, the first day of August next; to be
there at two o'clock in the afternoon, with arms and accoutrements in good
order. If any volunteer should want arms and ammunition, bring them forward,
and they shall be supplied as well as possible. -- Here, sir, is an expedition
proposed, in which you will have an opportutunity of displaying your military
talents, and of rendering service to your country. -- Four* days provision will
be wanted; let the men be thus supplied.

We are, etc. J. CANON, B. PARKINSON, D. BRADFORD, A. FULTON, T. SPEERS, J.
LOCYHRY, J. MARSHALL.


To Col. --


was dated the 28th of July, and the rendezvous was ordered on the 1st of
August: it was directed to the officers of the militia, in the same manner, as
an order would issue from a proper authority; and it was obeyed with much
greater promptitude. When an officer disapproved of it, he did not dare to
conceal from his battalion, or company, that he had received such a notice; and
when communicated, it was the people commanding the officer, not the officer
the people. -- Call us out, or we will take vengeance on you, as a traitor to
your country. The whole country was one inflammable mass; it required but the
least touch of fire to inflame it. I had seen the spirit which prevailed, at
the time of the stamp act, and at the commencement of the revolution from the
government of Great Britain; but it was by no means so general, and so
vigorous, amongst the common people, as the spirit which now existed in this
country.

After my return from the Mingo meeting, I was called upon by great numbers
from the country, on all sides adjacent, in order to know the result of that
meeting. I stated facts, but found, that, even on my own showing, I was not
about to be the subject of eulogium. They wou^d have approved more decisive
counsels, and decisive measures, to support what had been done. Said I, to some
of them, What will be the consequence? a war will ensue. Well, said they, let
those that do not choose to stand with the country, leave it; there will be
enough behind without them: what they leave will help to carry on the war.

Knowing that the government could not possibly overlook the outrages
committed, and finding these dispositions in the people to support them, I saw
my situation perfectly; and canvassed in my mind, the practicability of lying
by, and remaining spectator, or the necessity of abandoning the country. I
thought also of taking part, but the cause was not good; at the same time
hazardous, and nothing to be got by it. A revolution did not suit me, nor any
man else that had any thing to lose, or was in a way of making something. A
secession of the country from the government, presented nothing, that could be
an object with me. The repealing the law, by an exhibition of force, might be
the only thing in view, with the people, at that moment; but I well knew they
would not stop there. The opposing one law, would lead to oppose another; they
would finally oppose all, and demand a new modelling of the constitution; and
there would be a revolution: or they would be suppressed. For my part, I had
seen and heard enough of revolutions, to have any wish to bear a part in one.
But to lie by wa^ impossible; no man would be suffered to remain neutral. I
thought, therefore, of emigrating. These sentiments have not remained unknown
to all, but myself; I have vouchers of them. But I could refer, more fully, on
this subject, to general John Wilkins, with whom I conversed daily, and who
found himself precisely in the same situation, and with the same reflections
that I had. It had been considered, which way it would be most prudent to
withdraw. He thought of going up the Allegheny, into the woods, under a
pretense of improving and surveying lands. I thought of crossing the mountains
to Philadelphia: Nothing but the suddenness with which the march to Braddock's
fields came upon us, prevented my being out of the way, at that time. It was
impossible to make arrangements in so short a period. When that came, I thought
of nothing but weathering the blast, for the moment, and then making my escape.

Reflecting on the conduct of those, who had now become the principal actor, on
the scene, I was not much surprised at that of Bradford: for I knew him to be
capable of any folly; and the more absurd the measure, he was the more likely
to adopt it. But I was astonished at that of James Marshall, a man of good
sense, cool and deliberate. I had just heard of the part he acted in the
intercepting, or at least the opening of the mail* and the orders for a
rendezvous at Braddock's fields; when late in the evening, a relation of James
Marshall; having called upon me, on business at my house in Pittsburgh, I
stated to him my surprise at the conduct of Marshall; he said he had not seen
him, for he was of a part of the county, considerably distant from Washington;
but he was equally surprised with me. I explained to him strongly my
disapprobation of what had been done, and wished him, as he was about to return
through the town of Washington, to explain my sentiments to Marshall. I have
not seen him since, I mean the relation, and do not know whether he did or not.

But whether my sentiments were communicated to James Marshall, or not, the
sentiments of others were, both to him and ^radford, and with such effect, as
to alarm them at the rashness of the steps they had taken, and induce them to
issue orders of countermand for the rendezvous. These were actually sent, (...)
some quarters, and received, and the march of the battalions arrested. Orders
made out for other parts, and which had ^ot been sent, were not sent at all.

The countermand of the rendezvous produced disatisfaction (...) the town of
Washington, and the adjacent country, and the people rushed in from every
quarter and demanded that the busness should go forward. A large assembly had
convened (...) the court house. James Ross, of the senate of the United ^tates,
in a speech of great earnestness, of two hours in length, ^ndeavoured to
dissuade the populace; Thomas Scot, of the ^ouse of Representatives of the
United States, and Thomas Stokely, of the senate of Pennsylvania, David
Reddick, ^rothonotary, Henry Purviance, and others of the bar, exerted every
means to dissuade. James Marshall was in earnest to retract, and spoke
publicly. David Bradford seeing the violence of the multitude, by which he was
always governed, became more inflammatory, than he had ever been, denied that
he had consented to a countermand, and asked with confidence, who was the
sco^ndrel who would say he had consented? Thomas Stokely ^as since seen the
countermand to colonel David Williams, and in the hand writing of David
Bradford, and signed with his name. He has promised me a certificate of this,
and the original countermand, -- if I have an opportunity I will procure it.

It was carried that the march to Braddock's fields should go forward. To show
their disapprobation of the apostasy of Marshall, the door of his house was
tarred and feathered that night. Threats were also thrown out of personal
injury, and he was under the necessity of declaring his readiness to go
forward. Threats were also thrown out against others. Indisposition, lameness,
pressing business, was affected; many yielded to their fears, and thought it
safest to go. Others were disposed to go, with a view of endeavoring to
moderate the multitude, and and prevent outrages. Of this last description
there were numbers of the principal officers of the militia, who came with
battalions or companies, to humor them, and keep them from mischief. The
common language of the county, at the time, was, they were coming to take
Pittsburgh; some would talk of plundering it; others of burning it. It was an
expression, that Sodom had been burnt by fire from heaven; but this second
Sodom should be burned with fire from earth. I believe plunder was an object
with many. The shopkeepers were told a^ their counters, by persons cheapening
their goods, that they would get them at a less price in a few days. The very
women coming in from the country, would say, "that fine lady live^ in a fine
house, but her pride will be humbled by and by." Persons were coming to the
blacksmiths with old guns, that had laid by a long time, to have them repaired.
Others were buying up flints and powder from the stores; there were many that
were supposed to be from distant parts, no one of the town knowing them. I saw
some, whom I took for spies, who had been sent to look at the state of the
garrison, or of the town. I traced some without appearing to do it, and found
them lounging from place to place, without seeming to have any thing to do.

We had seen copies of the order of march; and now it was understood, from
various accounts, that the people were on their way to Braddock's fields. Major
Butler had been industrious to improve the defense of his garrison; Major Craig
had removed his family into it; Colonel Neville had prepared to defend himself
in his own house. It was thought advisable to have a town meeting, to consider
what was best to be done; notice was given of a meeting in the evening.

CHAP. VII.
A Town-meeting was assembled about dusk* almost the who^^ of the town
convened; General John Gibson in the chair; Matthew Ernest, Secretary.

It was announced, just at this moment, that individuals had arrived from
Washington, with a message to the inhabitants of Pittsburgh, which they wished
to deliver. A committee of the meeting was appointed, to wait upon the persons,
and receive the messages. The committee were general Wilkins, George Wallace,
and myself. The individuals from Washington were, Braid, Meetkirk, Blakenay,
and Purviance. They had brought the mail, which had been intercepted, and were
about to deliver it to the post office, with the letters which had been in it,
except certain letters from individuals in Pittsburgh, which had given great
offense, and which they were not to deliver; that these letters were from
colonel Presly Neville, to his father-in-law, General Morgan; General Gibson to
the governor of Pennsylvania; James Brison, prothonotary, to the governor;
Major Butler, to the secretary at war; and Edward Day, to the secretary of the
treasury. That these letters had made the writers obnoxious; and that it was
determined by the people, now on their march to Braddock's field, to take
vengeance on them; that nothing could exceed their rage, that all possible
means had been used, by moderate men, to restrain them; that a great number of
the principal men in the country had thrown themselves in with them, and were
coming along, with a view to restrain violence; that the prevailing idea was to
seize the writers of the letters, and burn the town of Pittsburgh; that after
all the means that could be used, it was doubtful whether it could be saved;
that they had come, in confidence with the well disposed, to give us notice,
and concert with us, the means of our salvation; that it was with great
difficulty they had made their way through the people; that notwithstanding it
was with the knowledge of Bradford and Marshall, they had come, and who had
delivered them the mail; yet in fact it was contrary to the wish of the
multitude, who wished no intelligence to be given, or an opportunity of
escaping afforded to the m^n who were to be seized, or to the town itself; that
in fact they had been arrested on the way, and address had been necessary to be
used in order to be suffered to come on; that there were two things which, in
their opinion, it behoved the town to do; the one, to have the obnoxious
persons sent away, and the other, to affect to join the people at Braddock's
field, and take away the pretense of coming to Pittsburgh. For, that if they
came, most assuredly lives would be taken, and the town laid in ashes; that the
obnoxious persons were those mentioned; but of these, Day and Brison peculiarly
so; that Abraham Kirkpatrick was obnoxious, on account of his defense of
Neville's house, and his being supposed to be the cause of the death of
M'Farlane; that these three were the primary objects of the ^^^entment of the
people; that others were so, in a secondary degree. Perhaps it might be
necessary for them to go; but that unless these were sent away, as a necessary
sacrifice to the resentment of the people, there would be no possibility of
stopping them from coming to the town, and executing any purpose.

The message from Washington was announced to the inhabitants of Pittsburgh,
the names of those, that were announced, read; Day and Brison were present; it
struck every one, and perhaps these persons themselves, that it became
necessary for them to be out of the way; it was thought advisable by their
particular friends, about them. They seemed to acquiesce, so far as I could
discover; I heard no objection. I do not know that Kirkpatrick was present, but
Neville, his relation, was there; if he had any particular friends, they were
there; for the whole town was present. There was no dissent by any one, no
previous question, no objection. There was no man so destitute of sense, as not
to see the instant propriety of the measure. It was generally and perfectly
understood, that these persons acquiesced in the policy of the maneuver.

It being then agreed upon, that these persons, on the one hand, should leave
the town, under the idea of being banished from it; and that the rest of us
should put on a mask of being with the people, and join them at Braddock's
field, it was proposed, that a committee should be appointed to conduct the
management of the part we were to act: A committee of 21 was nominated by the
chairman. It was entrusted to these to draw up something that might be struck
off from the press, and sent forward to the people at Braddock's field,
informing them of what had been done, and what we were disposed to do.

The meeting being dissolved, and the committee, now by ourselves, for I had
been appointed one, particular persons, the more intimate with Kirkpatrick,
were directed to call upon him, and explain the circumstance; it was
understood, and announced to us, on their return, that he was perfectly
satisfied of the necessity of the case, and would set out in the morning. Day
and Brison had been present, and there was no necessity of saying any thing to
them. They had declared themselves ready to leave the town. I heard Brison
myself say, that he was perfectly satisfied that it had fallen upon him, having
no family; that he had entertained the idea of taking a ride below, at any
rate, and the inconvenience would not be great to be out of the way a while.

It was agreed upon, to draw up, in the nature of resolves, something which
might answer the purpose of masking ourselves with the people. It was done, and
600 copies struck off, at the press, that night At a Meeting of the Inhabitants
of Pittsburgh, on Thursday evening, July 31, 1794, to take into Consideration
the present Situation of Affairs, and declare their Sentiments on this delicate
Crisis.
A great majority, almost the whole of the inhabitants of the town, assembled.
It being announced to the meeting, that certain gentlemen from the town of
Washington had arrived, and had signified, that they were entrusted with a
message to the inhabitants of the town relative to present affairs; a committee
of three persons were appointed to confer with them, and report the message to
the meeting. The persons appointed, were George Wallace, H. H. Brackenridge,
and John Wilkins, jun.; these gentlemen made report to the meeting, viz. that
in consequence of certain letters sent by the last mail, certain persons were
discovered as advocates of the excise law, and enemies to the interests of the
country; and that a certain Edward Day, James Brison, and Abraham Kirkpatrick,
were particularly obnoxious, and that it was expected by the country that they
should be dismssed without delay: Whereupon it was resolved, it should be so
done; and a committee of 21 were appointed to see this resolution carried into
effect; viz. George Wallace, H. H. Brackenridge, Peter Audrain, John Seull,
John M'Master^, John Wilkins, sen. Andrew M'Intire, George Robinson, John
Irwin, merchant, Andrew Watson, George Adams, David Evans, Josiah Tannehill,
Matthew Ernest, William Earls, Alexander M'Nickle, colonel John Irvin, James
Clow, William Gormly, Nathaniel Irish.

Also, that whereas it is a part of the message from the gentlemen of
Washington, that a great body of the people of the country will meet tomorrow
at Braddock's fields, in order to carry into effect measures that may seem to
them advisable with respect to the excise law, and the advocates of it;
Resolved, That the above committee, shall at an early hour wait upon the people
on the ground, and assure the people, that the above resolution, with respect
to the proscribed persons, has been carried into effect.

Resolved, also, That the inhabitants of the town shall march out, and join the
people on Braddock's field, as brethren, to carry into effect with them any
measure that may seem to them advi^eable for the common cause.

Resolved, also, That we shall be watchful among ourselves of all characters,
that, by word or act, may be unfriendly to the common cause; and when
discovered, will not suffer them to live amongst us, but they shall instantly
depart the town.

Resolved, also, That the above committee shall exist as a committee of
information and correspondence, as an organ of our sentiments, until our next
town meeting.

And that, whereas a general meeting of delegates from the townships of the
country on the west of the mountains, will be held at Parkinson's ferry, on the
M^nongahela, on the 14th of August next; Resolved, That delegates shall be
appointed to that meeting; and that the 9th of August next be appointed for a
town meeting, to elect such delegates.

Resolved, also, That a number of hand bills be struck off, at the expense of
the committee, and distributed among the inhabitants of the town, that that
they may conduct themselves accordingly


.

Late at night, the committee having dissolved, Henry Purviance, of Washington,
came to me, and expressed a concern of mind, that the gentlemen of his company,
those from Washington, who had come with the message, had, as he conceived,
from motives of delicacy, hesitated to express, in the case of colonel Neville,
and general Gibson, the full extent of the danger in which they were; that he
could not conceive on what principle colonel Blakeney, who had undertaken to
explain the information, had made a distinction in the case of Neville and
Gibson: that they were certainly equally obnoxious with the others, and would
be equally unsafe in the event of being found in the town, if the people should
march in; and it was cruelty in the effect, though humanity in the principle,
not to inform those gentlemen of the whole predicament in which they stood, I
thought so too; and that it appeared to me very extraordinary, at the time of
the distinction made; for the letter of Gibson was precisely to the same effect
with that of Brison; and that of Neville appeared to me more likely to give
offense to those, who had become leaders in the insurrection, than any thing in
the letters of the others. This, coupled with his being the son of the excise
officer, would seem likely to put him in the first list of those that ought to
be proscribed.

However, it was thought advisable to explain this to our committee. Having
collected them, or a greater part of them together, it was explained by Mr.
Purviance. It was thought proper, that those gentlemen, Neville and Gibson,
should be made acquainted with their situation, in the morning, that they might
do as they should think proper. Mr. Purviance was requested to explain to them.

General Gibson came to me in the morning, and appeared to have a just sense of
what had been explained to him; and requested my opinion heartily, as to his
danger, and the expediency of his going to Braddock's field. I thought it not
expedient that he should go; and added, that colonel Neville did not appear to
me to have a proper impression of his danger, and that I should not think it
advisable for him to go. Colonel Neville was anxious to go; but was prevailed
upon not to think of it.

The fact was, I thought it not only unsafe for these gentletlemen to go, for
their own sakes, but impolitic for us; as it would destroy the effect of our
mask; as it would naturally occur, What! you in earnest in the cause, and yet
bring these obnoxious persons along with you, as good citizens*

I had the same sentiments with regard to general Wilkins, and on the same
principles, would have thought it advisable for him not to go to the
rendezvous; and it was a great question, with the gentlemen of Washington, and
with his friends in Pittsburgh, what he ought to do? the obnoxious
advertisement was in the mouth of the people: However, he determined finally to
risk the going. Gibson and Neville thought it prudent not to go.

Having marched, early in the day, to the place of rendezvous, which was at the
distance of about 8 miles, we halted two miles short of it, and waited until
the messengers from Washington, should go forward with a number of the
hand-bo^s containing our resolves, and dispensing these amongst the people,
dispos^ them savourably toward us. In an hour these gentlemen retur^^d (...)
^^nounced a good effect from the hand-bills, and the information given of the
expulsion of obnoxious characters. We then marched to the field, the committee
in front, but without arms: this to evince that no opposition was intended on
our part. Advancing to the field, my reflections were not pleasant: I was far
from thinking myself secure from personal danger. I knew I had stood, in
general, well with the country, before this period; but I had given myself a
stab, as to my popularity, by what I said at the Mingo meeting house. I had
understood, that a current of obloquy ran strong against me, from that quarter.
It had been announced, every day, in Pittsburgh, by the people from the
country. In fact, I was thought to be at best but a halfway whig, as the term
was, and Bradford the real man to be depended on. I have since understood, that
it was a good deal debated amongst the people, coming to the field, what my
sentiments were with regard to the excise law. Those personally well affected
to me, gave it as a proof that I was against the excise law, that I had
published, in Philadelphia, some years ago, in the face of government,
something against the law, and put my name to it; and that I had brought suit
against the excise officer, for something done in the execution of his office.
These circumstances gave a favorable impression, and some were of opinion that
my house ought not to be burned; others thought that it might as well go with
the rest. That conversation of this nature took place, amongst the people, I
have from many on the march with them to the field, and who were under strong
apprehensions that, after all that could be done, great outrages would be
committed.

But independent of any unpopular thing lately said or done, I well knew, that
it was possible there were persons there, who had a personal prejudice against
me; though I could think of but two, that I thought it probable would be there,
who had any; these were Benjamin Parkinson and Andrew M'Farlane, the brother of
him who had fallen before the house of Neville. The prejudice they had
entertained, was of an old standing; but I did not know but that it might still
exist in its full vigor. My backwardness at the Mingo meeting house, I had
reason to suppose, had increased the prejudice of Parkinson; I had conceived
M'Farlane to be of a fixed and persevering disposition, and if he was disposed
to injure me, the advantage he derived from his brother's fall, would give him
great weight amongst the people, and put it in his power. The idea of the
people, at the time, was, that law was dissolved, and that the people
themselves, in their collective capacity, were the only tribunal. There could
be no idea, therefore, that the putting a man to death, who was obnoxious to
the people, would be any offense. I mentioned my apprehensions of M'Farlane and
Parkinson to some of our committee, as we rode; I think to Adamson Tannehill
for one.

Though I had stood well with Bradford heretofore, yet I was apprehensive of
him now. He might be dissatisfied at my not supporting him at the Mingo
meeting house; and he might naturally suppose, that it was some of the company
with me, or perhaps myself, that had communicated the account of his speech on
that occasion; of which speech, the letters intercepted in the mail were
conveying the intelligence to government; and on that account had drawn forth
his resentment against the writers. I was apprehensive that it would be
enquired, upon the ground, who it was that had communicated this information to
the writers. The fact was, we had all given it. I though it fortunate for us,
that Brison and Gibson, who had touched upon this speech, were not there, to
examine them. We would not have dared to justify the information, though we
could not but acknowledge the having given it. We should have had to have
admitted the possibility of a mistake, and saved ourselves with the tyrant of
the day, in the best manner possible.

Under these personal apprehensions for myself, and for the Pittsburgh people
in general, it was proposed by me, when near the ground, to advance with a
flag, which, even a mob might regard; and pulling out a handerchief, which
happened to be white, I put it on my whip. The committee were of opinion, that
we ought not to seem to distrust, and the flag was put down.

The fears entertained on this occasion, may appear unreasonable: not to any
one who has seen a large and enraged body of men, under the command of one as
mad as themselves, or under no command at all. In the first case, they will
execute what the one dictates; in the other, what any one suggests. In the
present instance, I knew Bradford would have great influence, but the people
themselves would have more; and there was reason to fear both. As to burning
the town, it was doubtless more talked of, than intended individually; but the
talking of it would produce the doing it, contrary to the wish of many who did
talk of it. Such is the history of the human mind in a state of anarchy.

CHAP. VIII.
THE ground where B^^ddock fought; is on the east side* the Monongahela, and on
the same side with the town of Pitt^^burgh. The ^^^itia from Washington had
therefore to cr^^^ the river in order to come upon the ground. They had ero^ in
great numbers, at the same ford where he did; and we^^ now upon the ground.
They were dressed (...) what we (...) ^unting shirts, many of them, with
handkerchiefs upon their heads. It is in this dress they equip themselves
against the I^^dians. They were amusing themselves with shooting wi^^ balls at
mark^, and firing in the air at random; with power only. There was a continua^
discharge of guns, and constan^ smoke, in the woods, and along the bank of the
river. The^^ appeared a great wantonness of mind, and disposition to do an^
thing extravagant. We had advanced within the camp, as it we^^ called, when the
committee halted, and waited for Gener^^ Wilkins, at the head of the Pittsburgh
militia, to come for^ward. I saw him march by us, and discovered in his
coun^^^nance sufficient evidence of a sense of danger: though I knew him to be
a man of great personal intrepidity; yet I did no^ wonder at his apprehensions.
Nothing but his appearing at the head of the militia, who were now to be
considered as friend^ to the cause, could have saved him. I was thinking of his
danger, when I turned my head a moment, and was struck with the very man I was
most afraid of, Andrew M'Farlane, just by me. He was dressed in a blue coat,
with dark visage, low^^ing countenance, and a rifle in his hand, looking at me.
^ eyed him in my turn, but did not venture to speak. I trusted to his fear of
the people, as he did not know perfectly how I stood with them; after sometime
he turned about, and went away.

The next object that arrested my attention was Bradford walking before a
number of battalions, that had just crossed the river, and were ranged upon the
bank, to be viewed by him. I was solicitous to know what my reception would be.
I knew that from his going on to the intercepting the mail, and the procuring
of this movement of the people, without my knowledge, he had not expected
assistance from me; and his not communicating his intention of it, discovered a
mistrust of me. But I found our proceeding at Pittsburgh had satisfied him; for
he advanced and spoke to me. The usual ^^^^essions by him and and every one
else, were, Had we sent away those men? (...) there no danger of their coming
back? our usual answer was, They were gone; they would not be suffered to come
back. Epithets of indignity were sometimes used with respect to them, to mask
our sentiments the better. It was said by them, that more must go. Every one,
from Pittsburgh, that I heard speak at all, assented to every thing that was
said; for it (...) a part of the system adopted; and we trusted to the
arrangement that could be made, to soften all matters, and prevent injury to
any one, in proportion as we ourselves could acquire confidence with the
leaders, or with the multitude.

Having been some time upon the ground, I fell in with Benjamin Parkinson, the
other person of whom I had been personally apprehensive. He was in a group of
men whom I knew to be warm in the cause. I advanced with great appearance of
confidence, and frankness of manner, and saluted them; I was received with
cordiality, and thought myself very fortunate. All, or most of those had been
at the conflagration of the house of the inspector, and had heard me at the
Mingo meeting; but the Pittsburgh hand bill, and my appearance on the ground,
now to join them, had effaced the unfavourable ^mpressions.

They sat in a group upon the ground, each with his rifle in his hand, or lying
by him. I sat with them. The conversation turned upon the burning of the house;
and they expressed great rage against Kirkpatrick, who had been the cause, as
they said, of the burning it, and the death of James M'Farlane, by his refusing
to let the house be searched for the inspector's commission and his papers.
They expressed resentment against Major Butler for sending out soldiers to the
house of the inspector. They had enquired for Ormsby, who had accompanied
Neville the younger, and the Marshal from Pittsburgh. I said he was upon the
ground, but was scarcely worth enquiring after. He was an inconsiderate young
man that would go any where. He had gone there, and he had come here, and it
was little matter what he did; that we had heard in what manner they had
treated him, when they had him a prisoner; that they had taken his horse and
pistols and hanger from him; and put him on the bare back of a colt to ride, as
a steed congenial with his years and discretion. I had heard something like
this; but whatever might have been the case, I was disposed to give them the
impression that I was diverted with the circumstance; and therefore put them on
the relation of it, and laughed immoderately; but concluded that he had been
sufficiently punished by his apprehensions, on that occasion; and as he had
gone there without the knowledge of his parents, and had come with their
approbation here, it was not worth while to mind him. It was agreed it was not.

I did not know, that in the mean time, the young man had been on the point of
assassination.

Fifteen men had painted themselves black, as the warriors amongst the Indians
do, when they go to war. They had gone in search of Ormsby. Zedick Wright of
Peter's creek had discovered it, and having a good will for the family, or from
motives of humanity, made haste to give him intelligence of it. He had escaped
but a few minutes, not a quarter of an hour, when they were seen to pass by
openly in pursuit of him. He made his way to Pittsburgh, in the course of the
day, by devious routes, and lay concealed in the barracks of the old garrison,
until the whole cavalcade was over.

I was greatly disconcerted, on one occasion, in the course of this day by
James Ross of Washington. It was the first time I had seen him on the ground,
when, sitting with two or three others, at the root of a tree, passing by, said
he to me, with a smile, you have got a great of subtility; but you will have
occasion for it all. I was alarmed, and looked about to see who must have heard
him. There were none near me, but those just with with me, whom I knew, and who
were wearing the the mask also. But I gave him to understand that he had
alarmed me, for he could not know the characters of those with me; he said he
did, and considered that before he spoke. Talking of the arrangements made, he
thought the business well managed on part of the town; and that nothing else
could have saved lives and property.

People were coming in from every quarter all that day; generally armed: but
some without arms. It was impossible to know the real sentiments of almost any
one amongst the multitude: how far they were there from necessity or of choice.
Every man was afraid of the opinion of another. Sometimes a word dropped, which
might be construed away, if not well taken, would lead to a confidence. The
great bulk of the people were certainly in earnest; and the revolutionary
language and the ideas of the French people, had become familiar. It was not
taring and feathering, as at the commencement of the ^evolution from Great
Britain, but guillotining; that is, putting to death, by any way that offered.
I am pursuaded, that ^f even Bradford himself, that day, had ventured to check
the violence of the people, in any way that was not agreeable to them; and had
betrayed the least partiality for the excise law; or perhaps even a remission
of his zeal against it, he would have sunk, in an instant, from his power, and
they would have hung him on the first tree. Yet he was weak enough not to have
foreseen this; it had been an argument used with him, in dissuading him from a
perseverance in the measure undertaken, that no man could calculate the
consequence of putting the mass in motion, with arms in their hands. His answer
was, that he could say to them, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further. Certain
it is that his influence was great. I saw a man wade into the river, lift cool
water from the bottom of the channel, and bring it his hat to him to drink.
Applications were made to him that day for commissions in the service.

Nevertheless, whatever his idea might have been, he would have seen the extent
of his power, if he had ventured to tell the people that they should return
without going on to Pittsburgh. It was the object of all men who were
apprehensive of the consequence, to dissuade from this; but it appeared very
doubtful, through the whole day, whether or not it was practicable. It was
afterward found that it was not.

Toward the evening, there was a council of the Pittsburgh committee. It had
been represented to them, and was the fact, that the people from the town, not
expecting to detain that night, had brought no provisions with them; it was
suggested that they might be suffered to return to town, and be at the place of
rendezvous early in the morning. It was thought expedient, and orders were
given accordingly.

I had seen general Wilkins but little through the day; he had remained close
with the Pittsburgh people, and ventured little though the multitude. On his
first coming, he had gone up to Bradford, apprehensive that he might denounce
him, and addressed him: "Sir, have you any thing against me?" No, said he. This
resolute behavior probably prevented him having any thing to say.

On its being known that the people of Pittsburgh were going home for the
night, there was a great clamor in the camp. It was said, they were about to
desert the cause; and in fact never had been sincere in it.

The fact is, there were of them shrewd enough to discover this. Some would
say, pleased with our address, but who would rather have had us all in earnest,
"You have acted well; but we understand you. We give you credit for your
management." It would be answered, "What! do you doubt our sincerity?" They
would say, "We do not dispute your good policy."

Finding the effect of the departure of the Pittsburgh people, it was thought
advisable to countermand the leave given. I rode after them with great haste,
and turned them to the field; with orders not to leave it, let their want of
food be what it might, rather than produce a dissatisfaction with the people on
the ground, and bring them irregularly, and in bad humor, to the town. It will
be asked, Whence had I this authority? and how was I obeyed so readily? I was
of the committee to whom the power had been entrusted of conducting all affairs
upon the occasion.

On my return with the Pittsburgh people, I saw James Marshal, for the first
time, upon the ground. I saw he was greatly here in his mind at the trouble he
had brought upon us; and had great solicitude with regard to the event. I
explained to him the dissatisfaction that had taken place at the departure of
our people, and wished him to ride through the camp, and give information that
he saw us all returned. He mounted his horse, with his rifle in his hand, and
set out to do it.

In the course of the day, a great subject of conversation had been, the taking
the garrison. It would seem to have been the original object of the movement;
but had been laid aside. On what principle I do not know; whether on account of
the difficulty of accomplishing it; or the projectors of the enterprise
hesitating to make war so immediately on the United States. I should rather
think it was the danger of the enterprise that operated on the mind of
Bradford: for he would naturally reflect, that he could not avoid taking a part
in the attempt himself; and I have no idea that he was a man of courage under
certain danger. The reason ostensibly assigned, at the relinquishment of this
object, was, that it was found the military stores in the garrison were
intended for the campaign against the Indians; and it would be improper to
derange the operations of that campaign, by seizing them. This part of the
enterprise had been abandoned by the projectors of it; but the rumor had gone
abroad, and it was not generally known to the people that it was abandoned. The
query, every where, was, Were we to take the garrison? I answered always, that
we were. The query then was, Could we take it? It was answered, No doubt of it.
But at a great loss? Not at all; not above a thousand killed, and five hundred
mortally wounded. This loss, to the more thinking part, appeared very serious.

Various modes were proposed of taking it: Some thought of providing stakes,
with sharpened points, and rushing up with those, and putting them in the port
holes, obstruct the firing from them; while others were cutting away the
pickets. In the mean time, others with their rifles taking off the men at the
guns, in the block-houses of the bastions, as the Indians took off the
artillery men, in St. Clair's expedition. I was asked, what was my plan of
taking it? I suggested the undermining and blowing up a bastion: but they would
fire upon the diggers; besides, it would waste powder.

To some complaining, that called out so hastily, they were not well furnished
with provisions, I proposed starving out the garrison; but these were
apprehensive they would starve out themselves.

After night I had a great deal of conversation on this subject, in the bushes,
and at the sides of senses; laying our heads together, and whispering. I was
for the most desperate measures; but admitted that much blood must be lost.

About midnight, I rode through the camp, where the people were laying at the
fires, in their blankets or without. I made a pretense of enquiring for the
Pittsburgh battalion; and this with a view, at the same time, to let them know
that the Pittsburgh people were upon the ground. My principal object was, to
ascertain the determination of the people, with regard to their coming to
Pittsburgh. I found the universal sentiment to be, that they would see the
town. There was little sleep in the camp. The firing and shooting had ceased;
but there was a continual conversation.

Coming up to a fire, a person to whom I was known accosted me: Is Kirkpatrick
gone? said he. He is gone. And why the devil did you let him go? said a person
starting up behind him. The question came so suddenly upon me, that I was a
little struck with it; but recovering, I replied, that it was no fault of mine
that he wont away; I would rather have kept him here, and punished him by law.
This was the truth; for I was prosecuting him at that very time, for
misdemeanors. The enrage, or enraged man, as I may call him, made no reply; but
the person who first spoke to me, gave me a touch in the side, and said, Come,
take a dram: we will not detain you. This I understood to be a hint to go away.
I give this incident, because; that having mentioned it afterward, it was used
by some as a proof that I had endeavored to inflame the people against
Kirkpatrick, by talking of punishing by law. It is true, the man deserves my
resentment: nevertheless, I had too much regard for my own feelings, and the
opinion of the public, to avail myself of that occasion to do him any injury.
But my expression, in the case mentioned, was equivocal; and was understood by
them as it was intended it should be understood; viz. as relating to the
circumstance which was the ground of their resentment, the defending Neville's
house; my insinuation was, that this was punishable by law. The thought was new
to the man, and it occupied his mind for the moment.

Passing on to a range of fires, I found Hamilton's battalion. This had arrived
late in the evening; it had been long expected, and was called the bloody
battalion. The greatest part of it had been at the burning of the inspector's
house. We expected desperate measures when these came. It was commanded by John
Hamilton, a man very moderate and reasonable; and who was disposed to restrain
the people from violence, and with that view had come with them.

Daniel Hamilton, his cousin, was the first that accosted me; and wishing to
serve me with the people, called out, This is a true whig. But what do you
think of that damned fellow, James Ross? he has been here, and all through
camp, persuading the people not to go to Pittsburgh. I saw now that it was in
vain to oppose the going; and it was better to acquiesce, and say they should
go. In that case, there would be more management of them, than if they came in
spite of opposition. I saw this, and took my part decidedly. -- Damn the
fellow, said I, what business has he with Pittsburgh? the people of Pittsburgh
wish to see the army; and you must go through it, and let the damned garrison
see, that we could take it, if we would. It will convince the government that
we are no mob, but a regular army, and can preserve discipline, and pass through
a town, like the French and American armies, in the course of last war, without
doing the least injury to persons or property. There was a general acclamation,
and all professed a determination to molest no one.

Returning to a farm house, just by the camp, where some of our committee were,
I communicated the result of my observations. Some of them had been through the
camp, in the same manner; and had the same impressions that I had, with regard
to the impossibility of preventing the people coming to town.

In the morning, having convened in the camp, and held a council of principal
officers, it was proposed to form a committee, to consist of three deputies
from each regiment, who should deliberate on what was to be done. Deputies
being chosen, and the committee met, of which I was one, as representative,
with general John Wilkins, and captain John M'Masters, for the militia of
Pittsburgh; in order that our deliberations might be the more free, it was
proposed to withdraw to some distance. We withdrew, and occupied a shady ground
in the wood. Edward Cook was appointed chairman. Bradford opened the meeting,
by stating the cause of their assembling in arms; viz. in order to chastise
certain persons, who had discovered sentiments friendly to the excise law; that
their sentiments had come to light through the vigilance of some persons, who
had intercepted the mail, and found their letters; that these letters would
speak for themselves. Here taking out the letters from his pocket, he read them
and commented on them. That, from major Butler of the garrison, giving some
account of the outrages committed, and his sense of the atrocity. That, from
Neville, the son of the inspector, alluding to the authors of the disturbance
and giving them the epithet of rascals. That, from Edward Day, suggesting a
project of carrying the excise law into operation. That, from general Gibson,
stating a motion by Bradford, at the Mingo meeting, to support the outrages
committed. That, from the prothonotary Brison, to the same effect. At the
authors of these two last letters he appeared particularly enraged as
distinguishing him at the Mingo meeting, and representing him as making such
motion. Addressing himself to me, Were you not there? did I make such a motion?
I looked at the man with astonishment. Is it possible, thought I, that you did
not know the scope of your harangue? you did not make the motion, but you
supported it, and that is all the inaccuracy in the statement of the letter.
But is it possible that you would regard the being distinguished to the
government, as supporting violent counsels, when you have distinguished
yourself so effectually in the very act of obtaining these letters? however it
was no time to explain; i^ would involve myself, and put it out of my power to
serve others, to enter into an altercation with the Robespiere of the occasion,
by stating, as the fact was, that if he did not make the motion, he supported
it. I therefore evaded it, by saying, that the statement in the letter was not
accurate, but that might be the fault of the info^^mation given to the writers.
It was answered, that it becam^ them to be more cautious in giving credit to
information; an^ at all events it evinced a disposition unfriendly to the
people, (...) be communicating information to the government of what the^ were
about. There was no answering this.

Having read the letters, and put them up again, said (...) there is another
person that is an object of resentment with the people, Major Craig: he has had
the insolence to say, that (...) the inspection office is shut up in the town
of Pittsburgh, he wi^^ open it in his own house. Calling on the deputies from
Pitt^^burgh; have any of you, said he, heard this? it was answere^ no. It was
stated by me particularly, that I heard nothing (...) it; from others I had
not. And as to himself I had had (...) conversation with him for a long time
past: the only convers^^tion whatever since the beginning of these affairs, was
the oth^^ day when we had heard of the rendezvous about to be at Bra^^dock's
fields. Falling in with him in the street, said he to m^ what is the meaning of
their meeting at Braddock's fields? the^ have found, said I, some pieces of
artillery lost on the retrea^ in the channel of the river, and they assemble
there to dra^ them out, and attack the garrison. I said this, to amuse my self
with the engineer, who had accused us with want (...) courage in not going out
to defend the inspector's house. For ad^mitting, that being habituated to the
implements of war, he di^ not regard small arms, I was willing to make an
experimen^ what effect great guns might have. I represented the effect a^
considerable, and drew a picture of his countenance as betray^ing symptoms of
concern; all this not with a view to hurt the man, but to serve him; or rather
to serve ourselves, by allay^ing resentment against any one in the town, which
might re^^der it obnoxious on his account; and I knew no better way than to
turn it to a laugh, and make the man an object of rid^^cule for the moment;
besides concealing thus any partiality for the man on his own account, or ours,
I could with the le^^ suspicion parry what might be proposed against him, by
sub^stituting something of less effect. It was with this view I we^^ on, and
introduced several other incidents respecting Craig* viz. that so far from
saying that he would keep the inspection^ office in his house, it was himself
that took down the label o^ the inspection office in the town; and having torn
it in severa^ pieces, presented it to a certain captain Lang to carry it to
the^ country, to convince the people that it was torn. This inci^ent I painted
in such a manner as to make the people laugh. (...) represented it in the
engineer to be the effect of vain fear; and that though at first he affected to
be a bloody man, and would have had a few of the town to sight the whole
country; ^et on a report prevailing that the people were coming to the ^own to
pull down the inspection office, he ran and took away ^he obnoxious signature
himself. Bradford was asked by some ^ne, where he had received the information
with regard to the ^anguage, he said, it was the talk of the camp.

It was now the question, what resolution should be taken with regard to these
men. It was proposed and adopted, that the question with respect to them should
be taken singly. The case ^f major Butler was considered first: his offense was
two sold; the interfering with the civil authority of the people, by send^ng a
military force to the house of the inspector; and by corresponding with the
government.

There was no man so rash as to question the illegality of these acts; but it
was observed by me, that being an officer of the United States, he was amenable
to the executive, for any thing unconstitutionally done; and on a
representation to the President, there could be no question, but that he would
remove him; at least from the command in this country. It would be therefore
most advisable to take no order with regard to him, at that time, but postpone
the consideration of his case until the meeting at Parkinson's ferry, and then
remonstrate to the executive, and obtain his recall. It was agreed.

The case of Craig was taken up next. It was observed by me, that there was
certainly ground of suspicion of his being over zealous in behalf of the excise
law; nevertheless it might be bad policy to order him out of the country at
this time. In his capacity of quarter master, he had the care of the military
stores that were sent forward occasionally, and intended for the campaign at
that time carrying on against the Indians; that it might derange these
operations, and give offense to the people of Kentucky, who were also against
the excise law, to disturb the quartermaster in his arrangements, and prevent
the forwarding these stores. But he was also an officer of the United States,
appointed by the secretary at war, General Knox, and that the same steps might
be taken with regard to him, as with Major Butler; a representation could be
sent, from the meeting at Parkinson's ferry, to the secretary, with information
that he was proscribed by us, and a demand that he should be superseded in his
office, and proscribed by him also.

The only difficulty that occurred to any one, in this case, was the question,
By whom he was appointed, and to whom the representation ought to be made? was
it not the President that had appointed him? James Ross, who was a member of
the committee, but who attended late, came in just at this moment; and being of
the Senate of the United States, and of course supposed to have an accurate
knowledge of the source of appointment, the question was put to him, Who it was
that had the commissioning the quartermaster? It was his opinion, that though
the President was the constitutional source of appointment, yet that, in fact,
the secretary at war had the nomination in these cases. It was agreed,
therefore, to address Knox on the subject of Craig.

These being disposed of, the case of Gibson and Neville, the two letter
writers, was taken up. On their behalf I spoke also: and with regard to Gibson,
observed, that he was a man of an inoffensive disposition, not much harm with
him; could do little injury, go or stay; was a man in trade, and the being
disturbed would affect him in making remittances to his merchants; and the
fraud, in that case, would be theirs, not his; that it was no object to banish
him. With regard to Neville, he had used harsh expressions, it was true; but it
was under the influence of passion, and in a private letter to a relation.

It was discoverable, that it did not go down well to pass over all. There were
many that discovered ill humor; there were sundry speakers for and against. In
the case of Neville, there was a man, leaning on one knee, with his chin upon
the head of his staff, and a slouched hat upon his head, who spoke softly, but
with great eagerness, for Neville; but at this moment, a man, whom I afterward
understood to be a captain Murray, with great liveliness of manners, came
forward, dressed in a light blue camblet coat, leather overalls, buff
waistcoat, and a cutlass by his side; he had not been present until that
moment. The fact was, that fresh battalions of militia were every moment
arriving; and as they arrived, they chose deputies to the committee. Murray,
wishing to make up for his lost time, was very active now; and understanding
the question was, with regard to the banishment of certain individuals, he was
strenuous for the banishment. If it had been for hanging, it would have been
the same thing; for the man had no resentment, politically or personally, but
simply wished to distinguish himself, and become conspicuous in the revolution.

I felt little or no concern in the case of Neville, for I did not see it to be
of any consequence to him, whether he was to go or stay. I rather thought it
was his interest to be sent away, and I had understood that it was his wish to
get out of the country. He actually expressed himself to that effect, to the
messengers from Washington, who came with the intercepted mail, and applied to
them for a passport, mistaking their authority. I had seen him, the morning of
our march to Braddock's fields, and with as much anxiety of countenance as a
man could discover, who conceived his life to be in danger; his expression was,
"The only thing I think of, is to escape assassination." Well, I thought of
nothing but this, the saving his life and property. For Gibson I was concerned;
not that I thought it would ultimately be of any damage to him to be banished,
but I supposed his feelings would be hurt for the present, and he might think
it of consequence to be sent away.

I was standing by Bradford at this time; turning to him, I observed, with some
warmth, "the sending away the people is a farce; it will be the best
recommendation they can have to the government; they will get into office, and
be great men by it; it is better to let them stay and be insignificant where
they are: you could not have done a better thing to those that are gone, than
to have sent them off." My language was candid; and his answer was equally so.
But said he, "the people came out to do something, and something they must do."
I now saw that, whatever his theory might have been, with regard to the extent
of his power over the people, his feelings for his own safety corrected his
vanity; and he saw the necessity of giving a tub to the whale. He had heard the
declamation of Murray, viz. that we must be firm, and clear the country of
disaffected persons, etc.; and conceiving that Murray, just fresh from the
camp, had brought its sensibilities with him, he was unwilling to relax in his
disposition, with regard to the expulsion. We ought to be firm, said he, and
unanimous.

At the first withdrawing of the committee, and taking their station in the
wood, we were followed by numbers, who wished to hear the deliberation. The
committee being opened, it was move^^* and the chairman was directed, to inform
the people, that it was our wish to deliberate in private. The chairman
addressed them to this effect. Some went away, and others did not; some came
again, and others with them. There was a constant intercourse between the
committee and the camp. It was frequently told them, that we wished to be by
ourselves; but in spite of all that we could do, we had a gallery of riflemen.
Just at this moment, about a dozen came up, fresh from the camp; and having
listened a little, leaning over a log, wi^^ their rifles on it, as we were
deliberating on the case of Nevill^ and Gibson; "Gentlemen," said one of them,
"we do no^ understand your counselling in mystery; do something spee^dily, or
we will go to execution ourselves." This, with the disposition that had been
discovered in the committee, induce us to think it not advisable to delay the
determination in the case of Neville and Gibson, lest the multitude should go
o^ and the committee of course break up without any determin^^tion at all; and
in that case, no resolution having been taken and announced, with regard to
these persons, they would b^ left to any resolution of the mob. Under these
impressions, ou^ Pittsburgh members, consulting aside, were of opinion, it wa^
best to say at once that they should be sent away, and that wa^ ourselves would
engage to have it done; but requested eigh^ days for them to be ready. Before
this ground of the question^ it was proposed by some one of us, that the
consideration o^ their case should be postponed to the meeting at Parkinson's
se^^ry. But that did not consist with the idea of doing things effectually, and
at once; and it was rejected.

Our undertaking to expel those people was not readily received. It was doubted
whether we would expel them. Thi^ led to the question. Whether those said to be
expelled, were actually gone? It was affirmed by us, that they were gone; and
we stated the circumstance, that they had crossed the Allegheny river in the
preceding morning, but whether to ascend or g^ down, we did not know. It was
doubted still, either seriously or affectedly, as a reason why we should not be
trusted with the expulsion of these remaining. I make no doubt, but that these
scruples with regard to our sincerity of acting, sprung in the whole, or in
greatest part, from a wish to seem extremely zealous in the cause undertaken,
and not an abstract principle of severity; but it had the same effect. We were
anxious to satisfy the doubt, but could not do it; until, fortunately, a young
man, who had just ^^me from the camp, announced, (...) one of the sp^es, in the
service of the state, against the In^^^ans on the frontiers, had just come in,
and brought account, that he had seen Kirkpatrick and B^ison ten miles, in what
is called the Indian country, on their way toward Sandusky. I have never heard
how this story originated, but it was not true: however, it served our purpose
at the time; and the doubt now only was, that they would come back. We
sti^ulated that they should not come back. It was said by me particularly, that
if they came back "they might seize us in their place." It was said by one,
"Remember the forfeit."

It was agreed, that the sending away Gibson and Neville, at the expiration of
the time mentioned, should be left to the Pittsburgh committee.

Bradford now moved, that the troops should go on to Pittsburgh. Yes, said I,
by all means; and if with no other view, at least to give a proof that the
strictest order can be preserved, and no damage done. We will just march
through, and taking a turn, come out upon the plain of the Monongahela's banks;
and taking a little whiskey with the inhabitants of the town, the troops will
embark, and cross the river.

James Ross, at this moment, stepping from another part of the committee, and
passing by me, said, "the veil is getting too thin, I am afr^^d it will be seen
through." But the committee had now risen, and were going away.

It is well for you, said Benjamin Parkinson to me, that the committee has
broke up in such a hurry; you would have been taken notice of, you gentlemen of
Pittsburgh. Give us whiskey! we don't go there for your whiskey. This was said,
grinding the teeth, and biting the lip. I considered his umbrage at these
words, as no more than a pretense of a quarrel, and was alarmed; but made, in
the softest manner, an explanation, that I meant no more than that we should
drink together, and not any offense whatever; and that it would affect me in
the most sensible manner, if any thing, inadvertently said by me, should
interrupt harmony, and injure the cause. I got him to seem satisfied; but I
rather suppose, that he had begun to suspect me of not being in earnest in the
cause, and that this was the real ground of his resentment.

A number of the Pittsburg committee having met, it was proposed, and thought
advisable, that some individuals, in whom major Butler would have confidence,
should ride in before the multitude, and inform him of the state of things:
that there was no intention of disturbing him, and this, lest he should mistake
the case, and fire upon the people; and they might suppose the town in
collusion with him, and make this a pretense of injuring it. Some members set
out, and went into town for this purpose. Others were dispatched, who undertook
to have the boats ready, at a proper place, to transport the people; and water
and whiskey on the ground where we should halt: that there might be no pretense
of leaving the ranks, in order to obtain refreshment.

Several members of the committee, and other inhabitants o^ the town, alarmed
at the idea of the people coming, had gon^ home, to put out of the way, some of
their most valuable arti^cles. Some of them buried their books and papers. I
had ^e^^ orders, the preceding day, for my papers to be carried out (...) the
town, and they had been carried out.

Officers in the mean time having been appointed, Edwar^ Cook and Bradford,
generals, and col. Blakenay, officer of the day, the drums began to beat, and
the line of march was tak^en up. By the direction of our committee I went
forward to the advanced guard, and undertook to conduct by the proper roa^ to
Pittsburgh.

Conducting the militia by what is called the Monongehela road, the route was
at a distance from the garrison, which i^ built on the bank of the Allegany
river. Entering the town, and marching to the main street, to satisfy the
people, and wheeling to the left, and leaving the town, the whole body was
halted on the plain to the east of the town. By the best estimate (...) have
been able to collect, the numbers were about 5400. About a fourth of the whole
numbers, at Braddock's field, had returned from thence, and not come to town.
So that, at the place of rendezvous, there might have been in the whole, about
7000 men.

By the order of the committee every possible provision had been made for them
on the ground, that the short space of time could allow; and as soon as the
Pittsburgh militia, who had marched in the rear, could be dismissed from the
ranks, they were employed in carrying water to the plain. Members of the
committee set the example, by carrying water and whiskey to these whiskey-boys,
as they have been since called. I was employed amongst the rest, very busily. I
thought it better to be employed in extinguishing the fire of their thirst,
than of my house. Most other persons thought in the same manner; and every man
had at least a hut that he could not afford to have plundered, or burned down.
In spite of all that could be done; straggling companies left the ground, and
came into the town, and were extremely insulting and troublesome. By order of
the committee the taverns had been shut up, but the tavern-keepers were under
the necessity of distributing gratis.

Great activity was used by well disposed men, to preserve order: General
Bradford left all to his officers, and gave himself little trouble. I did not
see him though the whole afternoon. He had retired to a bower, to cool himself
in the shade. There ^e was expatiating to those who had accompanied him, on the
^bject accomplished, the expulsion of the obnoxious characters.

It was an object of moment for the safety of the town, to ^ave the multitude
thrown across the river, as speedily as possi^le. There were but three or four
boats that could be collect^d from the ferries, and it would take a long time
to transport ^o great a number with these. But it was recollected that the
^orse, which might be a third of the number, could ford the ^iver. Knowing the
ford, which is at the confluence of the Monongehela and Allegheny rivers, I
rode down and attempted it; it was found to be practicable. Returning and
leading ^own a few squadrons, they crossed. When it had been announced, that
the river was fordable, the whole of the multitude, that had come on
horseback, came down and crossed the river. The foot in the mean time, the
greatest part, had crossed, and ^e had the prospect of having the town clear
that night.

But notwithstanding all exertions, an hundred or two had remained in the town;
these were in concert with some of these who had crossed the river, and who
were to burn some farm buildings belonging to Kirkpatrick on the hill opposite
the town; and the inflaming these, was to be the signal to those in town, to
set on fire his house, in town. It was also said, that the house of the company
whose clerk Day had been, and Gibson's house, Neville's, and that in which
Brison had lived, were to be consumed. The burning these, from their situation,
would have burned the quarter part of the town. But if they had begun to burn
at all, the whole would have been burned.

A company commanded by a captain Riddle, dressed in yellow hunting shirts,
were seen in the evening parading the town, as having something in view. They
appeared bent on mischief. About 9 o'clock at night, the alarm was, that these,
and others, were about to burn the house of Kirkpatrick. The inhabitants were
called upon to defend it; I found general Wilkins, and a number with arms,
rushing down. I addressed them, "This will not do; it is contrary to the system
we have hitherto pursued, and which has been successful. Return, and lay down
your arms. If a drop of blood is shed between the town and the country, it will
never be forgiven: it will be known, that there is a tumult in the ^own,
between the inhabitants and the country people; and those that have crossed the
river, many of them will return, and we shall fall a sacrifice. If the house is
to be defended, it must be by the people of the country themselves."

In fact, a number of the people of the country were at this time in arms, to
assist in defending the house. James Marshall and Edward Cook, and a brother of
M'Farlane that had fallen, had gone down. He had been called forward on the
principle, that being supposed to have the greatest cause of resentment against
Kirkpatrick, if he should oppose the burning, no other could, with a good
grace, insist.

It was on the same principle, (an incident which I had forgot in my
narrative), that the committee of Braddock's fields had sent for Andrew
M'Farlane; and representing to him our apprehensions of injury to the property
of Kirkpatrick, requested him, as we well knew it would be no gratification to
a man of sense, as he was, to destroy the property, even of one by whom his
family had been injured, that he would express his sentiments in the camp, and
make it as public as possible. His answer was, "that he had no with to injure
the property, and would declare it publicly; but that if ever Kirkpatrick and
he should meet, one of them should die."

Those in arms, with general Wilkins, rested where they were. Going forward, I
addressed myself to the people that were going forward for the purpose of
burning the house. Said I, Gentlemen, you cannot burn this house without
burning that of colonel O'Hara, that is near it; he is a good man, and he is
absent. If it is to be destroyed, let it be pulled down, not burned. I will be
the first ^o pull a board off myself; but what necessity to take the trouble
now; or to give yourself the trouble at all? the people of Pittsburgh will pull
it down, and throw it in the river.

These desisted to go forward. There had been some at the house, and were
preparing to set fire, when Cook, Marshall, and M'Farlane came forward, and
prevented it. A mistake of Cook was fortunate. Thinking those he saw before
him, at the house, to be of the persons that were there to defend it; said he,
Boys, are your guns loaded? Yes. "Then put in a second ball; and the first man
that puts fire to the house, shoot him down." Some affected to be there to
defend the house, and some went off.

In the mean time, intelligence had been brought, that the people were about to
destroy the buildings of Kirkpatrick, on the south side of the river; I fell in
with David Hamilton and Thomas Stokely, about to cross for the purpose of
dissuading from it; I crossed with them, to direct the ferry boats to be sent
over to the town side of the river, in order to prevent any part of those
a^^eady over, from re-crossing to the town. Having ordered the boats over, I
was returning, when the flame of a building of Kirkpatrick's, on the hill,
began to illuminate the river. It was a barn, with the produce of the harvest
in it. This had been the signal agreed upon, for the inflammation of the house
of Kirkpatrick in town, or other buildings. This had been prevented, by the
measures taken.

I have been minute in my relation of the incidents that respect Kirkpatrick's
house, and my concern to save it, because it has been insinuated, that I had a
wish to have it burned. I do not affect a regard for the man, for I have none;
and it is no presumption of my regard for him, that I wished to save his house;
but rather the contrary; for I well knew that, if burned, he would make five
times the value of it, out of it. It was in some degree for the sake of the
people themselves, that I wished to save them from doing mischief. How would
Kirkpatrick make five times the value, by the destruction of his property? It
would be considered as destroyed in the cause of the government; and therefore
liberally repaired. The being the brother-in-law of the inspector, would
establish a connection between his loss and that of the officer.

That plunder had been an object with many of the multitude, is certain.
Amongst other proofs of this, I saw a man, on Braddock's fields, put his hat,
an indifferent one, on the muzzle of his rifle, and twirling it about, say, I
have a bad hat now, but I expect to have a better one soon. On the day the
people marched into Pittsburgh, there were numbers of wom^n on the hills
opposite the town, from a considerable distance, collected to see the
destruction of the town, and to share in the plunder. The day succeeding, a
body, near a thousand, at the distance of four or five miles halted, and
deliberated, and with difficulty were prevented from coming back to plunder. On
their way, on another road, by the farm house of Neville the younger, where a
tenant lived, who had been a deputy under the inspector, they deliberated on
the plundering and burning the house, and presented their pieces to shoot the
wife of the deputy.

It will be queried, Whence the authority* that I insinuate myself to have
possessed, in the interfering with the orders of general Wilkins, with regard
to the defense of Kirkpatrick's house, by the militia of the town; and in
ordering ferry boats from one side of the river to the other; to remain all
night with the hands, to prevent the re-crossing of the people? I have already
said, that I was a member of the conmittee, which was supposed to have
superseded, for that occasion, all other authority. We were a kind of national
commissioners. The idea struck Henry Purviance, of Washington, who addressed me
by the designation of Commissioner Brackenridge. General Wilkins was therefore
no general now; I was a member of the committee, and had an equal power with
him, and might assume more sometimes; and if not contested, it was exercised.

CHAP. IX.
THE affair of Braddock's fields, and the marching to the town of Pittsburgh,
being over, it will be asked, Could 250 or 300 men, which was the extent of the
militia of the town, at the time, maintain it against 7000? but there might not
be 7000; but suppose only 700. The people of the town were not used to arms;
they might parade, on a review day, with empty muskets in their hands, but had
no other practice. They had the advantage of buildings out of which to fire;
but so had Kirkpatrick, at Neville's house: and yet the buildings were burned.
But the inhabitants of Pittsburgh were more, than the party of Kirkpatrick, and
the houses more than the houses of the inspector: but the force of the country
was proportionably more against it; and if this force had been repulsed, is it
to be supposed that a greater force would not return? but there must be
supposed to be a proportion of the town that had not yet acquired the same
property with others, and would not like to put their lives to an equal risk in
defense. Another proportion, from an acquaintance or connection with the
country, would presume themselves safe, and would not choose to defend. The
garrison could have been of no use; for they could have taken the town between
the garrison and them. They might have taken the garrison itself; it was a
quadrangle with bastions stockaded, and a block-house in the north-west, and
north-east angles, with a 6 or 9 pounder in each. But the bastions toward the
town were naked of cannon; and the port holes might have been closed, and the
pickets cut away. The people were mad; and if any man wishes to calculate the
force of madness, let him think of the French revolution, and the storming the
Bastile, and the Thuilries. It never came into my head, nor did I hear any one
else, suggest the idea, of using force on this occasion. I thought it the
safest way to give good words, and good drink, rather than balls and powder. It
cost me four barrels of old whiskey, that day, and I would rather spare that,
than a single quart of blood.

But it will be said, that the seeming to join the people at Braddock's fields,
and to support them in their views, did great public mischief, as it deceived
numbers in the country, and lead them to an opposition to the laws, or
confirmed them in it; and that it would have been better for the government,
for us to have, at least, remained at home, or to have made our escape from the
town. It is difficult to say, which has had the best effect generally; I admit
the truth and full force of the observation, that it was calculated to give a
temporary confidence of strength; but on the other hand, the desperate act of
plundering and burning the town, in whole, or in part, would have led the
perpetrators to every possible extent of violence, in order to protect what had
been done; and no possibility of accommodation with government could exist
after such an outrage. But in the present case, it was like the raking of the
leaves toward the flame, when the woods are on fire: the burning is greater
for the moment, but it cannot pass the path, where there is nothing to seed it.

It will be asked, how can we justify the sending away the proscribed persons?
I know of no case in our law, strictly parallel. I recollect an oriental case,
that may come near it. It is reported in the Negaristan.

Two travelers passing by a pool, on the side of the road, one of them,
missing a foot, sell in. The surface of the pool was some feet beneath the
level of the bank, and of itself deep; laying hold of the bank, he struggled to
get up, but it was steep, and he could not. His companion, extending himself on
his breast, and reclining over the bank of the pool, and reaching down his
hands, got hold of the hair of the other, and with some difficulty, extracted
him from the pool. But in dragging him against the bank, by some means an eye
was injured, so as to lose the sight of it. He conceived himself entitled to
damages against his companion, who had thus, without his interference and
application, dragged him out. He claimed the sum of 10,000 dinas. The cause
came before the cadi, who was puzzled, and laid it before the califf, who was
puzzled, and too the opinion of a famous lawyer, Ala Joseph.

The decision recommended by Ala Joseph was, that the in^jured man should have
his election of two things; either to g^ back to the pool, from which he had
been rescued, and take hi^ chance of getting out, or be satisfied with the act
of his comp^^nion, ^^d the consequence of it, even though an application for
assistance had not been made by him, and his consent to be drag^ged up formally
obtained.

The morning after Braddock's field, I had an interview wi^^ Neville, at his
own house; and the conversation turned on the state of the country. I was of
opinion, that it would not b^ an easy matter to reduce the insurrection by
force. He was (...) opinion that 3000 men would do it. I was of opinion, that
i^ it was attempted by less than 15,000, it would answer no other end than to
give strength to it. and lead to a lasting civil war* I reflected at the time,
that going to the government, he would be likely to mislead it, in the same
manner as Amh^rst, in England, with regard to America, before the revolution,
asserting, that he could march from north to south with 5000 men^ or as the
emigrants, at Coblentz, at an early period of the French revolution, affirming,
that it was a matter of little difficulty to restore the despotism: but I have
understood since that his opinion to government, on this head, was the same
which I then expressed. He had thought more deeply on the subject.

A day or two after this, Henry Purviance, of Washington, gave me to
understand, that Neville the younger had expressed to him his suspicion that I
was in confidence with Bradford, and had been privy to the intercepting the
mail; and had laid the plan of the expulsion of the persons denounced; and this
with an immediate view to them particularly. It was observed to him, that this
was totally improbable; as I could not, at the time of projecting the
intercepting the mail, provide that those persons should write letters by it.
This would exceed the power of any one, that had not an invisible power over
the minds of individuals, so as to make them act as the projector wished.

This observation was decisive. I must have had a supernatural power, or
uncommon good fortune, in having these persons to do what would give pretense
for the expulsion, which had been previously projected.

Neville could not answer this; but said, that if I had not projected it; I was
pleased with it now, that it had taken place.

I was struck, for the first time, with the knowledge that Neville had not a
perfect confidence in me; but it did not make much impression on me, as I
conceived him in a fever; and, like persons in a fever, ready to complain of
those that were taking the best care of them.

Suppose me to have been inimical to him, and the others; would expulsion have
served my turn? would I not rather have had them knocked in the head at once?
had any arrangements been made to keep them away? would not the government
restore them? It was like schoolboys ba^ing out a master in the Christmas
holidays. They would come back again. No; I knew the sending them away might
wound their feelings for the moment, but would not do them any essential or
permanent injury. On the contrary, it would ultimately serve them. It would
hold them up as martyrs of the government, and give them offices and
emoluments. I expressed this at the time; and it has so happened with some of
them.

It was said, that I had been at variance with all these persons. I had with
Kirkpatrick, but with none else, to my knowledge. If there was any variance, it
was in their minds only, and not known to me. There had been a variance with
Gibson, but it had passed away; at least I had forgot it. There might he still
a degree of distance; but it was the aukwardness of pride in coming to a formal
reconciliation* With Neville I had no difference, real or apparent: but his
observation shows, that he was not well disposed toward me. With Day there was
both a real and apparent good understanding. I knew Brison to have had malice
of an old standing against me; but I had thought it was dead. I never had any
against him. As to Kirkpatrick, I was prosecuting him for misdemeanors. But it
was defeating my purpose to send him away. I had him under recognizance to
court.

The second day after the departure of the multitude from Pittsburgh, it was
rumoured that Kirkpatrick had been seen in town. It was traced to an inhabitant
of Pittsburgh, who said; he had it from a person from the country, who said he
had seen him. The committee was called, to enquire of this inhabitant; and
censure him, if, without foundation, he had circulated this report. As the
committee were meeting, at a public house, Neville the younger, and Craig, were
coming down from the garrison: they were interrogated, and acknowledged, that
Kirkpatrick had returned to town, and was then in the garrison. It excited
great indignation, because he had deceived us, leading us to suppose that he
had gone, and to pledge ourselves to that effect. Neville and Craig alleged,
that he had not intended to return, but that he had been dogged by parties, and
had been under the necessity of returning, to be safe. It was answered, why not
then have given early information to the committee, that they might have taken
measures to escort him? Neville said, that he had not known of his being in
town until within half an hour; and on saying this, they left us. It was
thought ill usage, after all the pain we had taken on behalf of Kirkpatrick.
If he had gone to the garrison at first, there could have been nothing said
about it; but the being there now, would not excuse us, who would be supposed
to have deceived the country. The committee were determined on decisive
measures. Having had a difference with the man, I gave this as an apology, and
declined acting; but the resolution was, that Neville and Craig should be
seized in his place, and sent to Washington. Persons were dispatched to demand
their persons. It was believed that they were privy to his being in the
neighborhood of the town, the whole time; and that he had never attempted to
go away. Craig made his escape to the garrison; Neville gave his word of
honor, that in half an hour he would appear before the committee. He did
appear, and came up smoking a segar. I conceived the man was amusing himself
with our concern; and in fact he was, or affecting to do so; for his pride was
wounded, and he had misconceived the sincerity of our good will, and earnest
desire to save every one, and hurt none. He passed by me with that compressed
laugh, which conveys insult without saying any thing. I saw that he considered
me as diverted with his embarrassment: he did me great injustice.

However, when he came before the committee, he expressed himself with
discretion, and gave assurance, that if they would provide Kirkpatrick with an
escort, he would leave the garrison, and go away. This had been offered to him
when he went at first, but he declined taking it. The committee undertook to do
this, and an escort was provided.

Some of the people of the town, who had heard that Kirkpatrick was in the
garrison, and not knowing that the committee had taken measures, had determined
to lay in wait for him; presuming that he would come out in the night. Their
view was, to take him and surrender him to the country. It has been said, that
some talked of shooting him; and that he was actually fired upon, as he came
out of the garrison, when he went away.

The committee hearing this, next day, called a town meeting in the evening, in
order to explain to the people the impropriety of such behavior; all things
that regarded the police of the country, or the management of the affairs of
the times, having been delegated to them, for the occasion. It had become
necessary on another account; the idea had prevailed, that all law was at an
end, that a justice of the peace could issue no warrant, or constable serve it.

It was put on me to harangue the meeting, which I did; and denounced, in
strong terms, the impropriety of acting as in the case of Kirkpatrick, without
the orders of the committee; informing them also, that law was in force.

I was diverted with an expression of John Wilkins, senior, on this occasion --
"It is only the excise law that is repealed."

I had said, that it was only that law that the country had suspended. It will
be seen from hence, the manner in which we had to accommodate our language,
even to the town of Pittsburgh.

Had the denounced persons left the country immediately, before it became known
extensively that they were obnoxious, they could have got out of it without
difficulty; but it was no easy matter afterward. The cause of their
proscription was not distinctly known; and it was thought to be some great
state crime that had come to light. The people had an idea, that it would be no
harm to shoot them down; at least to arrest and imprison them.

Kirkpatrick was to have had an escort of two men, but one only had been able
to join him; the other had been detained by the people, who, not knowing the
measures of the committee, were lying in wait, to apprehend him. With the
person that had been able to join him, he escaped, by a circuitous route, on
the frontiers of the country, as far as the Allegheny mountains, and then
ventured to take the road.

Prothonotary Brison had been detained a night at the house of the deputy
attorney for the commonwealth, at the distance of some miles from Pittsburgh.
It was rumoured in the neighborhood, that he was there still. A party, of
about forty persons, had collected in the night, and surrounded the house. They
demanded of the attorney, to give them entrance, that they might search for the
culprit. It could not be refused. The lady of the attorney had fainted with the
fright; a mulatto woman had been dispatched to the spring hastily, for a glass
of cool water; and mistaking her complexion, in the dark, she was taken son the
prothonotary, making his escape in the disguise of a night cap. She was
pursued; and supposing herself obnoxious, she left the glass, and took to the
woods. It was thought that the prothonotary had escaped, and the resentment
fell on the attorney, for harboring a criminal; and it was with great
difficulty, and not until the mulatto woman, recovering herself, had come back,
that he could convince them of the truth.

Edward Day had taken the safest route, and descended the river to fort
Washington.

The inspection offices, through the whole survey, comprehending five counties,
had, at this time, been burned down, with the dwelling houses of the deputies.
Liberty poles, with inscriptions and devices, raised every where. Inscriptions,
such as, "an equal tax, and no excise;" devices, such as a snake divided, with
this motto, "united we stand, divided we fall." I met with no man that seemed
to have an idea, that we were to separate from the government, or to overthrow
it, but simply to oppose the excise law; and yet the people acted and spoke as
if we were in a state of revolution. They threatened life and property
familiarly. They talked of not suffering Alexander Addison, the district judge,
to return to the country. He was, at that time, at Philadelphia, A report,
that, on his way down, he had met the marshal, and encouraged him to come
forward with his writs, had rendered him obnoxious. They proceeded to acts of
violence among themselves; every man a^^^^^^g his own injury. Persons have
consulted me on the ex^^^^^^cy of coming to town, to shelter themselves there.
I dis^^^^^d from this measure, as dangerous to them, and to the to^^ both. We
could not defend it; and if we could, yet whence our provisions? It was better
to conceal, and lie by a little until it could be seen what arrangements could
be made for the resturation of (...); or if, in the mean time, any man (...) of
(...) to himself personally, he had better cr^^^ the (...), and (...) a while,
under the pr^text of discovering and (...) land* I was consulted by many, (...)
of the times; and when (...) real sentiment* as, will be (...) vouchers. I
(...) a thousand of these, were (...) them, ^y (...) were, that (...) be (...)
to order (...) ar^^^^^^ments amongst (...); or the (...) would r^^^ce them.
When I thought myself no^ sa^e, not knowing the persons, or suspecting myself
to be watched, my answers were evasive or equivocal.

The most deli^^te conduct was necessary, in order to avoid giving offense.
Some days after the cavalcade at Braddock's fields, I was reading an
advertisement, by one who had been there, (...) at a public house in
Pittsburgh, and laughing, with some (...) present, at the singularity of the
phraseology and orthog^^^^y. Looking round, I saw two or three from the
country, v^^to discovered, by their countenances, strong emotions of
resentment; they had conceived our merriment at the expense of the
advertisement, to indicate an undervaluing of the writer and his service. I
turned it off suddenly, by saying, that it was no matter; he did not spell
well; but he might be a good soldier, and sight well. This restored their good
humor.

I took and kept it, as a curiosity, and subjoin it in a note ADVORTUSMENT.
Notis is hearby givin to the publig that their was a par of portmantles lost
last time I went with the revue from Braddik's ground to Pisburgh, between the
nine mild run and the too mild run and with pirvisions in them and hankenther
in them. But I car for noting but the sadlbags, every person that his fond
them, will send them to Elisabet-toun, or live them at Mr. Wadsins tavrin, at
Pisburg so that the oner may get them shall have risonable chares paid for
there truble.

Suptumber 2d. 1794.

, not so much on account of the phraseology or spelling, as on account of one
word, the "revue" or review; as it shows an idea, which many of the people had,
that they were called out, by authority, as in the case of the reviews of the
militia.

In the mean time, a kind of temporary block-house was constructed in the
middle of the garrison to defend the curtain on the south, of which I have
before made mention, and exertions were made to furnish the garrison with two
months provisions. Application was made to a person, concerned in buscuit
baking in the town, to sell the public the buscuit he had on hand. He consulted
me, apprehensive that it might not be safe, as the country might hear of it,
and make him the object of resentment. I thought they could not take offense at
his disposing of what was in the way of business; but that, to save
appearances, it might be well to let the public barge come round and take it
from him. I mention this to show the delicacy of the apprehensions of
individuals.

It was suggested by me, and approved by others, that the records of the
county, in the prothonotary's office, should be put up, and kept ready to be
removed to the garrison, at the shortest notice, if the town should have any
reason to apprehend any thing from another movement.

As to myself, I canvassed my situation fully, and begun more seriously to
think of emigration; but in that case, I would be considered in the light of a
deserter, and my property become a sacrifice. I thought of disposing of my
house, which was perishable, to some individual less conspicuous, and under his
name save it. But that would be suspected or discovered. I thought of being
absent on some pretense that might be plausible; and it struck me to prevail
with the people of Pittsburgh to appoint me as an envoy to the executive, to
state the motives of their conduct, and explain their situation. I mentioned
this to James Ross, who approved of it, and at my request, to sound General
Wilkins, to get him to favor it. Mr. Ross did so, but informed me that General
Wilkins was not willing that I should leave the town. He was in the same
situation himself, and did not like to lose company. I have learned since, that
there were more in the same situation, and with the same reflections,
elsewhere, who had planned the getting out of the country, by pretending to go
below, to purchase powder. Subscriptions were opened in reality, in places, for
the sending below for arms and ammunition.

I made up my mind now to wait the result of the meeting at Parkinson's ferry.
My object was, a pacification of the country, by means short of force. With a
view to this, I wished the government to have a just idea of the situation of
the country; the magnitude and extent of the opposition. In that case, the
executive might be disposed to adopt conciliatory measures. On this principle,
having received a packet, containing some papers, from Tench Coxe of
Philadelphia, on agricultural subjects, to be communicated to the people of
this country, it struck me, to communicate to the government, by writing to
him, my impressions, with regard to the disturbance. This letter was
misunderstood, and considered as proof that I was engaged in the insurrection.
Some expressions led to this misconception, which I had used to save myself
with the more violent of the people of the country, if it should fall into
their hands, by the intercepting the mail; a thing constantly expected. In
writing to Tench Coxe, I considered myself as writing to the government,
understanding him to be in an official situation near the President.

A term had come into popular use, before this time, to designate the
opposition to the excise law; it was that of Tom the Tinker. It was not given,
as the appellat^on of whig originally was, as a term of reproach by
adversaries; but assumed by the people who were active in some of the masked
riots, which took place at an early period. A certain John Holcroft, was
thought to have made the first application of it. It was at the time of the
masked attack on a certain William Cochran, who rendered himself obnoxious by
an entry of his still, according to law. His still was cut to pieces; and this
was humorously called, mending his still; and the menders, of course, must be
tinkers, and the name, collectively, became Tom the Tinker. Advertisements were
now put up on trees, in the high ways, or in other conspicuous places, under
the signature of Tom the Tinker, threatening individuals, or admonishing, or
commanding them, in measures with regard to the excise law The following is a
specimen:
In taking a survey of the troops under my command, in the late expedition
against that insolent exciseman, John Neville, I find there were a great many
delinquents, even amongst those who carry on distilling. It will therefore be
observed, that Tom the Tinker will not suffer any certain class, or set of men,
to be excluded the service of this my district, when notified to attend on any
expedition, in order to obstruct the execution of the law, and obtain a repeal
thereof.

And I do declare, upon my solemn word, that, if such delinquents do not come
forth, on the next alarm, in equipments, and give their assistance, as in them
lies, in opposing the execution, and obtaining a repeal, of the excise law, ^e,
or they, will be deemed as enemies, and standing opposed to the virtuous
principles of republican liberty, and shall receive punishment according to the
nature of the offense; and that, at least, consumption of his distillery.


. In the march from Braddock's fields, the acclamation was, Huzza for Tom the
Tinker. It was not now, Are you whig or tory? but, Are you a Tom the Tinker's
man? Every man was willing to be thought so; and some had a great deal of
trouble to wipe off imputations to the contrary. Advertisements appeared in the
gazettes, from individuals, appealing to the public, and avering the falsehood
of aspersions upon them, as savouring the excise law.

It having been announced to Gibson and Neville, that, by our undertaking, in
their behalf, with the committee of battalions on Braddock's fields, they were
to leave the town in ten days, I received a note from Neville, addressed to me,
as chairman of the committee of 21, demanding a passport from the country, and
an escort. I discovered a symptom of ill humor, in addressing me as chairman;
for he knew it had never been my place to be chairman, but to be amongst those
that addressed the chair. I was the more disposed to construe it in this
manner, having found him, in a conversation the day before, in an irritated
state of mind, with regard to the part that had been taken by me and others, in
his expulsion. His expression was, that he understood "it was the members from
Pittsburgh that insisted on his expulsion." It might have been so represented
to him; and his informants may have misconceived our conduct.

I was hurt with these suspicions, and the unreasonable dissatfaction with me
personally. Nevertheless, considering the circumstances, I was determined to
maintain a perfect apathy to all impressions of resentment, and go on to render
him every service in my power. Having taken the trouble to go round, and
collect the committee; passports were made for him and Gibson: double passports
for each: one in a few words, to serve them to pass through the country; and
couched for them, as for prisoners under a guard. I have not a copy of it.

Another, and the principal one, was a statement of the ground of expulsion:
that it might be seen below, and manifest the futility of the charges against
them. The idea of this was suggested by me, and the passport dictated to the
secretary. It was afterward published in the gazettes of Philadelphia. I
subjoin a copy in a note At a meeting of the committee of 21 of the town of
Pittsburgh, August 4, report was made to them by the committee, who were a part
of the committee of battalions, on Braddock's fields, viz. that in the
committee on Braddock's fields, it was stated on the part of the committee of
four, that the three persons proscribed; of the town of Pittsburgh, viz.
Abraham Kirkpatrick, James Brison, and Edward Day, were expelled the town, and
had disappeared.

It was then taken into view what other persons were obnoxious, as being
suspected of being friendly to the exci^e law; as might appear by letters, or
otherwise; and on certain letters being read, which had been intercepted in the
mail, from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia; viz. one from colonel Presley Neville,
to his father in-law, contains in a certain paragraph, words unfavourable to
the oppo^e^^ of the excise law, though no person in particular was named; but
this being considered as a sufficient evidence of his enmity to the cause, it
was resolved that he should be expelled the country within ten days.

Also another letter from general John Gibson to the governor of Pennsylvania,
which, in a certain paragraph, evinces a like disposition, by a mistatement
made by him, on information, which information was not thought to be exact, and
which he had too hastily credited, it was resolved that he should be subject to
the like sentence, and that the committee of Pittsburgh should carry into
effect these measures necessary to the public safety.

Resolved, therefore, That notice of their respective sentences be forthwith
given to those persons, and that they depart accordingly; and that a guard be
ordered for each of them, to conduct them to a proper distance.

Resolved, also, That a copy of these resolves be given to each of these
persons as a passport from the country.

On behalf of the committee, JAMES CLOW.



.

Agreeable to our resolves, prior to the meeting at Braddock's fields,
delegates were to be elected to the meeting at Parkinson's ferry.

Circumstances were so materially changed, from what they were at the time of
the Mingo creek meeting, that I had declined all idea of going forward as a
delegate; and gave it to be known in the town, that in the appointment, I would
not choose to have my name mentioned. There appeared to me but little prospect,
that the meeting should rest short of deliberate and systematic hostility. I
had heard of the language of Bradford, after his return to Washington, from the
march to Pittsburgh. "A glorious revolution accomplished without bloodshed." I
conceived from thence, that he must have an idea of supporting^ at all hazards,
what had been done. My impression of Marshall, from what I had heard, from
others, and what I had seen of his conduct, was, that he had inconsiderately
involved himself in the business, but would be happy to get out* if he could.
But I knew the people would not let him; he would not dare to talk of any
thing, but going on to war; and such was his situation, from his personal acts,
that it had become as much his policy, as any man's, to meditate defense.

On these principles, I thought it most advisable to send to that meeting some
persons, who would not be under the necessity of acting a conspicuous part, by
being called upon to speak, not being supposed in the habit of it, as I
professionally was. That in short, to save appearances, it was advisable to
^end some persons; but, at the same time, such persons as could have it in
their power to remain obscure.

James Ross and general Wilkins, to whom I communicated these ideas, were of a
contrary opinion, and thought it advisable to go forward; and, at the same
time, to use endeavors to get forwards, from all parts of the country,
delegates, opposed to violent measures. I yielded to their opinion; and gave it
to be understood, that I was willing to go to the meeting, if I should be
chosen.

General Wilkins and others, in the town and adjoining country, were active in
getting forward persons in the county of All^gheny, of the description before
suggested. James Ross had gone to Washington, with the same views.

The election for delegates to the meeting took place, with some form* in
Pittsburgh, and under the appearance of being warm in the cause of Tom the
Tinker. John Wilkins, senior, was made a judge of the election; and being a man
of humor, with great gravity, made it a test of the right of suffrage, the
being for Tom the Tinker; and affected to scruple the votes of some, who, not
perceiving the burlesque, hesitated to say they were for Tom. When I came in,
to give my vote, said Wilkins, I need not ask any test from you, for you are
Tom the Tinker himself; meaning, that I had acted his part, in the affair of
Braddock's fields, in the most distinguished manner. The whole of this was
understood to be a jest: nevertheless, affidavits of this pleasantry of
Wilkins, in the case of the test, were carried to the executive; and he was
afterward alarmed about it.

I was chosen a delegate, with general Wilkins and others. The first great
object to be accomplished by that meeting, was, the taking the business out of
the hands of the multitude, by establishing an organisation, through which
alone they could act: First, resolving it to be the sense of the committee,
that the state laws were in force; and that the authority of all civil officers
was to be respected* and no violence to be done by any man, on his mere motion,
under pain of being denounced by the committee, as an enemy to his country.

For it will be understood, that the idea of a committee had become more
formidable than that of a court. It was a new authority, springing fresh from
the people's power, and had the force of opinion on its side. The mulct of a
court, for a breach of the peace, would affect the property; but the censure of
a committee, would render a man infamous.

Secondly, resolving, that the meeting address the President; stating what had
taken place, and praying a suspension of force against the country, and an
oblivion of what had taken place; under such arrangements as might be
obtainable.

Thirdly, resolving, that a standing committee of safety be appointed, to be
conservators of the peace, in support of the civil authority; and to be the
organ of negotiation with the executive, on the subject of an amnesty, and the
arrangements that might be obtainable.

Fourthly, resolving, that the meeting publish an address to the people,
explaining what had been done, and their views in doing it; and enjoining an
obedience to all the municipal laws It was necessary to use this plea, to avoid
the odium of including the excise law.
, during the pendency of the negotiation with the government.

Agreeable to the scheme of these resolves, I had drawn up an address to the
President, and another to the people, on the principle stated, and had them
prepared to be laid before the meeting.

General Gibson, at this time, or before it, had left the country. Colonel
Neville was about to go; but had some reluctance. It struck me with surprise: I
had been thinking how to get away, and he had been thinking how to stay. (...)
saw things from two different points of view.

He came to me after the delegation to Parkinson's ferry, and expressed an
idea, that he had a right to expect of me, and others delegated from the town,
that, at the meeting, we should go forward, and demand an examination of his
case, and a repeal of the sentence of the committee of battalions, on
Braddock's fields; that he had a right to expect this, in as much as it was on
the account of the town, that the sentence was to be carried into effect.

I was hurt at his want of a just conception of the case, in supposing, that it
was on account of the town, that he was to go away. It was on account of him,
and others, that the town had been in danger; and it was for his own sake, that
he was to go away. I had considered him as consigning his case to my
management, from what he had said to me, the morning I went to Braddock's
fields; and I never managed the case of a client, at the bar, with more
fidelity, than I did his, on this occasion. I had thought the business well
managed, in diverting an enfuriated mob from coming in to seize him, and
others: and this was accomplished, by the policy of getting the mob to condense
themselves into a committee; and then managing that committee, to adopt the
mild resolution of leaving him in the hands of the committee of Pittsburgh, as
guardians, in fact, of his safety, though nominally the executors of the
sentence.

I do not mean to blame him, or others, for writing by the mail, or for what
they wrote; but I state the writing as the occasion of the cavalcade, and our
disturbance.

I stated this heartily to Neville; and perhaps, in a more pointed manner, than
I would otherwise have done, had not my feelings been hurt, by his suspicions
which had been suggested to me.

But I farther observed to him, that, supposing it demandable of the town, to
go forward, and propose the recalling him; was it practicable? did he not know,
that he was considered by the people, as the inspector himself? what the father
got, the son had. It is known, that, before your father accepted the office,
you were consulted, and advised the acceptance. It is known, that application
has been made to you, to advise your father to resign the office: You have
said, No; would any of them resign an office of such value? It is known, that
you are the author of that advertisement, which has appeared in the gazette,
alleging, that certificates and bonds were plundered and carried off, at the
time your father's house was burned At my house, on Bower hill, on Chartier's
creek, which was attacked, plundered, and burned by the rioters, on Thursday
evening last, were 4^^^ dollars and 64 cents, (...) debt of United States, in
(...), in two certificatess, viz. No. 775, for 36^^ dollars, 2^ cents, 6 per
cent* and No. 603, for 980 dollars, 43 cents, 3 per cent. This, to caution the
public, least they may be offered for sale, with forged powers and convey^nce.
Interest is stopped at the (...) legal measure (...) imposition* If they have
fallen into the hands of an honest man, (...) return them to Colonel Neville,
in Pittsburgh. I also caution the public not to receive assignments to any
bonds, or notes to me, as they are in the same situation.

JOHN (...).
July 2^, 1794.


.

I am not about to question the truth of the loss, nor the propriety of
advertising. I only speak of the effect on the minds of the people, who may be
offended with the imputation; and, infact, they are offended. They know your
father had gone, before the appearance of the advertisement; and you are
supposed to have written it: and though they admit the loss may have taken
place by the burning, they resent the being thought capable of theft or forgery.

In your letter to the Mingo meeting, you gave offense: they thought your
casuistry, prevarication; and Kirkpatrick's intrepidity, of which you spoke,
they thought stupidity. From this emblazoning they join you with Kirkpatrick,
in their feelings; and more especially, as it is known to be a trait in your
family character, to support any branch of it, however insupportable This was
an impression of my own, more than that of the people; for they did not know it
so well but the other ideas were all in the minds of the multitude.
.

N^^ille behaved mildly, and said little; but, I suppose, thought the more; and
set this down in his mind, as a further proof that I was an insurgent. I have
heard that he has mentioned it as a proof; and that he resents a declaration
made by me, at the time, that, if I was to advocate the case of any person, it
would be that of judge Addison; who, it seems, had become obnoxious. I am not
capable of the indelicacy of wounding the self-love of any man, by a personal
preference of another, to his face; but I gave this as a proof, that, even in a
case where my own interest was materially concerned, as the having the
president of the court in the circuit, without whom the business of my
profession must, in a great degree, be at a stand, I would not think it
expedient to go forward, and mention his name. By that direct mode of acting, I
could not bring him back; and I would put myself away. I had in view, to save
the influence that I happened to possess, in order that the people might let me
work with them, in constructing the wheel, the revolution of which, would set
all matters right, and bring Alexander Addison and Presly Neville into their
places again.

The fact is, there was a great proportion of those at the burning of the
house, capable of all that was alleged; but the bulk of the leaders, were
themselves led by false ideas of patriotism, and though guilty of a great
offense, at the moment, would have shrunk from the violation of moral truth, or
the commission of dishonesty. I write this, not to make their apology, but to
explain human nature.

I had frequently heard it said, by the people of the country, since the
introduction of the excise law, that it were better for them to be under the
British; and at this time, such language began to be very common. But I cannot
say, that I ever heard any person of note breathe the idea. It was said, that
arms and ammunition could be obtained from the British.

At this time, reports from the east of the mountains were, that the people on
that side, were as violent as those on this; that they had proceeded to
outrages. This was alarming. I saw before me, the anarchy of a period; a shock
to the government; and possibly a revolution, -- a revolution impregnated with
the Jacobin principles of France, and which might become equally bloody to the
principal actors. It would be bloody unavoidably to them; and to the people,
destructive. Let no man suppose, that I coveted a revolution. I had seen the
evils of one already, the American; and I had read the evils of another, the
French. My imagination presented the evils of the last so strongly to my view,
and brought them so close to a probable experience at home, that, during the
whole period of the insurrection, I could scarcely bear to cast my eye upon a
paragraph of French news. This is not a statement of sentiment, invented now;
they were my expressions at the time. It was not the excise law, alone, that
was the object with the people; it was, with many, not the principal object. A
man, of some note, and whose family had been at the burning of Neville's house,
was seen on horseback, in Pittsburgh, the day of Braddock's field, riding along
with a tomahawk in his hand, and raised over his head -- "This is not all that
I want: it is not the excise law only, that must go down; your district and
associate judges must go down; your high offices and salaries. A great deal
more is to be done; I am but beginning yet."

In the appointment of associate judges, there were great disappointments among
individuals; and the justices of the peace, many of them, wished to be again
upon the bench.

I saw the course of things; that there would be no occasion for a lawyer for a
while; and on a retrospective view, I had conceived such a detestation of
pleading before justices of the peace, that, if that order of things should
once more take place, I would never plead at all. Of all things that I ever met
with in life, it was the greatest absurdity, to be appealing to men, as judges
of principles, the knowledge of which requires a study and practice of twenty
years; to men, destitute of a knowledge of a single element of the science. I
had considered the constitution of the courts of Pennsylvania, as a great
acquisition, and was unwilling that it should be disturbed: but, as a proof
that reforms of this nature were meditated, let me state, that, far before this
time, representations to the legislature, had been circulated in the country,
and subscribed; praying a reduction of salaries of judges, and a reinstatement
of justices of the peace upon the bench. A committee, instituted a year before,
at Mingo creek, and which was the cradle of the insurrection, went further; and
proposed suspending the courts and the justices of the peace altogether; and
actually drew causes to their own examination, and exercised judiciary
authority. Benjamin Parkinson was president of that committee.

There was an accidental circumstance, which, independen^ of fixed and
permanent causes, in the minds of the people, contributed to the inflammation
of this period. It preceded the election of sheriff, and members of assembly;
and without meaning any thing more than to be elected, the candidate was
clamorous against excises and salaries; and was for taking arms, not having the
least expectation of fighting, but willing to make other people think that he
would fight. This class of men were numerous, and greatly vociferous. Strange
as it may seem, it never once struck them, that if things went on in that
manner, there could be no election.

I have given the above, as the state of the country, previous to the meeting
at Parkinson's ferry.

CHAP. X.
IN the morning of the meeting at Parkinson's ferry, I saw James Marshall; and
in order to reconcile himself with his feelings, and dispose him favorably
toward me, I observed, that the calling out the people to Braddock's fields,
was a rash act; but it might have a good effect. It would impress the
government with a fear of the extent of the opposition to the law. He seemed
pleased with the apology made for it, and observed, "that Bradford was hasty in
undertaking things, and had not abilities afterward to manage them." I
considered this as an apology to me, for the rashness of what had been done.

But I found that he contemplated the going on to support, by force of arms,
what had been done. He showed me a set of resolutions, which he had drawn up,
to lay before the m^^^ing; one of which contemplated force against the
government. He gave me to understand, that Bradford also, had made a minute of
some things that he meant to move. Bradford here joined us, and I saw his
schedule. It contained the heads of particulars, that would be the subject of
consideration. A committee of safety, magazines, arms, ammunition, clothing,
provisions, etc.

There were two or three of the resolutions of Marshall, in substance, the same
with those I had devised in my mind, and I approved of them. I developed my
plan of sending commissioners to the executive, and showed the address I had
drawn up to be presented to him. They approved of it.

In order to retain the management of Bradford, it was my policy, at that
period, to conceal from him my total disapprobation of what had been done. I
said not a word with respect to it; nor did I venture to oppose, on the subject
of making war; but to keep him from thinking, and coming to a close
conversation, I amused him with pleasantry, and kept him laughing. I made use
of major Craig for this purpose, and encored the story of the big guns, to be
drawn out of Braddock's ford* and that of taking down the inscription of the
inspection office, as related to me by captain Lang.

Just before the opening of the meeting, Bradford came (...) me, and put it
upon me to introduce the business, by giving a history of what had taken place,
since the meeting at Ming^ creek; and offered me the letters which had been
intercepted in the mail, to read to the people. I declined it, by observing,
that his acquaintance with the subject was more than mine; and that the sedate
dignified narrative, was more his talent than mine. And besides, there had been
people expelled from Pittsburgh, on account of those letters; and living in the
same village with the connections and families of these, it was a case of
greater delicacy with me, than it could be with him, to explain the propriety
of their expulsion, or read the letters.

The meeting was opened, by placing Edward Cook in the chair, and making Albert
Gallatin secretary. The credentials of our election were produced; and there
appeared to be members from Ohio county, in Virginia, and five counties of
Pennsylvania. In the whole, there were 260. Our hall was a grove; and we might
well be called the Mountain, for we were on a very lofty ground, overlooking
the river. We had a gallery of lying timber and stumps; and there were more
people collected there, than there was of the committee.

Bradford opened the meeting, by giving some deduction of who had taken place;
-- the appearance of the marshal to serve his writs, the attack on Neville's
house, the flight of the inspector, the expulsion of other obnoxious
characters, etc. Here he read the letters intercepted in the mail.

Marshall now brought forward his propositions:

First, That taking citizens of the United States, from their respective
abodes, or vicinage, to be tried, for real or supposed offenoes, is a violation
of the rights of the citizens, is a forced and dangerous construction of the
constitution, and ought not to be exercised by the judicial authority.

It was alleged by Marshall, that the language of this resolve, as of the
others, might not be correct, or the idea well expressed; and he wished the
secretary to frame it as might seem proper. I spoke on this occasion: and
observed, that, by the constitution, the whole state was made the vicinage Art.
III. Sect. 3.
Trials shall be held in the state where the crime has been committed.


; and the judiciary had it in their power, to make use of it to that extent.
Nevertheless, it certainly was an abridgment of that advantage which the
citizens had before the constitution existed, where the vicinage was the
county; and that it was a hard construction of the constitution, to suppose,
that it contemplated such a judiciary system, as would bring citizens from one
end of the state to the other. For that reason, I approved of the substance of
the resolution; but as probably it might be improved in expression, I proposed,
that we should go over the resolutions, and having agreed upon the substance,
to refer them to a committee of three, or more, to digest the arrangement, and
express the sense, in the best manner, and lay them before the meeting for
their final consideration. It was agreed, and we passed on the second
resolution, viz.

That a standing committee be appointed, to consist of (...) members from each
county, to be denominated, a Committee of Public Safety; whose duty it shall
be, to call forth the resources of the western country, to repel any hostile
attempts, that may be made against the rights of the citizens, or of the body
of the people.

Comparing this resolution with the first, I saw that Marshall had conceived,
that the act of the district officer, in serving writs in this country, to
answer at Philadelphia, was illegal and void, and that it might be
constitutionally resisted; and also, that an attempt of the government to
enforce such an act, by pursuing those that had resisted, might be
constitutionally opposed; on the same principle that the money tax, and the
force of government in aid of it, was constitutionally opposed by Hamden; or
the declaratory act, and the enforcing of it, was opposed by America against
Britain. Coupling, therefore, these resolutions, they would seem to contemplate
the resisting the authority of the officer of the district, and protecting, by
arms, those who had resisted him. Taking the words by themselves, they were not
exceptionable: for, doubtless the people retain the right to repel hostile
attempts against their rights; on the same principle that I may repel the
officer, who would seize me without process. But coupling the words with the
preceding resolution, and with the acts perpetrated in the country, and with
the state of it, they appeared to me exceptionable. The^e were my reflections,
from the time I had read the resolutions, in the morning, until that time.

The resolution being read, secretary Gallatin rose: -- What reason, said he,
have we to suppose, that hostile attempts will be made against our rights? and
why, therefore, prepare to resist them? Riots have taken place, which may be
the subject of judiciary cognizance; but we are not to suppose a military
force, on the part of the government.

If I am not accurate in stating this language, or these ideas of the
secretary, it ought to be attributed to defect of memory, not design. It was my
impression, at the time, either that it was the only pretense that occurred to
him to use, to wave the resolution, or that actually he did not know, that the
acts committed brought it within the power of the President to order out the
militia.

I saw the principle, and respected the courage of the secretary, in meeting
the resolution; but I knew that it was a favorite one, with all those that had
been involved in any of the outrages, and, at the same time, a popular one
generally. I was alarmed, therefore, at the idea of any discusion of it; and
instantly, before any one could have an opportunity of speaking, I affected to
oppose the secretary; and thought it might not be amiss to have the resolution;
but it might be softened in terms, without altering the substance, and it might
be said, the committee should have power to take such measures as the situation
of affairs might require; and that the committee of four, to whom the modelling
of the resolutions was to be committed, might model the terms. Marshall
acquiesced, and there was no question, or debate.

Third resolution, That a committee of (...) members be appointed, to draft a
remonstrance to Congress; praying a repeal of the excise law, and that a more
equal, and less odious tax, will be cheerfully paid by the people of these
counties; and that the same remonstrance be signed by the chairman of this
meeting, in behalf of the people whom we represent.

This resolution was opposed, on the principle, that it was useless to
remonstrate to Congress; that body having treated with contempt, all former
remonstrances on that subject. It was, however, carried; those who had opposed
it, acquiescing.

Fourth resolution, Whereas the motives by which the people of the western
country have been actuated, in the late unhappy disturbances, at Neville's
house, and in the great and general rendezvous at Braddock's fields, etc. are
liable to be misconstrued, as well by our fellow citizens, throughout the
United States, as by their and our public servants, to whom is consigned the
administration of the federal government, Resolved, That a committee be
appointed, to make a fair and candid statement of the whole transaction, to the
President of the United States, and to the governments of Pennsylvania and
Virginia; and, if it should become necessary, that the said committee do
publish to the world, a manifesto or declaration, whereby the true motives and
principles of the people of this country, shall be fairly and fully stated.

This was committed, without debate, to the committee of four, to be modelled
as to arrangement and expression.

Fifth resolution, That we will, with the rest of our fellow citizens, support
the laws and government of the respective states in which we live, and the
government of the United States; the excise law, and the taking away citizens
out of their respective counties, only excepted: and, therefore, we will aid
and assist all civil officers, in the execution of their respective functions;
and endeavor, by every proper means in our power, to bring to justice all
offenders in the premises.

On the consideration of this resolution, the state of the country, without law
and safety, to persons or property, was represented, at some length, by me. Mr.
Gallatin supported the necessity of the resolution, with a view to the
establishment of the laws, and the conservation of the peace.

Though he did not venture to touch on the resistance to the marshal, or the
expulsion of the proscribed, yet he strongly arraigned the destruction of
property; the burning of the barn of Kirkpatrick, for instance. What! said a
fiery fellow in the committee, do you blame that? The secretary found himself
embarrassed; he paused for a moment. -- If you had burned him in it, said he,
it might have been something; but the barn had done no harm. Ay, ay, said the
man, that is right enough. I admired the presence of mind of Gallatin; and give
the incident, as a proof of the delicacy necessary to manage the people on that
occasion.

A member of the committee, who had seen the schedule of Bradford, moved that
it should be brought forward. It was brought forward, and laid upon the table.
Several persons spoke on the subject of constituting magazines of arms and
ammunition; and seemed to wish resolutions pointedly to this, on the ground of
Bradford's schedule. Gallatin was laboring hard to divert this, by attacking
it in front. It did seem to do: there was danger of some question of this
nature being taken. I had been out of the circle; but returned at this
juncture. I affected, as before, to oppose Gallatin; and made an apology for
those, who were for providing means of war. -- Said I, it may not be amiss to
talk of these things, and to hold out the idea of fighting, with a view to
avoid it; just as a general displays columns, meaning, by that display, to
avoid engaging. The idea of our being about to fight, may induce government to
accommodate with the country. But enough is done. These things will all be left
to the direction of the standing committee.

The apology saved the pride of the speakers, and satisfied the hopes of the
violent; and there was no more said. I was thought to be for war, if it should
be necessary. I was applaudded by the gallery; and it was said, I had gained
what I had lost at Mingo creek.

I had founded the public mind, before I came to the meeting, with regard to
the recall of the prothonotary of Allegheny county. He had left a young man in
the office: nevertheless, the absence of the prothonotary himself, was a great
inconvenience to the country, and to me, in my profession. I had sounded the
committee, since I had come, and made up my mind, that it was not advisable to
introduce his name. A circumstance, independent of his letter writing, had made
him obnoxious.

While the state excise had been in force, writs had been issued from his
office, against delinquent distillers; 70, or upwards, to one term. The
prothonotary was supposed to have had some concern in the matter, for the sake
of his fees. Besides, by purchasing claims in litigated cases, he had acquired
the reputation of a speculating prothonotary.

However, persons of his acquaintance, members of the committee from Allegheny,
were anxious to make trial of having him recalled; and one of them, George
Wallace, a judge of the court, solicited me to speak to Bradford, to prevail
with him not to oppose the motion. I did so; and made use of the address which
my judgment suggested. -- There is no question, said I, but this prothonotary
has acted with great impertinence, in writing to the government, and
introducing your name; and the coxcomb deserves what he has got, for his pains.
Nevertheless, it is an injury to the country, and to myself, that the
prothonotary should be absent; let us recall him for the present, and have him
removed in due time. I know there is a difficulty in the way, from the
prejudices of others against him, on account of his speculations, and the
affair of the 70 writs; some of the distillers, against whom they were issued,
being now of the committee; but, if you do not oppose the motion, probably it
may be carried. He said, he would not oppose it; but the people had thought
they had done something, by going to Braddock's fields, and if it was undone,
they would be dissatisfied.

I related this answer of Bradford to judge Wallace; and also said, I would
support the motion, provided he could get some person to make it. He could get
no one.

My introducing the idea of difficulty from others, in the case of Brison, was
a stroke of art. It was as much as to say, I know you care very little about
it, whether he comes or stays; but there will be objections from these people.
This was interesting him with me, to overcome the objections; at least, to
withdraw his own. It had the effect.

The committee adjourned to the next day. The committee of four, who were to
model the resolutions, were to meet early the next morning. This committee
were, Gallatin, Bradford, Herman Husband, and myself.

I lay, that night, at a farm house in the neighborhood, with an hundred, or
more, of the gallery or committee about me. The whole cry was, War. From the
manner in which they had understood me, I was greatly popular with them. Stand
by us, said they, and we will stand by you.

I felt my situation, with extreme sensibility. I had an attachment to the
people, because they had an attachment to me: and I thought of the consequence:
What suppose that, in the prosecution of the plan I have in view, arrangements
cannot be made to satisfy them, and that a war must ensue; what shall I do? I
am under no obligation of honor, to take a part in supporting them; for I have
no way contributed to produce the disturbance. And though, on principles of
conscience, it may be excuseable in them to make war, for they think they are
right; yet it would not be so in me, for I think them wrong. But, on the score
of self-preservation, and personal interest, what am I to do? It is a miserable
thing to be an emigrant; there is a secret contempt attached to it, even with
those to whom you come. They respect more the valor, though they disapprove
the principle, of those that stay at home. All I have in the world, is in this
country. It is not in money; I cannot carry it with me; and if I go abroad, I
go poor: and I am too far advanced in life, to begin the world altogether.

But as to these people; what chance have they? They may defend the passes of
the mountains; they are warlike, accustomed to the use of arms; capable of
hunger and fatigue; and can lie in the water like badgers. They are
enthusiastic to madness; and the effect of this is beyond calculation.

The people on the east of the mountains are, many of them, dissatisfied, on
the same principle; and will be little disposed to disturb the people here, if
they should mean to defend themselves. It is true, the consequence of war,
supposing the country independent of the United States, will be poverty, and a
miserable state of things, for a long time; but still, those who stand by the
country, where they are, have the best chance, and the most credit in the end.
Should I emigrate, and the country be reduced, I cannot live in it again, for a
thousand reasons. I am in a quandary; and in either case, the election is
painful. The only thing that can suit me, is an accommodation, and having the
matter settled without a civil war. But is there any prospect of this? Will the
executive be disposed to act with mildness, or rigor, in this instance? The
excise law is a branch of the funding system, which is a child of the secretary
of the treasury; who is considered as the minister of the President. He will
feel a personal antipathy against the opposers of it; and will be inclined to
sanguinary counsels. The President himself, will consider it, as a more
dangerous case than the Indian war, or the British spoilations; and will be
disposed to apply more desperate remedies. He will see, that here the vitals
are affected; whereas there, the attack was upon the extremities. Nevertheless,
the extreme reluctance which he must have, to shed the blood of the people,
with whom he is personally popular, will dispose him to overtures of amnesty.
-- These were my reveries, as I lay with my head upon a saddle, on the flooring
of a cabin.

In the morning, the committee of four having met, we proceeded to the
arranging and mending the resolutions. Bradford was not satisfied with the
indefinite expression of the power given to the standing committee, but wished
to have it in plain terms; probably with a view to get something to pass the
committee, that would involve all equally with himself, in the treasons
committed. I wished to evade it; and endeavored to divert his attention, by
keeping him laughing. I dispensed with Craig, on this occasion, and made use of
Herman Husband. I endeavored to amuse Bradford with him, as a person would a
boy, by playing with a bear.

I had heard of this extraordinary character, many years ago, when a principal
of the insurgents, known by the name of Regulators, in North Carolina. I had
seen him in the year 1778, when he was a member of the legislature of
Pennsylvania. I was present, when a Quaker lady was introduced, and preached
before the house. Herman, who was a divine, as well as a politician, thought
her not orthodox, and wished to controvert; but the house, willing to avoid
religious controversies, would not suffer him.

I had visited him, in the year 1780, at his residence, in the glades of the
Allegheny mountain, on my way from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh. He had then just
finished a commentary on a part of the prophet Ezekiel: it was the vision of
the temple; the walls, the gates, the sea of glass, etc. Logger-head divines,
heretofore, had interpreted it of the New Jerusalem; but he conceived it to
apply to the western country; and the walls were the mountains, the gates, the
gaps in them, by which the roads came, and the sea of glass, the lake on the
west of us. I had no hesitation in saying, that the commentary was analagous to
the vision. He was pleased; and said, I was the only person, except his wife,
that he ever got to believe it. Thought I, your church is composed, like many
others, of the ignorant and the dissembling.

It was to this topic I drew him at present, and wished him to explain his
reveries. But Bradford was too intent on getting the resolution amended, to an
explicit provisional declaration of war; he complained of my laughing, and
wished me to be serious. Gallatin, not perceiving my drift, said, cynically,
"He laughs all by himself." I let Bradford alone then, and he puzzled the
secretary enough, and obliged him to put in a sentence, to avoid a worse, viz.
that in the last of the second resolution, as it was brought in.

The resolutions, as brought in, are as follows:

1st. Resolved, that taking the citizens of the United States from their
respective abodes, or vicinage, to be tried, for real or supposed offenses, is
a violation of the rights of the citizens; is a forced and dangerous
construction of the constitution, and ought not, under any pretense whatever,
to be exercised by the judicial authority.

2d. That a standing committee, to consist of (...) members, from each county,
be appointed, for the purposes hereafter mentioned, viz.

To draft a remonstrance to Congress, praying a repeal of the excise law; at
the same time, requesting that a more equal, and less odious tax, be laid; and
giving assurances, that such a tax will be cheerfully paid by the people of
these counties: To make and publish a statement of the transactions, which have
lately taken place in this country, relative to the excise law, and of the
causes which gave rise thereto; and make a representation to the President on
the subject: To have power to call together a meeting of the deputies, here
convened, for the purpose of taking such further measures as the future
situation of affairs may require; and in case of any sudden emergency, to take
such temporary measures as they may think necessary.

3d. That we will exert ourselves, and that it be earnestly recommended to our
fellow citizens to exert themselves, in support of the municipal laws of the
respective states; and especially in preventing any violence or outrage,
against the property and person of any individual.

The first resolution was read, and adopted.

On reading the second, it was moved by me, to fill up the blank with the
number two, and to change the word county to township; so that the standing
committee should consist of two deputies from each township. My argument was,
that a great object being to have them conservators of the peace, in aid of the
civil authority, it was necessary they should be numerous, and every where
also, that by them the standing committee could the more readily disseminate
their ideas and resolutions amongst the body of the people.

There were persons who thought my object wa^ ^o have them scattered, to
prevent less promptitude of action, and the violent measures which a small
body, close together, might suddenly effect. Perhaps they were right. The
amendment was carried.

It was moved by me, to insert, before the words "to call together a meeting of
the deputies," these words, "a meeting, either of a new representation of the
people, or of the depu^^* ^ here convened."

My argument was, that a frequent change of representation was correspondent
with democratic principles; but thy real reason was, to have it in my power to
be quit of the business, provided I saw no prospect of accommodation with the
government, or submission with the people. I was seconded in this, with
avidity, by an associate judge of Washington, James Edgar; and though I have
not conversed with him, yet I will venture to say, it was upon the fame
principle. The motion was supported by a number, and I am persuaded, from the
same motives. It was carried.

An adjournment took place, to choose the standing committee; which was done by
each township for itself. I was one for the township of Pittsburgh.

The committee now met again. I had drafted the following resolution, viz.
"That (...) commissioners be appointed to want on the President of the United
States, with the representation of the people, and report to the standing
committee the answer they may receive."

But it having been announced, in the course of our sitting, that
commissioners, from the executive to us, had arrived in the country, I changed
the resolution to the following, viz. "That a committee, to consist of (...)
members of each county, be appointed, to meet any commissioners that have, or
may be appointed by the government; and to report the result of this conference
to the standing committee." It was carried; and the blanks filled up with
"three" members.

There was a considerable opposition to this. It was said, that, as the
commissioners were now in the country, and said to be but a day's journey
distant, the committee could wait until their arrival, and hear their
propositions, and determine themselves.

This was considered as extremely dangerous to the object in view. James Ross
was present, and had just received his appointment, as a commissioner from the
executive; and thought that, from the temper of the committee, and that of the
gallery, by which they would be influenced, it did not appear probable that any
propositions the commissioners could have it in their power to make, would be
received. The business must be more gradually broken, and brought by degrees,
and with cooling time, before the people. It was, therefore a great object to
carry the resolution as it was.

In support of this, the inconvenience of staying at the place was alleged; no
accommodation for ourselves, or the commissioners: that it would take a long
time for us to understand them, and them to understand us: that the negotiation
would consist of conference and correspondence; that there was no convenience
of writing at the place.

The resolution was carried, with considerable difficulty, that commissioners
should be appointed.

But it was moved, that the committee should wait where they were, or in the
neighborhood, until the commissioners, appointed by them, should report to
them.

This was thought dangerous, on the principle before suggested. The report
would come better, in the first instance, to the standing committee; in choosing
which, address had been used, to get the more reasonable and moderate members;
and that committee, being a smaller body, would be more easily managed.

The time the conference would take up, and the inconvenience of waiting on the
ground, or in the neighborhood, was urged; but such was the avidity of
curiosity, that they were anxious to remain. Gallatin had exerted himself very
much in these debates, and on this last point especially: others had supported
him, but seemed to fail.

I was walking on the outside of the circle; commissioner Ross came to me, and
wished me to step forward. I do not see that I can do any thing, said I;
Gallatin, and others, have said all that is reasonable in the case, and yet
have failed. You can do it, said Ross.

I then stepped forward. Knowing that it was the impatience of curiosity, that
made them anxious to stay, I observed, that it was not probable these
commissioners had any thing of much consequence to propose, the President not
having seen our representation before they had set out; and therefore though,
on principles of common decency, it was proper to hear them, yet it was not
worth while for the committee to waste their time waiting for them.

It was agreed, and the resolution carried as it stands.

It may be said, that it is from motives of vanity, that I introduce myself so
much in these transactions. No; it is from motives of self-defence. I am
explaining my conduct. Might I not do this, without introducing my speeches so
much? No; these speeches have been misconceived, and misrepresented; I am
explaining the quo animo, or view with which they were made.

The instruction movers now came forward. We must be instructed by the meeting.
This was parried, by getting it to be observed, and pressed, that instructions
could not be given, with regard to propositions, when it could not be known
what those propositions were.

It was now moved, that the time of the meeting of the standing committee
should be fixed. It was carried, that the standing committee should fix their
time of meeting themselves.

The committee adjourned without day.

The standing committee met, and fixed for their day of meeting the (...) of
September; and the place, Brownsville, on the Monongahela.

The commissioners to confer with those on the part of the United States, fixed
the time the 20th of August, and the place Pittsburgh.

Before my going to Parkinson's ferry, an old man, of the name of Bar, from
Mingo creek, calling at my office on business, informed me, that though the
people in his quarter had been offended with my speech at Mingo creek, they had
come home well pleased with my behavior in the affair of Braddock's field; and
now talked of making Bradford or me governor, on this side of the mountains.
This led me to think there must have been some talk of an independent
government. I had taken it for granted there had been; and in my letter to
Tench Coxe, which I wrote about this time, suggested it. But on going to
Parkinson's ferry, I heard not a whisper of the kind. I sounded James Marshall,
by asking, when I read his resolutions, that seemed to contemplate defensive
operations, By what system he meant to act? was it by the organization of a
government; or simply by a committee? I found that he had never thought of any
thing but a committee.

In our way to this meeting, we had found liberty poles in abundance. At
Parkinson's ferry, I think it was the morning of the second day, one was
raised, with a flag with six stripes, emblematical of the six counties there
represented. I fell in with Benjamin Parkinson, carrying down a board, with an
inscription, to fix upon the pole. I read the inscription; it was, Equal
taxation, and no excise. No asylum for traitors and cowards.
Thought I, there are two of us, then, that ought to be away: For you are a
coward, and I am a traitor; for I do not mean to go to war, and if you do, you
will not fight. This was the character of Benjamin.

This morning, just before the opening of the committee, Torence Campbell, of
Westmoreland, came to me, and informed me, that the excise law was not the only
object with which the people were dissatisfied; the high salaries of officers,
both in the general and state governments, were a grievance; that he had
prepared resolves on this, and some other subjects, which he would hand to me
to bring forward. I took him aside into the bushes, as if to communicate some
great state secrets, and informed him, that the plan agreed upon, was not to
take up more things than one at once; -- let us bull-bait the excise law for
the present, and, in due time, we will knock down every thing else.

Campbell had been secretary to a meeting in his county, and had draughted a
remonstrance against the use of judges in courts, and wished only justices.

A number of other persons were anxious to bring forward resolves, and motions,
to the same effect with Torence. But it was given them to understand, that the
policy of the occasion did not admit so general a reform all at once.

CHAP. XI.
I HAVE mentioned James Ross, as a commissioner on the part of the United
States; the others were, William Bradford, attorney general of the United
States, and Jasper Yates, a judge of the supreme court of Pennsylvania. The two
last had arrived at Parkinson's ferry, a short time after the adjournment of
the meeting; from thence they came Pittsburgh. Being known to the attorney
general, and the judge, I waited on them, at the public house, after their
arrival. I found major Craig giving them a tragical account of the cruel
treatment of Kirkpatrick, Neville, and the others, by the people of Pittsburgh,
in sending them away. I felt great indignation; and addressed him before the
commissioners: Said I, The representation is not just; you are imposing upon
these gentlemen; you are leading them to suppose, that the people of Pittsburgh
expelled these men; it was the country. We acted as their guardians in sending
them away; the act was for them, more than for ourselves. Here I gave a detail
of the circumstances. He was silent, and withdrew.

I had discovered in the commissioners, unfavourable impressions toward me; I
was at a loss, whether to attribute them to what they had heard on the way, or
to the account of Craig. An expression of the attorney general struck me much.
In my observations on the account of Craig, I had said, that I had never
considered myself as an insurgent. I was employed to negociate for those who
were; but that did not involve the fact, that I was one myself. Said the
attorney general, "That will be a subject of future consideration." I was with
the commissioners but a short time; finding the point of view in which I
conceived myself to stand with them. The expression of the attorney general had
hurt my mind; and, with the language of Craig, became the subject of very
serious reflections. I considered Craig but as an automaton; and that his
impressions must be those with which colonel Neville went away. That being the
case, I had reason to suppose that this representation would be the same which
Neville would make to the executive. The people of Pittsburgh, and in
particular myself, would be held up as insurgents. After all my labor to get
matters settled, this family would consider me as having injured them; and when
they returned, I should be insulted by them. I had found it hard enough, in the
village before, to support myself against them; but it would be worse now. I
began to consider, whether it would not be better to stand with the Sans
Culottes of the country, and keep these men away, while they were away. But was
it practicable? I could not reconcile it to myself to disturb the union; that
would be a wickedness beyond all possibility of contemplation. But this country
might secede from it. That is a right that is never given up in society. A part
of a country, as well as an individual, may quit a government; and no doubt
this country will quit the United States, in due time. That may be by a consent
of the union, or without it. But at present there would be no consent. The
example would be dangerous to give. Common interest would not suffer it. We are
bound to the union for our proportion of the public debt. We must discharge
demands against the partnership, before the firm, as to that, can be legally
dissolved. The United States have land beyond us; they cannot suffer us to shut
them out from these, by an independent government between.

But is it practicable to establish and support such a government? Perhaps it
might; -- claim these lands to the westward, and invite all the world to take
possession of them. Collect all the banditti on the frontiers of the state, to
help us to fight for them; tell the Spaniards to come up to the mouth of the
Ohio, and give us a free trade; let the British keep the posts, and furnish us
with arms and ammunition; get the Indians of the woods to assist us; tell them,
that the people on the east of the mountains want our whiskey, and their lands;
-- we might wage wa^, and perhaps succeed. It is true, we should succeed to
misery, for a while, and poverty at last. But even this would be more tolerable
to me, than to live under any circumstances, suspected by the government, and
treated with contumely by these people, when they had returned, loaded with the
favors of the government, as having been the great defenders of it.

These were the thoughts of a night. When I saw James Ross in the morning, I
explained to him my chagrin of the preceding day, and my reflections in
consequence of it; and gave him to understand, that I had half a mind to become
an insurgent. He took it more seriously than I intended it; his expression was,
"The force of genius is almighty; give them not the aid of yours."

I told him, that nothing but self-preservation would lead me to think of it;
or the being unjustly suspected. He soothed my mind, by assuring me, that no
suspicion could possibly fall on me; that the commissioners, the preceding day,
were perfectly satisfied with the explanation I had given in the presence of
Craig; and that what he had said, had not left the least impression.

Commissioners on the part of the state of Pennsylvania, had been appointed by
the governor; and had arrived. These were, the honorable Thomas M'Kean, chief
justice of the state, and general William Irwin.

A liberty-pole was raised in Pittsburgh, in the presence of the commissioners;
and it was with the greatest difficulty, that we could prevent the hoisting the
six stripes upon it. The flag was made, and ready to be put up. The people were
prevailed upon to substitute the fifteen. Yet it was (...) where the posse was
to have been raised.

I fell in with Gallatin, the morning of our opening our conference with the
commissioners. Said I, You understand me, Mr. Gallatin. I do, said he,
perfectly. It was the first conversation I had with him, since our modelling
the resolutions, at Parkinson's ferry; and I did not know but that he might
have misconceived my speeches. I explained to him the policy with which I had
found it necessary to act; and the fears I had entertained on that occasion,
least, by openly opposing, and bringing the matter to question, it should be
carried against him: That he had presumed more upon the powers of eloquence,
and the reason of the people, than he was warranted in doing, where the
passions were so violent; that a more particular acquaintance with the fury of
the people from what I had heard from Washington, and seen at the Mingo
meeting, and at Braddock's fields, enabled me to judge.

This was the first conversation that I ever had with Albert Gallatin in my
life. I have understood from him since, that, at Parkinson's ferry, he had been
somewhat at a loss to know my drift perfectly; but that James Ross had
explained to him, and he understood it.

The point was now gained, to which I had always looked forward; the point
where the foot was to be fixed, in order to make an open stand against the
insurrection. This was my expression to James Ross, when I walked out of the
circle of the committee, at Parkinson's ferry, having carried the appointing
the committee to confer with the commissioners. The point is gained, said I;
there is a basis now laid, from which we can act: to this point I had always
looked forward, not expecting commissioners from the government, but
propositions from it to commissioners, on our part, holding out an amnesty,
which I took to be the great secret of composing the disturbance. Until that
appeared, the disposition of those involved; would lead them to cut throats, to
support themselves; and the whole country, conscious that every man had, in
some degree, contributed, by words or actions, to produce that mental
opposition to the law, which had terminated in actual force, could not
reconcile it to their feelings, to abandon those who had acted, with
precipitation, in the late instances. But an amnesty being given, these could
say to their countrymen, You are now on a ground with us; stop, we will go no
further.

I considered the appointment of commissioners, on the part of the executive,
as a pledge of amnesty; though I had yet no information of their powers. I
therefore saw the way clear for the country to get out; and now the conduct
ought no longer to be, a concealment of intentions, and a halfway
acquiescence, but an explicit avowal of opinions.

On this principle, I took the first opportunity I had with Bradford and
Marshall, and it was in the presence of one of the committee, before any
conference with the commissioners, to inform them of my real sentiments, with
regard to the violalation of the laws, which had taken place; and particularly
with reg^rd to those in which they had been implicated; the intercepting the
mail, and the rendezvous at Braddock's fields. Bradford looked red and angry,
Marshall pale and affected.

My impression always was, that Marshall had become sensible of the rashness of
the acts, and would be willing to make a good retreat as speedily as possible.
Until this time, also, I had an idea that Bradford would be manageable, as soon
as he could see his way out. I had some apprehensions now, and explained this
to James Ross; and it was agreed, to speak to general Irwin, whom we understood
to be a favorite with Bradford, to take him in tow, and see what he could do
with him. Our reason for supposing Irwin a favorite, was a circumstance of
Bradford, while in the legislature of Pennsylvania, voting singly for Irwin, in
the election of a senator of the United States, notwithstanding Irwin was not
in nomination at the time, and no other person voted for him. The chief justice
also undertook to manage him.

It was with a view to manage Bradford, and also to have a good effect with
others of the committee, whose sentiments I did not know, that in our first
conference with the commissioners, I stated, at some length, in strong terms,
the past and present grievances of this country. My idea was, that having
showed myself impressed with a sense of all these evils, in addition to the
excise law, and yet disposed to yield, others well might, who had not appeared
to have so strong an impression of them.

Our committee had conceived themselves appointed only to receive and report
propositions. But the commissioners insisted on acquiescing or rejecting; as
otherwise they would not think it worth their while to continue the
negotiation. I did not think our acquiescing would be of any use. We would
appear to have exceeded our authority; and having given our assent, we could
not come forward in the committee, to which we were to make report, as
deliberating with others, whether we should accede, or not; and a state of
deliberation for myself, as others, is that in which I would choose to be, in
order to bring others with me; making them believe that they had half persuaded
me, when in fact I had wholly persuaded them.

My system from the commencement, had been to take the business out of the
hands of the multitude, as speedily as possible, by instituting an extensive
committee. Not to take a final question; but having enlightened that committee,
and rendered them moderate, to make use of them as evangelists amongst the
people, when they went home, to disseminate the proper doctrines. It was on
this principle, that I had suggested the Parkinson's ferry meeting. The fury of
the people, at that meeting, led me to see the necessity of reducing the
country into still smaller bounds, by a committee extracted from the first. It
was on this principle, I approved and supported the appointment of a standing
committee; even this committee was too large, with which to break the business,
and therefore I wished the smaller committee of twelve, to be the body with
which we should begin to act. Having instructed and enlightened these, and
gained their assent, we should come forward with them to the standing
committee, as so many disciples, not wounding the pride of others by having
taken it upon them, without their concurrence, to judge; but deliberating, as
if not having judged at all.

Having instructed and converted the standing committee, we should send them
home to disciple as many as they could; and come forward in the original and
extensive committee, in order to govern the result. In the mean time, by the
gazettes and hand bills, to reach the body of the people with reasonings on the
subject. If this system could have been adopted, it might have succeeded. For
it is a great mistake to suppose that Bradford or Marshall, or others, led the
people. It was the people led them. It was the mass of the people that
commanded; and it was the fear of them, that operated on the minds of the more
conspicuous individuals. Even Bradford was the most obstinate, because he was
the greatest coward. He had not reach of thought, to see the danger from the
government; but the danger from the people was just before his nose.

This was the system of proceeding which I had laid down in my mind, and
agreeable to which, we urged with the commissioners the suffering us to go
forward to the standing committee, with the report merely; without having given
our opinion on the proposition, as a committee; and to wait until the standing
committee should have called the original representatives at Parkinson's, or a
new general convention.

The commissioners thought it more advisable that the committee of twleve
should declare their sentiments, on the proposition, and make it part of our
report to the standing committee; and as to delaying until the original or a
new representation of the people could be called, at Parkinson's, it was
impracticable, as the season was advancing; and if offensive operations must be
commenced against the country, the President must know it soon.

This was decisive. I had it, also, in confidence, at the time, from one or
more of the commissioners, that there was danger of the flame spreading from
the country; that discontents had actually begun to show themselves, and the
like outrages to break out, in other places; that, for this reason, if
conciliation did not answer the end, severe remedie^ must be speedily applied.

Thus, the conduct of the people below, contributed to deprive us of that time,
that was necessary to bring the public mind, amongst ourselves, to a proper
sense of interest and duty.

In draughting our report, which had been committed to me, on the part of our
committee, I had introduced our statement, at least the statement made by me,
of our general grievances in this country. It was with a view to show the
people, that we had made the most of our case, and of course must be supposed
to have got the best terms, that could be given; and if we, who had been thus
impressed, had yielded, they might. The commissioners thought it might rather
strengthen opposition in their minds, and it was struck out.

I had stated strongly, on the part of the commissioners, the sense they had
expressed of the outrages committed; the burning, the expulsions, and
especially the intercepting the mail, and the march to Braddock's fields. It
was with a view to bring these strongly before the minds of the people, that,
sensible of the attrocity, they might the more appreciate the value of an
amnesty. But I am disposed to believe, that this gave offense to Marshall and
Bradford, who had been implicated in the last acts. For I can no otherwise
account for the dissatisfaction they discovered toward me, from this time. I
cannot believe that Marshall, especially, was at all dissatisfied at being
relieved from the extremely hazardous situation in which he had been involved.

Concluding the report, I added some reasons, which had been suggested, at
least by myself, in the committee, as ground^ of conceding to the propositions
of the commissioners. They were such, as I thought would have weight with the
people. Albert Gallatin, in his speech, in the legislature of Pennsylvania, on
the subject of the insurrection, speaking of these reasons, says, "They are, I
suppose, such as, in the judgment of the author, would make the most impression
upon the people. On that head, however, I think he was mistaken." I think now,
as I did then, that they were the most likely to impress; but that is a matter
of opinion, I am not going to dispute about it. The true democratic principle,
on which it should be put, doubtless was, that "the will of the majority should
govern: the national will had made the law, and it should be obeyed." However
unequal and oppressive, on this part of the community, we might suppose it; yet
the good of the whole demanded our submission.

It is an abstract argument that must satisfy the understanding; but can never
reconcile the heart. It is precisely the same with the theological argument of
the divines, The good of the whole requires that some should be damned; and a
man cannot be a saint, until he feels a disposition to be reconciled to the
Divine will, in this particular, even if it should fall to his lot to go to
hell. A man regenerated may come to this, but a natural man never will: so an
enlightened politician, may comprehend and acquiesce in the principle of
submission, to inequality of burdens, when the nation dooms him to it; but the
common mind revolts; and nothing will quiet him, but the consideration, that he
cannot help himself. My argument, therefore, chiefly contemplated the want of
power; and sometimes, by introducing an idea of postponement, on the ground of
existing circumstances, I endeavored to get an acquiescence for the present.
Using this argument with one, his answer was, "The people never can be roused
again." I knew that; and it was on this principle I suggested it. It was quite
safe to talk of another day; for if the devil had been once laid, it would be
difficult to raise him again. The people would begin to look back, and be made
sensible of the precipice on which they had been standing. Let the law be put
in operation, and they would not find it the evil they had conceived it to be.

At the request of the commissioners, it had been urged to call a meeting of
the standing committee, at an earlier day than appointed. They were called to
meet on the 28th of August.

CHAP. XII.
OUR committee of conference met at Brownsville, on the morning of the 28th of
August. Brownsville is on the Monongah^la, at the mouth of a stream, known by
the name of Redstone.

The first thing that struck us, was a party of men, perhaps ^^, armed with
rifles; who had marched from the upper part of Washington, with a view, as we
understood, to take the person, and burn the buildings, mill, dwelling house,
etc. of Samuel Jackson, near that place, who had given offense, by an
expression disrespectful to the committee. Pains were taken to dissuade from
outrage; informing them, that, by the arrangements made at Parkinson's ferry,
all complaints against offenders, were to come before the committee, who were
to decide upon the criminality, and upon the punishment. They were prevailed
upon to be contented with having him brought before the committee, and tried in
form^ but insisted upon going, with a file of men, to bring him.

The committee of sixty having met, which was under a shade of boards,
constructed for the occasion, Edward Cook was constituted chairman, and Albert
Gallatin, secretary.

Samuel Jackson had been, by this time, brought up and was before the
committee. He was of the denomination of the people, called Quakers; a tall
man, wi^h a broad brim to his hat. He preserved a grave demeanor, and stood
with an appearance of composed submission to the sufferings that might await
him.

The charge against him was, that speaking of the committee, he had called it a
Scrub Congress. The charge was proved by two witnesses. The question now was,
What punishment should be inflic^^^ if he was found guilty, in the language of
scripture, of "speaking evil of dignities?" By the Scottish law it was what is
called "leese-making," and subjects to transportation. By the common law of
England, which is our law, it might be construed "sedition," indictable and
punishable as a misdemeanor. In the delicate situation in which the country
then was, it was thought to be a dangerous language, tending to lessen the
respect due to the newly constituted authorities, and evincing a bad
disposition toward the cause of the people. A general and sincere concern was
felt for the man, because it was made a serious matter by the country, and
especially by the body of armed men who had marched a distance of 20 or 30
miles, to do execution on his person and property. There were of the committee,
who must be supposed incensed, and of course resentful of the insult.

I had recourse to my usual expedient in desperate cases; pleasantry. I
recollect, said I, to have read, that, in the time of Oliver Cromwell, lord
protector of England, when he was in the height of his glory, a person came to
him, and gave him information of words, used by another, greatly contemp^uous
of his dignity; viz. he has said, that your excellency may kiss his --. You may
tell him, said Oliver, that he may kiss mine. This Quaker has called us a Scrub
Congress; let our sentence be, that he shall be called a Scrub himself.

The story of Cromwell had produced a sudden, involuntary, and loud laugh, and
thrown a light upon the affair of Jackson; introducing a proper sentiment with
regard to him, viz. that there was more magnanimity in disregarding his
expressions, than in punishing them. The troop that had brought him, laughed,
and took him off to give him the epithet. He got a bucket of whiskey and water,
to drink with them, and we heard no more of it.

The report was now about to be read; and a number of copies having been struck
off, they were distributed amongst the members. While it was reading, there
appeared great agitation in the committee. At some sentences, a rumor, as in a
church at the response. -- Not, "Lord help us to keep this law;" but that of,
"Good Lord deliver us."

The popular mind had, by this time, gone far beyond the idea of an amnesty;
and they rather thought of giving an amnesty, than of taking it; pass^^^ by the
injuries of government, on condition that it did not repeat them. They had
expected a suspension of the law; or, at least, a promise of a repeal of it.

I was a good deal alarmed; and saw that it would not do to come forward in
defense of the report, immediately. It would be necessary to give them time to
reflect a little; and to prepare the way, by a general conversation, out of
doors. Finley, Smiley, and other popular men, were on the ground, and might
contribute to inform the people.

It had struck Gallatin, and others, in the same point of view, and it was
moved to adjourn, until the next morning. It was with a view to give the
members time to consider the report. An adjournment took place; and I heard
Bradford calling out, for the Washington members to convene by themselves.

I had crossed the river that night, and lodged at a farm house, on the west
side; and this, not only with a view to convenience, but also to be out of the
way, if, in consequence of dissatisfaction with our report, any personal
violence, to the committee of twelve, or any of them, should be meditated; a
thing which I thought not at all improbable: for what avails popularity in such
times as these? it is but the turning of the hand; the palm up or down; from
the height of favor, to the lowest point of obloquy and persecution. Was there
any man in Pennsylvania, more popular than John Dickinson, at the commencement
of the American revolution? he was said to be opposed to a declaration of
independence, and became obnoxious. James Wilson was at the height of political
fame, amongst the people; but he had disapproved of the form of constitution,
they had adopted in the commonwealth, and they were about to murder him in his
own house. I possessed, at this present time, the best kind of popularity, viz.
that obtained after much obloquy, through a series of years, suffered to
correct itself: a popularity obtained, doubtless, by sailing a little with the
popular gale; at least, not opposing it; but chiefly by a steady and upright
demeanor in my profession. The popular mind, though passionate, is generous;
and if it becomes sensible that it has wronged a man, will repair it. I mean to
explain this more fully, as far as regards myself, in the conclusion of this
narrative.

But though possessing, at this time, a solid popularity, I knew that a breath,
on the subject of the excise law, would put it to a temporary death. However, I
had no thought now of the loss of popularity, but so far as it would produce
permanent danger, in the ground. Gallatin was in his own county, amongst a
people more moderate, and he might be in less danger; nevertheless, he was not
without apprehensions, and had reason.

In the morning, crossing the river, and coming into the village, I was led to
understand, that* at the private meeting of the Washington members, the
preceding evening, great warmth, and a talk of guillo^i^ing, was heard, and the
clapping of hands. I met Gallatin, and James Lang, a member of the committee of
twelve; and who was of that village, and was greatly alarmed, from what he had
seen and heard. It was early, and the committe^ of sixty had not yet collected,
and the gallery, of which great numbers were from the neighborhood of the
Mingo meeting house, had not yet convened. I had conversed with some, the
preceding evening, before I left the village; and found strong prejudices
against me, as having made use of my talents, as a lawyer, to persuade the
committee of conference to the acquiescence with the propositions of the
commissioners. It was insinuated that we had been bribed; and it was told
myself, that attorneys would take fees. I hesitated, therefore, whether I
should remain or not. It might be safest to return to Pittsburgh. I thought of
this; more especially, as I had observed, that Bradford had preserved a
distance from me, and appeared to be dissatisfied. I knew that the example of
arresting members in the French Convention, the knowledge of which was familiar
here, might lead to the arresting me, or others that were obnoxious; and
between an arrest and putting to death, as there, so here, there would be but
little interval. Gallatin acknowledged himself not insensible of the delicacy
of the situation; and that insult, at least, might be offered; but observed,
that we had bound ourselves, in honor, to the commissioners, to come forward,
and support the propositions. I reflected with myself, that, nevertheless, in
this undertaking of our committee of conference with the commissioners, it was
not understood, that we were to run a risk of life, or even indignities, in
recommending their own interest to the people. However, as Gallatin was
disposed to try it, I was willing. It was then considered, what should be the
order of our speaking; there was a reluctance with each of us, to break the
business. I proposed, that we should get James Edgar, a member of the committee
of twelve, to begin. He was an associate judge of the court of Washington, and
a kind of a rabbi in the Presbyterian churches of the western country: had been
a presbyter, or elder, from his youth; had been a member of committees, in the
early period of the American revolution; and of legislative assemblies,
executive and censorial councils, or deliberative conventions, ever since. His
head was prematurely hoary, with prayers, and fastings, and religious
exercises; his face thin and puritanic, like the figures of the old
republicans, in the time of the long parliament in England. He was a man of
sense, and not destitute of eloquence. It was agreed, that he should open the
way for us. It was proposed to him, but he appeared reluctant; I know not on
what principle. It was imposed, therefore, upon Gallatin.

The committee having convened, with a formidable gallery, as the day before,
Gallatin addressed the ch^ir, in a speech of some hours. It was a piece of
perfect eloquence; and was heard with attention, and without disturbance. I
shall not undertake to give the scope of this speech, as I could not do it
justice; and probably they have misconceived, and mignt mistake some part of it.

I followed Gallatin, in a speech of some length, but under that advantage,
which a speaker feels, when he attempts a subject recently exhausted. In the
course of advocating, Gallatin had ^^^ply traversed the ground of distinction
between our case, and the case of America at the revolution. In our case, no
principle was violated; we had been represented, and were still to be
represented in the body which enacted the law. He examined the excise l^w
itself, and showed the ameliorations, which had taken place, as to the quantum
of duty, and the mode and means of raising it, and represented the probable
extinction of it in due time altogether. He explained the concessions made by
the commissioners, in the relinquishment of arrearages, comprehended under a
stipulation in the propositions, that "beneficial arrangements would be made."
He discussed the local, and existing reasons of our complaints; the Indian war;
our obtaining the posts, the Mississippi trade, by the negotiation of the
union. He painted the mischiefs which had been done, and would still farther be
done to this country, if we persisted in opposition; by weakening the spirit of
liberty itself; of which the insurrection in the state of Massachusetts was an
example, formerly the most democratic state in the union, now the most
aristocratic. For certain it is, the illegal opposition, when reduced, has a
tendency to make the people abject, and the government tyranny. He considered
the injury to the spirit of liberty throughout the union, and the injury to the
republican cause throughout the world. He demonstrated the superiority of the
structure of our republic, over all that had been; and painted the atrocity of
undermining or shaking the fabric. He took a full and conspicuous view of the
comparative strength and resources of a contest of this country with the United
States; the superiority in numbers, advantage of funds, sea coasts. He repelled
the absurdity of expecting, if any did expect, countenance or assistance from
Spain, or Britain. If eve^ by assistance, or without, a defense would be made,
the much to be lo^^, and the little to be gained in the result. Finally, the
complicated ignominy and ruin, on all these principles, of persisting in a
course, that was bad in itself, and hopeless in its success.

It was a difficulty with me to find any thing new that could be advanced; and
I spoke more for the sake of showing that I had courage to speak, than from an
idea that I could add to the argument, or improve the impression that had been
made. However I exerted my invention to vary the light of the argument, and to
add something new. Gallatin had addressed himself chiefly to the patriotism of
the audience. I addressed myself to their conscience and fears. I confess that
it was in their fears that I had the most confidence. Gallatin had been
didactic and deliberate, though animated. I became more impassioned, and
declamatory. My observations were to the following effect:

It seems to be an idea entertained by the people that we can remain a part of
the government, and yet wage war against it. That is impossible, in the nature
of the case; we are known to the government by representation only, and not by
force. We must therefore either overthrow it, or it must overthrow us. But we
have sworn to support it. If we contemplate the overthrowing it* Where is our
oath of allegiance? But can we overthrow it? we might as well think of tossing
the Allegheny mountain from its base.

But we may obtain a repeal of the law, by an exhibition of force; by
possessing the mountain, and making a show of arms. That is not probable, after
the steps taken by the President. On principle of example, it would so vitally
affect the safety of the government, that it can never be countenanced. We are
told by the commissioners, and we have no reason to doubt it, that the whole
force of the union will be exerted, to crush such a precedent.

But cannot we secede from the union? not, and remain a part of the government
at the same time. We must dissolve our connection with Pennsylvania, before we
can cease to be under the government of the United States. But have we a right
to dissolve our union with both? an individual may emigrate from society; and a
part of a society may separate from the whole, but an individual cannot leave a
state in war, because he owes service for the benefits he has enjoyed in peace.
He cannot leave it without discharging debts he owes to individuals, or to the
public. How then can a part of the community separate, before it has discharged
the obligations contracted by the whole? we are bound for the payment of the
public debt, a part of which has been contracted for our special protection.
The state of Pennsylvania has yet a right on some unsold lands, and we should
be unjust to depr^ve i^ of these

But is it our interest to secede? having no sea coast, we are at the mercy of
the imposts of all around us, even for the necessaries of life. If the weight
of the union, in the scale of nations, cannot procure us the surrender of the
(...) posts, peace with the Indians, and the navigation of the Mississippi; how
shall a half uninhabited, uncommerced extent of an hundred and fifty miles
square, command it. There is no manner of question, but the time will come when
the western country will fall off from the eastern, as north will from the
south, and produce a confederacy of four; but surely it is our mutual interest
to remain together as long as possible; to h^^e with inequalities, or local and
partial grievances, while we enjoy general advantages, and avoid general evils.
In due time the situation of affairs will provide for itself; and as in nature,
so here, dismemberment or subdivision, will maturely take place, with consent
and mutual adjustment of interest^. But these dis-jointings (...) yet
premature, and will produce convulsions and death to the part that attempts it.

But are you able to secede? Can you fight the United States? Can you beat the
15,000 that are in requisition by the President? grant it. Perhaps 30,000 in
the passes of the mountains, for a heat. What of that? Are you able to beat a
second 15,000 or a second 30,000? Are you able to beat a third army of that
number, or of a superior force to these? Can you maintain a war of years
against numbers, and the purse? you must do that, or be in the same situation
with the Miami Indians, that beat Harmar, beat St. Clair, and now are lately
driven into the lake by general Wayne. I know your spirit, but condemn your
prudence.

But do you know, that you are mistaken in your support at home? Do you think
that all are sincere, who have been clamouring for war? Some clamor, because
they are cowards, and wi^h to be thought brave; because they are ignorant
enough not to expect a war. Others, because they have not estimated the
fatigues of campaigning, and do not consider how soon they will be tired.
Others, because they have contracted for the sale of their lands, and are about
to remove to Kentucky, or elsewhere. Others, and this class numerous, because
they have nothing to lose, and can make their escape by the floods. If you
depend upon these, you will by and by have to take the same course, and descend
the current with the frogs This expression escaped me, is the hurry of the
speech, and gave great offense.
.

But men affect to be for war, because they are afraid to speak their real
sentiments. I have my eye upon those, here present, and could name them, who
are thought to be strenuous for the most violent measures; and yet, in the
course of our com^^tteeing, have acknowledged to me, what they really think;
and it is their earnest desire, to get out of ^he scrape, upon almost any
terms. After what has happened, any terms, short of life, ought to be accepted.

The outrages have been grievous, wanton, and useless; in construction of law,
amounting to high treason. Having had no privacy with these transactions, or
concern in the ^^^pe^^ation, but disapproving, when and where I could speak
with safety; nevertheless, for the sake of those involved, I have labored hard
to bring them out; and have ever looked forward to that amnesty, which is now
before you. If I, who have nothing to apprehend for myself, have been ready to
embrace it; surely these, in a different predicament, well may.

I have heretofore felt myself embarrassed, in knowing what to do* I considered
the feelings of the country with partiality of heart; knowing the ground of
them to be, the unequal law in question. I made excuses for these breaking into
acts; knowing it to be the error of judgment, not distinguishing between what
feelings are, and what acts ought to be. I was impressed with the reflection,
that the disapprobation of the law having been general, in the country, and
expressed by almost every one, no man could tell how far, by words, he might
have contributed to that current of resentment, which, at length, swelled
beyond the constitutional banks of representation and remonstrance, and broke
our into outrage. He must, therefore, have a disposition to repair the
mischief; and sa^e those, who have gone to an excess, not contemplated.
Besides, living in the country for a number of years, and, in my professional
capacity, having much acquaintance, and many attachments, it was natural for
me, to wish to save, from error of conduct, and danger of life, those who had
violated law, by accomplishing an accommodation, (...) settling terms of
oblivion. If these are not accepted, I am done; and consider myself as
discharged, in honor, and in conscience, from all further concern in the
business. It is, therefore, the last and only advice I have to give, that you
acquiesce with the propositions of the commissioners, and accept the amnesty
offered you. It is the expedient left to save the country, which has been
already impaired ^^nd reduced, by our late history. It was improving in
agriculture, replenishing with buildings, becoming an object of emigration from
abroad; and is now dejected, from this height, to a considerable depth, from
what it was. The value of property is reduced, from what has happened. I do not
consider what I possess, at this moment, as of more than one half of the value
of what it was three months ago; but it will be still worse, unless the evils
that are impending, are prevented by an immediate acquiescence.

The above is the substance of what was said by me, but at that time developed
and detailed to a greater extent.

Edgar followed me, with great earnestness, and with the solemnity of an
evening sermon, in a discourse of great length.

Bradford now rose to speak; and, contrary to his engagements* with the
commissioners, personally, and his agreement with the report of the committee,
he opposed the acceptance of the propositions, in direct and violent terms.
Speaking of the resources of war, arms, ammunition, etc. said he, "We will
defeat the first army that comes over the mountains, and take their arms and
baggage."

"Not so easy neither," said a man in a blue coat, who was in the gallery.
This, I understood afterward, was a colonel Crawford, a brave Indian warrior
of the frontiers. He had some experience of what fighting was, and an idea
there might be fighting; Bradford had none.

Alluding to my observation, that I considered that what property I might have
in the country as having lost half its value, on account of the disturbance,
Bradford used this expression -- "Dastardly to talk of property, when liberty
is in question." This was contemptuous and provoking; nevertheless, I did not
think it prudent, on the conclusion of his speech, to rise again, or to make
any observations. I saw, from the countenance of many of the committee, that
they were with him.

Gallatin spoke a little; and moved to take the vote, on the propositions of
the commissioners. Objections were made to the taking any vote at all. The
question was then (...)* Shall a vote be taken? This was negatived; not a
single person rising, but the committee of twelve, who had made the report. It
was again moved, on our part, to take a vote by ballot, on the propositions;
presuming, that an unwillingness to let their sentiments be known, on the
subject, was the reason of objecting to the taking the vote publicly. The
question was put, Shall a private vote by ballot be taken? It was negatived;
the twelve only, as before, rising.

Here was a moment of delicacy indeed. The taking no vote was rejecting the
propositions; and what was the consequence? Measures must have been taken
instantly, to prepare for war. B^^dford would have come forward with the
schedule, baffled at Pa^kinson's ferry, with his heads of amm^nition, arms,
money, provisions, etc. Gallatin and myself would have been arrested, upon the
spot. For the example of the Terrorists, as they have been called, in France,
was in the public mind, especially with Bradford, who had some light wandering
information of French affairs, as he had of other subjects; and had heard of
their arresting one another, after their debates, and cutting off heads; and
coupling the successes and the executions together, he would conceive the idea,
that the executions produced the successes.

Gallatin, with great presence of mind, seized the moment, and proposed, that
we should take a final vote, by ballot; not to be made a part of our answer to
the commissioners, but simply in order to know our own minds.

There was hesitation, even at this; for every man was afraid the hand writing,
even of his ballot, would be known; and by some means it might transpire, in
what manner he had voted.

At this instant, a member of the committee rising, and having a scrap of paper
in his fingers, with the word Yea written one part, and the word Nay on the
other, held it up, and proposed that 60 such scraps, with the words yea and
nay, written in the same manner, should be made out by the secretary, and a
scrap given to each of the members; and let every one divide his scrap in two
parts, with the Yea on one, and the Nay on the other; and let him chew, or tear
the Yea or the Nay, as he thought proper, and put the other piece into a h^t,
held by the secretary. When these were drawn out, it would be seen, what the
private sense of the committee was, without the possibility of any one knowing
how another voted. This mode was thought sufficiently safe, and adopted.

It struck me greatly, to observe the carefulness of every one, in dividing or
putting in his yea or no; to conceal it. All having been put in, and the
tickets drawn out, there were found 34 Yeas, and 23 Nays.

It verified what I had stated, that the sentiments of a great part were not,
privately, what they publicly avowed. I must confess, I was rather surprised,
that, in a committee which had been selected with great care and address, from
the general committee, at Parkinson's; and after the amnesty offered, and the
masterly reasoning of Gallatin, and the direct and plain explication made by
me, and the peroratory sermon of Edgar, there should have been so many Nays. It
may be seen, from this, what would have been the case, if the question of war
had been suffered to be directly called for, and taken, at Parkinson's.

Bradford appeared struck, on finding that the majority was with us. His
countenance became dark and dismayed; for I remarked him with attention. The
members that had been for war, were pretty easily discoverable, by the
dissatisfaction they evinced by the countenance, or by language. There were
some of them considerably enraged. But the gallery were the most explicit, in
showing satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the vote. It was, in general, not
a popular one.

However, it had changed the face of things; and there appearing a majority in
favor of adopting the propositions, it remained for the committee to go on,
and make up their answer to the commissioners. But having sat a long time, it
was thought proper to adjourn, and meet again for the purpose. During the
adjournment Bradford went home.

It may be asked me, How will I account for his conduct in coming forward with
his inflammatory speech? Had he conceived originally any project of ambition,
either in subverting the government, or erecting a separate commonwealth? Not
at all; he had not scope of mind enough to think of either; he thought of
nothing, but an exhibition of force inducing the Congress to repeal the excise
law. He did not consider, that, though in such a government as the republic of
Rome, where there were two distinct powers, actually in operation, the
senatorial and tribunitial, the secession of the people, to the Palatine or
Aventine mount, might impose terms upon the senate; and that, though in a
monarchy, such as Great Britain, where the statute of the parliament is
sometimes the statute of the minister, a dissatisfaction and disturbance may
alarm the minister, for the enjoyment of his place; knowing, that the king may
reconcile his subjects, by removing him; and he may use the same influence to
have the law repealed, that he did to have it enacted; -- but that, in our
government, there was but one organ of the public will, the Congress; and no
temporary officer, on whom the odium of an unpopular law could be thrown, so as
still to save the dignity of the enacting power. It was impossible, without
sapping all foundation of authority, to yield to the force, not the requisition
of a part.

Was Bradford sincere in conceding finally to the terms of the commissioners,
and engaging to go forward and advocate them with the committee? I believe he
was. How then will I account for his change of disposition? In this manner:
while the committee of conference sat with the commissioners, at Pittsburgh,
there were individuals from the country, waiting for the result, and some
occasionally in town, upon business, but who were solicitious to know what was
done. It had transpired, therefore, that "we were to submit to the excise law."
This was carried to the country, and produced a flame. It was said that the
commissioners had brought up gold, that I had got enough to make it unnecessary
for me to plead law any more. I had heard so much of this, that in riding to
Brownsville with the report, and passing through the Mingo creek settlement, I
made haste, apprehensive that I might be stopped, and the report taken from me.
Bradford had gone to Washington, and finding how the current ran, he denied
that he had acquiesced, and laid the blame on Gallatin and me. Yet he had not
intended to take any active part in opposing, but simply to glide with the
current, until he went to Brownsville, and saw the unfavourable manner in which
the report was received the first day; nor even then had he not perfectly made
up his mind, until in the committee, a short time before he spoke, when two of
the members urged him, saying, Will Brackenridge and Gallatin run us entirely
down? Can we have nothing to say on this side? This information I have from
James Allison, his brother-in-law, a judge of the court of Washington, to whom
Bradford acknowledged it, before he went away. I am the more inclined to
believe this, from recollecting an observation of Bradford to me at Parkinson's
ferry, when I mentioned to him, that the march to Braddock's field had been a
rash act; he laid it upon the people; and said that Marshall had nearly ruined
himself by retracting, but that he had saved himself by falling in with them.
In short, I knew him to entertain the idea, that it was safest always to stand
with the people, not distinguishing in this case, who were the people. If this
country had been lopped off from the world, it would have been all well enough.

It may be asked, Was he a man of eloquence? Could his harangue have such
effect? It served to give a face to an opposition, and doubtless prevented the
general acquiescence. Had he taken a contrary part, he would have lost
popularity, for the time; but there would have been no thought of further
resistance.

The committee having met, the question now was, Whether more favorable terms
might not be obtained from the commissioners; or at least time to convene the
original meeting of deputies at Parkinson's ferry, in order to lay the
propositions before them. It was well known to those who had been of the
committee of 12, that no better terms could be obtained. We were doubtful that
the commissioners would not wait for a convention of the deputies, at
Parkinson's, after a dissent of so considerable minority of the standing
committee; nevertheless, in order to satisfy the people, as to the first, and
to leave it to the commissioners, as to the last, it was perfectly agreeable to
us, that a new committee should be appointed, to wait upon the commissioners.
It would at least suspend the expectation of the people, and prevent any
violent measures being adopted in the mean time. Accordingly it was approved,
on our part, that a new committee of conference should be appointed.

A new committee of 12 was appointed, three from each county, and the standing
committee adjourned without day.

No gallery, or little, had attended in the afternoon. On going out I saw
clubs, and clusters of those, who had been the gallery, in private and close
conversation in different places. Passing by some of them, I spoke with
confidence, as if I suspected nothing; but was received with silence, and with
looks of indignity. Th^^e were persons, who were at that time, my clients, in
causes of moment, and whom I had served with success in former cases, and with
whom I had been long in habits of attachment; yet notwithstanding every lien of
amity, they behaved to me in this manner: A man, whom I had brought with me
from Pittsburgh, to carry the copies of the report, a few hundred of which had
been printed, gave me to understand, that from what he could over-hear, there
was something on foot. I gave him money to discharge my bill at the public
house, and as speedily as I could, without seeming to be in haste, crossed the
river; my horses had been left in a pasture, on that side; I assisted a lad in
driving them up, bridled them, and had them saddled, and was ready to mount,
when the man, whom I had left, had got over. Some persons had crossed over with
him; amongst these were four of the Allegheny members of the committee. It was
then dark; we rode eighteen miles that night, and got through the bulk of the
Mingo creek settlement.

I have learnt since, that nothing but a want of decision, prevented them from
arresting me, after my speech, in the forenoon. It was in agitation, but they
wavered in attempting it. The going away of Bradford also discouraged them.
They had talked of arresting Gallatin, but his speech had been more abstract
and guarded, and had not given so much offense as mine. It was in agitation,
some days after this, to take him, and a body of men had actually collected at
Fredericktown, on the west of the Monongahela, for that purpose. They were
dissuaded by persons who went over from Fayette county, and who endeavored to
remove their misconceptions.

In our company that night, of the four Allegheny members that were along, was
one of the name of Miller. When he first joined us, I was suspicious of him,
knowing that he had been a principal, in the two attacks upon the house of the
inspector, and commanding a company upon Peter's creek, in a settlement through
which we had to pass. I did not know but he might have been dispatched with
orders to arrest me, as I went through. I communicated this to some of the
other members in the company; and we took care to ride fast enough not to put
it in his power to be much ahead of us. He lodged with us, where we halted a
few hours, and slept on the planks, at the house of a German.

In the morning when we had set out, which was early, on our way, I kept close
by him, and fell into conversation. He had been in the American service during
the war with Great Britain; had been employed chiefly in the western country,
in the war against the Indians. Had distinguished himself for fidelity,
activity, and bravery, on every occasion. I led him to talk of his services,
and he gave the history of a variety of incidents. Sliding gradually from
thence, I touched upon the present affairs of the country; the coming of the
marshal, the opposition to him, the attack upon the house of the inspector,
etc. I knew he had been one of the delinquent distillers, and that it was on
leaving his house, after having served a writ, that the marshal had been fired
upon; which was the first opposition he had met with, in the service of
process. Miller gave me, with frankness, a relation of the whole circumstances.
The federal sheriff, said he, was reading the writ, and general Neville was on
horseback in the lane, when he called to the sheriff to make haste. I looked
up, and saw a party of men running across the field, as it were to head the
sheriff. He set off with general Neville, and when they got to the head of the
lane, the people fired upon them. Do you think, said I, they fired with balls,
and meant to hit them? Said he, I believe they meant to hit them; they pursued
them, and would have killed them.

That night, continued Miller, it was concluded that we would go on to
Neville's, and take him and the marshal. I felt myself mad with passion. I
thought 250 dollars would ruin me; and to have to go the federal court, at
Philadelphia, would keep me from going to Kentucky this fall, after I had sold
my plantation, and was getting ready This was one of the men that was thought
might be depended upon, in case of a war.
. I felt my blood boil, at seeing general Neville along, to pilot the sheriff
to my very door. He had been against the excise law as much as any body. When
old Graham, the excise man, was catched, and had his hair cut off, I heard
general Neville himself say, they ought to have cut off the ears of the old
rascal; and when the distillers were sued, some years ago, for fines, he talked
as much against it as any body. But he wanted to keep in the assembly then. But
whenever he got an offer of the office himself, he took it. I am a relation of
Kirkpatrick, his mother and my mother were sisters; I was always for general
Neville, in his elections; and it put me mad to see him coming to ruin me.

I desired him to give me the particulars of the attack upon Neville's house,
the first day. He did so: he said they had about thirty men, with fifteen guns,
six only in order. They found the general just got up; after some words, he
fired first. It was from the windows. A horn was blowing in the house, the time
of the firing. Was the door open? said I. It was, said he. Why then did you not
rush into the entry? We were afraid, said he, that he had a swivel, or a big
gun there*

The negroes, continued Miller, by this time, fired out of their cabins upon
our backs, and shot several; and we got off as well as we could.

Well, what now; are you for war? No, said he, I voted for peace; but if I was
to acknowledge that, I need never go home. I will have to deny it; and I will
have to do whatever my company will insist upon me doing now. But I expect to
get away soon, and to be clear of it.

By this time, we had arrived at his house, about eight miles from Pittsburgh.
As we came up, three pretty children presented themselves, in the inside of the
fence that enclosed the cabin; and one of them said, putting his fingers
between the rails, Daddy, I have got a little brother The woman had been
brought to bed in his absence*
. I was sensibly affected with the reflection, that possibly that daddy might
come to be hanged, and that brother fatherless, before it could know that it
ever had one.

The new committee of conference met at Pittsburgh, on the first of September.
Nine only attended. They requested a more general and explicit relinquishment
of arrearages; and demanded until the 11th of October, to take the sense of the
people.

The commissioners could not relax, in a single particular, from their former
propositions. But, considering the stipulalations with the former committee of
conference as at an end, there not being a prospect of that general submission,
on which the amnesty was to depend, yet willing to grant it to those who were
disposed to submit, they proposed a mode of taking the sense of the country,
and putting it in the power of every individual to save himself; viz. that on
the 11th of September, any man, in his district, should subscribe his name to a
paper, declaring his willingness to yield obedience to the law, and faithfully
promising acquiescence for the future.

The necessity of individually signing, would be considered by the people as
humiliating; nevertheless, it became necessary now, under a prospect of war, in
order to enable the government to distinguish the penitent or peaceable, from
the obstinate or refractory. But an advantage was gained, as the amnesty was
made to depend upon the conduct of the individual himself, and not upon the
peace being kept by the whole country.

Alexander Addison, president of the district on the west of the mountains, had
arrived at Pittsburgh, before this time. He had been returning from the court
of errors and appeals, at Philadelphia; but hearing of the personal prejudice
against him, of which commissioner Ross, after consultation with me, had
informed him by letter, he had remained at Bedford, at the distance of 105
miles from Pittsburgh. I had, in the mean time, ventured to write to him,
recommending the coming directly to Pittsburgh; but not to his residence at
Washington. The letter had passed him on the way; for he had adopted, from his
own reflections, a resolution, the same that I had suggested, and had come on
to Pittsburgh. Meeting here with gentlemen from Washington, and a pacification
being now agreed upon, he thought it safe to go on to Washington. He went; and
had been present at the meeting at Brownsville. He had returned from
Washington, and was now in Pittsburgh. In the mean time, having considerably
allayed the prejudice against himself, by his conversation with the people; by
a candid statement of his conduct, viz. that on his way to Philadelphia, he had
met with the marshal, and gave it as his opinion to him, that he would meet
with no insult in the execution of his duty; and this was the confidence that
he had in the reason of the people, at the time, and it was unfortunate that he
had found himself mistaken. Judge Addison, also, was active in conciliating to
an acceptance of the propositions of the commissioners.

The court of Allegheny, to be held the first Monday in September, was now to
be opened. It was a question, whether it was best to be opened at all, or not?
It was suggested, that that the suspension of justice might strike the public
mind, with view of the lurid state of things; like the interdict of the pope,
on the performance of religious rites, in the catholic countries. It did not
appear to me, that it would displease generally, but rather please, as a
liberation from the restraint of law; and leading to a wish, with the most
violent, that it should always remain so.

The court was opened; but it was a question, whether the grand jury should be
charged with the present merits of the offenses lately committed in the
country, in opposition to the excise law. The chief justice and judge Yates
were consulted by judge Addison, and it was thought advisable, that they
should not; as an amnesty, under conditions of submission, was in offer to the
country; and it could not be known who would avail themselves of it.

Such was the state of things, when the commissioners, both of the United
States and of the state of Pennsylvania, having done all that was in their
power to do, left the country. And here I cannot deny myself the pleasure, of
expressing the sensibility with which I then felt, and do now feel, the
patience, the mildness, and the philosophy, discovered by the commissioners,
both on the part of the United States, and of the state of Pennsylvania, in
hearing every thing, in conceding every thing that was tolerable or
practicable, in our negotiation; their solicitude to save the people here from
destruction, and the government from embarrassment; their thoughts to be in
union with us, I speak of those of us, and the greater part of the twelve
conferees were such, as had the same single point in view, to heal the
mischiefs of the country.

INCIDENTS, etc.
CHAP. I.
FROM the temper of the country, I was not without apprehensions that the
commissioners might be insulted on their return. It had not been thought safe
for them to go to Brownsville, and be present at the deliberations of the
standing committee. I found that it would not have been safe for the chief
justice, a commissioner on the part of Pennsylvania, to have gone. It had been
carried to the country, by individuals occasionally in town, that the chief
justice was very rigid in the management of the negotiation; and particularly
insisted upon having the recalling the exiled, made an article of agreement
with the commissioners. This, doubtless, had been urged by the chief justice;
but relinquished, on our observing, that the submission on the part of the
country, which was stipulated, as the condition of the amnesty, drew with it,
necessarily, the discontinuance of all personal violence; and that the return
of these persons would be of course, without saying any thing about it; that
the idea of submission itself, would be sufficiently difficult of digestion,
even though not accompanied with any other circumstance, at which the mind
would revolt.

At Greensburgh, the seat of justice of Westmoreland, a rioter had the
impertinence to charge the servant of the chief justice with stealing his boots
and spurs, and, under this pretense, had collected a party, to attack the house
in which the commissioners lodged. They were troublesome, during the greatest
part of the night. A liberty-pole stood near the house, and creeping up, they
would (...) themselves behind this, and give abusive language. They threw
stones at the house, and broke the glass of some of the windows. The
commissioners were armed with pistols, and stood on their defense. The party
had been intoxicated, and were not heard of in the morning.

It was unfortunate, that, at this time, the spirit of insurrection, on the
east of the mountains, had shown itself in the midland parts of Pennsylvania,
and in the upper parts of Maryland; and whatever of it did exist, was greatly
exaggerated by intelligence. Every one that came to our country, gave the most
flattering accounts of the congeniality of temper elsewhere, with the people
here. They brought messages in reality, or pretended to bring messages,
desiring the country to stand out. This had a most unfavourable effect, in
prejudicing the public mind against a submission.

A publication, also, had appeared in the Pittsburgh Gazette, of the 23d of
August, styled, "An INDIAN TREATY AN INDIAN TREATY.
SPEECHES intended to be spoken at a Treaty now holding with the Six United
Nations of White Indians A fashionable phrase, lately adopted by certain
gentlemen in the service of government.
, settled on the Heads of the Ohio, at the Town of Pittsburgh, on the 20th of
August, 1794, by the Commissioners sent from Philadelphia for the purpose.
Captain BLANKET, an Indian chief, spoke as follows:
BROTHERS, we welcome you to the old council fire at this place. -- It is a
lucky spot of ground for holding Indian treaties. No good has attended your
treaties at Beaver creek, Mushingum, etc. As the proffer of this treaty has
originated with your great council at Philadelphia, we therefore expect you
have good terms to offer. But you know, brothers, that it ever has been a
custom, to pay Indians well for coming to treaties; and you may be assured,
that unless we are well paid, or fully satisfied, your attempts, of any kind,
will have not the least effect. -- However, we doubt not but the pay is
provided; and that you have a sufficiency of blankets and breech-clouts, powder
and lead; and that the wagons are close at hand. You know, brothers, that our
neighbors the British, over the lakes, pay their Indians well; that they have
inexhaustible stores of blankets and ammunition, and that if they were offering
us a treaty, they would not hesitate a moment to satisfy all our demands.

Captain WHISKEY spoke next. --
Brothers -- My friend captain Blanket has indulged himself in a little
drollery about blankets, etc. but I must speak to the point. -- I am told, that
the people of your great council call us a parcel of drunken raggamuffins;
because we indulge ourselves with a little of our homes^^^ whiskey; and that we
ought to pay well for this extraordinary luxury. What would they think, if the
same was said of them, for drinking beer and cider? Surely the saying will
apply with equal force, in both cases. We say that our whiskey shall not be
saddled with an unequal tax -- You say it shall: and to enforce the collection
of three or four thousand dollars per annum, of nett proceeds, you will send an
army of 12,950 men, or double that number, if necessary. This is a new
fashioned kind of economy indeed. It is a pity that this army had not been
employed long ago, in assisting your old warrior, general ^ay^e* or chastising
the British about the lakes. However, I presume it i^ the present policy, to
guard against offending a nation with a king at their head. But remember,
brothers, if we have not a king at our head, we have that powerful monarch,
captain Whiskey, to command us. By the power of his influence, and a love to
his person, we are impelled to every great and heroic act. You know, brothers,
that captain Whiskey has been a great warrio^, in all nations, and in all
armies. He is a descendent of that nation called Ireland* and, to use his own
phrase, he has peopled three-fourths of this western world with his own hand.
We, the Six United Nations of White Indians, are principally his legitimate
offspring; and those who are not, have all imbibed his principles and passions
-- that is, a love of whiskey; and will, therefore, fight for our bottle till
the last gasp. Brothers, you must not think to frighten us with fine arranged
lists of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, composed of your water-melon armies
from the Jersey shore; they would cut a much better figure, in warring with the
crabs and oysters, about the capes of Delaware. It is a common thing for
Indians, to fight your best armies at the proportion of one to five; therefore,
we would not hesitate a moment to attack this army at the rate of one to ten.
Our nations can, upon an emergency, produce twenty thousand warriors; you may
then calculate what your army ought to be. But I must not forget that I am
making an Indian speech; I must therefore give you a smack of my national
tongue -- Tougash Ge^chi^ -- Tougash Ge^chi^, very strong man (...) captain
Whiskey.

Captain ALLIANCE next took the floor. --
Brothers -- My friend, captain Whiskey, has made some fine flourishes about
the power of his all conquering monarch, Whiskey; and of the intrepidity of the
sons of St. Patrick, in du^^^e of their beloved bottle. But we will suppose,
when matters are brought to the test, that, if we should find ourselves unequal
to the task of repelling this tremendous army, or that the great council will
still persevere in their determination, of imposing unequal and oppressive
duties upon our whiskey, who knows but some evil spirit might prompt us to a
separation from the union, and call for the alliance of some more friendly
nation. You know that the great nation of Kentucky, have already suggested the
idea to us. They are at present Mississippi mad, and we are whiskey mad* it is,
therefore, hard to tell what may be the issue of such united madness. It
appears as if the Kentuckians were disposed to bow the knee to the Spanish
monarch, or kiss the pope's a -- e, and wear a crucifix, rather than be longer
deprived of their darling Mississippi: and we might be desperate enough, rather
than submit to an odious excise, or unequal taxes, to invite Prince William
Henry, or some other royal pup, to take us by the hand, provided he would
guarantee equal taxation, and exempt our whiskey. This would be a pleasing
overture to the royal family of England; they would eagerly embrace the
favorable moment, to add again to their curtailed dominions in America, to
accommodate some of their numerous brood with kingdoms and principalities. We
would soon find that great warrior of the lakes, Simcoe, flying to our relief,
and employing those numerous legions of white and yellow savages, for a very
different purpose to what they have now in view. If the Kentuckians should also
take it into their heads, to withhold supplies from your good old warrior
Wayne, who is very often near starving in the wilderness, his army must be
immediately annihilated, and your great council might for ever bid adieu to
their territory west of the mountains. This may seem very improbable indeed;
but as great wonders have happened in Europe, within the course of three years
past.

Captain PACIFICUS then rose, and concluded the business of the day. --
Brothers -- My friend Alliance has made some very alarming observations; and I
confess they have considerable weight with me. A desperate people may be drove
to desperate resources; but as I am of a peaceable disposition* I shall readily
concur in every reasonable proposition, which may have a tendency to restore
tranquillity, and secure our union upon the true principles of equality and
justice. It is now time to know the true object of your mission; if you are the
messenger of peace, and come to offer us a treaty, why attempt to deliver it at
the point of the bayonet. If you are only come to grant pardons for past
offenses* you need not have fatigued yourself with such extraordinary dispatch
on the journey; we have not yet begged your pardon; we are not yet at the
gallows, or the guillotine, for you will have to catch us before you bring us
there. But as I am rather more of a counselor than a warrior, I am more
disposed to lay hold of the (...) than the tomahawk: I shall therefore propose,
that a total suspension of all hostilities, and the cause thereof, shall
immediately take place on both sides, until the next meeting of our great
national council. If your powers are not competent to this agreement, we
expect, at you are old counselors, and peaceable men, that your will at least
repo^^ and (...) to our GOOD OLD FATHER who sits at the helm. -- We know it was
his duty to make proclamation, etc. etc. but we expect every thing that can
resu^t from his prudence, humanity, and benevolence toward his fellow
creatures.

A BELT, on which is inscribed, "Plenty of whiskey without excise."


;" it had a bad effect. The sentiments contained in it, were quoted as
arguments against submission. It was attributed to me, by those who had not
known my sentiments, and drew with it all the advantages, that any reputation I
might possess for understanding, could give it. At Brownsville, and other
places, I did, in the most public manner, disavow it.

At this time also, just after the commissioners had left the country, a
certain John Gaston, calling on the printer of the Pittsburgh Gazette,
presented him with a note, which he had received, signed Tom the Tinker;
commanding him to have it inserted in the Pittsburgh Gazette. In the situation
of the country, even then, the printer thought it prudent, for his own personal
safety, to insert it. It shows the sentiments of the violent, at this time, on
the question of submission. It will be seen in the note TO JOHN GASTON.
Sir,
You will please to have this printed in the Pittsburgh paper, this week, or
you may abide by the consequence.

POOR TOM takes this opportunity to inform his friends, throughout the country,
that he is obliged to take up his commission, once more, though disagreeable to
his inclination. I thought, when I laid down my commission before, that we had
got the country so well united, that there would have been no more need for me,
in that line; but my friends see more need for me than ever. They chose a set
of men whom they thought they could confide in, but find themselves much
mistaken; for the majority of them have proved traitors. Four or five big men
from below, has scared a great many; but few are killed yet. But I hope none of
those are any that ever pretended to be a friend to poor Tom; so I would have
all my friends keep up their spirits, and stand to their integrity, their
rights, and liberty, and you will find poor Tom be your friend. -- This is a
fair warning; traitors take care, for my hammer is up, and my ladle is hot. I
cannot travel the country for nothing.

From your old friend, TOM the TINKER.



.

John Gaston, the person who brought Tom the Tinker's letter to the printer,
was a client of mine, in an ejectment brought for him against a certain
M'Clure. He called upon me at my office, and, with a freedom which he thought
he could take with his lawyer, who would not suspect him of personal ill will,
he inveighed against me much, for having consented to the propositions of the
commissioners. What? said he, five men scare 75. -- The court being at hand, he
was led to enquire, when his cause would come on? Not at all, said I. How so?
said he. Why, said I, the government is gone to the devil; the courts are
overthrown; all law is at an end; there can be no justice now. The strong hand
must manage all things. Is this M'Clure a stout fellow? has he any sons? Cannot
you and your sons beat him? take the cudgel and drive him off. Ah, said he,
that will not do. It may be, said I, there is no help for it; that is all that
can be done now; at least until some other government, and other courts of law,
are set up, in the place of those that are overthrown If this language to John
Gaston had transpired, and he had come forward and stated it, the quo animo
with which I spoke being out of view, it would have been strong evidence of my
insurgency.
. He did not appear sensible of the scope of my observations, but thought it a
play of fancy, on my part, and laughed; and, after inveighing another while
against the committee of conference, he would return to the question, "When
will my cause with M'Clure come to trial?" I mention this incident, to show the
indistinct conception, on the part of the people, of the connection between the
state government and the federal. Though laws of the state are not the laws of
the union, yet the laws of the union are laws of the state. I scarcely ever met
with a man, that I could get to comprehend this.

On the first of September, Alexander Addison, the president of the court,
delivered an excellent charge to the grand jury of Allegheny county. It was
published in the Pittsburgh Gazette, of the 6th of September; and has been
since republished in most of the gazettes of the United States. However
excellent, yet the grand jury could not be brought to approve of it. It
appeared in the paper, with the following note.

The above sentiments of peace and obedience to the laws, would have received
the sanction of the grand jury, but a few members declined their assent;
silence was thought better, than an approbation not unanimous.

This was the best apology that could be made, and putting the best face on it.
The grand jury, though summoned by a sheriff well disposed, and themselves
chiefly well disposed, yet were under such apprehensions from the country, as
not to think it safe to manifest an approbation of the sentiments contained in
the charge.

The language of individuals, from the country, had all along from the
commencement of the disturbances, been highly contumelious, and we where
constantly threatened with Tom the Tinker. The system of tolerance and
conciliation had been that, which we had hitherto pursued; we had thought it
prudent to use the utmost policy, from the first, to mask our sentiments, and
to save ourselves from the odium that existed against the town. To give an
instance which I have omitted in my narrative, I think it was after the affair
of Braddock's fields: A man came to me from the country, and mentioned the
circumstance of one of the men, who had been wounded at the attack of Neville's
house the first day, being at the house of a doctor in the neighborhood, who
was to take care of him, on principles of humanity, for that the man himself
had nothing in the world; that the congregation of the rev. Mr. Clerk had
proposed to raise a collection for him, to help to subsist him, and to pay the
doctor. That it would have a good effect in the country, and allay the fury
against the town, if we were to raise something for the wounded man. I thought
so; and spoke to a person to go about to collect, and gave half a dollar
myself. I did it on the double principle of humanity, and the policy suggested.
I always wondered that this circumstance was not brought forward against me, as
a proof that I was an insurgent. I never heard it mentioned.

The union of the people being now broken by the propositions of the
commissioners, and a standard erected, round which those, opposed to the
insurrection, could rally. It was suggested, as advisable for the town of
Pittsburgh, to associate and form a system of defense; to protect against the
insults of individuals, or an attack by the insurgents, should any part of the
country be finally disposed to go to war against the government. General
Wilkins thought it might be now safe to take a step of this nature. I doubted
it, not with regard to the expediency of an association to protect against the
insults of individuals, but with regard to the holding out the idea of
protecting against the country, should any part of it embody in arms against
the government; I had doubts of the prudence of such a measure. It might put it
into the minds of the country to come and attack the town, when otherwise they
would not perhaps have thought of it. It might be best to continue, for some
time, our system of conciliation, and affect to repose a confidence in the good
disposition of the people toward us. I was not sure, if the country should go
to war, what proportion of the town would go with it. It might be well enough
to wait the result of the taking the sense of the people, on the 11th of the
month, as proposed by the commissioners, before we entered on a step of this
nature. However, General Wilkins had lost patience, and said, he would lose his
life, rather than to be bullied any longer. I yielded, contrary to my judgment,
and proposed the calling a town-meeting and explaining the reasons for the
measure, and taking their sense upon it.

A town-meeting was called, accordingly, on the 6th of September. It was opened
by me, taking a view, in a speech of considerable length, of what had taken
place since the commencement of the insurrection; the principles of the policy,
which it had been necessary for the town of Pittsburgh, to adopt; the change
which had taken place, in the situation of affairs, and the probable safety now
of avowing real sentiments; and the possible expediency of associating for the
purpose of defense, in case of insult from individuals of the country, or an
attack from a body in arms, should a war be contemplated.

I saw instantly, that this idea produced a revulsion in the minds of the
people. It struck some, as unsafe to set the country at defiance; and probably
others, as ineligible, because they meant at all events to stand with it.

General Wilkins supported the expediency and necessity of associating; however
it did not appear to go down with the meeting. There was a visible reluctance.
On this I suggested a postponement for the purpose of consideration.

The meeting broke-up. In the evening, General Wilkin^ with a number of
gentlemen met in a public house, and a not^ was sent, requesting my company, in
order to deliberate on the subject of an association. We met; and as before, I
expressed my doubts as to the expedience of an association, bringing expressly
into view a defense against the country, should it embody in arms, to attack
the town. If a war should ensue, there was no manner of question, but that the
garrison would be the first object; the town could support it very little; and
the garrison could not support the town at all. The town might be safe by lying
by and remaining quiet. That for my part, if a war should ensue, it was
probable I should quit the country, and not consider myself as bound by any
association to remain and defend the town. However, if it was thought
advisable to associate at all, it might be under an idea of defending against
banditti, and small parties, who, for the sake of plunder, might be disposed to
come against us.

This idea met with approbation, and an association was drawn upon that
principle, with all possible caution. It was as far as appeared prudent to go
at that time WHEREAS by the committees appointed, on the part of the people to
confer with commissioners on the part of the union and the state of
Pennsylvania, certain propositions have been agreed upon, and recommended to
the people, viz. an amnesty or oblivion of offenses in the violation of the
laws, with other^ accommodations and beneficial arrangements; reserving the
constitutional right of remonstrating, and pursuing, at all times, a redress of
grievances. And WHEREAS by resolves of those, and other committees, it has been
determined to preserve the peace amongst ourselves, and nevertheless there may
be persons disposed to violate the peace, in the person or property of those,
who may not be willing in resistance to the laws. We, the underwritten, do
associate to preserve the peace for ourselves and property, meaning to preserve
a^ neutrality in any opposition to force, that may take place against the
government, as that, in the one case, we will not be the champions of
government, and join in any hostilities, that may take place, for the enforcing
the laws; so, on the other hand, we will not be the subjects of compulsion in
being drawn into opposition against the government, out remain, as we are,
neuter and at peace.

It is also agreed, That a meeting of the associates shall take place at 10
o'clock, on Monday next, and a committee be appointed to devise and execute
such measures, from time to time, as may be expedient to carry the object of
the association into effect.


.

It was carried round, and generally signed by the inhabitants. A system of
defense was then adopted, and arrangements made for the purpose of repelling
hostility.

At the town-meeting, I had recommended strenuously to the inhabitants the
signing the paper of submission, on the 11th. I recommended it then, in as much
as I would not be present to recommend it on that day; I urged, that it became
them to sign, notwithstanding they might consider themselves as having no need
of an amnesty. But for example, and more especially as by this test, the
government would be able to determine the question, whether force was, or was
not necessary.

CHAP. II.
I HAD now set out to attend the court of Westmoreland, at the seat of justice
at Greensburgh. The state of the public mind in this county was, as elsewhere,
unfavourable to submission. The same charge, with additions, was deliver^^ by
Judge Addison, here, as at Pittsburgh, but I recollect no reply or approbation
of the grand jury. The election for a member of Congress, and for the state
legislature was approaching, and the people talked familiarly of resisting, and
yet electing. The tide of popularity had not ebbed so far against me, in that
quarter, being remote from Brownsville, where I had declared myself.
Application were made to me to let my name run for Congress, in that district,
as they were dissatisfied with Findley, on account of his recommending it to
them, to submit to the laws. They considered it as strangely inconsistent, that
he should have been speaking and writing against the law, and should, all at
once, turn round, and be in favor of it. Having had a political difference
with Findley, which had become personal, I might have been disposed, on a less
delicate occasion, to improve the prejudice against him; and it might have been
amusing to have taken advantage of the adverse gale to fail by him, in a
popular vote, in his own district. But it must have been at the expense of the
people and myself, in an essential point of allegiance and fidelity, to have
availed myself of this error of the people at the time; I had therefore to
just^fy Findley, in his recommendation to them, to submit. This had a good
effect; for, if so strong an adversary to Findley, as they conceived me to be,
and with the offer of a seat in Congress against him, nevertheless supported
the same sentiments, which were rendering him unpopular; these sentiments must
be right, and for their interest.

During the fitting of the court, great pains were taken to inform the people
and persuade them. The second evening, all that were attending, were convened
and harangued by Findley, and by gentlemen of the bar of that county. The
disposition appeared to have become general, to submit; that is, to make a
declaration of committing no outrrge, for the future, upon officers of the
revenue. But there was a reluctance at the idea of signing the words in the
form of the commissioners.

In the evening of the third day, I understood that a young man, by the name of
Parker, who resided in Westmoreland, was about setting out from Greensburgh, to
his father's family, near Parkinson's ferry, in the county of Washington, in
order to inform them of the general disposition to submit, in his county, and
induce them to sign, and to take advantage of the amnesty; as several of his
brothers had been involved in the affair of Neville's house. It struck me, at
the moment, that it would be rendering an essential service to humanity, and to
the object of composing the country, if that settlement, from which the
insurrection sprung, could be brought to submit. I reflected, that my
apprehensions at Brownsville, might have been, in some degree, imaginary; but,
if not, by this time the public mind might have cooled a little, and reason
have begun to take place; and that this young man, coming from Westmoreland,
and informing them of a disposition, in that county, to submit, the fear of
being left by themselves would take place, and reduce their violence. I felt a
passion, at the moment, of risking my own safety, to assist in accomplishing
this object; and proposed to the court, to excuse my attendance, and I would
ride into the Parkinson's ferry settlement. The distance to Parkinson's ferry,
was about 25 miles. Having set out, and crossed the Youghageny river, in the
night, we halted, and went to sleep, for some hours, in the ferry house.
Setting out, we arrived at the Monongahela, opposite Parkinson's ferry, early
in the day. Enquiring of the keeper of the ferry, of the name of Devore, with
regard to the sentiments of the country, he referred us to a major Scott, who
was standing by, loading his rifle. I was over, said major Scott, the other
day, on Mingo creek, when there were about 200 present, and they all, to a man,
pledged themselves not to sign, and to shoot any man that will. I am going to
the meeting in the forks of the rivers, and I will take care that nobody shall
sign there.

I was silent; and crossed the river. When on the other side, I addressed the
young man, and observed, that, from this account of major Scott, I thought it
dangerous for myself to go further; I would take the road directly down the
river, and make my way to Pittsburgh. He suggested the enquiring at the ferry
house of Parkinson, who was a brother to Benjamin, and hearing what
intelligence there. We did so; and had a contrary information, that the people
were disposed to submit. On this, it was suggested by the young man, to ride on
to the house of Benjamin Parkinson; about a mile ahead. I hesitated; informing
him, that I knew of but two men in the settlement, who had any predisposition
to assassinate me; and that Benjamin Parkinson was one of them; Andrew
M'Farlane the other. He urged me with great earnestness, and pledged himself to
lose his life before I should lose mine. I rode on.

Coming opposite to the house, and having leapt over a small pair of bars, into
the yard, I was struck with a horse standing saddled, and a rifle, at the door.
I took it, that Benjamin Parkinson was setting out for the place of meeting,
for the purpose of taking the sense of the people that day; and the taking his
rifle with him, was no good symptom of a disposition for submission.

Alighting, and entering the house to an inner apartment, I was all at once
appalled, with the sight of Benjamin Parkinson and Andrew M'Farlane together;
Andrew M'Farlane with a rifle standing by him. I was shocked; but concealing my
sensations, I addressed Parkinson with an appearance of perfect confidence. He
spoke frankly, and with a countenance of pleasure. Stepping out with young
Parker, he left me with M'Farlane, to whom I had bowed, but not yet spoken. I
was sitting just by him, within a step, in the small room. I kept my eye upon
his hand, and his rifle, and thought, if I saw him move, to seize his rifle; I
could, perhaps, by a sudden spring, gain the door. I cast a glance at a window
in the room, and thought of springing, head foremost, through it, if I saw him
move. My fear was, that the young man would not have the resolution to offend
the country, by interfering to defend me, after what Parkinson might
communicate to him, out of doors. I thought my situation precarious, and the
chances against me. While these were my sensations, I turned round, with an
open and direct countenance, to M'Farlane; Mr. M'Farlane, said I, these are
disagreeable times, Indeed they are, Mr. Brackenridge, said he. The expression,
and the manner, relieved me from my apprehensions in a moment; and left me only
at a loss to account for his seeming cordiality. For, continued he, I have
been, for these two days, afraid of my life, because I recommended submission.
I have been afraid to sleep at home, and I am obliged now to go with my rifle.
Ah hah, thought I, I shall not be shot yet.

Benjamin Parkinson, in the mean time, came in, and expressed himself extremely
happy at the information he had received from young Parker; and much obliged to
me, for my intention of coming over to serve the settlement; that, for his
part, he was heartily disposed to submit, and was going to the meeting for the
purpose. I asked him, if he had a form of the submission? that, if not, I had a
number of them in my pocket. He said, he had one. On enquiry, I found that the
district, where he had to attend, lay up the Monongahela, and out of my way to
Pittsburgh. Young Parker and Parkinson urged me, with great solicitation, to
ride there, in order to assist in persuading the people; but, judging from
their apprehensions, I did not think it advisable to run the risk. I answered,
that the Parker's family would doubtless credit their brother; and that he
could give the same information that I could, and state my solicitude, in
riding all night, to serve them; that if I went to any meeting at all, it would
be to the Mingo meeting, which was on my way, and to that of Peter's creek
district, which was on my way also. The only question now was, Whether it would
be advisable to go to the Mingo meeting? M'Farlane, with candor, and good
will toward me, gave his opinion, that it was not advisable; that the rage of
the people, against our committee at Pittsburgh, and me especially, was
violent; that, for his part, he was under apprehensions of going himself to the
Mingo district, though amongst his neighbors; and meant to go to David
Hamilton's, about four miles distant, in a lateral direction, in order to find
out, whether it would be safe to go to the meeting. On this, I declined going;
but purposed writing, by him, to Hamilton, an open letter, which might be read
at the meeting, or elsewhere, as containing information from me. The letter was
as follows: DAVID HAMILTON: Sir,
I have rode all night, from the court at Westmoreland, with a view to come to
the meeting of the Mingo creek district, but, from what I hear, do not think it
safe; but I state my sentiments, by letter, which you may consider as written
to you and to others. It is to inform them, that the greater part of Allegheny
county will submit, and all Westmoreland will, and I presume Fayette. You will
then be left alone. Surely you would not wish to give the excise officer the
satisfaction of having you hanged. For this reason, all those that have been
involved in any violence, ought especially to save themselves. It is from
motives of humanity that I have taken this trouble. If there could have been
any doubt of a force coming before, after the propositions of the
commissioners, if the people should persist, there can be no doubt; and it will
come with rage against the country, after having rejected what is so reasonable.




I took the road now toward Pittsburgh, but not the direct road, as it would
have led me by the Mingo creek meeting house. As I rode, I fell in with
numbers, crossing my course, in a direction to the meeting, and all of them
armed. Stopping at a cabin, to enquire the way, I was struck with the
appearance of John M'Donald, the secretary of the Mingo creek society, stepping
out. I was not afraid of him, having had a conversation with him in Pittsburgh,
and knowing his sentiments to be moderate. His advice also to me was, not to go
to the meeting: his expression was, "Let them go to the devil their own way."

Enquiring the way to Pittsburgh, he directed me by the house of John Holcroft.
That is the very man, said I, that I am the most afraid of; he is Tom the
Tinker. I was obliged to put up with the insulting language of one of his sons,
the other day, in Pittsburgh; not thinking it safe to resent it, in the present
state of things. He threatened the town with Tom the Tinker.

M'Donald gave me directions, in what manner, crossing a certain road, that led
from the house of Holcroft, I could avoid it, by a circuit through the woods,
and come into the road again. But before I had got to that point, I met two men
on horseback, one of whom accosted me by name, and expressed himself sorry,
that he had set out before I had got to his house, that he might have offered
me a little whiskey, and something for my horse to eat; but, said he, I will go
back with you to the house. I was not without apprehensions of every man;
nevertheless, I thought the safest way was, to affect to have confidence, and I
suffered him to ride back with me. The man with him accompanied us.

When we came in sight of the house, I knew the farm to be that on which a
certain Samuel Irwin, some years ago, had lived; and which I knew had been sold
to Holcroft. Heavens! thought I, is this Tom the Tinker? is he to get his sons
to help to murder me, that he is taking me to his own house? pretending
civility, but meaning to put it out my power to negociate with commissioners
any more. However, I concealed my apprehensions, and entered his house. Our
conversation turned upon the business of the day; the signing a submission.
Holcroft gave me to understand, that the people were greatly averse in that
neighborhood, and threatened death. That is unreasonable, said the man that
was in company; it is not so with us, in our settlement. We allow free liberty
of conscience, and molest no man for doing what he pleases. Every man that
chooses to submit, let him do it; and we give him five weeks, to sell off his
effects, and move out of the country. I was diverted with his ideas of perfect
freedom; but thought that, in five weeks, probably, the situation of the
proscribed and the proscribing would be changed, without the days of grace, to
sell off effects and move away.

I could discover, in Holcroft, hesitation to know what to do. I explained
myself fully; informed him of the history of crossing from Westmoreland, with
what views, etc. He expressed himself happy in having seen me, and wished me to
go to the meeting with him, and to which he had been on his way; but
acknowledged there would be danger of insult. I declined going for this reason,
and because I was now on my way past the ground. I took leave of Tom the
Tinker, and came on.

On my way to Peter's creek, I understood that a company of rifle-men had gone
forward, in order to oppose a submission. Nevertheless, I did not hesitate to
go on, as it was in the neighborhood of Pittsburgh, viz. about 7 miles
distant; and I felt myself more at home, and knew the people more generally,
and had a greater confidence in my influence with them. On my arrival at the
meeting, I was informed, that captain Miller, the member of the committee, of
whom I have given some account, with his company, had opposed the signing the
submission, and threatened death; but that the signing was then opened in the
house, and persons had begun to go in. I saw Miller's company by themselves,
under some trees, at at a distance. Crowds of the people came around me, and I
gave them an account of my having come from Westmoreland, the preceding
evening, and of the disposition of that county to submit. Having delayed half
an hour, and conceiving all things to be going on well, I set out to
Pittsburgh. Coming to town, I was happy to learn, that the people had generally
signed the form of submission. It was too late, and the hours of signing
expired; but it was not for this reason, but because I had no solicitude to
bring myself within the amnesty, not conceiving myself to have any need of it*
that I did not go forward, even then, to put my name to the paper. I went
forward next day and put my name to it, that I might show the people, that I
would do what I had recommended to them to do; and that it had been my absence
only, that had hindered me from being amongst the first.

CHAP. III.
BEFORE the day of submission, great pains had been taken, not only by the
civil officers, and men of political appointment, and by the bar in different
counties, and prudent men every where; but, in particular, by the clergy, in
various congregations. The reverend Samuel Porter, and the reverend John
M'Millan, and others of the same denomination, had, from the first, borne a
decided testimony against the forcible opposition to the laws. Previous to the
day of giving the test of submission, M'Millan having appointed a day for
giving the sacrament of bread and wine, adjourned the celebration, until it
could be known who would submit; meaning to exclude those from the ordinance,
w^^^ should remain obstinate, and refuse this declaration of fidelity. He
attended himself, on the day of submission, and used his immediate influence,
but not to much effect. The table was carried away, on which the papers were
put, to be signed; and such was the disturbance, that the meeting had finally
to break up.

At Mingo creek, a body of men armed, paraded, and menaced death to any one
that would breathe a thought of submitting. A justice of the peace had taken
his seat, and a few persons had got their names on his paper, when the armed
multitude broke in, and prevented any more. They tore the paper in pieces; and
it was not until after night, when every thing was thought to be over, that the
same persons, and some others, getting together with the magistrate again,
signed anew; and the justice, putting it in the pad of his saddle, got off with
it, to the place of return, at Washington.

At Washington, Bradford had become a convert to submission; putting it on the
principle of being deserted and left to himself, and therefore it was in vain
any longer to stand out. At a large meeting of the people, in the courthouse,
he made a speech of two hours, and recommended submission. He himself signed on
the day. James Marshall, John Canon, and a considerable number of others, who
had appeared in the scene, also signed. Some were obstinate, and would not.

In the upper part of Washington county, the signing was inconsiderable. In the
upper part of Allegheny county, and the lower part of Westmoreland, in what are
called the forks of the Monongahela and the Youghagheny rivers, major Scott,
whom I saw at Devore's ferry, attended with his rifle, and headed the violent,
who prevented the signing. At the district where Benjamin Parkinson went, there
was an opposition, but some signed; the Parker family particularly; Parkinson
had not the resolution. In the lower part of Allegheny county, the member of
the committee, who had carried down the papers, was surrounded, in his house,
by a masked body of men, and had his papers taken from him. In some places, and
some at all places, signed for war instead of submission.

In Fayette county, the form prescribed by the commissioners was not signed at
all; it was under an idea, that the last committee of conference, from
Brownsville, had not authority to change the terms agreed upon with the first.
They were commissioned only, to endeavor to procure an enlargement and
amelioration. This was true; and they did not change. It was the commissioners
that changed; considering themselves as absolved from their engagement with the
first stipulations, in consequence of what amounted to a rejection, by the vote
of the committee. And there was no question, but by the negative of the
minority they were absolved; for the condition of amnesty, in the first, was,
"that the peace being kept, and the law obeyed, by the whole country, to the
10th day of July, then next following." Here was what amounted to a declaration
of war, by twenty-three townships; and put an end to all contemplation of a
general and sincere acquiescence in the execution of the laws If there shall be
a general and sincere acquiescence, in the said laws, until the said 10th of
July next, a general pardon and oblivion, of all such offenses, shall be
granted.
.

This was the idea of the commissioners, as expressed to the second conference
The terms required, have not been acceded to. You have come hither to demand
new terms, and it is now necessary for us to dicide, whether we will return
home, or enter into other arrangements.
.

The matter seems to have been understood otherwise, by a meeting of
committees, from the several townships of the count^ of Fayette, held at Union
Town, on the 10th of September, 1794. Twenty-one members present, at least;
they preferred the giving government assurances of their submission, agreeably
to the terms settled with the first conferees, and made a declarration to that
effect The terms which had been obtained by the first committee of conference,
having, however, been changed, in point of form, at the last conference, in
which we were represented only by one member, although the committee had not
received power for that purpose, it is necessary for us to take them into
consideration. It is alleged by the commissioners, on the part of the union,
that the standing committee of the western counties, having neglected at
Redstone, to make the declaration and recommendations required of them, in the
explicit manner which was settled at the first conference, the terms are broken
on the part of the said committee, and the commissioners now required that
those declarations, which it was the duty of the standing committee to make,
should be made by the people themselves, and testified by the individual
signatures of the citizens, excepting at the same time, from the amnesty, such
of the concerned in the late offenses, as shall refuse or neglect to sign the
same. To that, or to a similiar mode of giving assurance of submission, which
was proposed at the first conference, it was objected, that such a mode, if
adopted, might be misunderstood, and have a tendency to defeat the proposed
object, in as much as persons not immediately concerned in the riots, would not
choose to sign individually, for fear it might be construed as a tacit
acknowledgement that they had actually broken the peace. And we may now add,
that as a great inducement for the persons not concerned to give assurances of
submission at all, was to procure an amnesty for the offenders, this motive
exists no longer, since the pardon for every individual, concerned, depends
upon his own signature. In as much, therefore, as the body of the people of
this country can derive no benefit from an act of oblivion, for offenses, in
which they have not had any share; we are of opinion, that, however disposed
they hitherto have been, might have in the neighboring counties, will induce
us to use every means to render the assurances of submission more easy, and of
course more acceptable to the citizens. The best mode of doing it, is, for
ourselves, who are the committee for Fayette county, to make those
declarations, which were required from the standing committee of Redstone, and
having thus strictly adhered, on our part, as far as relates to this country,
on the question contained in the letter of the commissioners, of the 22d of
August, without requiring from them any individual signature.

For these reasons, and upon these principles, wishing however to have it fully
understood, that from the following declaration, no implication is to be drawn
of an acknowledgement that we have ever failed, either directly, or indirectly
in that duty which every citizen owes to his country, viz. submission to its
laws; we, the committee of townships, for the county of Fayette, do not
hesitate explicitly to declare our determination to submit to the laws of the
United States, and of the state of Pennsylvania, not to oppose directly or
indirectly the execution of the acts for ^ai^ing a revenue on distilled
spirits, and stills, and to support (as far as the law require^) the civil
authority, in affording the protection due to all officers and citizens; and we
do further recommend to our fellow citizens, a perfect and entire acquiescence
under the execution of said acts, and also that no violence, injuries, or
threats be offered to the person, or against the property of any officer of the
United States, or of the state of Pennsylvania, nor of citizens complying with
the laws. At the same time we make those explicit or sincere declaratio^s and
recommendations, we also heartily and openly declare out intention to persist
in every (...) and constitutional measure, that may tend to (...)


. The fact is, the committee had no power to make new terms; but the
commissioners had power to offer, through the organ of the committee, new terms
to the body of the people. The inhabitants of Fayette county, met in three
districts, out of four; 721 attending, out of whom 560 declared their
determination to submit to the laws.

Numbers, that had been prevented signing on the day, or who, on reflection,
thought it advisable to sign, came to the officer in possession of the paper,
and signed afterward. I was consulted on the subject by many, who came from a
considerable distance to have my opinion on the validity of signing after the
day. I had no hesitation in declaring a perfect confidence in the executive,
that a liberal construction would be given to the terms of the commissioners;
and that where it should be proved, to the satisfaction of the executive, that
the not submitting was owing to a force preventing them, and that they had
signed as soon as they could have it in their power, after the removal of the
force, it would be considered as equivalent to a signing on the day. It could
not be pleaded in a court of justice, as a pardon; but the executive would not
be able to reconcile it with the spirit of the terms, to proceed in the
prosecution; or, at least, he would not choose to proceed against repentant
offenders, under these circumstances.

The return of the papers, from the several districts, were to be made to James
Ross, of the commission, on the 16th, at Union Town; who, from thence, was to
set out for Philadelphia.

Having set out, he was pursued a day's journey by two men, under pretense of
taking the papers from him; but who, coming up, informed him, they wished to
get their names put down; and, as it afterward appeared, these very men had
been active, in their own districts at home, to hinder others from signing, and
had not signed themselves.

The officers of the district subscriptions, had been pursued, in many places,
after they had left the ground, under the same pretense, by some that had
appeared the most violent, in opposing the submission, but who now, with tears
in their eyes, solicited to have their names put upon the paper. This was the
policy of those, who wished to preserve popularity at home, by affecting not to
have submitted; and yet, to save themselves with the government, by
clandestinely taking advantage of the amnesty.

CHAP. IV.
IT began now to be mentioned in Pittsburgh, that it might be safe to recall the
exiles. A town meeting was called, to consider of it. The idea was suggested,
chiefly a by gentleman related to Kirkpatrick, and who had not been present
during the fury of the disturbance, and had not a perfect knowledge of the yet
unsettled disposition of the people. He was, moreover, supported in his
proposition by a gentleman of the bar, who had also been absent from the
country, the greatest part of the period, and came forward, at this juncture,
to distinguish himself, in doing something. He was an adversary of mine; we had
been upon bad terms for a long time. It is on account of his connections, that
I do not introduce his name.

The first of his appearance, after his return, was at Brownsville, the first
morning of our meeting. The moment I saw him, I knew his object would be to do
me mischief; but it would be some time, before he could reco^^oitre the ground,
and determine upon the ways and means of acting. I knew him to be intriguing,
and to have exercised the powers of his mind in this way, and in no other way,
through his life; but I was at a loss to know what he could lay hold of. He
would have sense enough to discover, that the insurrection was broken, by the
propositions of the commissioners; and that it would not be safe, now, to take
any part with it; and therefore it would not do to oppose the submission, or
disapprove of it. He could not, therefore, join in the clamor, with open
mouth: or support Br^dford (...) having also come on from that place, his first
address was with the commissioners; insinuating, that I had been concerned in
the insurrection, and privy to the transactions of Bradford; that Bradford had
given him this information at Brownsville.

I had traversed in my imagination, all possible ground which he would find to
injure me, but I had never thought of an insinuation of that nature. I had
thought of nothing, but his inflaming Bradford and the people against me, and
had attributed the dissatisfaction, which Bradford had discovered, to his
management, in some degree. I had also observed him in close conversation with
a younger brother of M'Farlane, that had fallen, and other violent men; and I
apprehended a good deal from that increase he would give to their resentment.
It never had entered my mind that he would venture upon a calumny of this kind.
I had avered in my public speech, my not only having nothing to do with any of
the acts of violence, but my total disapprobation of them. I was not
contradicted by Bradford; though he replied to me in warm invectives, yet he
had not the audacity to insinuate any thing to this effect.

I was unwilling that any unfavourable impression should be made upon the minds
of the commissioners, and I took the first opportunity of giving them a key to
all that could be said by my brother of the bar; by informing them that a
difference existed between us, and referring to James Ross, for a knowledge of
the fact. The commissioners assured me, that any thing he had said, had made no
impression, and should make none; that even taking it for granted that Bradford
had said so, he had given sufficient proof of his want of truth and honor, in
violating his private promise, and public stipulation, in support of the
propositions, to put the credibility of any assertion of his, altogether out of
view. This was the language of commissioner Yates to me, in the presence of
James Ross.

My brother of the bar had, in the mean time, made all possible experiments
upon the minds of the people of Pittsburgh, to induce them to believe that I
had been privy to the transactions of Bradford; that, at the Mingo creek
meeting, I had projected the intercepting the mail, in order to get the letters
that were found, and have the writers banished; that, having private malice
against these persons, I had planned the matter to injure them. But it was
asked. How did I manage a^ trace the origin of the fact, as I have explained,
in the course of my narrative. It has been seen that it was contrived before
the Mingo creek meeting, and before I saw Bradford, to have any communication
with him.

It was to have the credit of seeming to have done something for the exiles,
that my brother of the bar had supported the recalling them at this time.

I had notice of the town-meeting, and attended. My brother of the bar opened
the meeting, with an harangue of considerable length. The scope of it was an
invective against those who led the people into the insurrection, and had now
deserted them. This was the only sentiment he had to express, but if he wanted
variety of thought, he made it up by variety of action. But as there was no
one, who deserted the people, his invective was without an object. He put me in
mind of a man, whom I knew in early life, who had been taught the use of a
small sword, and when he had taken a cup, as he was accustomed to do, and was
coming home, in a moon light night, and seeing a bush with a shadow, he would
imagine it to be the devil with a tail, and would begin to fence with his
staff, "there I have you, Satan; there I have you, devil." So it was with my
brother of the bar, here he was with violent gestures declaiming against some
devil, and no one, but himself, saw any.

The idea, however, of deserting the people, was a string to harp upon. I never
knew the people themselves complain of this. They knew that no one had deserted
them; but some of them were obstinate, in not coming off the ground, when a
parley had been beaten, a negotiation taken place, and the conditions of peace
were announced, by the persons whom they had appointed to negociate. Men of
sense accepted the stipulations, and drew off, and told all to do so. Some,
like fools, would stay and fight. Was this deserting them?

After this harangue, to which there was no reply, the gentleman, related by
affinity to Kirkpatrick, brought forward a a proposition for the recall of the
exiles. I was alarmed, and thought it not prudent. The present interval of
quietness in the country, might be an insiduous calm. The first movement that
would take place, if any did place, would be on hearing of the advance of a
force, on the part of the government. It would (...) certainly they would
entertain no idea of returning in the present situation of affairs.

However, it was urged, and I acquiesced; but it was contrary to my judgment,
and not agreeable to the general sense of the town. There were some for it; and
it was improper to divide upon it. The resolution was modelled by my brother of
the bar, and published in the gazette At a meeting of the inhabitants of the
town of Pittsburgh, for the purpose of considering the proscriptions of certain
citizens, during the late disturbance^* in which (...)
.

It was contrary to my judgment to publish it. It would depend upon the
circumstance of any part of the country taking arms, whether it would not be
unsafe to the town. I advised to enclose the resolution to the exiles, with a
statement of the real situation of the country; which their particular friends
could transmit; and leave it to themselves, to use their discretion, in
returning or staying. But my brother of the bar wished to have it published,
and I did not choose to trouble myself, by opposing much. He would make it a
presumption of his allegation, that I had contrived the original expulsion. I
le^ pa^^. Nevertheless, I thought it sufficiently absurd, to be taking pains to
recall people, when others were watching occurrences* in order to enable them to
determine on going away. I was, in the mean time, making contingent
arrangements for quitting the country, the moment I should have reason to
apprehend the embodying in arms, in any part of it. We had frequent reports of
this nature, and were looking every day to find them realized.

CHAP. V.
THE return made to government, of the signatures for submission, bore so small
a proportion to the number of the inhabitants, that it had been considered, on
the part of the government, as unavoidably necessary to send a force to reduce
them. It began now to obtain credit, that a force would be sent. In the
Pittsburgh Gazette, of September 20th, several extracts Philadelphia, September
13.
The quota of this state, and that of New Jersey, are to rendezvous at
Carlisle; passing, on their route, through Lancaster and Reading. The governor
will, in a few days, pitch his tent on the other side of Schuylkill, and open a
list for the enrollment of volunteers. The legislature, it is hoped, will allow
them a bounty, in some degree proportionate to the price of labor.

At a meeting of the old City Troop of Cavalry, commanded by captain Dunlap, at
the City Tavern, and of the Volunteer Greens, commanded by captain M'Connell,
at M'Shane's, on Wednesday afternoon, we have it from good authority, that
every member of both troops offered themselves, as volunteers, on the
expedition against the western insurgents. The second troop, commanded by
captain Singer, we hear, had a previous meeting, at which the some republican
spirit was displayed, in support of the laws, and violated authority of the
state.

In addition to the foregoing very agreeable intelligence* we ha^^ the (...)


, from the public papers of Philadelphia, appeared, announcing that a force was
collecting. Intelligence by individuals, was to the same effect. Many still
affected to disbelieve it, because they had heretofore said, that a force would
not come; and some did really disbelieve it. Nevertheless, the belief in it was
gaining ground every day; and bringing to some sense of danger, those who had
hitherto stood out.

Though I had hesitated to go the court of Washington, which was to begin the
22d of September, yet now, under these circumstances, I thought it safe to go.

At the court, I was informed of what I have stated, viz. that Bradford, on the
day of submission, had recommended to the people to submit. The popular
language, with respect to him, was, that "DAGON was fallen."

I do not know that he had any idea, at this time, that he was not within the
amnesty. I presume not: for he had been solicitous to gain the concurrence of
the people to sign, in order that he might venture to do it himself. He was out
of the amnesty, no doubt *, by his speech at Brownsville, on the 28th; but the
man had not precision of thought sufficient to discover it.

My brother of the bar was paying great court to him; their heads were
constantly together, at the table, whispering; and out of doors, they were arm
in arm, walking; or hats off, at a distance, to each other. I knew by brother
of the bar had despised Bradford, and Bradford had disliked him; but the
ancient enmity of the one toward me, and the recent dissatisfaction of the
other, had cemented them in great apparent cordiality. I was determined to wait
quietly, to see what this hatching would produce. I did not know what Bradford
might be brought to say; I knew my brother of the bar to have will, and not to
want ingenuity. From the incidents I have traced, in the course of this
narrative, it will be seen, that Bradford was not incapable of a deflection
from the truth. I did not know how far the preservation of himself, in the hope
of obtaining the clemency of the government, might lead him to gratify those
who might have the ear of it. But I trusted to this, that it is so difficult to
make falsehood consistent, that he would not be able to put it together, in such
a manner as to render it probable.

The Democratic Society, of Washington, was convened, during the court. It had
been proposed to publish resolutions, expressing the sentiments of the society,
with regard to the late violations of the laws, after the example of the
Democratic Society at New York, and Philadelphia. A committee was appointed, to
draw up the resolutions.

A young gentleman of the bar, Dorsey Pentecost, was one: and having drawn a
sketch, he showed it to me, and wished me, as having more politically
considered these matters, to assist him in forming it, to be laid before the
committee. I assisted him: and expressed myself, with regard to the outrages,
in very read in the society. Bradford, who was a member, heard them with
embarrassment, and moved for a postponement, for a consideration of them, at
that time. He said, a fuller meeting was expected the week following. The
consideration was postponed, and I never heard any more of them.

At the opening of this court, judge Addison delivered his charge to the grand
jury, and received from them an explicit approbation of the sentiments
contained in it. The people seemed to have become sensible of their error, or
at least of their danger. I believe that great numbers had become better
informed; but I must admit, that the conversion, with the bulk, was the result
of fear.

Judge Addison had held a court, in the mean time, in Fayette, and brought a
favorable account of the impressions of the people of that county. On the 17th
of the month, a committee of townships had met at Union Town, at which
resolutions had been taken into view, and adopted, expressive of a good
disposition to preserve order, and support the laws (...); and holding out an
idea, that, so far as it respected that county, it would not be necessary to
have recourse to the aid of military force.

During the session of the court, the like favorable account had been received
from almost all quarters. With the suitors of the court, and all persons
attending, there appeared the most perfect good disposition to submit to the
laws. In the countenances of the unfortunate persons, who had been involved,
Whereas the inhabitants of this county, by a large majority, determined to
submit to the laws of the United States, and of the state of Pennsylvania; and,
whereas the general committee, of the western counties, held at Parkinson's
ferry, entered into resolutions, for the purpose of protecting the persons and
property of every individual; and, whereas it is necessary to show to our
fellow citizens, throughout the United States, that the character of the
inhabitants of the western country, is not such as may have been represented to
them; but that, on the contrary, they are disposed to behave in a peaceful
manner, and can preserve good order amongst themselves, without the assistance
of a military force,

Resolved, That it be recommended to the inhabitants of the several townships,
to take such measures, as, in their opinion, will be best calculated to
preserve peace and order amongst themselves; and that the members of that
committee be requested, to promote such associations amongst the body of the
people, as may be necessary for the prot^^^ion of the persons and property of
all citizens, and for the ^^^port of civil (...).

(...) and other counties, or the west of the mountains, the present state of
this country, with respect to the late convulsion, was taken into view; and
from comparing information, it appeared to them that the country was in fast
progression, if not wholly ar^ived at a state of general submission to the
laws; so a^ to render it unnecessary for any adva^^e of force, on the part of
the government, for the purpo^e of assisting civil authority in suppressing
insurrection, and preserving peace; and that measures ought to be taken, as
speedily as may be, to communicate information of this favorable state of
affairs, to the government.

Resolved, therefore, That a meeting of the delegates of townships, of the 14th
of August, at Parkinson's ferry, be called to convene at the same place, viz.
Parkinson's ferry, on Thursday next, the 2d of October, to take the above into
consideration. And as it is of great moment, the delegates are requested to be
punctual in their attendance, and at an early hour, that day.

And it is recommended that all justices of the peace, and members of the
committee, obtain and bring forward all signatures of the declaration of
submission, that may be taken* in order to lay before the committee, and
forward to government, with such address or commissioners, on the part of the
country, as may be thought advisable.


and had not taken the benefit of the amnesty, you could see terror and dismay.
They saw before them, the necessity of relinquishing the country instantly, or
being hanged. I saw Benjamin Parkinson, but he hung down his head as I passed.
He was conscious to himself, that he had acted like a coward, and that I knew
it. A man in a pillory, could not have been more ashamed to lift up his face.
He was one of fifty-two, who met some days previous to the signing, and
solemnly pledged themselves to come forward, at a larger meeting, and support
the idea of submitting.

At a larger meeting, of 200, which took place the day after, finding the
current set in a contrary direction, he lifted both hands, and declared that he
never had consented to sign. I have related his earnestness to be put upon the
list of those entitled to the amnesty, at the time I saw him at his house; he
had not courage to sign, that day, at his district. His language was, "I advise
you to sign, but I will not." The following day, he employed a person to put
his name to the paper, and afterward denied that he had employed him.

Toward the end of the week, the court having risen, I was requested to attend
a meeting in the courthouse. I attended. A number of gentlemen of the county
had convened; president Addison, the assistant judges, and others. The state of
the country was taken into consideration, and it was proposed to pass
resolutions similiar to those of Fayette.

Though not of the county, yet having been asked to the meeting, I took the
liberty of observing, that, if it was the object to give the government such
assurances of the restoration of order, as would justify the dismission of the
force which had been ordered, the proper means would be, to call the original
Parkinson's ferry delegates to meet at the same place, and from thence send
forward ^ declaration of their sentiments, and delegates to the President, to
explain all circumstances. It was agreed; and I was requested to insert in the
Pittsburgh Gazette an advertisement to that effect.

I knew it would not be a wish with the government, to be under the necessity
of coming forward, and I thought it for the honor of the country, that a
necessity should not exist.

A considerable number of delegates met at Parkinson's ferry, on the 2d of
October. General Wilkins, and others from Allegheny county, attended with me.
Resolutions were passed, expressive of our ideas of the then state of the
country. William Findley and David Reddick, prothonotary of Washington, were
appointed delegates to the President.

General Wilkins and myself had objected to the positiveness of the
express^^ns, with regard to the restoration of order. It was observed by me,
"that, as on the one hand, it would be painful to see an army in this country,
which, in spite of all possible discipline, would commit outrages on persons
and property, yet, on the other hand, I would not wish to deceive the
government." General Wilkins made the like observations.

Judge Addison, who was secretary, observed, that as delegates were appointed
to explain circumstances to the President, it could be left to his discretion
to judge, and relieve us from that personal responsibility, which would
otherwise exist. Besides, unless we could speak with some positiveness, it
would not be worth while to send forward to the President at all; as he could
have nothing certain, on which he could depend; that for his part, he would not
hesitate to speak with confidence of the three counties, in which he had last
been; Westmoreland, Fayette, and Washington.

The Allegheny delegates were willing to vouch for the good disposition of our
county; for warrants had been actually issued for offenders, who had been abo^^
to leave the country, and had been arrested without opposition Adamson
Tannehill, a justice of the peace, in Pittsburgh, had issued warrants against
some who were apprehended; he had issued a warrant for Miller, of whom I had
spoken, and who was about to remove. I had seen the officer set out from
Pittsburgh to take him. I thought of his poor children, that I had seen at the
fence, and wished that he might be gone. He was gone.
.

Bradford and Marshall had attended at Parkinson's. Great was the difference in
the temper of the ^^e^ing, from that which prevailed at the first, on the same
ground. I felt great pity for some that appeared distressed at their ow^
obstinacy, which had brought us to this trouble. Bradford appeared thoughtful,
but behaved with his usual folly. He nominated John Cannon to the chair; who
took it. It struck judge Addison and others of us, as improper; col. Cannon
having been chairman of a former obnoxious committee, at Pittsburgh* and also
deeply involved in the late outrages; and it would be no good symptom to the
President that we had made him chairman on this occasion. This was hinted to
col. Cannon himself, and pressed with all possible delicacy; but Bradford
insisted on his keeping the chair, and Cannon himself was tenacious of it.
However, in making out our report, we kept his name out of view, and made no
mention of a chairman at all.

I had no conversation with Bradford, during the court at Washington, or at
this meeting, but in public. I knew the predicament in which he stood, and
avoided him. I thought it of little consequence to him, whether the army came
to the country, or not, for he would have to leave it, or be arrested for trial
at Philadelphia. It occurred to me, at the time, that the strongest proof the
President could have of the restoration of the authority of the law, and a
proper one, would be for judge Addison to arrest him, and send him down. It did
not suit me to suggest this. At the same time that I wished to serve the
country, I did not like to hurt myself; it would have been an unpopular act;
and on principles of humanity, I could not reconcile it to my feelings, to be
the means of arresting any one; nothing but an absolute official duty could
induce me. At the same time, it is to be observed in his case, and that of
others, that it would be improper to have undertaken to say who were not within
the amnesty, or had forfeited it; of this the executive would judge, in the
first instance, and it would be proper to wait until orders of arrest come from
the judicial authority of the union.

I had not said a word to Bradford, in the mean time, with regard to the
information he was said to have given to my brother of the bar; it was for this
reason: My name was still in view as a candidate for the Congress; and Bradford
had influence, and I did not wish to break with him, but as little as possible,
until that was over. My brother of the bar had said that judge Addison was
present, when Bradford had given the information; or that Bradford had given
the like information to judge Addison. I asked judge Addison, and he said it
was not the case. He had heard Bradford say nothing more, than to complain of
me, that I had not spoken more plainly to him, at an earlier period. I made
enquiry of Mr. Reddick, with whom Bradford was intimate, whether he had ever
suggested any thing of the kind, that I had been privy to his transactions. Mr
Reddick said not, but the contrary. He complained that I had not given him my
confidence, at an early period. The truth is, I gave it as much as I thought
safe. The first time I saw him, was at Mingo creek; he might have seen in my
speech, what my real sentiments were. Others saw clearly. John Baldwin, one of
those involved in the burning of Neville's house, has acknowledged to me, that
it was that speech that first opened his eyes; and he had always thought
Bradford a man of sense till that time. It would not have been safe for me to
speak plainly on Braddock's field, or at Parkinson's ferry. I did speak, as
soon as it was prudent to do it; that is, in the committee of conference at
Pittsburgh. High enough indeed! Give my confidence to a man who had gone on to
the commission of high crimes, and had a mob at his command? But did I not
speak plainly at Brownsville? surely he had my confidence there, for all the
meeting had it; and yet he answered me with all the pomp that his id^a of
superiority over me, in the possession of the public confidence could inspire,
and if he insulted me after our negotiation with the commissioners, what would
^e not have done at an earlier period, when he had those at his back, who
having no amnesty to which they could look forward, would be disposed to take
the most desperate resolutions, with regard to all who differed from them.

In the appointment of delegates, at the meeting at Parkinson's, to wait upon
the President, a circumstance took place, which gave me the impression that
Marshall as well as Bradford, was not favorably disposed toward me.

John Lucas, a member of the committee, mentioned to me a conversation with
Marshall, before the opening of the meeting "Whom do you think," said he,
"shall we send as delegates to the President? I have been thinking of Findley,
Gallatin, and Brackenridge, but Bradford has conceived a prejudice against our
friend Brackenridge."

When the point of choosing delegates came forward in the meeting, it was urged
by judge Addison and genesis Wilkins, and others, that four persons, one from each
county, should be appointed, and I knew it was their wish that I should be one.
Bradford strenuously opposed it, though he could assign no plausible reasons. I
saw instantly it was to prevent the appointment of me. Marshall supported him;
I had supposed to gratify him. I supported him strenuously, though Addison and
Wilkins were dissatisfied. I had precisely the same object in view with him; to
keep myself out. The election was coming on, and I chose to be at home.

It was carried that no regard should be paid to counties. It was then moved by
Bradford, that two delegates should be appointed from the western country, and
that these two should be Findley and Reddick. Marshall supported the
appointment of two, but proposed Findley and Gallatin. I saw at this moment,
that Marshall also was dissatisfied with "friend Brackenridge", and that though
he differed with Bradford, as to persons, yet they both wished to exclude me.
In this object I concurred with them, but meaning that Bradford should be
gratified in all things, I supported his nomination of Reddick, and we carried
it.

I have never understood what was the ground of Marshall's dissatisfaction, if
he had any. Bradford had said, that I represented him in an unfavourable point
of view to the commissioners at Pittsburgh, during our conference. That was not
the fact; I made the best apology for the conduct of both; so that on one
occasion the Attorney General observed to James Ross, Is it possible that
Bradford and Marshall can be innocent too? I had stated no more than what I
have done in this narrative, that it was the people who had carried off both
Marshall and Bradford, and not they the people. And it was with a view to
historical truth that I have stated this curcumstance.

So far with regard to Bradford for the present.

On my return to Pittsburgh, I enclosed a copy of the resolutions of the
meeting to President Washington, and one to the governor of Pennsylvania.

CHAP. VI.
THE general election, which was to take place on the 14th of October, was now
approaching. My brother of the bar had offered himself as a candidate before my
name was brought forward, and had availed himself of the temporary
circumstances in canvassing against me. With those opposed to the outrages that
had taken place, he insinuated, that I had been at the bottom of them; and with
the insurgents themselves, he asserted that I had been a spy for the
government, from the first; that I had taken notes, and would be the worst
witness that would come forward against them. He retailed scraps of speeches,
which I was said to have made; viz. that the people of the country were a set
of "vipers and fools," and deserved to be hanged for what they had done. At
least I have been led to understand that this was the nature of his address. It
was all fair; we were adversaries.

Before the court at Washington, I had received a note from Daniel Hamilton,
who had commanded the advanced guard, on the day of Braddock's fields, and as
we rode along had complimented me, at the time, by saying, that my behavior on
the occasion would carry me to Congress. He now wished to know whether I
continued my name as a candidate for the Congress, as the prejudice was strong
against me, since the meeting at Brownsville, and he was quite tired supporting
me against B. Parkinson, and others. I wrote him a note in answer, that I was
thinking nothing about it; there were objects of greater moment on my mind. The
fact was, I was at that time, making arrangements to leave the country, if a
war should ensue. Hamilton had written with a view to induce me, to relinquish
the idea of Congress, for^at that time, he had declared himself a candidate. In
receiving my note, he construed it into a declination on my part, and rode
through the country reading it, with that construction. At the same time, he
read a letter he pretended to have received from Tom the Tinker, advising him,
to declare himself. So that, I had my brother of the bar on the one hand, and
Daniel Hamilton on the other, to contend with. Of the two, my brother of the
bar was certainly the best qualified, possessing some legal knowledge; and in
that particular having the advantage of Hamilton. But, as it was natural, I was
willing the people should think me better qualified than either. And I had
turned my attention to the object, since the prospect of a restoration of order
had taken place.

Thomas Scott of Washington, formerly of the Congress, was also a candidate,
but with him and myself there was a good understanding, viz. that I gave him a
preference to Hamilton, or to my brother of the bar. It was with hesitation
that I had, at first, thought of being a candidate. It was inconvenient, on the
one hand, to go; but on the other hand, it was pleasant to be amongst political
and literary men for a while. At present, it was merely on a principle of
pride, as my name had been used, that I would not withdraw it.

A few days before the election, hearing that it was generally credited in
Washington, that I had declined the election, I put a paragraph in the gazette
contradicting the report Citizens of the district of Washington and Allegheny,
Previous to the late convulsions, it was proposed to me to give my name, as a
candidate for the Congress of the United States; I accepted the compliment. It
is now circulated that I have declined it; No. Considering the delicacy of the
times, I might wish I had not thought of it, but as it is, it would imply a
fear of submitting my conduct to investigation, to withdraw my name from the
public; I have therefore not done it. I may, at present, have less popularity
than I had, but the time will come, when I shall be considered as having
deserved well of the country, in all the delicate conjuntures, in which we have
been situated.

H. H. B.
October 8, 1794.


.

In the same gazette appeared a publication, which had been handed to the press
by major Craig, containing a correspondence between him and Bradford, in which
the latter comes forward, to state those circumstances to which, I presume, he
had a reference, in saying that I had been privy to acts of violence. I saw in
this publication, the result of the management of my brother of the bar; he had
made use of the folly of Bradford, and the weakness of Craig, in order to wound
me, but at their expense; for it has obliged me to expose them both, in the
course of this narrative, more than I could have wished to have done. To have
explained myself by an answer, at the time, was impossible. I could not do it
without giving a narrative, at a considerable length, of the part I had found
it necessary to act with Bradford, in the course of the transactions. I
contented myself with a paragraph in the next gazette, promising a comment and
vouchers in due time I have taken notice of the correspondence between D.
Bradford and Isaac Craig, ^n which my name is introduced; and meaning in due
time to give a history of the incidents of the late convulsion, I have laid
this paper by, to be inserted with a proper comment, and such explanation and
vouchers as may satisfy all reasonable men, of the uprightness of my
intentions, and the purity of my conduct with regard to individuals, or the
public, in the whole of this business.
.

I now addre^s myself to fulfill that engagement, and shall introduce the
publication containing the correspondence of Craig with Bradford.

Mr. Scull,
Your inserting the following letter, and the answer thereto, in the Pittsburgh
Gazette, will oblige your humble servant,

ISAAC CRAIG.
Pittsburgh, 9 th October, 1794.

Pittsburgh, October 1 st, 1794. Sir,
When the commissioners of the United States were at this place, they were told
by H. Brackenridge, esquire. in my presence, that had it not been for his
interposition I would have been proscribed, at the time the people were at
Braddock's fields. It is said the circumstance that induced this, was facts
stated by you; viz. that I had said I would suffer my own house to be made an
excise office of, etc. This, if true, was what any citizen is justifiable in
doing, but not being so with respect to me, I consider the lie to have been
designed for my destruction, and now call on you for your authority. I would
not have addressed you on this subject, had I not supposed that you were
deceived in your information, and could point out the scoundrel with whom it
originated, and from whom I might seek redress for the injuries intended, and
suffered.

I am, sir, your obedient humble servant, ISAAC CRAIG.

DAVID BRADFORD, esquire. Washington.

Washington, October 5 th, 1794. Sir,
I received yours of the first of this current month, in which you have said,
that Mr. Brackenridge asserted, in the presence of the commissioners of the
United States, that, had it not been for his interposition on your behalf at
Braddock's fields, that you would have been banished.

I must inform you, that Mr. Brackenridge has either a very treacherous memory,
or a strong disposition to assert falsehoods, if he asserted as you state: The
truth of the case was, that he evidenced to me the strongest desire to have you
banished. I shall state to you his expressions, or at least some of them. You
may then judge for yourself.

The first day day at Braddock's fields, Mr. Brackenridge cold me, the people
of Pittsburgh were well pleased that the country were about to banish the
persons, whose names had been mentioned; he added, that they ought to go
further, that little He is certainly but a "little" man. However, the epithet
is too feeble for my expression; it is a counterfeit; it wants an indicium of
the genuine bank-bill. I would have used a figure, and have said musk-rat
Craig, if I had said any thing at all.
Craig ought to be banished, for he was one of the same damned junto I have
used this phrase on some occasions, and I might have used it on that; and if
you will place a general with the office of an inspector of the revenue for an
extensive survey; a colonel, his son, with the office of county surveyor,
brigade inspector of the militia, with an independent salary annexed to it, and
a member of the legislature at the same time; a major, his son-in-law, with the
offices of quarter master, deputy commissary, and notary public; a
brother-in-law, now a commissary general, a lender of money on interest, with a
salary of 1500 or 2000 dollars, and all these wealthy, independent of their
offices. If you will place these, I say, in a small village of 150 houses, with
all the influence that employment of mechanics, and their custom to
shopkeepers, and their entertainments can give, they must conduct themselves,
with more delicacy, than is usual with men, if they do not form at least a
damnable, if not, "a damned Junto."
. I replied, there appeared to be no ground to proceed against you, that there
was no letter of yours intercepted, mistating facts, or the conduct of
individuals, to government. Further conversation took place, which had
manifestly for its object, to irritate me against you I knew Craig to be at
that time in the garrison; I had understood he had removed his family there; of
what use would a sentence of banishment be, unless it had been proposed to
storm the garrison. It is not impossible, but I might have been turning the
scent upon a false chase, by holding up Craig and Butler to his nose, who were
safe; the one quarter master and engineer, the other the commandant of the
garrison; and this in order to divert his attention from those, for whom I was
more immediately apprehensive. The quo animo is the thing; not what was said.
And that I had nothing more in view, in all my management, than to parry the
doing any thing, is evident from what afterward took place in the committee.

It was agreeable to my system of managing him, to affect to outstrip him in
his passions, and to be the more violent of the two, that if afterward I
relaxed, he well might. This is a key to his statement. It will be a sufficient
refutation of any idea on my part, to banish any one, that I knew it would do
them no harm, but exalt them; and I expressed myself to this effect, at the
time. I am solicitous to save myself of the imputation of planning or
concurring in the banishment of these people, as much from an unwillingness to
be thought a fool, as to be thought wicked. See my vouchers in the appendix,
the deposition of justice Meetkirk, particularly.


.

The next day, when the commissioners sat, Mr. Brackenridge took me aside, and
mentioned to me your conduct after the burning of Neville's house I did not
speak a single word to him, about Craig, that day; it was after the question
with respect to Craig, was discussed and disposed of, and that of Neville and
Gibson on the carpet, that, turning to him in the committee, I spoke a few
words to him aside, as I have stated in my narrative; they respected Neville
and Gibson.
; that you assumed high airs in contempt of every thing that had been done by
the people, that you had declared in the most positive manner, that you would
keep up the letters, designating the office of inspection, at every risk; and
though the people of Pittsburgh requested you to take them down, you would not.
In short, that you were determined to keep the office open, in contempt of the
then ruling opinion It was in the committee, publicly, not in private, that I
related the having heard a story from captain Lang, with regard to Craig's
taking down the papers, etc.
.

He told farther, that he put in operation a stratagem to see whether you had
firmness to support all the vaunts and blasts you had made. He said, he went
out in the street, and asked the first person he met, if he had heard there
were 500 of the Washington county people, coming down armed to burn Pittsburgh,
because the inspection office was kept open; the answer was, No. He asked the
next he met, the same answer was received; by this means, the news was spread
over the town in a few minutes, that 500 armed men were approaching the place,
to burn it, etc. He said the letters were immediately taken down, and torn to
pieces; in short, he told me you was one of the warmest sticklers for the
revenue law, and that you had been as odious to the citizens of Pittsburgh, and
the neighborhood, as the excise officer himself had been.

It was also publicly, in the committee, that I told the story of the 500 men;
and all this, to make Bradford and the committee laugh at Craig, and think no
more about him. It was at Parkinson's ferry when I encored it to Bradford, that
running on, it came into my head to say that I had contributed to the report
myself. It was the second time of telling. It required a new circumstance to
enliven it. The story was founded in fact, but I did not make conscience of
embellishing it.
I then mentioned to Mr. Brackenridge, that he had better state to the
commissioners the circumstances he had just related to me; he said it was
disagreeable to him, as he lived in the same place It was at Parkinson's ferry,
when he pressed me to read the intercepted letters, that I made this apology;
like some of the modern dramatists, be neglects the unities of time and place*
in his composition.
; I replied that I could open the way, and immediately stated to the
commissioners a report which I had heard respecting your conduct after the
burning Neville's house, and stated precisely what Mr. Brackenridge had stated,
one minute before, not mentioning from whom I had the report. I observed, as it
was only a report,, it would be improper to take it up as true, till it could
be discovered whether true or false. I then called upon the gentlemen from
Pittsburgh, to give information, if they knew any thing on the subject. Mr.
Wilkins observed, that he did not know any thing against you. Mr. M'Masters to
the like effect, and Mr. Brackenridge also concurred. He declined to give the
narrative which he had done to me just before, though I opened the way, on what
principle I know not.

Extract from the deposition of justice MEETKIRK, in the appendix.
Mr. Bradford then spoke concerning the expulsion of major Craig; for he said
he had been informed that major Craig should have said, immediately after the
burning of genesis Neville's house, that he would let the damned rascals see that
the excise law should be enforced, for that he would open an office of
inspection in his own house. Mr. Bradford was then requested to give his
authority; he replied, that he could not recollect, but that he heard it
mentioned among the people. It was then referred to the gentlemen in the
committee, that represented the people of Pittsburgh, Wilkins, M'Masters, and
Brackenridge; and it appeared that neither of them could give any information
on the subject.


I shall here mention another circumstance, though it does not concern you; it
may, perhaps, obviate false insinuations, which he may be disposed to make. On
the morning of the second day's meeting of the commissioners, at Parkinson's
ferry, Mr. Brackenridge told me, that there was a young man, who wrote in
Brison's office, attending the commissioners for the purpose of presenting a
petition for the return of Brison. He wished me to oppose (...) suggesting
reasons, that he had always been a pest to the^ (...)* that he was a great
friend to the excise, alluding to a certain period when a number of suits were
brought, or indictments preferred to the grand jury; that Brison was known to
be at the bot^om of that business -- that he was a damned scoundrel and
conceited coxcomb -- that nothing could ever turn out about Pittsburgh, but he
must be writing to the governor -- a puppy, added he, what had he to do with
the governor? it was his place to have sat in his office, and issue writs, when
called on, etc. I observed to him, if he had any reasons to offer to the
commissioners, why Brison should not be suffered to return, he had better offer
them himself; no petition was presented. These are facts which I have stated*
and I leave you at full liberty to make any use of them, you may think proper.
I would have answered your letter before, but I have been much indisposed.

I am, sir, your very humble servant, DAVID BRADFORD.

Major ISAAC CRAIG.

If it was necessary, I would refer to George Wallace, Robert Galbraith,
attorney for the state, and others, that I engaged to support the recall of
Brison, if any person would be got to move it; and I refer to colonel
Valandighan, Doctor Bedford, for proof, that I endeavored to persuade them to
move it. That I called Brison coxcomb and puppy, and all that, and said he had
no business to be writing to a governor, is all true enough; but the quo animo
is the question. I shall subjoin an extract from John Baldwin's deposition in
the appendix:

After the meeting at B^addock's fields, and before that of Parkinson's, I was
with Mr. Brac^enridge on some business in law, and found a difficulty was in
the way of doing the business, from the absence of the prothenotary, Mr. Brison.

A conversation took place, about the sending away the persons, that were gone.
Mr. Brackenridge explained why it was the people of Pittsburgh had acquie^c^d,
or ^eemed to favor it. It was to ^ave the town; that, for his part, he could
wish they could be allowed to come back; and was anxious for this as to all,
except Kirkpatrick; and as to him, did not care if he never came back, for he
had a long time been under an apprehension of a private assassination from him;
a^ to the prothonotary Brison, it stagnated the business of the county, and it
would be his wish to get him back. Mr. Brackenridge sounded me with respect to
the opinion of the people in suffering Brison to return. My opinion was, that
it would be a difficult matter, as he was very obnoxious on account of his
speculations on the people.


Why not move it myself? it is well known that the place of seconding is more
favorable to a warm support of a measure, than that of moving it in the first
instance. Besides, it was necessary for me to preserve myself, at that time,
from all possible odium, in order to accomplish objects with the people, of a
more serious nature, and it would be less odious to second, than to move the
resolution. There was no person more injured in the expulsion of the
prothonotary than I was, or more interested in his return; and it is false in
Bradford to say that I wished him to oppose it. I stated difficulties in order
to interest him with me to overcome them. It was flattering his vanity to do
this, and the way to persuade him.

My brother of the bar, who had, at least, the superintendence of this
composition of Bradford, was overseen in letting him put in this paragraph, for
it shakes the credit of all the rest. I might be supposed willing to have the
Neville's junto mortified, in getting the people at least to talk of banishing
them; but it is absurd to suppose that a practicing lawyer would wish to
derange his own business, by disturbing the prothonotary.

The paragraph respecting Brison, has also this bad effect. It is traveling
out of the interogatory of Craig, introducing what relates to an indifferent
person. It is a negative, pregnant with regard to the allegation that I have
been privy to the transactions of Bradford, in general; that I had advised or
prompted these; for on the same ground, at this time, he would have brought
every instance out. I acknowledge that it operates also, to give credit with
regard to what he has stated; for if he chose to invent at all, why not invent
more. This has weight with me, and induces me to resolve his own statement of
facts, where he has mistated any, into misconception, and a want of
recollection, more than deliberate intention. But there are parts, that appear
to me intentionally false.

There is one advantage certainly derived from Craig's publication: It is
relinquishing his province, the sword; and entering that of the press. I do not
consider myself, now, bound to fight him; he has waved the duel, which with a
man of such courage, as I know him to possess, is a great matter to me. God be
praised; I have escaped a challenge, or any future obligation to accept one,
from an engineer accustomed to the sound even of big guns, and one of the
bravest men on earth.

CHAP. VII.
THE general election for a member of Congress, for the district of Washington
and Allegheny, was held on the 14th of October; it might naturally be supposed
that, notwithstanding the hurricane of the insurrection had subsided, it must
have been in a great measure, from the impulse of fear, and that the same
principle which produced it, must still have existence in the minds of the
people, and that for this reason the spirit of insurgency must govern the
election. If so, the most violent insurgent, or one the most favoring them
would be chosen. So it was, nevertheless, that Daniel Hamilton, who had a
command at the burning of Neville's house, and at the election, supported by
Bradford, was the lowest on the poll; and Albert Gallatin, who had opposed the
idea of war, more directly, at the meeting at Parkinson's than I had thought
prudent, and who had distinguished himself, afterward at Brownsville, in
overthrowing the purposes of the violent, and was under the disadvantage of
being taking up, on three days notice, and out of his own district* was the
highest. My brother of the bar, who had been absent from the country, and was
not under the necessity of ^^fending the wishes of any one, and had courted the
insurgents since his return, and was supported by the Neville's interest, at
the same time, was but little above Hamilton. My conduct during the early part
of the insurrection was of such a nature, that except with confidential
persons, it was not understood, and must have been thought to have been
equivocal. Yet I was on the poll, next to Gallatin. Thomas Scott, who had every
^^y expected assassination from the violent, at his own house d^ring the
disturbance, was next to me. I cannot well explain all this. I state the facts.
I should most probably have been elected, had it not been understood in all the
more remote part of Washington county, that I had declined Extract of a letter
from a gentleman in Washington, in the Pittsburgh Gazet^e. October 18th.
Mr. Gallatin's name was introduced all of a sudden, and without his knowledge,
it was almost univ^^^ally understood in this county, that Mr. Brackenridge had
declined.



. I had but a few votes in that county, but the greater part of Allegheny,
where I reside. I only remark further, that in Hamilton's district, which is in
the neighborhood of Parkinson's ferry and Mingo creek, and was the hot bed of
the insurrection, I had but 24 votes, Daniel Hamilton, 132, and my brother of
the bar, 90; which was about a fourth of the whole he had in the two counties.
I state this only to show who it was, that stood fairest with the most violent
of the insurgents.

I had been perfectly quiescent with regard to the election. I had heard the
tales propagated amongst the insurgents against me, and I had seen the horses
from the public stables dispatched by quarter master Craig, to all parts of the
country, with tickets for my brother of the bar. The French convention had not
more couriers out, at that time. But I was not disturbed at this; for though I
did not choose to withdraw my name, yet I did not wish to be elected. I knew
that the suffrages of the people, under existing circumstances, would be
construed as a presumption of having been more with them, in the recent
convulsion, than became a good citizen. It would render my character
questionable abroad; I had reason in a very short time to look upon it as
fortunate that I had not this presumption. This will open a new scene upon the
reader, as it did upon me.

I had heard before this, by individuals from Philadelphia, of the impression
made upon the citizens, by my letter to Tench Coxe. That it was considered as a
letter of defiance, and had excited an irresistible flame of indignation
against me. This did not much disturb me, at first, for I conceived the
government would understand it, and take it in good part, and the people in due
time would understand it also. Marshal Lenox had gone to Philadelphia, and knew
my solicitude in his behalf, when at Pittsburgh. Presly Neville had gone, who,
though somewhat chagrined, because I would not do every thing his way, yet,
when his mind cooled, would see things in a more proper point of view, and
would at all events, do me the justice to acknowledge, that it was at his
instance that I came forward at an early period of the business. Commissioner
Ross, who knew my conduct from the commencement, had been with the executive,
and in speaking of those in this country, that were hostile or offenders, would
represent me favorably; on these grounds, I was perfectly easy, as to men of
information near the President, and concluded that from thence, just ideas,
with regard to me, would spread, and gradually correct the popular error, with
the militia that were coming forward. I had seen paragraphs unfavourable, with
regard to me, in the gazettes; but I thought nothing of that, considering them
as the result of an unavoidable, but temporary misconception. I had also heard
of the flame excited by the "Indian treaty" publication, which was charged to
my account; and had raised the resentment of the Jersey militia, in particular,
so that they were hewing me in imagination, with their ^abres, as they came
along, and bayoneting every bush or other thing upon the road, and calling what
they bayoneted, "Brackenridge". But I conceived it to be the policy of the more
intelligent to let the people exercise their minds with some objects, and
perhaps improve their resentment, general, or particular, but not that any
person, who knew my style, would take that publication for mine.

I had more reason to be apprehensive, than I was aware. A few days after the
election, David Reddick, commissioner with Findley, from the committee at
Parkinson's, returned from his mission to the President, whom he had found at
Carlisle, with the army on their march; he called upon me, and with great
appearance of solicitude, gave me to understand the unfavourable point of view,
in which I stood with the army, and the great personal danger I had to
apprehend from the threats against me. That having occasionally introduced my
name to the President, as not being concerned in the insurrection, he was
silent. But that those about him, appeared to have strong prejudices. This
brought to my mind, an expression I had seen in the address of the President at
Carlisle; exhorting, amongst other things, "to detect intriguers". Thought I,
that savours a little of chevalier Neville. He knows that I cannot be charged
with any overt act, and may have insinuated there, as he had done here, that I
have intrigued against the government. The fact was, the intriguers here were
all on the side of government; there was nothing but open force against it.

At the time Mr. Reddick called, I had just finished a representation, which I
had taken into my head to draw up to the President, and intended to communicate
by the post; representing to him, "that whatever doubt might have been
entertained of the pacification of the country, at the time commissioners
Reddick and Findley left it; yet none could be entertained now, that I would
pledge my life for it, that a single troop of horse might come up and arrest
any man with safety: that the depression had been as sudden and as low, through
the country, as the insurgency was rapid, and the fury high before. That the
effect would be greater in resting the army at Bedford and Cumberland, than in
coming further; for report had magnified the force, and imagination is stronger
than the eye; and it would be a more dignified spectacle to see the laws
restored by the bare showing of an army, and the civil authority of this
country, itself, in motion, to aid the authority of the union, in arresting
offenders, than the whole body coming actually into the country; that five
hundred horse might come on with the judge and the marshal, merely as an
escort; not for safety, but for dignity. That something was to be left to the
honor of the country; and the line of demarcation percisely marked between the
impression of necessary awe, and that of degrading reduction: that the country
could not always be retained by force, and therefore it would not be prudent to
extinguish affection: that the people, then under his command, were subject to
the like error with the people here; and it might, in the turn of things, at no
very distant day, happen, that the government would stand in need of the
country to repress insurrections elsewhere; that if the army should come into
the country, they would come weary and fatigued, through the mountains, in the
rains of the season, and would be seen to a disadvantage; they would be less
satisfied with the campaign themselves, and the awful apprehension, which the
people here had, would be lessened, and they would begin to say they could have
fought them. It would be also difficult, if not impossible, to restrain the
army from depredations on property, or from personal insult; and that would
soar the minds of the best friends of the government; and reduce that internal
check derived from their support against another insurrection."

I mentioned to Mr. Reddick what I had been about, but said, if this is the
case, that I am suspected, let me say what I may, it will be misconstrued; I
shall throw by my papers, and let things take their course.

I was struck with information from Mr. Reddick, of an expression by the
President, when the commissioners were stating to him the probable
irregularities of the army, from the temper in which they were, and possible
indiscriminate injury to persons, as well as property. The President said "that
if a single gun was fired in opposition, he could not answer for the
consequence." Thought I, if that is the case, and the army should march into
the country, whether a gun be fired or not, he, or those who may command them,
may not be able to answer for the consequence to individuals, whose names are
obnoxious, it will not be safe for me, as things now stand, to trust myself in
their way, but to avoid them, if practicable, until it can be seen, whether
discipline and subordination to civil authority is preservable, or not.

Commissioner Reddick had proposed to call a third meeting of the Parkinson's
ferry delegates, and at the same time invite the most conspicuous inhabitants
to attend, in order to send forward such further assurances to the President,
as might justify him in suspending the march of the troops, or at least of the
whole body. He put an advertisement in the paper to this effect The
commissioners appointed by the Parkinson's ferry committee to wait on the
President of the United States, and governor of Pennsylvania, on the affairs of
the western counties of Pennsylvania, having performed the duty, requests the
meeting of that committee on Friday, the 24 instant, at their usual place
(Parkinson's, ferry), in order to receive the commissioners report. The
commissioners do request that a full meeting may be had, not only of the
members of the committee, but as many discreet citizens, as can any way find it
conveni^nt, would likewise give their attendance, as matters of the greatest
concern to the safety, happiness, and prosperity of the country, may be then
discussed.

N. B. A very awful army approaching this country, it is hoped, will make the
business too serious to be trifled with.


.

I weighed deliberately, after Mr. Reddick had left me, the propriety of my
attending that meeting, and I determined not to do it. I could no longer go
forward, as I had done heretofore, without the least apprehensions of my views,
or my conduct, being misconstrued by the government; and therefore I would not
go at all. One of our deputies from Pittsburgh attended, and I wrote by him to
that effect.

In the mean time, I thought it proper to endeavor to remove the misconception
of the army, with regard to the Indian treaty publication, and at my request,
the printer discharged me of the imputation, by a paragraph in the paper
Understanding that a certain publication, which appeared in our paper, sometime
ago, containing speeches, in imitation of an Indian treaty, and supposed to
reflect on the militia of New Jersey, and has been attributed abroad, to Mr.
Brackenridge, we are ready to declare that Mr. Brackenridge is not the author.
.

More than a thousand of the principal inhabitants of the country convened on
the 24th of October at Parkinson's, and adopted the following resolutions:

1st. Resolved, That in our opinion, the civil authority is now fully competent
to enforce the laws, and to punish both past and future offenses, in as much as
the people at large are determined to support every description of civil
officers, in the legal discharge of their duty.

2d. Resolved, That in our opinion, all persons who may be charged or
suspected, with having committed any offense against the United States, or the
state, during the late disturbances, (and ^ho have not entitled themselves to
the benefit of the act of oblivion,) ought immediately to surrender themselves
to the civil authority, in order to stand their trial; that if there be such
persons amongst us, they are ready to surrender themselves accordingly, and
that we will unite in giving our assistance to bring to justice such offenders,
as shall not surrender.

3d. Resolved, That in our opinion, offices of inspection, may immediately be
opened in the respective counties of this survey, without any danger of
violence being offered to any of the officers; and that the distillers are
willing and ready to enter their stills.

Messrs. William Findley, David Reddick, Ephraim Douglass, and Thomas Morton,
where then appointed to wait on the President of the United States, with the
foregoing resolutions.

JAMES EDGAR, Chairman.
ALBERT GALLATIN, Secretary.
The above were published in the Pittsburgh Gazette, as usual.

In the same paper appeared an avowal of the Indian treaty publication, by a
citizen of the western country, offering his name, when the printer should be
called upon, and avering the publication to have been well intended, and for
the purpose of giving the commissioners of the government while at Pittsburgh,
an idea of the popular language of the country. It appeared, on inquiry, that
the author was a friend to good order, and had never countenanced the
insurrection.



CHAP. VIII.
THE rage of the army against me appeared to increase, as they approached the
country; at least the accounts I received of menaces and death, were every day
more frequent and determined. It was said, that I had saved myself by the
amnesty of the government, but that should not save me from death without the
forms of law. The executive would not be justifiable in bringing me to trial,
in violation of their faith; but, on moral or political grounds, there would be
no impropriety in the army exercising, at least in one instance, an act of
summary, though irregular, justice. This I understood to be the language, not
of those in the ranks of the common soldiery only, but of the highest officers.

The publication of Bradford had appeared, and that would complete the proof to
the exiles, of what they would have only suspected before, viz. that I had
prompted Bradford to their expulsion. These were with the army, and would no
doubt contribute to the flame that had prevailed. I had understood before this,
by intelligence from Philadelphia, that Neville the younger, though not
publicly charging me with being concerned in the insurrection, yet his
insinuations, to individuals, were to that effect. Commissioner Reddick, on his
return from his first mission, informed me, that, being in company with general
Neville, he had said, that as I had a knowledge that his house was to be
burned, sometime before it happened, he thought I might have given him some
information, that he might have removed at least his papers. I began to reflect
what possible ground he could have for supposing that I had a knowledge of an
intention of burning his house, before it took place. I recollected that, after
the burning of the house, I mentioned the language of M'Donald, secretary of
the Mingo meeting, to me, sometime before, in my office; viz. that the people
talked of breaking up Neville, and burning Pittsburgh; and that I had thought
nothing of it, at the time; but as they had burned Neville's house, they might
accomplish the other part of the threat, and burn Pittsburgh See the testimony
of M'Donald in the Appendix.
. This had been carried to general Neville, and he had deduced from it, that I
had a knowledge that his house was to be burned.

But the publication of Bradford had appeared, and fixed upon me, so far as the
publication could have credit, at least a privity with the expulsion, and a
support of it. The army was now at Bedford and Cumberland, and the enquiries,
with respect to me, were, Whether I had left the country? or was it probable I
would remain until they could get me in their power? It seemed to be a contest
amongst them, who should have the honor of dispatching me. I conceived, that
the example of the Jacobins in France had infected the mass of the army, just
as much as it had the people here, in Tom the Tinker's time; and I thought it
not at all improbable that I should be assassinated. It appeared to me
expedient, to address letters to some of the principal officers; stating my
apprehensions, and representing the disgrace that it would bring upon their
march, to injure a man who was, and in due time would appear to be, innocent;
giving them also to understand, that I remained in the country, was ready to
resign myself to the cognizance of the laws, and made no claim to an amnesty,
if I stood in need of any. I had written a number of letters to principal
officers, to this effect; but I reflected, that individual officers might not
like to be addressed by me, in my present situation. It would argue a
confidence reposed in them, from personal acquaintance, which it would please
them as well to keep out of view at present. Besides, I did not see well what
officers could do. My fate would most probably come from the corpse of horse,
that would come on first. These especially, were composed of individuals, in
the capacity of common soldiers, equal, in all respects, to those constituted
officers. It would depend upon the sentiments of the mass, more than the
discipline of officers, with regard to me. It struck me, therefore, to address
the army generally, in a hand-bill, which would be circulated through the whole
body; whereas, if I addressed individuals, my letters could not be generally
communicated, in order to correct in any degree the false sentiments
entertained of me, or to avert the intention of putting me to death, without
enquiry. Under this idea, I drew up a short address Citizens of the Army
advancing to the Western Country:
SERIOUS intimations are given me, that I am considered by you, as greatly
criminal in the late insurrection in this country; and though I may have
shielded myself from the law, by taking advantage of the terms of the amnesty
proposed by the commissioners, and sanctioned by the proclamation of the
President, yet that I shall not escape the resentment of individuals. It would
them to me totally improbable, that republican soldiers would fully the glory
of their voluntary rising, by a single intemperate act. Nevertheless, as it
would wound me with exquisite sensibility, to be treated with indignity, by
words or looks, short of violence, I beg leave to suggest to you, that it is a
maxim of reason, that a man "shall be presumed innocent till the contrary is
proved;" and I give you a strong presumption of my innocence, viz. that though
having an opportunity of relinquishing the country, I stand firm, and will
surrender myself to the closest examination of the judges, and put myself
entirely on the merit or demerit of my conduct, through the whole of the
unfortunate crisis.

H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Pittsburgh, October 26, 1794.


, and dispatched a messenger, with some hundred hand-bills, to commissioner
Reddick and others, who had been appointed from the last meeting at
Parkinson's, to wait again upon the President, or other commanding officer with
the army, in order to lay the state of the country before them. The army had
moved from Bedford and Cumberland, and were met by our commissioners the march
of a day or two from the country. My direction to our commissioners, to whom I
had transmitted my hand-bills, was, to deliver them to the commanding officers
of the different parts of the army, to be by them distributed, if they thought
proper, amongst the troops. I addressed letters, with the hand-bills, to the
commanding officers, to this effect. The hand-bills were delivered to the
commanding officers of the right wing, governors Howell and Mifflin; and to the
commander in chief, general Lee, who was, at that time, with the left wing, on
his advance from fort Cumberland. The President had returned to Philadelphia. I
was informed by letter, from commissioner Reddick, that fame had not at all
exaggerated the fury of the army against me; and there would appear to be no
individual, even of those highest in command, who appeared disposed to have any
solicitude on my account, or at least to be willing to have it thought they had
any; that governor Howell, on receiving my hand-bills, threw* them instantly
into the fire; that Mifflin and Lee had given feeble assurances, that I should
be personally safe; -- but that he himself, Mr. Reddick, in order to serve me,
had contrived that some of the hand-bills should find their way amongst the
troops, without going through the hands of the officers. I disapproved of the
having done this; for I knew that offense would be extracted from every thing
possible, and that the officers would say this was wrong. It was said to be
wrong; and I began to be charged with stupidity, as well as villainy, in not
knowing better than to send forward papers amongst the ranks of an army. I was
blamed for addressing them at all. I had considered this army as consisting of
citizens, and I did not conceive any greater impropriety, in addressing them in
a camp, by a hand-bill, than in their counting-houses, or upon their farms, in
the gazette of Philadelphia, Trenton, or Richmond. But I was unpopular; I was
under the imputation of being a traitor to my country; if I was not hanged, I
deserved to be hanged; and it was immaterial what I said or did, it would be
taken in bad part. It was said, it was a damnable impertinence in me, to have
the assurance to write or speak a word to any body. I scarcely knew whether to
laugh or indulge chagrin at the absurdity of such speeches. I had thought the
recent instances in France, of men being run down by the clamor of an
occasion, and murdered without an opportunity of justifying themselves, might
have corrected such precipitancy in the American mind.

The deputation of commissioners from the country, had not answered the end of
arresting the march of the army, by assurances of the restoration of
tranquillity, and obedience to the laws. The President had seen things from a
different point of view with me, and had not thought himself justifiable in
suspending the march. I presume, he had not a perfect confidence in the
submission of the people. It would s^em so from the circumstance of spies
traversing the country* at this time, in order to gain intelligence on which he
could better depend, than on the representations of our commissioners. I
presume he also conceived, that the exhibiting so formidable a force in the
country, would leave an impression of fear; the best security, in his opinion,
against future opposition to the laws. It would take away effectually, the
saying hereafter, that the militia could not have sustained a march across so
vast a mountain. The difference of expense would be little; as the equipments
and appointments for the army had been made, stores and every requisite
provided, and the troops might as well be marching into the country, as
remaining at distant points, until the judiciary had advanced, and finished
their examinations and arrests in the country. It would have a good effect in
other parts of the union, where a spirit of insurrection might exist, to hear
that an army had crossed even the Allegheny mountain, to the heads of the
waters that run to the west, in order to crush the insurgency, that had shown
itself in that remote skirt of the government. It would have a good effect in
Europe, and restore that confidence in the government, which had been lessened
by the report of the disturbance of the summer. Finally, a great part of the
army were anxious to see the western country, and they might as well come on
embodied as they were.

The right wing of the army had now crossed the mountain, and were in the
western country. It was like the approach of a tempest to me. I could hear the
thunder at a distance; every day new accounts of butchery denounced against me,
without judge or jury. I began to hear general Neville raise his voice; "the
damnedest rascal that ever was on GOD Almighty's earth."

The left wing had also crossed the mountain, at the distance of 30 miles to
the westward. I could hear of colonel Neville at the table of general Lee, and
publicly elsewhere, through that camp, denounce revenge against the "damned
rascal," meaning me.

I began to think it would be unsafe to stand it: that I could not have
sufficient confidence in the good disposition of the commanding officers, much
less in their power, to restrain injuries; and that it would be advisable to
be out of the way a little, until I could see whether subordination to the
civil authority; wa^^ reservable or not. I had the wilderness behind me; and,
as before, I had meditated to escape from Tom the Tinker, by going to the east,
so now, I meditated to escape from an equally outrageous banditti, as I began
to think them, by going to the west. My sensations were violent at the time,
but they ought to be excused, as I must have thought it very extraordinary in
people, to have come to support the laws, and to be talking of violating them.
I communicated to general Wilkins my resolution of going, neither to Spainards,
nor British, but of taking my chance amongst the Indians, for a month or two,
until I could have a proper assurance of protection, in surrendering myself to
the judiciary authority. I had thought of a hunter, whom I could employ to go
to the woods with me.

General Wilkins could not but acknowledge the expediency of going, from all
that he had heard or seen, and proposed a hunter, whom he knew, and thought
more expert, than the one of whom I had made mention; and engaged to speak to
him to go with me. He was to send for him next morning.

I lay upon a couch, and thought of it till midnight. I reflected that people
would always talk more than they would do; and that putting me to death would
be more in the language, than in the intention of the mass. It was the
fashionable speech of the camp, and every one adopted it; without meaning to
carry it into effect. But I reflected also, that this very strain of talking,
though not originating from intention of act, with the mass, yet might lead
some inconsiderate and unprincipled men, to perpetrate what they heard spoken
of; more especially as I had heard of the violence of the Nevilles, and
suspected that the horrid resentment, which they appear to entertain against
me, might prompt them to encourage assassination.

However, after the deep thought of many hours, I sprung from my bed couch, and
expressed my determination, that if I was to be assassinated, it should be in
my own house. It never should be said, that I would move a foot from the
ground; more especially as in my address to the army, I said I would not. It
was true, I made that declaration, at the time, under the impression that my
address would be read, and all idea of personal injury would be relinquished,
and the examination of my conduct left to the judiciary, under the avowal which
I made, of putting myself entirely upon the merit, or demerit of of it; meaning
that I should set up no claim to the amnesty, of which it might be supposed I
would be willing to avail myself.

Having now determined to await my fate, I employed a day or two in putting my
papers in order, and making a short sketch of the outlines of my conduct,
during the insurrection, and directing it to be deli^ered to James Ross, who
know the greater part, of his own knowledge, with a request that he would sta^^
i^^o the public, and do my memory justice. I knew the rage against ^^e was
founded in the misconception of the multitude, and the malice of individuals.
But it was what had happened to others in other times, and would happen a
thousand times again. It had been the case of La Rochefoucaut, Clermont de
Tonnere, and others, at an early period of the French revolution.

About this time Josiah Tannehil, an assistant burgess of Pittsburgh came to
me, and mentioned the name of my brother of the bar, said he, he has discovered
--. What? said I, the longitude? No, said he, but that you are not within the
amnesty, you did not sign upon the day. Is that all? said I, that will not do
me any harm.

The event of the election had incensed my brother of the bar still more, if
possible, than he was before. From a want of delicacy, or a defect of
education, he values himself upon the application of force, and will talk
familiarly of knocking down a man. I had heard that he had talked of having
recourse to this mode of showing his superiority over me. If he was not so
popular, he would convince the people that he was stronger, and more ferocious.
However, he had lost sight of this, when the prospect appeared of having me
assassinated by the army, the propriety of which he strenuously advocated, and
conceived, that the army might justifiably do that, en mass, which every
individual would be justified in doing by himself, upon so horrid an insurgent
as I was. He had, no doubt, been busy in impressing this idea, by all avenues,
by which he could possibly reach the army. But on discovering that I was not,
in strictness, within the amnesty, and beginning to believe that, with good
management, something might be done with me with the judiciary, he had
relinquished the idea of assassination, and contemplated the more disgraceful
consequence to me, the being ignominiously arrested, and tried at the bar for
high treason.

I had no idea that it had been any secret before, that I had not signed on the
day. I had ^ever thought of an amnesty. I would have resented it as an
indignity, to have it supposed that I did. I had signed upon the principles I
have stated in my narrative.

It struck me, as fortunate, that my brother of the bar had fastened upon this.
He would communicate the circumstance to the Nevilles with the army, and that
would change their views, with regard to the mode of proceeding against me; and
instead of getting the father-in-law, general Morgan's dragoons, to put me to
death privately, would lead them to assail the judiciary with accusations, and
to use all address, influence, and industry, to collect or make testimony.

It was precisely as I had foreseen. Accounts from the army, of the language of
the Nevilles, now began to be, that of having me hung. I was diverted with a
speech of general Neville's, reported to me: When some of the people, alarmed
for their situation, had gone forward to solicit his favor; Children, said he,
it is not you we want; it is some of the "big fish," Brackenridge, Gallatin,
and Findley, that we want. Thought I, it is high enough to expect to find me in
the same shoal of fish with Gallatin and Findley, when I have had a political
difference with Findley, that has produced a distance, which still exists; and
when I have never spoke to Gallatin in my life, that I recollect, until I saw
him at Parkinson's ferry. But the fact was, Findley and Gallatin were
obnoxious, perhaps with the judiciary, but certainly with secretary Hamilton,
who acted in aid of the judiciary in the examination of witnesses; and it would
have a good effect to involve me in the odium of Gallatin and Findley. I give
credit to the ingenuity of the old general in this.

Willing to avoid the circumstance of an arrest, in any humiliating way, I had
prepared a letter to judge Peter's, giving him to understand, that whether
within the amnesty or not, I was ready to disclaim it; and had a right to do
this, under the principle, Juri pro se introducto quisquis renunciari potest;
every man may renounce a privilege that has been specially given him; but that
it would not be necessary to wound my feelings, by dispatching troops to arrest
me. I would come forward upon a moment's notice, or I would remain, and be
ready to surrender myself at Pittsburgh, when they should come forward to that
place.

At the same time, I had prepared a paragraph for the gazette, calling upon all
good citizens, who knew any thing of treasonable actions, speeches, seditious
writings, or misdemeanors of any kind, cognizable by the judiciary of the
United States, by me done, said, or written, to come forward, and give their
testimony to the judiciary, then in the country, and ready to hear them.
Commissioner Ross was at this time in Pittsburgh, and was about to set out to
the army. I showed him my letter to judge Peter's, and my advertisement, which I
was about to insert in the gazette; and I requested him to bear my letter to
judge Peter's. He made this remark, that, in his opinion, the true medium was,
on the one hand, not to court a prosecution; on the other, not to fear it. I
thought the observation solid; and I reflected, that I have been always
dissat^fied with the petulence of persons accused, as if they were willing to
derive popularity from a prosecution; and it had struck me, as more dignified,
to consider it, as it really was, a great misfortune, but, at the same time, to
bear it with modesty and firmness.

James Ross undertook to mention it to the judiciary, that I was ready to
surrender myself, and would pledge his honor, that I would not remove from the
town, or avoid an inquisition, This, he presumed, would supersede the arresting
me with any ignominious circumstances; a thing which it was possible my enemies
would endeavor to accomplish, in order to have that gratification, if they
could obtain nothing more. On this, I laid aside my letter to the judge, and my
paragraph for the gazette.

CHAP. IX.
MY brother of the bar had gone to the camp, and had entered upon his office of
solicitor of testimony against me. The justice of the peace, on whose paper of
submission I had put my name, had been called before the judiciary, in order to
ascertain the fact, that I was not within the amnesty. It was ascertained; and
now the field was open for accusation. In the examination of all witnesses, the
great burden of the song was, "What do you know of Brackenridge?" I knew well
that secretary Hamilton would have a predisposition against me. He would rather
find the opposition to the law to have originated in the plan of some leading
individuals, than with the mass of the people: for the excise law being a
result of the funding system, of which the secretary was an advocate, it would
save the pride of judgment, to have it thought opposed by the seditious arts of
one, or a few, rather than by the feelings or common sense of many. I reflected
also, that the secretary would have observed, in my letter to Tench Coxe, and
in some other publications, that I was not a friend to the funding system
itself. And this, even with a man of integrity, would constitute a bias
imperceptible to himself; and I was sensible, that the opinion of the
secretary, in my case, would have weight with the judiciary.

Judge Peter's I knew to have no prejudice against me; and I did not conceive
that Rawle had any; but as the army were vociferous to have me made a victim,
there would naturally spring up, in the minds of both, an inclination to
gratify them.

But with the secretary and judiciary, the wishes of the Nevilles connections,
who were considered as martyrs to the government, would have an almost
irresistible influence. I reflected, that the drift of my speech at the Mingo
meeting house, might not have been fully understood by all; but more especially
my management at Parkinson's ferry, the first meeting, was not understood
generally, for it was not my wish that it should be generally understood, and
therefore the testimony that would of course come forward, with regard to what
was said or done on these occasions, would place my conduct in an equivocal, if
not in a criminal point of view. When I add to this, the leaning that persons,
conscious of criminality, would have to gratify the government, by testimony
against a character that was to be run down, in order to gain favor for
themselves, I thought an arrest not improbable. But when I also took into view,
the prospect of favor with government, as to offices, of which it would be
supposed the Nevilles connection would have now the distribution, and that an
oath, on the present occasion, would go a great way to recommend, I thought my
arrest certain.

My adversaries considered themselves as having lost a great deal, in the
departure of Bradford. On the return of the first commissioners, Reddick and
Findley, he had been informed of an observation of the President, on the
commissioners representing, that all the principal actors had taken the benefit
of the amnesty; We have heard, said he, of inflammatory speeches made after the
22d day of August The amnesty respected only what was done before this day.
. It was understood by them, that this had a reference to Bradford: it was on
this that he thought proper to abandon the country. If he had known the
arrangements that had been made on his behalf, by some of my adversaries, he
would perhaps have staid at home. The way had been prepared: it had been given
out, that he was a weak man; that he had been gulled into the business; that he
had been set up as a thing to be shot at, by some behind the scene; that I was
the manager of the puppet show; the most dangerous person to the government on
the west of the mountain; that Gallatin and Findley were nothing to me. I will
not charge the Nevilles with devising this; it was the plan of my brother of
the bar. The letter of Craig to Bradford, insinuating I would not have
addressed you on the subject, had I not supposed that you were deceived in your
information.


that it was not supposeable that he could do or say any thing amiss, gives a
key to the system of making use of him. He was to be represented to the
secretary as deceived, misled by an artful and designing man, whom they wished
hanged in his place. The Nevilles had been brought into it, and begun to adopt
the language suitable to the occasion, and which continues to be the rhyme yet,
that Bradford was gulled.

In the mean time, a detachment of horse, escorting general Gibson, who had
been exiled, arrived at Pittsburgh. They were under the command of corporal
Cunningham, a merchant of Philadelphia. He had given orders not to speak to me.
I had supposed, that general Gibson, who had been acquainted with the
commencement of the insurrection, would have explained to them the mistake
under which they had labored with regard to me. I had heard of him, as the
only one of the exiles who had the candor to do me justice, on his way out of
the country. It is probable he had given his opinion favorably, with regard to
what had happened before he went away; but it might be supposed, that I had
acted a different part afterward. I reflected on my solicitude on his account,
at the time of the expulsion See Meetkirk's deposition in the appendix, and
John Scull's, and others.
, when I saw him pass by my house, with the dragoons of his train, looking up,
and laughing; as much as to say, "There lives a fellow that is to be hanged."
He ought to have recollected, that he was chairman of the committee that exiled
the first three. But Gibson is far from being an unfeeling or unjust man, but
he was under the necessity of giving way to the current against me; it was too
strong to be stemmed. He did go so far as to say, that all things considered,
he could not conceive me to be so much concerned in the insurrection as I was
supposed to be.

The next detachment that arrived, was an escort of three or four squadrons of
horse, conducting, in great pomp, the younger Neville. General Morgan himself
was along. They showed themselves on the southern bank of the Monongahela; they
crossed the river; the standards were unfurled, and the cornets blew their
horns; the guns of the garrison were discharged; -- it was like a Roman
ovation, a species of the lesser triumph.

General Morgan, in the evening, accompanied by his suite, and parading near my
house, with a military gait, was heard to say, "Hang the rascal, hang him."

After night, I was informed by my servants, that some of the dragoons were
occasionally coming and going, and watching the avenues to the house; and that
two of them had come into the kitchen, and looked into the adjoining rooms.
About 9 o'clock, I had farther information, that two of them had been in the
yard, and had gone away. This did not strike me much; I resolved it into
curiosity, or an intention of plundering something. They would naturally think
it could be no great harm to make free with the property of an insurgent.

However, the danger was greater than I had imagined; that night, about eleven
o'clock, I was to have been assassinated. The troops had advanced within 20
yards of my door, when an officer, who had been apprised of their intention,
and in vain labored to dissuade them, having run to general Morgan, who was in
the house of Neville the younger, and not gone to bed, gave him information.
The general and the colonel ran out without their hats, and the general
opposing himself to the fury of the troops, said, "That it must be through him
they would reach me;" that I had stood my ground; would be cognizable by the
judiciary; and let the law take its course.

I had dismissed all apprehensions of assassination; conceiving that my
adversaries had turned their attention to a legal prosecution. It was not until
two or three days afterward, that I heard of the attempt of the troops of
cavalry. I had thought myself perfectly secure, at all events, from a
detachment under the immediate command of the general, and who had escorted his
son-in-law, because the murder would be immediately attributed to them; and a
regard for their own honor, independent of all principles of humanity, would
lead them to avoid the perpetration at that time; and if any thing was to be
executed, let it be by a detachment from some other corpse, at another time. I
will not say, that the Nevilles were usually capable of deliberately
contemplating the putting me to death. The father is outrageously passionate,
but not vindictive or cruel; the son is a man of good temper, and humanity; but
they labored under irremoveable misconceptions, owing to a variety of
circumstances; and their pride had also been wounded by acts of mine, which I
thought virtuous, and think so still. My brother of the bar had all hell in his
bosom; and had it not been for the prospect of hanging me, would have struggled
hard to have me murdered. And I knew well, that the misconception of the
Nevilles had been, in a great degree, originally established by him; and that
their rage had been fanned by his information. He was now busy at the camp,
with general Neville. The general, who had been a subject of the outrages, was
there in the light of a private prosecutor; and in aid of the judiciary, was
assisting in bringing forward and interrogating witnesses. My brother of the
bar was active in sounding, embracing, and marshalling them; and if, on
examination, any thing was omitted by the judiciary, he took the general aside,
and gave him a hint of it. The general would then return to the charge with
fresh questions. This is the account that I have from witnesses that were
examined, or from gentlemen occasionally present.

When the matter was thought to be pretty well fixed against me, the great and
concluding stroke was to be given. A treasonable letter of mine, addressed to a
certain Bradford, had fallen into the hands of my adversaries. It was dark and
mysterious, and respected certain papers, a duplicate of which I wished him to
send me, having mislaid the first copy; that these were so essential, I could
not go on with the business without them. This letter was now brought forward.
What do you make of that? said secretary Hamilton to James Ross, who was
present: you have averred, as your opinion, that Brackenridge has had no
correspondence with Bradford; look at that, is it not the handwriting of
Brackenridge? It is the handwriting, said James Ross, pausing for some time;
and there is only this small matter observable in the case, that it is
addressed to William Bradford, attorney general of the United States, not to
David Bradford It was wrote to the attorney general, William Bradford, when
commissioner at Pittsburgh, when I was superintending the publishing the report
to be made of the correspnodence of the committee of twelve and the
commissioners. I wrote to him, requesting some of the papers that were to be
inserted. This note had been dropped at the public house, and picked up by my
adversaries. They were in such a hurry to believe every thing against me, that
they had not taken time to examine it with attention. I presume, major Craig,
virtute officii, as notary public, had picked it up.
.

When a blast, transverse, takes a shallop on the river, and throws her on her
beam ends, with all her sails set; or when a send of wind takes the standing
corn of the farmer, and on the field bows the stalks to the earth, so
languished my brother of the bar. The old general stood motionless and
speechless, and to this hour had been standing, had not secretary Hamilton
broke silence. "Gentlemen, said he, you are too fast; this will not do."

The late circumstance had weakened the credit of the prosecution; and all
things considered, especially when James Ross was examined, it began to be
doubted whether it would be for the honor of the government to prosecute me.
However, the case remained open for farther testimony.

It was not until a considerable time afterward, that I had information of
this indiscreet zeal on the part of the prosecution. I had heard all that I had
apprehended confirmed; viz. that there was the strongest disposition with the
judiciary, and through all the branches of the assistant examiner to find ground
of arresting me. This was so strikingly observ^ble by the country, that it
quite restored me in their good opinion; and if the election had been to take
place then, there would have been no question of my having their suffrages.
They were satisfied they had wronged me, in supposing that I had stipulated any
indemnity for myself in particular; or had made fair weather with the
government, by deserting them. I had nothing to fear from the body of the
people, they would rather lean in my favor; but there were still enough of
unprincipled persons, that might be brought forward, or who would offer
themselves in order to obtain favor. It was amusing to me, to see the numbers
of those coming forward, and passing themselves for friends of government,
whom, during the insurrection, I had a great deal of trouble to keep down. They
took their revenge now, and joined in the cry against Brackenridge.

Some poor fellows did this to save themselves; I had given them leave to do
it. They came to me, with tears in their eyes, to consult whether they would go
off or not, or stand trial. The army had then crossed the mountain. I directed
them to contrive to let my brother of the bar hear them curse me, and say they
had voted against me at the election; this would be carried to the ear of my
adversaries, and they would be represented as friends of government. They did
so; and it had the effect.

At the time I had given this advice, I had dreaded nothing but an
assassination; I had no idea of having any thing to fear from a judiciary
process. Now I began to apprehend danger from this source. I looked forward to
a trial before a jury, in Philadelphia; which, heated with prejudice against
me, would differ little from a revolutionary tribunal of Paris. Besides, the
part I had been drawn in to act, was so various, and of such a nature, that it
would take a multitude of witnesses to explain the quo animo; and the expenses
of a trial would ruin me. But, what alarmed me still more, from a stroke that I
received from a sedentary life, twenty years ago, I am subject to a delinquency
or sailing of nerves, especially when any thing affects my mind; and I was
afraid that my feelings would kill me, under a sense of the arts that were
practicing against me. I ^^^e it with apparent fortitude, but my sensibility
was greatly affected. Not that I was uncommonly afraid of death; but I recorded
my memory for the sake of my family, and was apprehensive, that if I sunk under
the sensibility of my affections, it would be resolved into a consciousness of
guilt, and not into the pain which the ingenuous mind feels when it is wronged
by the world.

It may seem to reflect upon the judiciary, to have it supposed that they would
give so facile an ear to general Neville, as may seem to have been insinuated.
Let it be considered, that they would find, in the course of their examination,
that even at the burning of the house of the inspector, there were persons who
had been under the impulse of fear for themselves, and were carried there by
constraint. But more especially at Braddock's fields I knew a man, nearly
related to me, on B^^shy Run, in Washington county, who, having no gun, sat two
nights in his cabin with his axe in his hand, to defend himself against his
captain, of the name of Sharp, who had threatened his life, for not going to
the burning of Neville's house, agreeable to summons. He yielded on the order
to go to Braddock's field, and appeared there with a crooked horn by his side,
but had no powder in it. He saw, as he went along, the tomahawk drawn over the
heads of men, at their breakfast, or dinner, and obliged to march.
, many were present under compulsion; and through the scene in general, men were
obliged to pretend to be what they were not. The quo animo, therefore, was to
be determined, a good deal, from what had been known to be their sentiments and
conduct heretofore. To whom could this be referred better, than to the
inspector of the revenue, who knew the people? and this gave him an unlimited
influence in his representations. I have no disposition to be dissatisfied with
the use the inspector made of this advantage, in saving individuals; I wish I
could equally excuse the use he made of it in prosecuting others. I can only
soften my censure, by acknowledging that, so far as I have heard, he exercised
favor in more instances than prejudice. But in both cases, he must be
considered as having misled the judiciary; and though my observation may help
him as a man, it must hurt him as a prosecutor. It would have been better he
could have declined his attendance on the examinations; to have been escorted
to his house, at an early period, and to have remained there; leaving the
judicial investigation to an operation unbiassed by him; so as not only to
avoid the influence of opinion, but the suspicion of it. But this is a delicacy
which the noble mind alone has from nature, or which a refined education gives.

CHAP. X.
THE instructions from the President to governor Lee, the commander in chief,
are greatly excellent; and the governor had conducted himself, agreeably to
these instructions, with great propriety and delicacy INSTRUCTIONS to Governor
LEE.
Bedford, 20 th October, 1794. Sir,
I have it in special instruction from the President of the United States, now
at this place, to convey to you, on his behalf, the following instructions, for
the general direction of your conduct, in the command of the militia army, with
which you are charged.

The objects for which the militia have been called forth, are, 1. To suppress
the combinations which exist in some of the western counties of Pennsylvania,
in opposition to the laws laying duties upon spirits distilled within the
United States, and upon the stills. 2. To cause the laws to be executed.


These objects are to be effected in two ways: 1. By military force. 2. By
judiciary process, and other civil proceedings.


The objects of the military force are twofold: 1. To overcome any armed
opposition which may exist. 2. To countenance and support the civil officers in
the means of executing the laws.


With a view to the first of these two objects, you will proceed as speedily as
may be, with the army under your command, into the insurgent counties, to
attack, and, as far as shall be in your power, subdue, all persons whom you may
find in arms, in opposition to the laws above mentioned. You will march your
army in two columns, from the places where they are now assembled, by the most
convenient routes; having regard to the nature of roads, the convenience of
supply, and the facility of cooperation and union; and bearing in mind, that
you ought to act, until the contrary shall be fully developed, on the general
principle, of having to contend with the whole force of the counties of
Fayette, Westmoreland, Washington, and Allegheny, and of that part of Bedford
which lies westward of the town of Bedford; and that you are to put as little
as possible to hazard. The approximation, therefore, of your columns, is to be
sought; and the subdivision of them, so as to place the parts out of mutual
supporting distance, to be avoided, as far as local circumstances will permit.
Parkinson's ferry appears to be a proper point, toward which to direct the
march of the columns, for ulterior measures.

When arrived within the insurgent country, if an armed opposition appear, it
may be proper to publish a proclamation, inviting all good citizens, friends to
the constitution and laws, to join the standard of the United States. If no
armed opposition exist, it may be still proper to publish a proclamation,
exhorting to a peaceable and dutiful demeanor, and giving assurances of
performing, with good faith and liberality, whatsoever may have been promised
by the commissioners, to those who have complied with the conditions prescribed
by them, and who have not forfeited their title by subsequent misconduct.

Of these persons in arms, if any, whom you may make prisoners; leaders,
including all persons in command, are to be delivered to the civil magistrate;
the rest to be disarmed, admonished, and sent home, (except such as may have
been particularly violent, and also influential); causing their own
recognizances for their good behavior, to be taken, in the cases in which it
may be deemed expedient.

With a view to the second point, namely, "the countenance and support of the
civil officers, in the means of executing the laws," you will make such
dispositions as shall appear proper, to countenance and protect, and, if
necessary, and required by them, to support and aid the civil officers, in the
execution of their respective duties -- for bringing offenders and delinquents
to justice; for seizing the stills of delinquent distillers, as far as the same
shall be deemed eligible by the supervisor of the revenue, or chief officer of
inspection; and also for conveying to safe custody, such persons as may be
apprehended, and not admitted to bail.

The objects of judiciary process, and other civil proceedings, will be, 1. To
bring offenders to justice. 2 To enforce penalties on delinquent distillers, by
suit. 3. To enfore the penalty of forfeiture, on the same persons, by the
seizure of their stills and spirits.


The better to effect these purposes, the judge of the district, Richard
Peter's, esquire. and the attorney of the district, William Rawle, esquire. accompany
the army.

You are aware, that the judge cannot be controlled in his functions. But I
count on his disposition, to cooperate in such a general plan, as shall appear
to you consistent with the policy of the case. But your method of giving a
direction to legal proceedings, according to your general plan, will be by
instruction to the district attorney.

He ought particularly to be instructed, (with due regard to time and
circumstance), 1st. To procure to be arrested, all influential actors in riots,
and unlawful assemblies, relating to the insurrection, and combinations to
resist the laws; or having for object, to abet that insurrection, and those
combinations; and who shall not have complied with the terms offered by the
commissioners, or manifested their repentance in some other way, which you may
deem satisfactory. 2dly. To cause process to issue, for enforcing penalties
upon delinquent distillers. 3d. To cause offenders, who may be arrested, to be
conveyed to gaols where there will be no danger of rescue -- those for
misdemeanors, to the gaols of York and Lancaster -- those for capital offenses,
to the gaol of Philadelphia, as more secure than the others. 4th. To prosecute
indictable offenses in the courts of the United States -- those for penalties
on delinquents, under the laws before mentioned, in the courts of Pennsylvania.

As a guide in the case, the district attorney has with him a list of the
persons who have availed themselves of the offers of the commissioners, on the
day appointed.

The seizure of stills, is the province of the supervisor, and other officers
of inspection. It is difficult to chalk out a precise line concerning it. There
are considerations which will require to be nicely balanced, and which must be
judged of by those officers on the spot. It may be found useful, to confine the
seizures to stills of the most leading and refractory distillers. It may be
advisable, to extend them far in the most refractory county.

When the insurrection is subdued, and the requisite means have been put in
execution, to secure obedience to the laws, so as to render it proper for the
army to retire, (an event which you will accelerate as much as shall be
consistent with the object), you will endeavor to make an arrangement for
detaching such a force as you deem adequate, to be stationed within the
disaffected country, in such a manner as best to afford protection to well
disposed citizens, and to the officers of the revenue; and to repress, by their
presence, the spirit of riot and opposition to the laws.

But before you withdraw the army, you will promise on behalf of the President,
a general pardon to all such as shall not have been arrested, with such
exceptions as you shall deem proper. The promise must be so guarded, as not to
affect pecuniary claims under the revenue laws. In this measure, it is
advisable there should be a cooperation with the governor of Pennsylvania.

On the return of the army, you will adopt some convenient and certain
arrangement, for restoring to the public magazines, the arms, accoutrements,
military stores, tents, and other articles of camp equipage, and entrenching
tools, which have been furnished, and shall not have been consumed or lost.

You are to exert yourself, by all possible means, to preserve discipline
amongst the troops; particularly a scrupulous regard to the rights of persons
and property, and a respect for the authority of the civil magistrate; taking
especial care to inculcate, and cause to be observed, this principle, -- that
the duties of the army are confined to the attacking and subduing of armed
opponents of the laws, and to the supporting and aiding of the civil officers,
in the execution of their functions.

It has been settled, that the governor of Pennsylvania will be second, the
governor of New Jersey third in command; and that the troops of the several
states, in line, on the march, and upon detachment, are to be posted according
to the rule which prevailed in the army during the late war, -- namely, in
moving toward the sea-board, the most southern troops will take the right, --
in moving westward, the most northern troops will take the right.

These general instructions, however, are to be considered as liable to such
alterations and deviations in the detail, as from local and other causes may be
found necessary, the better to effect the main object, upon the general
principles which have been indicated.

With great respect, I have the honor to be, Sir, Your obedient servant,
(Signed) ALEXANDER HAMILTON.
Truly copied from the original,

B. DANDRIDGE, secretary to the President of the United States.





.

The judiciary had now been upwards of ten days in the country; and proceeded a
considerable length in their examinations, so as, in their opinion, to have had
information with regard to the principal offenders. It seemed, therefore,
advisable to commence arrestations. In order to avoid delays, and prevent
escapes, from the alarm that the commencement of arrestation would cause, it
was thought advisable, to have the arrests made all at the same instant,
throughout the whole country; more especially, as so general and rapid a
stroke, made in the night, would have a more awful effect upon the minds of the
insurgents. Agreeably to this system, communicated to the commander in chief by
the judiciary, orders were issued by him, to the several commanding officers,
enclosing lists of persons to be apprehended; and giving directions to arrest,
at discretion, others who should be represented to them as principal offenders.
The arrestation took place generally, through the country, on the night of the
13th of November.

By virtue of an order to general William Irwin Head Quarters, near Parkinson's
ferry.
November 9 th, 1794. Sir,
From the delays, and danger of escapes, which attend in the present situation
of judiciary investigations, to establish preliminary processes against
offenders, it is deemed advisable, to proceed in a more summary way, in the
most disaffected scenes, against those who have notoriously committed
treasonable acts; that is, to employ the military, for the purpose of
apprehending, and bringing such persons before the judge of the district, to be
by him examined, and dealt with according to law.

To you is committed the execution of this object, within that part of
Allegheny county to which you are advancing.

As a guide to you, you have herewith a list of persons (No. 1.) who, having
complied with the terms offered by the commissioners of the United States, are
entitled to an exemption from arrest and punishment; and who are, therefore,
not to be meddled with. You have also a list (No. 2.) who it is understood, on
good grounds, have committed acts of treason; and who may, therefore, be safely
apprehended.

Besides these, you may, in the course of your operations, receive satisfactory
information of others who have committed like acts, and whom, in that case, you
will also cause to be apprehended. The acts alluded to, are the following: 1st.
The firing upon, imprisoning, or interrupting, in the course of his duty, the
marshal of the district. 2d. The two attacks on the house of John Neville, esquire.
inspector of the revenue. 3d. The assembling, or aiding the assemblage, of an
army at Braddock's field, in the county of Allegheny, on the first day of
August last. 4th. The assembling, and acting as delegates, at the meeting at
Parkinson's ferry, which began the 14th day of the same month. 5th. The meeting
at Mingo creek meeting house, termed a Society, sometimes a Congress. 6th. The
destruction of property, and expulsion of persons, at and from the town of
Pittsburgh. 7th. The interrupting and plundering of the public mail; and the
injuries and violences to the houses and persons of Benjamin Wells, John
Webster, and Philip Regan, officers of the revenue. 8th. The planting of poles,
impudently called liberty-poles, with the intention to countenance and co
operate in the insurrection. -- You will carefully direct your enquiry toward
civil and military officers, who have been extensively concerned in the
enormities committed; it being their special duty, to have prohibited, by their
exertions, every species of enormity. But in the apprehension of persons, not
named in the list (No. 2.) you will use great circumspection, to embrace none
but real offenders; nor will you be too promiscuous, or too general. The
persons apprehended, ought to be leading or influential characters, or
particularly violent. -- You will also find a list marked (No. 3.); this paper
comprehends witnesses. The individuals are to be brought forward, and treated
as such.

Direct all who may be apprehended by you, to be conveyed to your camp; where
detain them in safety, until further orders. Send off your parties of horse,
with good guides, and at such a period, as to make the seizures, however
distant or near, at the same moment; or intelligence will precede them, and
some of the culprits will escape. I presume, the proper hour will be at
daybreak, on Thursday morning; and have, therefore, desired the operation to
be then performed, in every quarter.

I have the honor to be, Sir, with great respect, Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) HENRY LEE.
List, No. 1, mentioned in this letter, is in possession of governor Howell,
and will be sent to you, if requisite. Wait not for it.

List, No. 3, is not to be expected, as no witnesses are summoned from the
district in which you act.

H. L.



Major General IRWIN.


, who commanded the Pennsylvanians, then in the neighborhood of Pittsburgh, an
arrest was made, agreeably to a list (No. 2.) (No. 2) List of persons, in
Allegheny county, charged with offenses against the United States.
Pittsburgh -- Andrew Watson, Norris Morison, Samuel M'Cord, John Hannah,
William Amberson, William H. Beaumont, Alexander M'Nickle, Alexander Sturgeon,
Mordecai M'Donald, James Hunter, Joseph Kane, Stephen Masters, Joseph Guthrie,
John Hi^^ins, John Hanna, Martin Cooper, John or George Robinson, and Henry
Parker, near Pittsburgh.


, enclosed to him, with the order. List, No. 1, never came forward. That being
the case, general Irwin was, of course, confined to the list, No. 2, who must
be supposed as not in the list, No. 1, or as having forfeited the amnesty; that
is, not having the list of those entitled to the amnesty, he could exercise no
discretion, agreeably to information he might himself receive, but was to
suppose all in it, or innocent, that were not in the list of persons to be
arrested. Of list, No. 2, were personally known to me, Andrew Watson, Norris
Morison, Samuel M'Cord, John Hannah, William Amberson, William H. Beaumont,
Alexander M'Nickle, Mordecai M'Donald, Martin Cooper, and George Robinson. Of
these, all had signed the amnesty, except George Robinson, and Mordecai
M'Donald. And with regard to George Robinson, I never heard a single syllable
alleged; but, on the contrary, he was known to be a most worthy peaceable man;
the chief burgess of Pittsburgh. His not signing the paper of submission, was
owing to a mistake of pride, which had existed with many, that it would be a
virtual acknowledgement of having done something in violation of the laws.
Nevertheless, these were arrested, in the night of the 13th of November, all
except Andrew M'Nickle and William Amberson; the last of whom had received some
hint of it, and surrendered himself to the judiciary, then sitting in his
house. Alexander M'Nickle found favor, and by some direction to general Irwin,
was passed over. Martin Cooper, also, was passed over; and he never knew that
he had been upon the list, until I informed him, the other day, when these
papers came into my hands. Nothing could be a greater proof to me, of
favouritism and prejudice* than the forming this list, and the management
respecting to it. Jeremiah Sturgeon had been arrested, as the person intended
under the name of Alexder Sturgeon. I will now assume four of these; Andrew
Watson, William H. Beaumont, Jeremiah Sturgeon, and George Robinson; than whom,
I will pledge myself, there are not four less supected, much less offending
men, in the whole town of Pittsburgh. With regard to the others, there had been
allegations in regard of raising a liberty-pole; but, as to the greater part of
them, found afterward to be groundless.

Andrew Watson was my neighbor, one of the most worthy men on earth, and a
person who had suffered as much uneasiness, from the disturbance, as any man
could do; had demeaned himself in the most unexceptionable manner. Jeremiah
Sturgeon, one of the most unoffending of men; and of George Robinson I have
already spoken. These men were little known out of the town of Pittsburgh; and
it must have been from thence, that any information against them, could have
come.

These men were dragged out of their beds, at two o'clock in the morning: not
suffered to dress themselves, but in an unfinished manner; obliged to march,
some of them, without putting on their shoes, which they had to carry with them
in their hands; dragged out of their beds, amidst the cries of children, and
the tears of mothers; treated with language of the most insulting opprobrium,
by those apprehending them; driven before a troop of horse, at a trot, through
muddy roads, seven miles from Pittsburgh; impounded in a pen, on the wet soil.
The guard baying them, and asking them how they would like to be hanged; some
offering a dollar to have the privilege of shooting at them; carried thence
four miles toward the town; obliged to lie, all night upon the wet earth,
without covering; under a season of sleet, rain, and snow; driven from the fire
with bayonets, when some of them perishing had crawled, endeavoring to be
unseen, toward it; next day empounded in a waste house, and detained there
five days; then removed to a newly built and damp room, without fire, in the
garrison at Pittsburgh; at the end of ten days brought before the judiciary,
and the information against them found not to be regarded. -- Was this the way
to quell an insurrection? Was this the way to make good citizens? Do I blame
the judiciary? No. I blame the management of those concerned to injure them.
These were neighbors and friends of mine, and that is the secret of their
sufferings. It was thought by my adversaries that they might have a knowledge
of something against me, and that, when alarmed for themselves, they would
disclose it. At least I can in no other way, account for the representation
which had been made with regard to them, as suspicious persons. They were
examined, but all they could say, was in my favor.

William H. Beaumont, from the cold, was affected in his eyes, and incapable of
doing any thing for the remainder of the winter, and yet labors under a
weakness in that organ. George Robinson was affected with a cold, unfit for
attending his business, which was that of a mechanic, for a long period. Why do
I mark these things so minutely? It is to induce Mr. attorney Rawle, or judge
Peter's, if they ever read this, to enable me to trace the source of information
against these, that in a free country, I may bring the calumniators to justice.
I feel myself concerned, not only personally, but for the honor of the
government.

In the course of the day or two following, intelligence from the seat of
examination, to me by citizens who were occasionally from thence, purported
that the testimony was becoming very strong, and that recruits of witnesses
against me had gone on. It began to be understood that a second arrest was to
take place, and that general Wilkins, James Clow, town clerk of Pittsburgh, a
certain Fergus Ferguson, a collier, and myself were to be upon the list. Is it
possible, thought I, that malice can impeach general Wilkins, who, during the
insurrection, was himself so obnoxious, for his attachment to the government,
and who exerted every means in his power, that were prudent and proper, to
check the insurrection? As to Clow, his offense could be nothing more than
signing the passport of Neville, which was to serve him. Fergus Ferguson had no
concern in the disturbance that I ever heard of; but he had neglected to appear
on the 11th of September, and to sign the submission paper. He was alarmed, not
knowing but that all were to be hanged, that were found out of it. He had
consulted me at an early period. I was of opinion, that as his employment and
residence was subterraneous, he could plead the not belonging to the surface of
the earth; or if in strickness, this would not bar the jurisdiction of the
court; it would at least have weight with the executive, to direct the attorney
general to enter a noli prosequi, in as much as he had been under ground
through the summer, and had not heard of the insurrection, until it was over.

Charles Smith, son-in-law to commissioner Yates, one of the assistant
examiners with the judges, had come to town, and mentioned it to a person, who
communicated to me, that my arrestation was certain; that he was astonished
that I was still in Pittsburgh. -- "Had I no regard for my life?" That others
also, who had no apprehension of it, were in the like predicament; that 36
hours would make a great change in Pittsburgh. Thought I, my adversaries have
been more successful, in marshalling the presumption of guilt in my case, than
I had conceived. I take it for granted, that I shall be arrested, beyond all
question, now. However, I had composed my mind a good deal by this time, and
thought I could have fortitude to bear all they could accomplish; and if there
was any chance of justice at all, I would finally triumph over them.

Hearing that I had been considered as a leader of the insurgents, I thought I
must endeavor to support the appearance, as I would be a good deal looked at.
And I had, just before this time, got a large cocked hat, and buff under dress,
with a coat of military blue; and now and then occasionally showed myself in
the street, imitating, as well as I could, the grave deportment, and stately
gait of a general officer. A variety of detachments of horse had come to town,
and I found it was a matter of curiosity, to see the leader of the insurgents.
I would sometimes hear it said, when not supposed to hear it, "He has the
appearance of a military man."

In order to account for this, it was said by some, who pretended to know my
history, that I had been an officer in the late war.

Notwithstanding it was known that I remained in Pittsburgh, yet it might be
supposed, that as the danger approached, I might become more alarmed, and
abscond, if direction was given to take me in the day; and for that reason, and
because it would gratify my adversaries, to accumulate humiliation upon me, I
counted upon being arrested in the night. I therefore lay all night upon a
couch, without undressing, ready, at a moment, to obey the mandate, and go with
the guard that should call for me. I lay two nights in this manner, not
sleeping much, but consoling myself with reading some of the lives of Plutarch.
Reading that of Solon, I meditated upon his laws, making it death for a
citizen, in a civil tumult, not to take a part; for by taking a part, on one
side or the other, the moderate citizens will be divided, and mixing with the
violent, will correct the fury, on both sides, until an accommodation can be
brought about. It was on that principle I had acted in the insurrection; and by
seeming to be of the insurgents, had contributed to soften all their measures,
and finally prevent a civil war. But I saw that the law of Solon would apply
chiefly to a small republic, where the moderate men were known to each other,
and could explain themselves in the course of the gociation. I had been
treading upon a precipice; making an experiment extremely dangerous. My
intentions were laudable, but my conduct hazardous. It is true, I had been
called upon, in the first instance, by a public officer; and through the whole
of the scene, was in confidence with men, that I had conceived would be
unsuspected. But I was at a great distance from the seat of government, and not
in confidence with the first officers, and it might be said, that I had
deceived others. If the like scene should happen again, I will not conduct
myself on the principle of Solon's law. Let people that are to be expelled, get
out of the country the best way they can, and let the executive and insurgents
settle their own negociations; I will have nothing to do with them.

In the mean time, the judiciary had come to Pittsburgh; and the commander in
chief also. The deputy quarter master had taken my house for head quarters;
not, I believe, because it was my house, but because it was a large one. I was
pleased, in one respect, to see written upon my door, "The commander in chief's
quarters," as it would secure from assassination There were still threats to
this effect.
. But, on the other hand, it would increase the ignominy, to be dragged hence
under a guard.

I had reduced myself, with my family, to one apartment of my house, where I
meant to remain, and not see the general; but unexpectedly was informed, that
some of the military had entered the outer door, and were asking for me. Having
nothing but the arrest in my mind, I composed myself a moment, and stepped out
to surrender myself; thinking of some words to address the officer of the
guard, in order to conciliate, as far as was practicable, civility of
treatment. I was appalled, at the address of general Lee, who, with his suite,
had just entered. I had known him, when a lad, at the academy, twenty years
ago; and I had often, as being a senior scholar, assisted him in his
prelections, or in the study of the principles of composition, and eloquence;
and had never expected to see him the general of an army, arresting me for an
attempt to overthrow a government.

The general discovered a pause in me to receive his advance, and to answer;
and asked, if he was mistaken, in supposing that his quarters were to be at my
house? I gave him to understand, that there was no mistake; and having showed
him into an apartment, withdrew. I confined myself to my apartment. The day
after* general Lee sent a message to me, signifying his expectation, that, as
my house was taken up by his family, I would dine with him. It was extremely
painful to me, but I could not make an apology, without explaining the delicacy
of my situation; and it had been my system, to be prepared for an arrest, but
not to discover that I expected it. I endeavored to decline the invitation,
upon common place grounds, but he insisted, and I dined with him.

At dinner. I sat next a general Chambers, whom I had never seen in my life
before, yet I hated him. I had heard, that the day of the arrest of the
inhabitants from Pittsburgh, when the guard was removing them from the first
ground to a second, at some distance, the captain of the guard, Colhoun, of
Chamber^^urgh, had lent his horse to my neighbor, Andrew Watson, who had
fallen sick, and was unable to walk; when general Chambers coming up, ordered
him to dismount, with opprobrious appellations. I conceived, from this
incident, that the general had discipline, but not humanity. Perhaps, at the
time, I did not make a sufficient allowance, for that indignation which he
felt, on seeing one, whom he must think a great culprit, treated with
indulgence. As soon as I could, to save appearances, I withdrew from the table.
My mind was extremely hurt; for though every person behaved with politeness to
me, yet I conceived them to think me an insurgent; and I felt, every moment,
the absurdity of dining in such company this hour, and the next to be
conducted, with ignominy, as a criminal.

Early next morning, a subpoena was read to me, from judge Peter's, commanding
me before him, at his chamber, to give testimony, touching all such matters as
should be enquired of me. I considered this as, in fact, an examination
touching myself; and that, on the opinion formed from this, was to depend my
being or not being arrested.

I attended the judge, and was referred by him to secretary Hamilton, for
examination. I was received by Hamilton, with that countenance, which a man
will have, when he sees a person, with regard to whom his humanity and his
sense of justice struggles; -- he would have him saved, but is afraid he must
be hanged; -- was willing to treat me with civility, but was embarrassed with a
sense, that, in a short time, I must probably stand in the predicament of a
culprit, and be in irons. He began, by asking me some general questions, with
regard to any system or plan, within my knowledge, of overthrowing the
government. I had known of nothing of the kind. After a number of general
questions, to which I had to answer in the negative, I proposed putting an end
to that, by giving him a narrative of every thing I did know. It was agreed;
and he began to write. I gave him the outlines of the narrative I have given in
this publication, until I came to that particular, where, after the burning
Neville's house, I represented the people calling upon Bradford and Marshall to
come forward, and support what was done, under the pain of being treated* as
Neville himself had been. At this the secretary laid down his pen, and
addressed himself to me; Mr. Brackenridge, said he, I observe one leading trait
in your account, a disposition to excuse the principal actors; and before we go
further, I must be candid, and inform you of the delicate situation in which
you stand; you are not within the amnesty; you have not signed upon the day; a
thing we did not know until we came upon this ground, I mean into the western
country; and though the government may not be disposed to proceed rigorously,
yet it has you in its power; and it will depend upon the candor of your
account, what your fate will be. My answer was, I am not within the amnesty,
and am sensible of the extent of the power of the government; but were the
narrative to begin again, I would not change a single word. I went on. Having
passed through the circumstances of the marshal and Neville being privy to my
giving my opinion to Black and Hamilton, on the effect of the writs of subpoena
against delinquent distillers, and Neville requesting me to go to the Mingo
meeting house, my examination was adjourned; Mr. Hamilton being called upon to
dinner; and I was desired to attend in the afternoon.

I came home; but declined dining with general Lee that day, though pressed by
several messages* I could not bear to show myself with that company, in the
doubtful predicament in which I stood.

At three o'clock I returned to my examination; Mr. Hamilton entering the room
where I waited for him, appeared to have been reflecting, and said, "Mr.
Brackenridge your conduct has been horribly misrepresented." I saw that he
never before heard the least of my being solicited by Neville the younger, to
go to the meeting at Mingo creek, but having just dined in company with
Neville, at the house of major Craig, where I was then examined, he had asked
Neville, and he had acknowledged it. This is conjecture.

I went on to give an account of the Mingo creek meeting. The secretary
appeared not satisfied. "Mr. Brackenridge," said he, "you must know we have
testimony extremely unfavourable to you, of speeches made at this meeting; in
particular your ridiculing of the executive." I saw that some fools had
misunderstood, and had been giving account of what I had deduced from the
lenity of the President, in the case of the Presqu'isle establishment, and my
^^^roducing general Knox and the Seneca Indian, Obeal, or Cornplanter, making
speeches. I was extremely hurt to think, that, after I had been called upon, in
the manner I was to go forward on that occasion, I should be at the mercy of
the accounts of persons who did not understand me, and obliged to answer the
pleasantry I had found necessary to use, to carry off their minds, for a time,
from the object they were upon, until I saw them better disposed to hear what I
had farther to say. My answer was, "Five persons were chosen to go with me to
that meeting; for the express purpose of bearing testimony of what I should
say; let these be called upon. Is it reasonable I should be at the mercy of the
misconceptions, or a voluntary misrepresentation of weak or prejudiced
individuals?" He was silent. I went on giving an account of the town meeting of
Pittsburgh. I stated it, as moved by me, that we should march and affect to
join the people at Braddock's fields. I saw the secretary pause at this, and
sink into a deep reflection. It staggered him. Was it any more, said I, than
what Richard the second did, when a mob of 100,000 men assembled on Blackheath?
the young prince addressed them, put himself at their head, and said, What do
want, gentleman? I will lead you on.

My narrative now continued. After some time the secretary observed, "My breast
begins to ach, we will stop to night; we will resume it tomorrow morning at 9
o'clock." I withdrew, but was struck with his last expression. I was at a loss
to know whether his breast ached for my sake, or from the writing; but disposed
to construe every thing unfavourable, I supposed it was for my sake, and that
he saw I must be arrested.

Next morning general Lee made an apology to Mrs. Brackenridge, that for the
sake of retirement, and to be in a less central part of the town, he was about
to withdraw to other quarters, with some part of his family. I considered this
as owing to the delicacy of his feelings, that he wished to be out of the way,
and not a witness of the circumstance of one with whom he had been acquainted
in juvenile years, sinking into a melancholy situation just under his eye. I
had taken it for granted that he had received a hint from Mr. Hamilton, of what
was to take place.

Waiting on the secretary, at 9 o'clock, my examination recommenced. In the
course of the narrative, his countenance began to brighten, and having finished
the history, there was an end. "Mr. Brackenridge," said he, "in the course of
yesterday I had uneasy feelings, I was concerned for you as for a man of
talents; my impressions were unfavourable; you may have observed it. I now
think it my duty to inform you, that not a single one remains. Had we listened
to some people, I do not know what we might have done. There is a side to your
account; your conduct has been horribly misrepresented, owing to misconception.
I will announce you in this point of view to governor Lee, who represents the
executive. You are in no personal danger. You will not be troubled even by a
simple inquisition by the judge; what may be due to yourself with the public,
is another question."

In so delicate a case, where life had been sought by insidious men; and where,
what I felt with more sensibility, my hopes of estimation in the world, were
likely to be blasted, at least for a time, it may easily be supposed, that no
word escaped me, or will ever be forgotten.

My sensibility had been greatly wounded, when I waited on judge Peter's with
the narrative to sign it, as directed by Mr. Hamilton. It was with difficulty,
I could write my name. I cursed the circumstance of having to write it five
times, to the five different sheets of paper, of which my narrative consisted.
I returned to my house with different feelings from those I had for a long time
before.

CHAP. XI.
IN collecting testimony against me, there was no pains spared. It had been the
constant study and employment of my brother of the bar, for a long time before;
with denunciations that he would have me hanged. In the examination of
witnesses, when brought forward, there was no boot, or other instrument of
torture, in the hands of the examiners; but there was certainly every address
to the fears of individuals, to extort from them, an acknowledgment of
something said or done by me. I am unwilling to mark any thing as contrary to
my ideas of propriety, but declaring, that in all I have seen or heard I have
nothing else to mark, I take the liberty of stating as what was considered by
me as improper, viz. the suggesting to witnesses, in the course of examination,
that the enjoyment of the amnesty, which they claimed, would depend upon the
candor with which they gave testimony against others; it will be recollected
that it was suggested to me, by the secretary, what amounted to the same thing;
that, though not under the amnesty in strictness, yet candor in my own case,
and that of others, would determine the executive in giving a rigid or liberal
construction to my signing after the day. I felt the observation with infinite
sensi^ility. It was humiliating enough to have it thought, for a moment, that I
had any occasion for an amnesty; or that if I had, I would purchase it, by
giving testimony against others, more liberally, than if safe. I saw that in
the mind of the secretary, justice was not done to me. He knew not my pride,
and the path of honor which I have pursued through life. But I acknowledge, in
defense of such species of torture, for I give it that name, that the judiciary
must have discovered a reluctance in witnes^e to give testimony; no doubt of
it; but better no testimony than false; and who could tell but that a timid
wretch, under fear of being hanged, even though he had no testimony, would
endeavor to make some, in order to escape the suspicion of keeping back what
he had. It is the general impression of the country, and I aver it to be my
own, that wrong has been done by persons deposing, under fear, against their
neighbors more than was true. At the same time, there is no manner of
question, but that much more frequently matters have been softened in the
relation; but there is no defalcation or setting off in this case; for it is
better that ten guilty persons escape, then one innocent person suffer.

The judiciary were aware, but not sufficiently, of the diligence of malice in
some persons against others, taking advantage of the occasion, to exercise
revenge. There was just as much danger of this now, on the one side, as there
had been in Tom the Tinker's time, on the other. I have heard of a great deal
of it. Why do I remark these things? of what use? I mean it as a memento,
should a like occasion arise. I mean to strengthen that caution, with which
testimony is to be received in all such cases; and which, I acknowledge, has
been exercised by the judiciary on the late occasion, in general, as far as,
considering all circumstances, could reasonably be expected.

I do not mean to question the necessity, for nothing else could justify it, of
making the arrest in the night, and by squadrons of horse; but I only take
notice, that, this being necessary, it was the greater hardship for a man to be
arrested, who was a good citizen; for instead of being treated, as far as
consistent with confinement, with all the delicacy that a still existing
presumption of innocence demands, and which the mild habits of an arrest, by a
common civil officer, gives, he is subjected to the insults, which may
naturally be expected from those who, having just before thought of fighting
and killing, are disposed now to have, at least the satisfaction of cursing, or
starving, or otherwise abusing the people.

The 13th of November was a dreadful night through the western country.
Hundreds were arrested; offenders and witnesses sometimes together. Though the
directions were to distinguish in the treatment, yet it could not always be
done, in the first instance. There was danger of witnesses absconding, as well
as of those against whom testimony was to be given. The scene was disagreeable.
Men thrown into jail, kept in cold barns, or outhouses, or tied back to back
in cellars. The officers charged with their custody, in some cases, behaved
with mildness; in others, with wanton and unnecessary severity. Captain Dunlap,
of Philadelphia, is said to have conducted a number of prisoners from
Washington to Pittsburgh, with humanity. A captain -- is said, on the other
hand, to have driven a number, under his custody, like cattle before him, at a
trot, in muddy roads, through a water, the Chartiers, to the middle; and then
impounded them in a wet stable, and insulted them, by ordering to be thrown
into the manger, dough and raw flesh to eat. Passing to Washington, sometime
afterward, I examined the stables, and collected these circumstances.

The judiciary were employed a considerable length of time, in examining the
^^se of individual prisoners, as they were brought before them. L^ss ^ttrociou^
offenders, or at least those thought to be such, were remitted to the president
of the state district, to be recognized to appear at the courts of quarter
session of their respective counties, to answer for the misdemeanor. A class,
still less proper objects of punishment, either from alleviating circumstances
in their case, or from indigence or helplessness of family, were sent to
governor Lee, to be admonished by him, agreeably to instructions, and
dismissed. The judiciary was humane; and pardonable frauds were practiced upon
it. It was no uncommon thing for girls, with pads, to save their lovers, by
passing for married and pregnant women, with two or three children at home,
calling for bread. Judge Peter's could not be supposed to be a midwife, nor
could the writ de ventre inspiciendo issue, but from the court. It was
therefore necessary to admit the fact.

Whether from a natural cunning, finding out what could excuse or recommend, or
taught by my adversaries, a proper use was also made, especially when remitted
to the governor, of the prejudice that was supposed to exist against me. "It
was Brackenridge that brought them into all their trouble." Sometimes they
would add Bradford.

A part of governor Lee's family had remained still in my house, and I came to
understand the ground of his removal; it was owing to objections made to come
to his table, or to the house on my account. I had soreseen this, and had it in
my mind. The od^um of the army was, of itself, sufficient to produce this. But
my adversaries were not wanting to assist, if any thing was def^c^ent. Governor
Lee justified his civility to me, and told the remonstrants, that he was to
presume me an honest man, until I was declared other wise, by those whom he had
a right to know; that when presented to his authority in the light of a
criminal, to be treated as such, he would know what to do. This was during my
examination by secretary Hamilton. However, the clamor was so general, and
great, that he found himself under the necessity of yielding, in the manner I
have stated.

My adversaries were extremely enraged, at the disappointment of not having me
arrested. I was diverted with an expression of old general Neville -- "The most
artful fellow that ever was on God Almighty's earth; he has deceived Ross, he
has put his finger in Bradford's eye, in Yates' eye The attorney general and
commissioner Yates. It would seem that their gentlemen spoke ^avourably of me,
on their return from the country.
, and now he has put his finger in Hamilton's eye too: I would not wonder if he
is made attorney for the states, on the west of the Allegheny mountain."

My brother of the bar expostulated very warmly with the judiciary, for the
astonishing defect of official duty, in not sending me in irons to the capital.
It is to be presumed, they made proper apologies for acting agreeably to their
own judgment, and contrary to his.

Neville the younger had conducted himself with more delicate, but with more
dangerous address. I had been more apprehensive of the effect of his influence,
than that of the attorney. Having failed of a public prosecution, his object
has been to establish individual resentment. I have heard of the information he
has given, with a view to make me enemies. When I am called upon, I will
answer, as to the correctness of the information given.

Talk of assassinating me had considerably subsided, in the mean time. A feint
had been made one day, as I stood in the door. An officer presented a pistol,
within a few steps. It was to intimidate; for on my not moving, but looking at
him steadily, he dropped it. He was a whimsical fellow; for returning to the
public house, he took part against another officer, who was abusing me; and
said, I must be an honest man, for I stood firm when he presented his pistol.
It came to a contest between them, and my champion disarmed his adversary.

Governor Howell having been, by this time, a little better informed in my
case, had the politeness to call upon me, and make an apology for destroying my
hand^^^ls; alleging, nevertheless, the impropriety of my addressing an army,
by sending writings into camp. I affected to acknowledge it to be an error of
judgment in me: but I thought it an error of prejudice in him. However, I was
greatly pleased with the soldier-like appearance, the frankness of manners, and
the eloquence of the governor; and was very sorry that, though my standing was
better than it had been, yet, even then, I could not feel myself easy in
visiting his troops, amongst whom I had many academic acquaintances, having
been educated at the college of that state.

Arrangements had been made for the return of the army, and the divisions had
moved. Governor Lee give a dinner to the gentlemen of the village. I had no
invitation. He was led to suppose, that it would give offense to the greatest
part. I smiled, to think how my adversaries were reducing themselves, and
raising me.

I had an invitation to dine with the governor next day, with his family alone.
If this was not a greater compliment, it was certainly a greater pleasure to
me, than to have had an invitation with the crowd. He did me the honor to
request a conference, in private, the morning following, on the affairs of the
country. It was a proof to me, that though he had given my adversaries the
compliment of ceremony, he gave me that of confidence.

A dinner was now to be given to the governor, on the part of the citizens. A
number of gentlemen, who had called upon me, and expressed their indignation at
the treatment I had received, solicited me to join in the subscription to the
entertainment to be given to the governor. I declined it, on the ground of not
having been at the public dinner on the part of the governor.

A ball was now to be given, on the evening of the entertainment. Protho^otary
Brison had been always thought qualified for, or at least assumed the place of,
a master of ceremonies on these occasions. He was made a manager; and whether
it was because I had called him a coxcomb, or my adversaries managing him, he
declined sending the usual card to Mrs. Brackenridge. She was hurt; I saw the
flesh of indignation in her cheek, and a sparkle of fire in her eye. I was
offended for a moment. What! said I, are you hurt at this? you insult me,
because it is on my account you suffer the indignity. Did you not read to me,
the other evening, the life of Phocion? -- after having rendered services to
the state, and accused of treason by the arts of malignant individuals, and
acquitted by the people; suppose his adversaries to have taken their revenge,
by getting a master of ceremonies to exclude his wife from a ball; would you
not think it more honorable to be the wife of Phocion, under these
circumstances, than of a common Athenian, though you had received a card, and
been called upon to lead down the first dance? would not Phocion have laughed
at the indignity, as I do? and would not his wife have laughed too? By this
address to the pride of the human mind, I had a philosophe^ess in a moment,
perfectly reconciled with the circumstance.

Excuse the comparison of small things with great* myself with Phocion. It was
a rhetorical flourish, to save myself from being wounded by my adversaries.

CHAP. XII.
ON a review, it must be evident, that the judicious and mild policy of the
executive, in appointing commissioners, was what saved the country from a civil
war. It gave the government a strength which nothing could resist. It silenced,
at once, all clamor from below, and divided the people here. The
reasonableness of the propositions, left the refractory without excuse; and
brought forth the force of government with a warmth of heart, unchecked by an
idea that all conciliatory means had not been tried. It may be thought slight;
but, in my opinion, a great matter was effected. An early and effectual lesson
was given in our republican government. It would be too much, to say that a
revolution was crushed in embryo; but I will say, with boldness, that what I
was afraid might cost an hundred thousand lives, was repressed without the loss
of one. The physician who, by perfect skill in his art, reaches the disease, in
its first principle, by a single grain of medicine, the patient himself
scarcely sensible of it, surely deserves more praise, than him who, by the
strongest applications to the exterior of the system, makes a greater show of
having done something, but has done less; or, to take a simile from my own
profession, a single wise word of counsel, in a cause, at the commencement, is
worth an hour of the most masterly oratory, at the management in court. A
client will sometimes say, when his cause is gained, Why ask so much, you had
no trouble? He measures the service, not by the effect, but by the appearance
of labor his counsel had in accomplishing it. He counts upon the bustle of
speaking; whereat it has been the silence of thinking that has done the
business. Thus it has been said, that because there has been no horrid battle,
there was necessity for so strong an army. But it was the display of so strong
an army, that rendered unnecessary any thing but the display of it.

It struck me greatly, to hear it observed, when the army was in the country
and all was submission -- "What an abject cowardly set these insurgents are?
was it worth while to make this parade for such a set of poltroons? they have
not given us the satisfaction of the slightest resistance. Have we marched all
this distance, to meet none of them in arms?" I have seen the waves, when they
were calm, and I have wondered that they ever could be wrought into a storm to
shipwreck navies. Let my fellow citizens on the east of the mountain, be as
happy as I am, that they met with no resistance. The rage of the forest would
have been more awful than its solitude. Be not offended, that I am partial to
the spirit of these people; they are yourselves; you have them for your
compatriots against a common foe; and I will pledge myself, they will not
disgrace you in any enterprise it may be necessary to undertake, for the glory
of our republic, however during and hazardous it may be.

END OF VOLUME SECOND.
INCIDENTS, etc.
CHAP. I.
HAVING given this detail of incidents, during the heat of the insurrection; I
shall now revert a little, and take a view of the history of excise laws in the
western country, from their first existence, down to the catastrophe that has
lately taken place.

By an act of September 25th, 1756, under the then province of Pennsylvania, a
duty had been laid in the nature of an excise, on "all rum, brandy, or other
spirits sold, drawn, or bartered under the quantity of 70 gallons, and on all
wine in like manner under one hogshead." This duty was for the purpose of
redeeming certain bills to the amount of 30,000l. issued on the credit of the
province, and was to continue for the space of ten years; but by other acts,
and for other purposes, was from time to time continued. An act of March 21st,
1772, was for a like purpose of redeeming bills of credit, and was in force at
the commencement of the revolution. By a clause of this act, "wine, rum,
brandy, and other spirits made or distilled from the natural products of this
province, for the private use of the owner, are excepted."

By an act of February 18th, 1777, under the commonwealth, the duties payable
under former acts are made recoverable, and the collectors continued; and where
no collection existed, it is directed that such be appointed.

Collectors were appointed in the western country from time to time, but no
attempt made by any of them, that I can trace, to collect the duties. It was
thought to be an ignominious service; the name of an excise was odious. Whence
the origin of this prejudice? Doubtless from the dominions of Great Britain.
This country is peopled by emigrants from North Britain and Ireland. The excise
duties of those countries are extensive, they embrace almost every object of
consumption* the people are in the habit of eluding them by every means
possible. They hate excise officers, and consider them as men having a distinct
interest from that of the community. The government itself seems to consider
them in some degree in that point of view, for by statutes 14. George III. C.
^8.
, officers of the excise are ineligible as members of parliament 1. Blackstone.
176.
, and prohibited under the penalty of 100l. from intermedling in elections, by
persuading or dissuading any voter 1. Blackstone. 179.
. The law guards against them as dangerous to liberty, not only from their
numbers and influence, but from the interest which they have to increase the
duties. Amongst the common people there is a horror of them, not only on
account of the drawback which they make, but on account of the power which they
have to enter houses, to search, and make seizures. The term gauger, is a term
of reproach, and no person who can make out to live in a reputable way will
accept the office; the gauger and the hangman are generally coupled in idea.
The people from these countries brought these impressions with them, when they
came to America; and attach the same odium to excise laws and excise officers
here, which they were accustomed to entertain before their emigration.
Independent of these abstract prejudices, the people of the western country not
having a market for their grain, had recourse to the distillation of it; and
under the acts, all beyond what was for private use, was liable to the duties.
Thus it became still more an object to evade the law, or oppose it.

The council of the state finding that from the prevailing odium in the western
country, no person could be got to accept the office, or if appointed, would
not offend their neighbors by any enquiry on the subject of the duties,
commissioned in the year 1783. a certain William Graham, to be collector
general on the west of the mountains. His necessitous circumstances had induced
him to accept the office. He had kept the king of Prussia tavern in the city,
but had fallen through, and was reduced to poverty. He entered upon his office
in the western country; and was treated with all possible indignity. He was not
considered as company for any person of character. He was unable to carry the
law into effect, but occasionally got a little money to bear his expenses, by
compounding with individuals, who, rather than be troubled with him, were
disposed to give something. With some he compounded for 40 shillings per annum;
with others for less. The people had occasionally amused themselves at his
expense, singeing his wig, cutting the tail of his horse, putting coals in his
boots, and every other imaginable prank they could devise. In the year 1784, in
the county of Westmoreland, at the time of the holding a court at that place,
he was besieged in a public house a whole night, by persons who affected to be
about to kill him, he had his pistols with him, and kept the door, and hindered
those within getting out. In the morning these last pretended their horses had
gone off in the night, with their saddle-bags and money, and brought suits
against the collector for false imprisonment and damages. He informed against
those who he conceived had been on the outside of the house; and prosecutions
were instituted, and removed into the supreme court. On trial in the year 1785,
he was found to have been deceived by some of those on the outside passing
themselves for different persons; so that having sworn against individuals who
were personated, but were not there, the alibi was proved, and his oath
discredited with regard to others who really were present and active in the
outrage.

In the same year, 1784, after the riot, at the seat of government in
Westmoreland, advertisements were publicly put up, offering a reward for his
scalp. He was under the necessity of abandoning Westmoreland, and took refuge
in the county of Washington. In the neighborhood of Cross creek, in that
county, he was openly attacked by a mob of upwards of an hundred persons, and
was shaved, and had his hair cut off, and was conducted and put over the
Monongahela into Westmoreland, with threats of death if he returned to the
Washington side of the river any more. At a court of oyer and terminer held in
the county, in the year 1785, bills of indictment having been found against 12
of the rioters, they were convicted and fined. Graham had been absent from the
country in the mean time, but in order to give testimony at the trials, he had
attended, and it was only by coming in company with the judges, that he could
think himself safe. He now resigned his office, and others were appointed, who
made a jest of doing nothing. A justice of the peace, of the name of Craig, in
Washington county, had accepted the office, in good earnest, and made attempts
to do something, and became infamous.

I am disposed to believe the duty was not collected in a single instance, on
spirits distilled in the country. At Greensburgh, the seat of justice of
Westmoreland, I have heard of liquors being seized, that had been brought
across the mountain, the owners having neglected to take out permits, agreeably
to law. But in that case one half of the liquors was forfeited to the informer;
this was the great spring of attention to the law, but these seizures were
considered as savouring of rigor, and disreputable.

A seizure of a quantity of liquors was made in the town of Pittsburgh, in the
year 1790, by a collector of the name of Hunter. I appeared for the owners,
before the justices, to whom an appeal by law was given, and had the seizure
determined to be illegal, succeeding more perhaps on the odiousness of the act
itself, than of strictness in law.

An attempt was made by collector Hunter to carry the law into operation
against the distillers of Allegheny county, who had not paid the duties on the
spirits distilled; having advertised his place of residence in Pittsburgh, and
demanded a compliance with the law, he directed a number of writs to be issued,
to the amount of 70; these were served, but the defendents appearing and
employing counsel, had the writs crashed, on the ground of improper process, a
capias having issued instead of a summons, whereas on a penal statute, bail is
not demandable. In this there might have been some question, as the capias
might have been issued with directions to accept appearance. However, the
odiousness of the law gave a favorable leaning to relieve from its rigor. The
popular odium against the collector was so great, that he left the county, and
resigned his office, or ceased to exercise it. Prothonotary Brison was supposed
to have encouraged him in the attempt to carry the law into effect, and a
degree of od^um exists against him, on that account, to this day It will be
recollected what was said with regard to him at Parkinson's ferry.
.

Such was the state of the public mind, with regard to excise laws, when that
of the United States was enacted. This was of March 3d, 1791.

The bill had been brought before the house of representatives in Congress, on
the January preceding; the legislature of Pennsylvania then in session also.
The Pennsylvania house of representatives took the matter up, and entered into
resolutions, expressive of their sense with regard to excise laws; and
directing these resolutions to be communicated to the senators House of
Representatives, January 22d, 1791.
The legislature of this commonwealth, ever attentive to the rights of their
constituents, and conceiving it a duty incumbent on them, to express their
sentiments on such matters of a public nature, as, in their opinion, have a
tendency to destroy their rights, agreed to the following resolutions:

Resolved, that any proceeding, on the part of the United States, tending to
the collection of a revenue, by means of excise, established upon principles
subversive of peace, liberty, and rights of the citizens, ought to attract the
attention of this house.

Resolved, that no public exigency, within the knowledge or contemplation of
this house, can, in their opinion, warrant the adoption of any species of
taxation, which shall violate those rights which are the basis of our
government; and which would exhibit the singular spectacle, of a nation
resolutely opposing the oppression of others, in order to enslave itself.

Resolved, that these sentiments be communicated to the senators, representing
the state of Pennsylvania in the senate of the United States, with a hope that
they will oppose every part of the excise bill, now before the Congress, which
shall militate against the just rights and liberties of the people.


, representing the state of Pennsylvania in the senate of the United States. To
these resolutions, carried by a majority of 36, there was a dissent of 11
members; not on the principle of justifying an excise system, but on that of
the impropriety of the state legislature interfering in the deliberations of
the federal government. They take notice also, of the inconsistency of that
house objecting to an excise law under the United States, when "an act of their
own, of the same nature, existed unrepealed, and in operation in the state; an
act also which involved powers, far more obnoxious, and oppressive to the
people, than those in contemplation in the act of Congress."

The majority, in support of their resolutions, entered on the journals the
reasons for their votes on the question, when the yeas and nays were called
These reasons were the usual objections against exci^e laws.
. A member, who had not been present at the first moving of the question,
entered on the journals the reasons of his dissent from the resolutions; this
was Thomas Ryerson, of Washington.

This gentlemen having been a member of the house with James Marshall, the
preceding year, had differed from him, in a vote with regard to the
continuation of a state tax; the state debt being assumed by the federal
government, a tax was not necessary as to that object. Marshall thought, that
the people being in the habit of paying, would not be dissatisfied at the
continuance of a light direct tax; and there were great public objects to be
accomplished; opening roads, clearing rivers, etc. I thought Marshall right at
the time, and Ryerson, who differed from him, wrong. But Ryerson had the
popular side, the keeping clear of paying of money, and he run Marshall down;
so that at the next election he was left out.

When the vote of Ryerson was announced, in the case of the resolutions,
Marshall, in his turn, came forward against Ryerson. He became a leader in the
opposition to the excise law. It may easily be supposed, that Ryerson was left
out at the next election.

All the members, on their return from Philadelphia, in order to enhance the
merit of their services, may easily be supposed to have been strong in
testimony borne against the excise law of Congress, which they had so
strenuously, though unsuccessfully, opposed. The resolutions and the reasons
were published in the Pittsburgh Gazette, of March 1791, and read and commented
on at all public meetings and places.

David Bradford, who had not, before this time, interfered in political
affairs, came forward, in an open and direct manner, to arraign the law.
Whether for the sake of popularity, or from a personal pique against Thomas
Scott, the sitting member of Congress, who had voted for the law, or against
Alexander Addison, who, at this time, came forward, in the Pittsburgh Gazette,
with a strong publication in favor of it; or whether it was, that he conceived
it would drain the country of circulating cash, and injure the profession of
the law, or on general principle^, I declare myself at a loss to say. But it
would seem to me, that he had not reach of mind, nor information sufficient, to
entertain objections, on elementary principles, of its being a tax on domestic
manufacture, and dangerous, as introducing that principle extendible to any
length.

William Findley, of Westmoreland, who had been several years in the
legislature of Pennsylvania, and had meditated no blow at the excise law of
Pennsylvania, was now of the house of representatives in Congress, and saw
great evils in that of the United States. He fell back amongst the people, with
all his weight, to reprobate it.

Smiley, of Fayette, also, then a member of the house of representatives in
Congress, and who also had been of the legislature of Pennsylvania several
years, having voted with Findley in the opposition, returning to his county,
added his influence, to fix, if any thing was necessary, the rivets of
prejudice more strongly against the law.

But if these had all been quiescent, the prejudice was, of itself,
irresistible. Had they attempted to reconcile the people to the law, they would
have been instantly unpopular, and have descended to the level whence they
rose. It was not any thing celestial in the form or talents of these men, that
made them popular; it was their standing with a party, and consulting the
prejudices of the people. The moment they opposed the feelings of the
multitude, they were damned, with them, to a lower bed than those whom they had
never favored. But it was not enough for them even to be silent; they were
charged publicly, in the gazette, with their unpardonable inattention, while
members of the legislature of Pennsylvania, in having suffered an excise law to
exist in the government. They were under the necessity of acknowledging it to
have been a great oversight; to atone for which, they would have the state
excise taken away, and would redouble their diligence in having that of the
United States repealed also. The state excise law was repealed at the next
session of the legislature, the September following; and nothing now remained,
but to have that of the United States repealed also. Findley and Smiley must
do, at least seem to be doing, something, in order to keep their seats at the
next election. Perhaps the men may have acted on the same principle with the
people, viz. from an absolute dislike of it, and prejudice against it. I only
state grounds of conduct, which would be sufficient with me, to account for
their opposition, independent of the abstract principle, of any inconsistency
in the law with equality of tax, or principles of liberty.

Alexander Addison, who had come forward at an early period, in defending, or
at least in apologizing for the law, though possessing an independent
situation, yet was shortly obliged to take in his sails, and slacken course. He
would soon have ceased to have been regarded, in all he could say to a jury in
his charges; and his person itself would have been insecure, in his riding the
circuit, had he persisted.

Such had been the state of things, and situation of the country, when general
Neville, shortly after the passing the act, had accepted the office of
inspector, for the survey comprehending the four Pennsylvania counties on the
west of the mountain, and that of Bedford on the east.

I had never considered general Neville as possess^ng an extensive popularity,
yet, at the same time, he had a respectable share of it; and what was in his
favor, he stood well in his own neighborhood. But he had been a member of the
legislature of Pennsylvania, when the resolutions against the excise law were
moved and carried. He had absented himself from the house when the vote was
taken; and this conduct was afterward attributed, to his having previously
looked forward to an appointment under the law. The circumstance of a man, whom
the people have sent forward in a legislative capacity, looking out for a
profitable office, that he may retire, has, at all times, an appearance of
selfishness; and introduces the suspicion, of having himself more in view than
the public. If that man is already wealthy, and has no need of offices, as was
the case with general Neville, it increases the charge of covetousness, and
accumulates the odium of his conduct. Had general Neville stood forward in the
house, and, on the local ground of the unequal operation of the tax to the
western country, supported the resolutions of the house; (and I am clear, they
had a right to instruct their senators, as immediately appointed by them); if
he had, I say, acted this part, and, after the law had passed, had pointed out
to the government, some firm and respectable character, in the western country,
whom he might induce to accept the office, and have returned home, free from
all suspicion of interested motives, to recommend an acquiescence to the law,
and to support the officer as far as he could individually, he would have acted
the part of a patriot. As the case was, he contributed to fix the odium of the
office more deeply in the minds of the people, by the circumstances under which
he took it.

CHAP. II.
I HAD been employed as counsel in defending the rioters on the indictments, at
the prosecution of Graham, the state collector of excise. It is to be presumed
that I had been of the same opinion with my clients, that excise laws were
odious, and that an honest fellow ought not to be severely treated, who had
done nothing more, than to shave the under hairs from the head of an excise
man, who wore a wig at any rate. I had appeared for the seventy distillers that
were sued in Allegheny county, and in defending them, was led unavoidably to
avail myself of arguments drawn from the odious nature of the excise laws, as a
ground of strict construction against their operation. I was thought by the
people to be staunch against all excises. I did not like much to lose my
character in this respect, nor indeed could I well afford it. I had been at the
head of the practice at the bar in the year 1786, when, in order to accomplish
a particular purpose, the obtaining a new county, comprehending Pittsburgh, I
procured myself to be elected to the legislature of the state; the members of
the surrounding counties, out of which the new county must be taken, were of
course opposed to a dismemberment, and was under the necessity of making
friends elsewhere. There were two parties at that time, in the house, known
under the name of constitutional and anticonstitutional. The w^^^ern members
were constitutionalists, I was therefore obliged to join the
anticonstitutionalists, in order to get their interest to accomplish my object;
of course, when the western members returned, I was represented as a traitor,
who had betrayed my country, because I had gone with a wrong party. They were 9
to 1 against me; Findley was at the head of them, and I had thought to have
defended myself by writing, but only made the matter worse, for the people
thought it impossible, that plain simple men could be wrong, and a profane
lawyer right.

Another circumstance had taken place during the session, which accumulated
odium upon me; that was the calling a convention to new model the federal
government. I supported that measure; and when the convention had sat and
published a constitution, I supported the adoption of it. All my colleagu^^
from the westward came home antifederalists, and held me up in a worse point of
view, if possible, than before. My character was totally gone with the
populace. My practice was lost; and James Ross and David Bradford and others,
whom I left at the bar just beginning, got it all. Pride and good policy would
not permit me to leave the country, until I had conquered the prejudice* I knew
that to be practicable, by lying by until the popular f^^y should waste itself;
it required time, but I had patience. But it was necessary for me to be silent,
and add nothing more to the popular odium. It was the first experience, I had
ever had in life, of unpopularity, and I found it a thing more painful to
sustain, and more difficult to remove, than I had thought it to be. Had I
possessed an independent fortune I would have cared less about it; but I had
just laid the foundation of making something, by the practice I had
established, and this was now taken from me. It is astonishing what an effect
political character has upon professional success. It was not to be expected
under these circumstances, let my sentiments have been what they might, that I
would have come forward as the champion of government, in the case of the
excise law. It would have been excusable, had I taken some advantage of the
popular gale, having been so long becalmed or detained by head winds, where I
lay. But the fact was, that though an advocate for the federal government, I
had not been an admirer of the administration of it, I speak of the legislative
department; the fun^ing system, in all its branches, was contrary to my wishes,
and all my ideas of justice. I am conscious I was influenced by no motives but
abstract principles of what I thought right or wrong. At the same time ^ am not
calling in question, the integrity of the framers, bu^ what I give them leave
to call in question with me; the judgment. The excise law I considered as a
branch of the funding system, and I felt a hatred to the offspring on account
of its stock; at the same time, I saw the operation to be unequal to this
country, the people having put themselves very generally in the way of
distilling, and spirits from domestic manufactures being chiefly in use. It is
true, that the excise paid by the country, would be that only on spirits
consumed in it. But even in the case of exports, the excise must be advanced,
in the first instance, by the distiller, and this would prevent effectually,
all the poorer part from carrying on the business. I was opposed to the law on
these grounds, and would have preferred a direct tax, with a view to reach
unsettled lands, which all around us have been purchased by speculating men,
who kept them up, in large bodies, and obstructed the population of the
country. Nevertheless, I was shackled by my connections; the party to which I
belonged in the legislature, and who had finally enabled us to succeed in
obtaining a county, were rather on the side of the funding system, and excise
law. Thomas Scott of Washington, was a friend of mine, and he had voted for the
law. Alexander Addison had supported it in the public paper, and he was a
friend of mine. I had been upon such terms with the Neville connection, that it
was disagreeable to me, to come forward strongly in opposition to the law, when
the head of that house was the officer for carrying the law into execution.
Moreover, Findley, Smiley, and others, my political enemies, had come forward
to reprobate the law. I did not like to be ostensibly in the same party with
them; besides in my gazette writings against Findley and others, I had treated
with such ridicule the arts of seeking popular favor, that I was afraid of
being suspected of that myself. Had it not been for these circumstances, I am
persuaded I should have come forward against the law more than I have done; and
have given my adversaries much greater presumption of having contributed to the
insurrection, than exists, as things now are. If I had not been shackled by the
terms on which I was with the Neville connection particuularly, it is not
improbable that I might have exercised at least attempts at wit, at the expense
of the officer or the office; and excise duties might have been sung here, as
Wood's half pence in Ireland. And I know well that if any other had been the
officer, there is no man would have enjoyed it more than general Neville. But
if I had written ever so much in the way of wit or invective, it would be
absurd to charge me with the acts of others; for the distinction is infinite
between constitutional and unconstitutional opposition. A man has a right to
arraign the policy of a law as well after it is enacted, in order to procure a
repeal, as before, in order to prevent the enacting it.

I shall now return to the farther history of the opposition.

CHAP. III.
A Meeting was held at Redstone old fort, now called Brownsville, on the 27th
of July, 1791; at which meeting, it was understood that Findley, Smiley, and
Marshall, with a great number of the inhabitants of the western counties, were
present. Albert Gallatin was clerk of the meeting. He was, at that time, a
member of the legislature, and had voted with the majority, in support of the
resolutions to instruct the senators, on the excise bill in Congress. Edward
Cook was chairman, who had been a decided federalist; so that it was not
considered to be a question of federalism, or antifederalism; nor had it been
so considered in the legislature of the state, numbers of the firmest
federalists voting with the majority, in the case of the resolutions with
regard to the excise bill. It was, at this meeting* resolved, That it be
recommended to the electors of each election district, in the several counties
of Westmoreland, Washington, Fayette, and Allegheny, to meet on the third
Tuesday of August next, at the place of holding their annual elections, and
there to choose, not more than three representatives, for their district, to
form a county committee. That the representatives thus chosen, do meet at the
seat of justice of th^^r county, respectively, on the fourth Tuesday in August
next; and having fairly collected the sense of the people, within their
respective counties, shall respectively choose, out of their ^wn body, three
members, to form a general committee.

That the members, thus chosen by the several county committees, shall meet on
the first Tuesday of September next, at the house of Mr. Tannehill, in the town
of Pittsburgh, and there draw up, and publish in the Pittsburgh Gazette, a set
of resolutions, expressing the sense of their constituents, on the subject of
the excise law.

That the said general committee, if in their opinion it shall be necessary,
shall draw up an address to the legislature of the United States, on this
subject, wherein they will express the sense of their constituents, with
decency and firmness.

That they shall draw up, and communicate a circular letter, and general
address, to the neighboring counties in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Kentucky,
calling upon them for their exertions, in a cause which is common.

Agreeably to the above resolutions, district elections had taken place through
the greatest part of the four counties, and the members from the districts
having met at the seat of justice, chose deputies to meet in a general
committee, on the first Tuesday of September, at Pittsburgh.

At the meeting of the district members, in the town of Washington, on the 23d
of August, delegates were chosen to the general meeting, and certain
resolutions were adopted, of a violent nature, with regard to the law in
question Any person, who has accepted, or may accept an office under Congress,
in order to carry it into effect, shall be considered as inimical to the
interest of the country; and it is recommended to the citizens of Washington
county, to treat every person who has accepted, or who may accept hereafter,
any such office, with contempt, and absolutely to refuse all kind of
communication or intercourse with the officers, and to withhold from them all
aid, support, or comfort.
.

James Marshall, whose first spring in this business, might, in some degree,
have been his contest with Ryerson, but who doubtless had the same general
impressions with the others, had been at Pittsburgh occasionally, having, at
that time, a contract with the public, for the purchase of horses for the
wagons of the army, had conversed with me on the subject of the excise law;
and finding my sentiments in unison with his, not only with regard to the
excise law, but the funding system in general, expressed a wish that I would
come forward, and get myself elected a member from Allegheny county. I declined
it, on the ground of having suffered in practice, not only from the obloquy
against me, but the impression the people had, that I made political subjects
more the object of my attention than law. This was true; but the chief reasons
why I did not come forward, were those I have before assigned. Marshall excused
me; but thought I could have no objections to assist in drawing up the
addresses proposed to the public, or to the representatives in Congress. L^^d
no objections to that.

James Marshall was a man for whom I had all along entertained respect. When I
came to this country, in the year 1781, a strong party existed in favor of the
establishment of a new state, comprehending the Pennsylvania and Virginia
counties. Marshall was county lieutenant of Washington, and had exerted himself
greatly in opposition to this measure. I was with him, in all endeavors to
compose the country, and establish the Pennsylvania jurisdiction. This produced
an intimacy. After his lieutenancy he was sheriff of the county, and discharged
this office with general approbation, from the court, the bar, and the country.
During my political debates with Findley, and others, he had leaned in my
favor, to a certain extent; I had believed, from personal engagements. When a
member of the convention, for the purpose of adopting the federal constitution,
he was the most moderate of all the antifederalists, and refused to sign the
protest, as reasons were alleged in it which did not weigh with him. I had
flattered myself, with thinking that my opinion and representations, in favor
of the constitution, had contributed to make him moderate; for he is naturally
a democrat, perhaps in the extreme. At the lowest ebb of my popularity, he was
willing to serve me in my practice; and did contribute considerably to restore
it. In the difference between him and Ryerson, I could not take part, because I
was friendly to both.

I state these things, in order to explain the standing on which I was, at this
time, with Marshall.

The committee met at Pittsburgh, on the 7th of September. Agreeably to my
engagement to Marshall, I had prepared a sketch of resolutions, and a draught
of an address to Congress; this last drawn with great care, and to the best of
my ability. On the day, Marshall came forward, with a rough draught of an
address to the people. Bradford also had drawn something. These were put into
my hand, with a request to new model them, and give them any polish that they
might seem to want. I did so; and my address to Congress was copied by
Marshall, and that to the people copied by Bradford. My sketch of resolutions
was copied by a member of Westmo^^^and.

I was present, as a spectator, some time during the debates in the committee,
until the papers, some of which I had written, had been committed to three
persons; my brother of the bar, who was then of the committee, David Bradford,
and Edward Cook, chairman. I heard no more of them until the day after, when,
being in the printing office, I saw the proceedings with the printer, to be
published; and I made this observation to him, "The first draughts of some of
these writings were by me, they are totally changed, rendered inconsistent and
absurd, and I disclaim all responsibility." They had been new modelled in the
committee. I understood my brother of the bar had alleged there were
treasonable expressions in the first draughts. I have heard of a sentence he
has quoted; all I can say is, that he mistook a figure for a threat, and had
not literary taste sufficient to distinguish A sentence in the address is as
follows: -- How shall we avoid it? (meaning the excise law) -- By expressing
our fear to the representatives of the present Congress; in the mean time, by
cultivating the idea amongst ourselves, that excise offices ought not to be
accepted. If there can be found virtue enough in the people, to refuse such
commissions, the law cannot be carried into effect, and it will be the same as
if it did not exist.

The above is to the same effect with the preceding intemperate resolution of
Washington. How will my brother of the bar account for the giving his sanction
to this?


.

A report of the secretary of the treasury, on the excise law, was made to the
House of Representatives, on the 6th of March, 1792. It begun to be published
in the Pittsburgh Gazette of April 7th, 1792, and was continued through several
papers. Strictures on it had been published in the National Gazette, under the
signature of Sidney, said to be written by William Findley. These strictures
were copied into the Pittsburgh Gazette, I have understood by request. They
were continued through several papers, at a considerable length; from the paper
of May 19th, to that of November 3d, 1794.

A great variety of publications had appeared, in the mean time, in the western
paper, on the subject of the excise; some of which were attributed to me, but
in which I had no hand. A publication of considerable length, signed John
Neville, had appeared in a pamphlet. The object was to reconcile the people
with the law. It was answered, in a variety of publications, in the gazette. I
was not the author of any. The address was of no use. Professions of
disinterestedness were held out, which were thought to be absurd, as it must
have struck every one, that in accepting the office, he could have no other
object in view but the making money.

CHAP. IV.
A SECOND general meeting took place at Pittsburgh, on the 21st day of April,
1792. I do not find any previous advertisement in the gazettes, calling that
meeting, nor do I kno^ how it was brought about. An extract from the
resolutions entered into at that meeting, I subjoin in a note That whereas some
men may be found amongst us, so far lost to every sense of virtue, and feelings
for the distresses of their country, as to accept the office for the collector
of the duty.

Resolved, therefore, That in future we will consider such persons as unworthy
of our friendship, have no intercourse or dealings with them, withdraw from
them every assistance, and withhold all the comforts of life, which depend upon
those duties that as men and fellow citizens, we owe to each other, and upon
all occasions, treat the^ with that contempt they deserve; and that it be, and
it is hereby most earnestly recommended to the people at large, to follow the
same line of conduct toward them.


.

I had been elected a delegate from Allegheny county, but declined serving. I
recollect to have been asked by some of the members whether the going so far
could be construed treason. I thought not. I was told by the member, that the
same question had been put to my brother of the bar, and that he was of
opinion, that it did not amount to treason. It struck me to be going to the
utmost boundary of right reserved by the people. On the principle of political
virtue, nothing but extreme necessity could justify it; it is the last step
short of using actual force. It is a thesis I should like to see well
discussed. Gallatin in his speech in the legislature of Pennsylvania, on the
question of the western election, seems to have given it up, and calls it his
"political sin;" he would seem, on reflection, to have considered it, not, I
presume, as a misdemeanor, cognizable by the law, but as censurable, on the
ground of abstract political virtue. I would certainly think it so, unless in
the case stated, viz. as the last step, before using force.

In a republican government, I would wish to see an office of lucre, at all
times considered as illiberal, in order to prevent a competition for it, and to
hinder men, rich enough already, to be grasping at it, while there are men in
the country equally qualified, who have large families, and have more need of
it. When I say illiberal, I mean in the same point of view as servile
employments, which a man of easy fortune may be above, and leave to others who
must live by them; but it would be wrong to say, that I would not eat or drink
with such, though at the same time, I might keep up a distinction of ra^k, not
on the principle of pride, but on that of associating with those in the same
habits with myself.

President Montesquieu Book 13th. Chapter 10th. Spirit of Laws.
, has carried the idea further; and considers it a symptom of ruin in a
republican government, when an office in the revenue, becomes, by means of the
profits, an object of honor. His words are as follows: "All is lost when the
lucrative employment of a collector of the revenue comes to be also by its
profits, an honorable employment. It may do in a despotic government, but not
in a republic, and it was this very thing that destroyed that of Rome Tout est
perdu lorsque la profession lucrative des traitants parvient encore, par ses
richesses, a etre une profession honn^ree. Cela p^ut etre bon dahs les etats
despotiques, o^ souvent leur employ est une party des s^nctions de^
gouverneurs eux a^om^^* Cela n'est pas bon dans la republique, et une chose
par^ille detruisit la republique Roman. Cela n'est pas meilleur dans la
monarchy; rien n'est plus contraire a l'esprit de ce gouvernement. Un de gout
faisit tous les autres etats; l'honneur y peid toute sa consideration, les
moyens lents et naturals de se distinguer ne trouchent plus, et le gouvernement
est frappe dans sou principe.

On vit bien, dans les tems passes, des fortunes scandaleuses, c'etait une des
calamites des guerres de cinquante ans: mais pourlors ces richesses surent
regardees comme ridicules, et nous les admirons.

Il y a un lot pour chaque profession. Le lot de ceux qui levent les tribute et
les richesses, et les recompenses de ces richesses sont les richesses mem^. L^
gloire et l'honneur sont pour cette noblesse, qui ne connoit, qui ne volt, qui
ne sent de vi^^ bien que l'honneur et la gloire; le respect et la consideration
sont pour ces magistrates qui, ne trouvant que le travail apres le truvail,
veillent nuit et jour pour le bonheur de l'empire.


."

I think the reflection just. It marks a total loss of public virtue; it saps
the very principle, which is the love of character, and fixes in the heart the
root of all that is evil, "the love of money. Surely to correct this, by
attaching contempt to a legislator, descending to be a tax-gatherer, if
Montesquieu be be right, is nothing more than recurring to first principles,
and restoring the republic.

With regard to a different object, which was that of procuring a repeal of the
law, it is a different matter, and if at all justifiable, it must be as the
last resort.

It will be asked, What effect had these publications and resolves on the
public mind? It would be difficult to say, whether they inflamed the
opposition; because it would be difficult to add to the heat or flame of it. It
has been seen what the force of it was, from the first. A breath in favor of
the law, was sufficient to ruin any man. It was considered as a badge of
toryism. A clergyman was not thought orthodox in the pulpit, unless against the
law: a physician was not capable of administering medicine, unless his
principles were right in this respect: a lawyer could have got no practice,
without at least concealing his sentiments, if for the law: a merchant, at a
country store, could not get custom. On the contrary, to talk against the law,
was the way to office and emolument. In order to be recommended to the
government, as a justice of the peace, you must be against the law. To go to
the Assembly, you must make a noise against it; and in order to go to Congress,
for to keep in it, you must contrive, by some means, to be thought staunch in
this respect. -- It was the shibboleth of safety, and the ladder of ambition.

The imagination of the people had presented the excise in every shape, and on
every subject. Riding through the country with a gentleman, lawyer Patterson of
Harrisburg, and coming to a house, he enquired of a woman, who showed herself
at the door, what quantity of land was in that farm? and who the owner was? She
declined answering; informing him, as she did not know him, he might be the
excise officer. On another occasion, I was amused with the fears of an honest
woman, who was under great concern, from an account she had heard, that the
excise was to be put next upon the spinning-wheels. I told her that was nothing
to what was talked of, the putting it upon night-caps. She had one on.

It might be said, with plausibility, that the keeping the attention of the
people to a constitutional redress, by resolves of committees and addresses to
representatives, was calculated to restrain the people from that force which
they were prone to use, and which otherwise might have sooner broke out; but on
this I shall hazard no opinion.

An opposition to the law by actual force, showed itself, at first, chiefly in
masked attacks upon deputy excise officers. The history of which has been
traced by the secretary of the treasury, in his report to the executive. Having
no particular information, relative to the incidents, I refer to that statement.

It may be asked, How came it to pass, that the leading men of the country, who
had come forward, from time to time, in the committees, hearing of these
unconstitutional attempts (...) to redress the grievance," did not use equal
fidelity to the gove^^ment, as before to the people; or, in better phrase, did
not show themselves good citizens, by assembling in committees, and bearing
testimony against such irregular proceedings? I must acknowledge this was a
great error; nevertheless, I do not dwell upon it, as the feelings of these men
have, in general, been sufficiently hurt by what has taken place; so that if,
on reflection, they are conscious to themselves, of having contributed, in any
manner, to the late convulsion, by the length to which they went, they must
regret the not having used vigilance to inform the people, and restrain them
from actual violence.

There is one of these persons, however, who is not hurt; but, on the contrary,
affects to have been irreproachable in all things. I speak of my brother of the
bar. He was a leading member of the Pittsburgh committee. He was unquestionably
a man, at least in his own opinion, of great popular influence. In the fall of
this very year 1791, he was a candidate for a seat in Congress, and in the
district election ran against Findley. Two years after he ran against Thomas
Scot. Where was he when actual violence began to show itself? Probably so
immersed in study, to fit himself for a seat in the legislature, that he never
heard of them. He had just awakened from his books, time enough, when the
judiciary came to this country, to inform them, that they ought to hang me. If
I deserved hanging, I leave it to the reader, whether he did not deserve to be
at least choked a little, for what he did in the Pittsburgh committee.

It will be asked, Was there no legal cognizance taken of the outrages, at an
early period? As to what was done in mask, it was impossible; because the
perpetrators were not known. No information could be made, or at least was
made. In one case, in Allegheny county, where an outrage was committed,
cognizance was taken, and the offenders brought to justice. It was in the case
of an attack upon a certain Richmond, who had been assaulted, and detained by
force, to prevent his coming to the court, to give testimony of an attack upon
a certain Wilson, who had been mistaken for an excise officer. This Wilson was
a man somewhat deranged in his intellects, or at least in a manner bordering on
craziness, and either imagined himself ^o be an excise officer, or affected to
be such; and on making some enquiries relative to stills, he was seized, by
persons unknown, and branded, tar and feathered, etc. Richmond, who had
knowledge of the persons, had informed, and bills of indictment were found
against them, on the oath of Richmond; but in order to keep him away, on a
trial of the traverse, he was himself assaulted, and detained from the court,
as has been said. Seventeen concerned in the assault upon Richmond, were
indicted on his information; and on trial, at September session, 1792, the
greater part were convicted, and fined. I have stated the above, in order to
rebut the allegation, that the courts of justice have refused to take
cognizance of outrages, in the case of the excise law I have heard the district
judge censured, as disposed rather to s^^^our an opposition to the law, than
repress it; and it has been given, as a proof of this, that he handed a
poetical composition to the printer, in Pittsburgh, containing ridicule on
George Clymer, inspector general of the revenue, which, at my request, the
printer did not insert. This is true; but the composition respected nothing
more, that I recollect, than the incidents, on the part of the inspector
general, in coming to the country; and as some altercation had taken place,
between the inspector and the judge, this last was disposed to be amused, with
a composition that respected the ground of it. I spoke to the printer, not to
insert it, as it might be attributed to me, as all paragraphs usually were, by
people at a distance.
.

CHAP. V.
A Democratic society was instituted in the town of Washington, in the month of
April, 1794, on the same principles, and in correspondence, as I have
understood, with societies of the same denomination, in New York, Philadelphia,
and elsewhere. I have traced no resolutions, or proceedings, of this society of
Washington, with regard to the excise law.

Prior to this, a society, of a nature much more democratic, had been
instituted in the neighborhood of Mingo creek. The place of convening was
usually the meeting house.

Various principles combined to produce this society. Some of the leaders in
it, had been disappointed in their wishes to be justices of the peace, or to be
upon the bench, as associate judges; others were harrassed with suits from
justices and courts, and wished a less expensive tribunal The society was to
have a cognizance of suits between the members, and they actually went on to
determine in all cases.
; others favored it, as an engine of election for county offices, or for the
state legislature; others, from a desire natural to men, of being conspicuous.
This society was the cradle of the insurrection. They did not, as a society,
project the first outrages, but they naturally sprung from that licentiousness
of idea, with regard to law and liberty, which the articles of their
institution held out, or were calculated to produce.

A society of a singular nature, was instituted in a part of the county of
Allegheny, in April following. We have the first account of it in the gazette
of April 26th, 1794 At a meeting of the society from the four counties, at the
house of Samuel Sinclair, at the mouth of Yough, April 15th, 1794.

Resolve. That the following be proposed, as a constitution for forming a
republic, or society, in each colonel's district, throughout the four counties.


.

The articles of this society are to the same effect with that of Mingo creek,
and equally calculated to abstract the public mind from the established order
of the laws Art. 1st. Sect. 6th. "The president, council, or deputies, for any
speech or debates in the society, shall not be questioned in any other place."
.

The account given me, by Mr. M'Donald, the secretary, or rather the apology
made, for instituting this society, was, that the people of the settlement were
outrageous to do something, on account of the excise law, the costs on the
suits before justices, court expense, and salaries of officers; and were
determined to do something, and had talked of breaking up general Neville, and
burning Pittsburgh; and that the instituting a society, was thought of, by the
more moderate, as a means of employing the people's minds, and to keep them
deliberating instead of acting. Be this as it may, it does not seem to have had
the effect, but rather to have accelerated the commencement of actual violence.
It appears, that at the June court, at Washington, 1794, there was
conversation, and by some of the members of that society, of a nature with that
mentioned by Mc'Donald, viz. the seizing Neville, and breaking up the office in
Pittsburgh Art. 2d. Sect. 3d. "Nothing in this constitution, shall be so
construed, as to prejudice any claims of the United States."
.

It was on the verge of Mingo creek settlement, that the marshall was opposed
in serving the first process. He had served process without molestation, in the
counties of Bedford, Westmoreland, Washington, and Fayette; and in Fayette
county a meeting of distillers had been called, at which Gallatin assisted, and
it had been determined to employ council at the federal court, to defend the
suits. It was in serving the remaining process in the county of Allegheny, on
the verge of the Mingo creek settlement, that the opposition broke out into
actual hostility. The marshall had served several writs in a single
neighborhood, in the course of one morning. Those, on whom he had served the
first, had collected and pursued him, while he was serving the last. The people
left the harvest fields, and took up arms. There was no pre-concert, no
determined object. It had nothing in it, but the essence of a mob. I attribute
little to the circumstance of general Neville being in company, or to that of a
writ being served in a harvest field, amongst a groupe of reapers; nor do I
attribute much even to the circumstance of a number of men being assembled at a
board of appeals, in case of fines for a neglect of militia duty, held that day
by the inspector of brigade, at Benjamin Parkinson's. I resolve it rather into
the established temper Testimony of Neville the younger in court.
of the country, than into accidental causes. Be this as it may, the
inflammation spread rapidly. The quiting harvest fields, a most urgent business
with the farmer, was a strong proof to me of the violence of the people. The
whole settlement was in commotion suddenly. The first party that attacked
Neville's house, were but a squad from the bulk that were behind, in agitation,
consulting what measures to pursue. Holcroft, in his retreat was met at
Couche's fort by numbers, who had come forward disposed to violent purpose.
These returning, roused others, and in the course of one night the body was
assembled to the amount of at least 500 men, that met at Couche's fort. A
committee ^as here chosen to direct the operations, and it was under their
orders, occasionally given, that the people marched. The flags passed and
re-passed between them and those that attempted to defend the house of the
inspector.

From the preceding statement it will appear, that the idea of "an individual
projecting the insurrection," is without foundation. It originated on the broad
basis of popular prejudice. However, it may be that leading men, at home or,
abroad, contributed by speeches, or by writings to foster, and support that
prejudice. I am persuaded, that no digest was ever made in the minds of any
one, to rouse the people to an actual and general outrage.

CHAP. VI.
HAVING given the preceding history of incidents which led to it, I address
myself to rebut those presumptions that I have heard alleged against myself,
as projecting the disturbance, or having a privacy with the counsels of those
who did. As to the grounds of my intimacy with Marshal, or my supposed privacy
with his councils, I have stated every particular that is within the
recollection of my mind. As to Bradford, I was upon terms of apparent intimacy;
and of that I give the following account:

It is well known to gentlemen of the bar, that lawyers who reside in a county,
usually bring the suits, and it rests with them, in most cases to recommend to
clients, the assistants out of those who ride the circuit, whom they may employ
on the trial of the cause. Bradford, though not a great lawyer, was a popular
one, and I had found it useful, at a time when I was struggling to restore my
practice, to stand well with him. I had found my account in it still on, and
the very advantage which I had derived, independent of any principle of
philanthropy, established in my mind a good will for the man. But I was thought
to have an intimacy with him, which I had not. It was in appearance
considerable, but not much in fact; for he was not a man of much sentiment, and
my acquaintance with him went no further, that the interest which I had in
sharing business.

I have heard it predicated loudly by those, who wished to involve me in any
prejudice that may exist against Findley, Smiley, Gallatin, etc. that I had
fallen in with them, and formed a conjunction on the west of the mountain.
After an established difference with Findley, I had come so far in the course
of nine years, as to exchange a common salutation; but the first time I gave
him my hand was at Brownsville, the morning I was going forward with Gallatin,
to support the propositions of the commissioners; I gave him my hand, and said
it was time to forget differences, and join in our endeavors to avert a civil
war. With Smiley I never had any difference, except what was political, and
abstract; but I have not exchanged with him seven words, these seven years.
With Gallatin, I do not recollect that I ever exchanged a word, in my life,
until in the course of our transactions in composing the disturbance. With none
of these have I ever corresponded; to none of these have I ever sent a message,
nor they to me. I was never of a committee, or other meeting where any of them
were present, or with which they had any thing to do. If I have not the credit
of individual patronage, why should I be subject to the odium?

It has been said, that disappointment had soured my temper with the federal
government, and that I was disposed, if not to overthrow, at least to embarrass
it. In proof of this, it is alleged, that in my correspondence with some
gentlemen of Philadelphia, some years ago, I expressed chagrin ^ith the federal
party in the state, and said they would find he effect of having affronted me.
It is true I was chagrined, and did write to this effect. Let me explain it. It
has been seen that while a member of the legislature of Pennsylvania, in the
year 1787, I had found it necessary to join myself to a party. This was
distinguished, at the time, by the name of anticontitutional, o^ those opposed
to the frame of government, which Pennsylvania had adopted. Having stood firmly
in the house ^ith those, on all questions, I had become obnoxious to the
opposite. It was the anticonstitionalists that brought forward the bill for a
convention to revise the federal government; the model framed by this
convention was supported by the party in the house, to which I was attached. On
my return from the legislature, I became the advocate for it in the western
country; I fought a hard battle in its favor, until it was adopted. The
election for the first representatives was to be general through the state, and
not by districts. In order to frame a ticket, two distinct conventions were
held at Lancaster and Harrisburgh; that at Lancaster was the federal, as it was
called, or the interest to which I had been attached. Findley, who had been my
adversary, was to be taken up, as it was understood, by the Harrisburgh, or
antifederal ticket. It struck me to have my name brought forward in the federal
ticket, in opposition to him. I procured a delegation from the four counties of
two gentlemen who attended at the Lancaster convention, and presented my name.
It was rejected. I felt the indignity, and considered myself as absolved from
all engagement to the party, and expressed myself to this effect. But that had
nothing to do either with my attachment to individuals, or to the government
itself, that had been established. My resentment respected merely the party in
the state, and nothing else. It had been no object with me to be a
representative. I had cared nothing about it. But merely on a principle of
opposition to my adversaries, I had suffered my name to be carried forward; and
that being the case, I was affronted to have it thrown aside. I felt it with
sensibility until I came to understand how it took place; viz. that it was not
on the ground of personal disrespect to me, but on that Thomas Scott, whom they
took in my place, being less exceptionable at the time, with their adversaries;
and of course his name vould serve the ticket more.

CHAP. VII.
HAVING given this detail of circumstances anterior to the insurrection, I
shall now revert to the point where I was; the departure o^ the army from the
western country.

General Morgan, with a corpse of 800, enlisted out of the militia that ^ad
crossed the mountain, remained in the country, in order to s^pport the laws,
until every symptom of opposition had disappeared. In addition to this body of
troops, a corpse of calvary was raised from the country itself. This body of men
was stationed on the Monongehela, at the distance of 14 miles from Pittsburgh.
Officers from this encampment were frequently in town. Unfavourable impressions
still existed amongst them with regard to me. Threats of assassination were
frequently made; but I was under no apprehension now. They were not sure that
the government considered me as a man that might justifiably be murdered.
Ideas, nevertheless, prevailed with regard to the force of the civil authority;
of course there was great license of conduct in some of those officers. They
were noisy in taverns -- late in their patroles through the streets; the cow of
a man, that had but one, was stabbed -- the horse of another run through the
body. These acts could not be fixed upon individuals. A waggoner discovering an
officer about his wagon, and asking abruptly who he was, was assaulted. He was
fortunate in warding off the blows of the cut-loss, with his wagon screw,
until he got into the public house ^ust by, where he alarmed his fellow
waggoners, who made a show of attacking the officer, and pursued him. The
officer escaping to his quarters, at another public house, alarmed his fellow
officers, who came out upon the waggoners, who slying in their turn, were
pursued. One of these waggoners was overtaken; two or three slices were taken
from his skull, and a finger was cut off. The man applied to me: I brought an
action for the trespass. A compromise took place, favored by me, considering
the circumstances, and the man received the sum of 150 dollars. The name of the
officer who gave the wounds, was M'Dermot. I heard a great deal said afterward
of abusive language amongst the corpse against me, for bringing this suit.
M'Dermot threatened instant death, whenever he should meet me. I gave it to be
understood, that if I heard any more of it from M'Dermot, I would have him
prosecuted for the mayhem, which, by the law of our state, subjects to hard
labor and imprisonment. I heard no more of it.

An atrocious outrage was committed on a certain Baltzoover, in the
neighborhood of the town: his house was entered, his locks broke, his property
taken, and carried away. I brought a suit against an officer, who was said to
command on the occasion; it was a captain Weezley of the Jersies. But it is
alleged there has been a mistake of the person, and that he was not the man.

A second outrage was committed by M'Dermot in company with others, in the
house of a certain Bayard, in Allegheny county. They demanded victuals -- His
wife was sick -- He excused himself -- They insisted and threatened -- The man
made exertions, and got something. After eating and drinking, they imprisoned
him in his chamber, made strokes at him with their swords -- threw his bedding
on the floor, danced upon it -- broke his tables and chairs, and other
furniture. He applied to me; I recommended to him to have his damages
appraised, make out his bill liberally, go to the camp, and demand reparation;
if not made, then to return to me. The bill was made out and paid, but with
many imprecations against me, to whom it had been understood, he had made
application.

A violent trespass was committed by a captain Randolph, on a farmer of the
name of M'Clure, a man greatly respectable; he was imprisoned in his own house,
and insulted by opprobrious language. I directed an indictment against the
captain which has not yet been determined.

A troop of calvary encamped at the house of a certain Reed, out down shade
trees before his house, wantonly. I brought an action of trespass against a
captain Simeson, who was said to command on the occasion. Trespasses were
committed in other places, in the course of foraging in the country. I
recommended indictments in a number of these cases. The temper of the country
was greatly ru^^led at these indignities; and the more so as they saw the force
stationed to be parade, and nothing more. It could have no effect to suppress
an insurrection, if any had been meditated; this was their idea, as they
expressed it to me.

Some of these outrages had taken place in the absence of general Morgan, on a
visit to Virginia. On his return the representations made to him by his
officers, were, doubtless, favourvourable to themselves. He was led to believe
that the suits were stirred up by the insurgent Brackenridge. The general
himself could not be unwilling to admit other grounds than misbehaviour in his
officers, for he had set the example, and was guilty of the first breach of the
peace, in the country. It was on the person of a James M'Allister, the keeper
of a public house. In the course of the winter this man applied to me, and gave
his story. It was when the army first came. The man had charged a quarter of a
dollar for a quart of whiskey to a soldier. The general knocked him down with
the but of his whip, and abused him considerably. On the score of the delicacy
of the time, alleging sudden passion and other palliatives of the general's
conduct, I dissuaded him from the prosecution.

On the advance of the army, a number who had been involved in the
insurrection, and were not within the amnesty, or distrusted the faith of the
government, had absconded. Others were occasionally absent. These were included
in a proclamation by governor Lee, dated November 29, 1794. Amongst these was
David Bradford, who had escaped by the Ohio with considerable difficulty. A
small Kentucky boat had been prepared, which was to have received him at the
mouth of Grave creek; but being pursued by a man, from whom he had liberated a
negro under the abolition law of Pennsylvania, he was obliged to leave his
horse and take a canoe. Descending with this, and passing Galliopolis, he was
pursued by a party of four men dispatched from Galliopolis, by De Abecour, the
commandant of the militia at that place. He had lain all night in his canoe at
the mouth of Sandy creek, and had got into a coal boat, in the service of the
contractor, cold, wet, and hungry, about two hours before the party in pursuit
of him came up. They entered the boat, demanded Bradford, and took hold of his
arm to drag him away. He made no resistance; but a young lad of the name of --
from Washington, seized a rifle, and singly defended him. He obliged the party
to relinquish their intentions, and withdraw. This young lad had himself
absconded, under apprehension from having painted the device of a liberty pole.
Bradford continuing his course, was pursued by a captain Joly as far as Red
Bank, which he had passed two days before. He is said to have gained the
Spanish territory.

A number who had absconded, came in, and surrendered themselves to general
Morgan, who dismissed them on parole, to appear at the federal court, at
Philadelphia. There were but two of these did not appear.

The persons in whose case bail had been refused by the judiciary, 21 in
number, were conducted to the jail of Philadelphia, by a detachment of
dragoons, under general White. His treatment was humane and liberal. A
circumstance is reprehended in the conduct of the captain, who had the charge
of them in entering the city, viz. the obliging them to wear, each, a badge of
white paper in his hat, to distinguish them to the people. It was a great
indelicacy. It is ungenerous to insult the feelings of the miserable.

During the winter I had been employed in arranging business in my profession,
and occasionally collecting vouchers from individuals of note, who had been
privy to my sentiments, and witnessed my conduct in the course of the
insurrection. In the spring, being under a recognizance to attend the federal
court, as a witness in the case of the prisoners sent down, I went to
Philadelphia. It had been the wish of the relations of the prisoners in the
country, that I should appear for them. My doing that would depend upon
circumstances.

CHAP. VIII.
THE session of the federal court for the trial of the prisoners took place on
the 4th of May, 1795. Patterson, and Peter's, judges of the court. A motion had
been made at the spring term, just before, by William Lewis, of council for the
prisoners, to have the trials held more in the vicinage of the western country.
It was not judged advisable to grant it. The judicary system requires an
amendment in this respect. Every man is liable to be accused, and to be under
the necessity of going 300 miles or farther, and sending for his witnesses to
that distance, where his own private character is not impressed on the minds of
the jury, and where the credibility of the witnesses for and against him is not
equally known and impressed, is a great evil. I felt this strongly in my own
case, when the prospect of an arrest and trial was before me. But independent
of the advantage to the prisoners, in point of safety, the expense of
witnesses, at such a distance is intolerable; it will not do; it must be
remedied; or the government will not exist in the affection of the people. If I
could have had a trial in the western country, even with a jury brought from
Philadelphia, I should have thought less of it; for I could have called five
hundred witnesses out of the bosom of the country, to facts that would have
readily acquitted me. But to call the tenth of these to such distance, was a
weighty difficulty. On a retrospect it will be seen, that a great variety of
testimony would have been necessary in my case, to have done myself justice.

I had heard a great deal before I left the western country, of the obloquy
that existed against me in the city. It had been fed, and improved with all
possible industry by colonel Neville, and my brother of the bar, who had spe^^
the winter in the city. Colonel Neville was of the legislature of the state,
and being a good deal in the best company, did me great damage. My brother of
the bar not so much; he was too violent. People saw passion. But my impressions
of prejudice and obloquy, which were before me, did not equal what I found to
exist. I was shunned by every one. Persons who had known me formerly, advancing
in my way, would change their course, or affect to see some objects on the
other side of the street, so as not to be under the necessity to meet my eye. I
was as unwilling to meet theirs, and would change my course also, and affect to
see objects. I contemplated the buildings a good deal as I walked, casting my
eyes to the upper stories of the houses. A stranger would have thought me a
disciple of Palladio, examining the architecture.

My brother of the bar had left the city, but colonel Neville was still there.
Shortly after my arrival, I heard of his showing general orders which had been
issued by his father-in-law, general Morgan, in which an allusion had been made
to "an evil disposed and professional character, stirring up suits against his
officers Extract from the Orders.
In taking one view of this subject, I cannot avoid a suspicion, that some evil
disposed professional character, and who is an enemy to the happiness of this
country, has been busy in fomenting differences, and urging prosecutions of a
vexatious kind, which otherwise, from the favorable opinion of the people in
general, would not have existed.


." A day or two after, these orders appeared in the gazette. As the allusion
would undoubtedly be applied to me by the public mind, I was hurt by the
insinuation, and could not avoid taking notice of it. I did it by
acknowledging, and at the same time justifying my having instituted suits, and
directed prosecutions against "unprincipled, wanton, marauding pandours of his
corpse." My censure could respect only those against whom suit^ had been
brought, or prosecutions directed. I have mentioned the names of those officers
in my narrative, that others may not be wounded by the epithets.

There was said to be in Philadelphia, some who had a warm side to the
insurrection, and I had supposed that some of these would have recognized me as
a brother, and have given me the solace of a little company. But a report which
had originated in mistake, or had been propagated by my adversaries, destroyed
me even with these. It was that I had saved my life by turning what is called
state evidence. That the commissioners on their arrival in the western country,
found they had occasion for me, and brought me off with a promise of indemnity,
and left me as a spy upon the people, and that now I was come down to fulfill
that dark engagement of giving testimony to hang others. On all sides I stood
in the most odious predicament. I knew the allegation would be found
groundless, when I came to give my testimony; for I had known little or nothing
of the acts of individuals, at least of those who were to take their trials.
But it was painful, in the mean time, to labor under such an imputation.

I was in the city some days before the session of the court; and had found
private lodgings. But the mistress of the house, who was a widow lady,
understanding who I was, expressed great uneasiness. She took it for granted
that I was to stand trial, and did not like the idea of having a man hanged out
of the family. I prevailed upon her to suffer me to remain at least until I was
about to be put on my trial.

Under the predicament in which I was, I did not think it prudent to attend the
theater, or to go to places of public resort. I would subject myself to the
indignity of looks, if not words. I attempted to amuse myself a little in the
shops of booksellers; but even these were shy of me. They were afraid to have
it thought that they were of the councils of insurgents. My chief walks were
about the dock-yards, looking at the shipping, or traversing the environs of
the city, viewing the improvements that had taken place. Sauntering one day to
the large building that is carrying on by Robert Morris, a Scotchman who had
some care of the materials, not knowing me, showed me every thing with great
civility? I was disposed to please him, and observed that I supposed this was
nothing to the houses in Scotland. Na, said he, they wad na tirn their horses
into it. I question, said I, if they would make a cow house of it. Aye, said
he, they might make a cow house. But, said I, it can be nothing to the duke of
Argyle's house at Inverary. Na, said he, nor the duke of Bucleugh's, or lord
Haddington's.

The sessions of the court, began on the 4th of May. I had laid aside all
thoughts of appearing in defense of the prisoners. I knew my standing with the
court, especially with judge Peter's, was not favorable. I had heard that he
considered me as blamable; and on my passing him once in the street, he turned
away his eye. I wondered at this, if he had read my examination by secretary
Hamilton. Perhaps he had not. That being the case, his impressions were those
which had been made by the ex part testimony taken against me, by the
information and advertisements of my adversaries. Independent of the court, I
knew that I must stand ill with the jury; and what I should say would be
considered as the pleading of one criminal for another. Besides all this, I did
not know that I would be permitted. If I had been involved in the insurrection,
a crime aggravated a thousand fold in the case of a man who knew the law, I
must be considered as unworthy of appearing at any bar, in the light of a
counsel for a client. It was not without hesitation that I ventured to take a
seat at the bar; and when I did this, it was only just to show myself and
retire again. In the cases of prisoners or others attending under recognizance,
having given him, proof was procured to explain questionable circumstances with
regard to the signature of submission, and they were dismissed. Bills of
indictment were sent up against others, and a number found; some for treason,
and some for misdemeanors. I do not mean to give the history of the judiciary
proceedings; understanding that a report will be made by a gentleman of the bar
who attended. I was examined as a witness only on three occasions, and this was
with regard to the general history of particular scenes; for I know nothing of
the acts of the individuals.

In the course of the trial it became pretty clear that the impressions with
regard to me, as having been involved in the insurrection, were groundless;
that on the contrary, I had merit in opposing it, and quieting the disturbance.
The people began to talk less of having me hanged instead of the accused, and
the gentlemen of the bar became sociable; and the court complaisant.

CHAP. IX.
THE Epithets of "unprincipled, wanton, and marauding pandours," which I had
applied to the officers of the corpse of Morgan, in my answer to the insinuation
in his general orders, had given great offense to the general and his army. The
younger Neville had enclosed the publication to a colonel Stephenson, with such
comments as were calculated to inflame passion. The very compliment of being
singled out from a whole body, to be the champion of their honor, was
calculated to engage hostility. This col. Stephenson had been an officer in the
late war with Britain, and had distinguished himself as a man of courage,
bordering on temerity. And is said to have fought several duels with more
success than humanity could wish. He was a Pennsylvanian; in which case, less
imputation of Virginia influence would exist in his accomplishing revenge. He
had sworn my death. Randolph and Simeson, had sworn also. Captain ^eezly had
gone to the Jersies.

The only difficulty was to restrain themselves until I should return to the
country. In the mean time they killed (...) in imagination* the air was out a
thousand times with their ^ab^ee, wishing it to be me. I had every thing to
fear; Simeson (...) sedate brave young officers; M'Dermot was a new burning
Irishm^n; but, worst of all* Randolph would have made a figure in the days of
chivalry, for personal strength, and in^^edipity; he had fought duels and been
engaged, hand to hand, in several encounters, with knives and cutlasses. His
face wore the marks of this, being seared from the forehead to the chin in
several places.

No person dared to write to me, to inform me of the danger; not knowing in
what point of view I stood below; and whether it might not be a proof of guilt
in them to seem to be concerned for me. Nevertheless* there were persons of
humanity who ventured to signify their apprehensions on my account, by notes to
individuals in Philadelphia from the westward, who gave me warning of the
threats against me. It was the opinion of these, that ^ would be most advisable
for me to remain below until Morgan's troop^ left the country. I thought not;
because I felt passion, and wished to present myself immediately, in order to
see the result of this fury. I was impatient to set out for Pittsburg. As soon
as dismissed from the court, I was upon my way, and arrived at home speedily.
The scene had greatly changed; a difference had taken place in the camp itself.
A captain Low had assaulted and beaten M'Dermot; general Morgan had been
obliged to put Stephenson under an arrest, to keep him from killing Randolph.
Simeson having seen writs after writs served in the camp, and the troops making
no resistance* began to think there was something forcible in law, and had gone
to Washington to study it. There were a few stragglers still at Pittsburg, that
talked of killing me; but what was every body's business was nobody's business.
The thing was who should do it. No one disturbed me; and I am alive at the very
moment I am writing this narrative.

It having been thought no longer necessary to continue a body of troops in the
country, the civil authority appearing in competent operation, by orders from
the secretary at war, they were dismissed, and general Morgan took his leave of
us, in an affectionate address, dated at his camp, June 3, 1795.

There was every reason to confide in the peaceful disposition of the country,
for those, that had remained with him, were chiefly weak and sickly men, that
were unable to recross the mountain; and a fever breaking out in the camp,
affected them still more, and rendered them unfit for service; nevertheless the
country made not the least movement to disturb them, notwithstanding every
possible provocation of abusive words and insulting actions. The four
battallions of militia that had been raised from the country were the greater
part of them insurgents, and had been amongst the most troublesome. If joining
in abuse and insult to the people, was a proof of sincere conversion, it
existed. So that all things considered, the dismissing the army at this period,
was a justifiable-measure.

CONCLUSION.
I HAVE now finished the detail which I had in view. That my information may
not have been correct in all cases; that my memory may have led me into error;
that my imagination may have colored facts, is possible; but that I have
deviated from the strictness of truth, knowingly, is what I will not admit.
That I have been under the painful necessity of giving touches which may affect
the feelings of some persons, is evident. But it has been with all the delicacy
in my power, consistent with doing justice to myself. If I have done them
injustice, they have the same means with me in their power; an appeal to the
public. This is the great and respectable tribunal at which I stand. For though
I have not been arraigned at the bar of a court of justice, yet from the first
moment of obloquy against me, I have considered myself an arrested man, and put
upon my country. From that day, the morning sun shone to me less bright; the
light of night has been more obscure; the human countenance presented nothing
but suspicion. The voice of man hurt me; I almost hated life itself. For who
can say that I have pursued riches? Who can say I have been a devotee of
pleasure? Who can say I do not love fame? What then have I, if I loose the hope
of estimation? Was I a traitor to my country? Ask me, Was I a traitor to that
class of men with whom I am in grade of education? Would I disgrace the praise
of science, the advantage of an enlightened reading? Who am taught to know that
virtue is glory; and benevolence and truth, that alone which can assimilate
with the Divine nature. And what greater deviation than to disturb the settled
order of a government, while that government remains republican? Such owes it,
and such to be supported; and any man who touches it with any other views than
to rub the wheels and springs, deserves the anathema of the people.

If strictures are made in reply to my statement, let it be with moderation
equally, at least, to that which has been shown by me. For should I be under
the necessity of rejoining, it will be with more severity. I have attributed a
great deal to the misconception of any adversaries, the Neville's especially.
But if I find that after this development of all transactions, they still go on
to represent me as criminal, I shall resolve it into voluntary prejudice, and
address myself to explain the grounds of it. I had much rather he relieved from
the necessity, by a cessation of hostilities.

APPENDIX.
A Dissertation on the Treason Laws of the United States.
TREASON by the common law is indefinite There was a great latitude left in the
breast of the judges to determine what was treason or not. 4 Blackstone 75.
: Restrained by 25 Edward III Whereas diverse opinions have been entertained
before this time, in what ^ase treason shall be said, and what not, the king,
at the request, etc. -- Statutes at Large, p. 117.
: enlarged by 21 Richard II* restrained again by 1 Henry IV. chapter 10th, and
brought back to that of 25 Edward III The preamble of the statute is, that,
"Whereas in the said parliament, the said one and twentieth year of the late
king Richard, diverse pains of treason were ordained by statutes, in as much
that there was no man which did know how he ought to behave himself, to do,
speak, or say, for doubt of such pains, it is approved and assented to by the
king, etc. -- Statutes at Large, 118.
: enlarged again by sundry statutes: it was brought back to that of 25 Edward
III, by 1 Edward VI. chapter 12th: enlarged again by sundry statutes Statutes,
632.
: it was brought back by 1 Mary, chapter 1st Statutes at Large, 709.
. I have noted the above to show the rigor of the common law, and the
fluctuation of the statute law of England, in regard of the extent of treason.

The table of treason in England at this present day, is that of 25th Edward
III. By the treason law of the United States, this table is reduced to a single
item; viz. "that of levying war against the king in his realm, or being
adherent to the king's enemies in his realm, giving to them aid or comfort in
the realm or else."

The words of our act are, "if any person or persons, owing allegiance to the
United States of America, shall levy war against them, or shall adhere to their
enemies, giving them aid and comfort within the United States, or elsewhere."

My deduction now is, 1. That an immense softening has taken place in the law
of England, from what it was by the common law, in regard of the extent of
treason. 2. That by the treason law of the United States, it is softened still
more as to the extent.

It will be seen, in the second place, what improvement there has been of the
common law, in regard of trial. By the common law, no over of indictment was
allowed before arraignment; no copy before trial; no council, except on point
of law; no process, to compel witnesses for the defendant to appear; not upon
oath, when they gave their testimony; no limitation of the prosecution.

By 7th William III, it is provided that a copy of the panel be given two days
before trial.

Compulsory process for witnesses.

Limitation of prosecution to three years, contrary to the maxim of the common
law. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.

By the common law of the United States the prosecution is limited to three
years. "A copy of the indictment, and a list of the jury, and witnesses to be
produced on the trial for proving the said indictment, mentioning the names and
places of abode of such witnesses and jurors, is to be delivered to the accused
at least three entire days before he shall be tried for the same." He is
allowed counsel to be employed by himself, or if not able himself to employ,
counsel to be assigned by the court; he is entitled to compulsory process to
procure the attendance of witnesses on his behalf; and those witnesses are
heard upon oath.

Thus the treason law of the United States, improves in some particulars, even
the amelioration statute of William III.

Let us see, in the third place, what has been the change in the nature of the
proof necessary to fix the crime of treason.

By the common law one witness was sufficient. By 1 Edward VI. chapter 12, two
witnesses are made necessary "Be accused by two sufficient and lawful
witnesses, or shall willingly and without violence confess the same." -- Stat.
686.
. 1 and 6th Edward VI, chapter 3d: it is made necessary that the witnesses be
brought face to face with the accused "Be accused by two lawful accusers; which
said accusers, at the time of that arraignment of the party accused, if they be
then living, shall be brought in person before the party accused, and avow and
maintain that they have to say against the said party, to prove him guilty of
the treason or offenses contained in the bill of indictment." -- Stat. 686.
.

By 13 Charles II, "Two lawful and credible witnesses, upon oath, upon (...),"
are made requisite.

While such was the process of legislative improvement in regard of proof in
case of treason, did the judges keep an equal pace in favor of humanity in the
construction of those statutes? No; their leaning constantly was against the
accused; for near a century 17. Foster. 232.
, the statute of 1 Edward VI. was little regarded, or it was rendered ^ugatory;
by the extraordinary resolution, "that one witness of his own knowledge, and
another by hearsay, from him, though at third or fourth hand, made two
witnesses or accusers within the act." Even in cases where the accused insisted
strongly or the benefit of this act, the counsel for the crown has gone or in
the method formerly practiced, reading examinations and confessions of persons
supposed to be accomplices; some living and amesnable, others lately hanged for
the same treason.

In succeeding trials, the prisoners have been told that the statutes of Edward
VI, were repealed, particularly that which regards two witnesses face to face;
"that this law had been found dangerous to the crown."

When the people of all ranks and parties in England had been learning
moderation in the school of adversity, light began to dawn upon them. The
judges were at length brought to attend to the statute of Edward VI; but gave
it a construction unfavourable to the accused: viz. "that admitting two
witnesses to be necessary, yet one witness to one overt act, and another to
another overt act, of the same species of treason, are two sufficient witnesses
within the act." The judges drew the legislature after them in this illiberal
construction of the statute, and by 7 William II, it is sanctioned by the
clause, "on the oath or testimony of two lawful witnesses, either both of them
to the same overt act, or one of them to one, and the other of them to another
overt act of the same treason." But at the same time, the illiberal
constructions of the judges are rectified restrained in another very material
particular; it is provided by section 4th, that where "two or more distinct
treasons of diverse heads, or kinds, be alleged in one bill of indictment, one
witness produced to prove one of the said treasons, and another witness
produced to prove another of the said treasons, shall not be deemed or taken to
be two witnesses to the same treason.

Another error in the decision of the judges is corrected, or at least the
construction given by them, is ameliorated by 7 William, chapter 3d, section
8th, by which it is provided "that no evidence shall be admitted o^ given of
any overt act, not expressly laid in the indictment."

By the treason law of the United States, a great improvement has been gained
on the statute of 7 William. The proof demanded by o^^ law is, "the testimony
of two witnesses to the same overt act of treason, whereof indicted." And by
our act, the construction given by the judges, at some period in England, to
the clause of the statute of 1st Edward VI, is rectified. The "willingly and
without violence confessing the same," had been construed to be a confession
out of court, made however casually: this is fixed to a confession "in an open
court."

It will be seen that the decision of the English judges have opposed the
improving mind of the legislature; they have reduced it from time to time,
contrary to the natural and humane meaning* by subtle and unreasonable
construction. But in ascertaining the necessary proof of treason, the law of
Congress has corrected all this, and fixed it on the basis of reason and
humanity.

The only question now to be considered, or at least the only question which I
shall consider, is, What shall be said to be a "levying war?" I shall state
first what by the decision of the judges of England, has been construed to be a
levying war.

It would strike the common mind, that the taking (...) to dethrone the king,
or to change the government, could alone amount to a levying war; that there
must be not only an assembling in arms, but an animus subvertendi, or intention
of overthrowing in the case. But it has been carried much further by the
judges. To explain this, I cannot serve the public better, than by transcribing
a chapter from the most sensible writer on this subject; that is judge Foster*
it is chapter 2d, of discourse 1st, of high treason, on the clause of l^vying
war, and adhering the king's enemies.

"Lord chief justice Hale speaking of such unlawful assemblies as may amount to
a levying of war within the 25 E. 3, takes a difference between those
insurrections which have carried the appearance of an army formed under
readers, and provided with military weapons, and with drums, colors, etc. and
those other disorderly, tumultuous assemblies, which have been drawn together
and conducted to purposes manifestly unlawful, but without any of the show and
apparatus of war before mentioned.

I do not think any great stress can be laid on that distinction. It is true,
that in case of levying war, the indictments generally charge that the
defendents were armed and arrayed in a warlike manner; and where the case would
admit of it, the other circumstances of swords, guns, drums, colors, etc. have
been added. But I think the merits of the case have never turned singly on any
of those circumstances.

In the cases of Damaree and Purchase, which are the last printed cases that
have come in judgment on the point of constructive levying war, there was
nothing given in evidence of the usual pageantry of war, no military weapons,
no banners or drums, nor any regular consultation previous to the rising. And
yet the want of these circumstances weighed nothing with the court, though the
prisoners counsel insisted much on that matter. The number of the insurgents
supplied the want of military weapons; and they were provided with axes, crows,
and other tools of the like nature, proper for the mischief they intended to
effect.

-- Furor arma ministrat. Sect. 1. The true criterion therefore in all these
cases is, Quo animo did the parties assemble. For if the assembly be upon
account of some private quarrel, or to take revenge on particular persons, the
statute of treasons has already determined that point in favor of the
subject. If, says the statute, any man ride openly [so the word descouvert
ought to have been rendered] or secretly with men of arms against any other to
slay or rob him, or to take and keep him 'till he make fine for his
deliverance, it is not the mind of the king nor his council that in such case
it shall be adjudged treason; but it shall be adjudged felony or trespass
according to the laws of the land of old times used, and according as the case
requires Then immediately follows another clause which reaches to the end
of the statute; and provideth that, if in such case or other like the offense
had thentofore been adjudged treason, whereby the lands of the offenders had
come to the crown as forfeit; the lords of the fee should notwithstanding have
the escheat of such lands, saving to the crown the year, day, and wast.

I will make a short obse^vation or two on those clauses.

1st, The first clause is evidently declaratory of the common law, it shall be
adjudged felony or trespass according to the law of the land of old time used.
The second has a retrospect to some late judgments, in which the common law
had not taken place; and gives a speedy and effectual remedy to lords of the
fee who had suffered by those judgments.

2dly, The words of the first clause descriptive of the offense, "if any man
ride armed openly or secretly with men of arms," did in the language of these
times, mean nothing less than the assembling bodies of men, friends, tenants,
or dependents, armed and arrayed in a warlike manner, in order to effect some
purpose or other by dint of numbers and superior strength. And yet those
assemblies so formed and arra^ed if drawn together for purposes of a private
nature, were not deemed treasonable.

3dly, Though the statute mentions only the cases of assembling to kill, ro^,
or imprison, yet these, put as they are by way of example only, will not
exclude others which may be brought within the same rule* For the retrospective
clause provideth, that "if in such case or other like it has been adjudged" --
what are the other like cases? all cases of the like private nature are, I
apprehend, within the reas^n and equity of the act. The cases of the earls of
Gloucester and Hereford, and many other cases cited by Hale, some before the
statute of treasons, and others after it, those assemblies though attended many
of them with bloodshed and with the ordinary apparatus of war, were not held to
be treasonable assemblies. For they were not in construction of law, raised
against the king or his royal majesty, but for purposes of a private personal
nature

Sect. 2. Upon the same principle and within the reason and equity of the
statute, risings to maintain a private claim of right, or to destroy particular
enclosures, or to remove nuisances which affected or were thought to affect in
point of interest the parties assembled for those purposes, or to break prisons
in order to release particular persons without any other circumstance of
aggravation, have not been held to amount to levying war within the statute.

And upon the same principle and within the same equity of the statute, I think
it was very rightly held by five of the judges, that a rising of the weavers in
and about London to destroy all engine looms, a machine which enabled those of
the trade who made use of it to undersell those who had it not did not amount
to levying war within the statute; though great outrages were committed on that
occasion not only in London but in the adjacent counties, and the magistrates
and peace officers were resisted and affronted.

For those judges considered the whole affair merely as a private quarrel
between men of the same trade about the use of a particular engine, which those
concerned in the rising thought detrimental to them. Five of the judges indeed
were of a different opinion. But the attorney general thought proper to proceed
against the defendents as for a riot only.

Sect. 3. But every insurrection which in judgment of law is intended against
the person of the king, be it to dethrone or imprison him, or to oblige him to
alter his measures of government, or to remove evil counselors from about him,
these risings all amount to levying war within the statute; whether attended
with the pomp and circumstances of open war or no. And every conspiracy to levy
war for these purposes though not treason within the clause of levying war, is
yet an overt act within the other clause of compassing the king's death. For
those purposes cannot be effected by numbers and open force, without manifest
danger to his person.

Sect. 4 Insurrections in order to throw down all enclosures, to alter the
established law or change religion, to inhance the price of all labor or to
open all prisons, all risings in order to effect these innovations of a public
and general concern by an armed force, are in construction of law high treason,
within the clause of levying war. For though they are not levelled at the
person of the king, they are against his royal majesty. And besides, they have
a direct tendency to dissolve all the bonds of society, and to destroy all
property and all government too, by numbers and an armed force. Insurrections
likewise for redressing national grievances, or for the expulsion of foreigners
in general, or indeed of any single nation living here under the protection of
the king, or for the reformation of real or imaginary evils of a public nature,
and in which the insurgents have no special interest, risings to effect these
ends by force and numbers, are by construction of law within the clause of
levying war. For they are levelled at the king's crown and royal dignity.

Sect. 5. It was adjudged in the 16th Car. 1. a season of great agitation, that
going to Lambeth house in a warlike manner to surprise the archbishop, who was
a privy counselor, it being with drums and a multitude to the number of 300,
was treason.

This is a very imperfect account of an insurrection, which has found a place
in the best histories of that time. The tumult happened on Monday the 11th of
May 1640 about midnight. On Thursday following the special commission under
which the judges sat was opened and proceeded upon; and Benstead a ringleader
in the tumult was convicted, and within a very few days afterward executed.

It is not very easy from the short note of the case given by the reporters, to
collect the true grounds of this resolution. But the history of the times will
enable us to form a probable conjecture concerning them.

On the fifth of May the parliament was dissolved to the general
dissatisfaction of the nation. And, which greatly increased the ill humor of
the people, the convocation was by a new commission empowered to continue
sitting, notwithstanding the dissolution of the parliament. And the blame and
odium of both these unpopular measures were laid upon the archbishop.

On Saturday the ninth of that month, a paper was pasted up at the Exchange,
exhorting the apprentices to rise and sack the archbishop's house on the Monday
following. And accordingly on that very day an attempt was made upon Lambeth
house by a rabble of some thousands; with open profession and protestation,
that they would tear the archbishop in pieces.

It were to be wished that the full import of the libel posted at the Exchange,
in consequence of which the attempt was made, had been ^et out: and also that
we were informed what was the cry among the rabble at the time of the attempt,
more than that they would tear the archbishop in pieces. These circumstances,
could we come at them, would probably let us into the true reason and motives
for the rising, and consequently into the reason and grounds of the opinion of
the judges. For if it did appear by the libel, or by the cry of the rabble at
Lambeth house, that the attempt was made on account of measures the king had
taken or was then taking at the instigation as they imagined of the archbishop;
that the rabble had deliberately and upon a public invitation attempted by
numbers and open force, to take a severe revenge upon the privy-counsellor, for
the measures the sovereign had taken or was pursuing; if this may be supposed
to be the case, I think the supposition is not very foreign, the grounds and
reasons of the resolution would in my opinion be sufficiently explained,
without taking that little trifling circumstance of the drum into the case.
Upon such a supposition, the case came within the reason of Talbot's case, 17
R. 2, cited by Hale. And I think too within the rules laid down in the two
preeeding sections. But without the help of some such supposition, I see
nothing in the case as stated by the report, which can amount to high treason.

Sect. 6. But a bare conspiracy for effecting a rising, for the purposes
mentioned in the two preceding sections and in the next, is not an overt act
of compassing the king's death. Nor will it come under any species of treason
within the 25 Edward 3. unless the rising be effected. And in that case the
conspirators as well as the actors will be all equally guilty. For in high
treason of all kinds, (...) the participes crimines are principals.

It must (...) that conspiracies for these purposes have been adjudged treason.
But those judgments were founded on the temporary act of 13 Eliz. which made
compassing to levy war, declared by printing, writing, or advised speaking,
high treason during the life of the queen.

There was an act in the 13 Car. 2. to the same purpose on which some
prosecutions were founded; but that act expired with the death of the king.

Sect. 7. The cases of Damaree and Purchase for destroying the meeting houses
of Protestant Dissenters, being the last in print that have come in judgment
upon the doctrine of constructive levying war; and having been ruled upon
consideration of former precedents, I will state them somewhat largely from the
printed trials.

The indictments charged that the prisoners withdrawing their allegiance etc.
and conspiring and intending to disturb the peace and public tranquillity of
the kingdom, did traitorously compass, imagine, and intend to levy and raise
war, rebellion, and insurrection against the queen within the kingdom; and that
in order to complete and effect those their traitorous intentions and
imaginations, they on the (...) day of (...) at (...) with a multitude of
people to the number of 500 armed and arrayed in a warlike manner etc. then and
there traitorously assembled, did traitorously ordain, prepare, and levy war
against the queen, against the duty of their allegiance etc.

It appeared upon the trial of these men, which I attended in the students
gallery at the Old Bailey, that upon the 1st March 1709, during Dr.
Sacheverell's trial, the rabble who had attended the doctor from Westminster to
his lodgings in the temple, continued together a short space in the King's
Bench walks, crying among other cries of the day, down with the Presbyterians.

At length it was proposed, by whom it was not known, to pull down the meeting
houses, and thereupon the cry became general, down with the meeting houses: and
some thousands immediately moved toward a meeting house of Mr. Burges, a
Protestant dissenting minister; the defendant Damaree, a waterman in the
queen's service, and in her livery and badge, putting himself at the head of
them, and crying, come on boys, I Will lead you, down with the meeting houses.
They soon demolished Mr. Burges's, and burnt the pews, pulpit, and other
materials in Lincoln's Inn Fields. After they had finished at that place, they
agreed to proceed to the rest of the meeting houses. And hearing that the
guards were coming to disperse them, they agreed for the greater dispatch to
divide into several bodies, and to attack different hous^s at the same time.
And many were that night in part demolished, and the material^ burnt in the
street.

The prisoner Damaree put himself at the head of a party which drew off from
Lincoln's End fields and demolished a meeting house in Drury Lane, and burnt
the materials in the street; still crying they would pull them all down that
night.

While the materials of this house were burning, the prisoner Purchase who had
not, for aught appeared, been before concerned in the outrages of that night,
came up to the fire very drunk; and with his drawn sword in his hand,
encouraged the rabble in what they were doing And incited them to resist the
guards who were just then come to the fire in order to disperse the multitude.
He likewise assaulted the commanding officer with his drawn sword, and struck
several of their horses with the same weapon And then advancing toward the
guards, cried ou^ to the rabble behind him, come on boys, I Will lose my life in
the cause, I will fight the best of them.

Upon the trial of Damaree the cases referred to before in Sect. 4. and 5. were
cited at the bar, and all the judges present were of opinion that the prisoner
was guilty of the high treason charged upon him in the indictment. For here was
a rising with an avowed intention to demolish all meeting houses in general;
and this intent they carried into execution as far as they were able* If the
meeting houses of Protestant Di^^enters had been erected and supported in
defiance of all law, a rising in order to destroy such houses in general, would
have fallen under the rule laid down in Keiling with regard to the ^emolishing
all bawdy houses. But since the meeting houses of Protestant Dissenters are by
the toleration act taken under the protection of the law, the insurrection in
the present case was to be considered as a public declaration by the rabble
against that act, and an attempt to render it ineffectual by numbers and open
force.

Accordingly Damaree was found guilty, and had judgment of death as in cases of
high treason.

But he was pardoned and soon after restored to his badge and livery, which he
wore to the death of the queen Her majesty's new advisers did not choose to
have the dawn of their administration stained with the blood of one of Dr.
Sa^hervell's ablest advocates.

With regard to the case of Purchase, there was some diversity of opinion among
the judges present at his trial: because it did not appear upon the evidence,
that he had any concern in the o^iginal rising, or was present at the pulling
down any of the houses, or any ways active in the outrages of that night;
except his behavior at the bonfire in Drury ^ane, whither he came by mere
accident, for aught appeared to the contrary.

The jury therefore by the direction of the court found a special verdict to
the effect already mentioned.

Upon this sp^^ial verdict, which in substance took in the whole transaction on
the first of M^r^h, the judges unanimously resolved, that for the reasons
mentioned at Damaree's trial, he and the others concerned with him in the
demolishing and rifling the meeting houses, were guilty of high treason in
levying war against the queen.

As to the case of Purchase, chief justice Trevor, justice Powel, and baron
Price were of opinion, that upon the facts found, he was not guilty of the
charge in the indictment. But all the rest of the judges differed from them.
Because the rabble was traitorously assembled, and in the very act of levying
war when Purchase joined them, and encouraged them to proceed, and assaulted
the guards, who were sent to suppress them. All this being done in defense and
support of persons engaged in the very act of rebellion, involved him in the
guilt of that treason in which the others were engaged.

This man likewise was pardoned. His case in point of law and of real guilt
too, came far short of Damaree's.

Sect. 8 The joining with rebels in an act of rebellion, or with enemies in
acts of hostility, will make a man a traitor: in the one case within the clause
of levying war, in the other within that of adhering to the king's ^^emies. But
if this be done for fear of death, and while the party is under actual force,
and he takes the first opportunity that offers to make his escape, this fear
of compulsion will excuse him. It is however incumbent on the party who makes
fear and compulsion his defense, to show to the satisfaction of the court and
jury, that the compulsion continued during all the time he staid with the
rebels or enemies.

I will not say that he is obliged to account for every day, week, or month.
That perhaps would be impossible. And therefore if an original force be proved,
and the prisoner can show, that he in earnest attempted to es^ape and was
prevented; or that he did get off and was forced ba^k, or that he was narrowly
watched, and all passes guarded; or from other circumstances; which it is
impossible to state with precision, but when proved ought to weigh with a jury*
that an attempt to escape would have been attended with great difficulty and
danger; so that upon the whole he may be presumed to have continued amongst
them against his will, though not constantly under an actual force or fear of
immediate death, these circumstances and others of the like tendency proved to
the satisfaction of the court and jury, will be sufficient to excuse him.

But an apprehension though ever so well grounded, of having houses burnt or
estates wasted or cattle destroyed, or of any other mischief of ^he like kind,
will not excuse in the case of joining and marching with rebels or enemies.

Furnishing rebels or enemies with money, arms, ammunition, or other
necessaries will prima facie, make a man a traitor. But if enemies or rebels
come with a superior force and exact contributions, or live upon the country at
free quarter, submission in these cases is not criminal. For flagrante bello
the jus b^lli takes place, it is the only law then subsisting. And submission
is a point of the highest prudence to prevent a greater public evil.

And the bare sending money or provisions (except in the case just excepted) or
sending intelligence to rebels or enemies, which in most cases is the most
effectual aid that can be given them, will make a man a traitor, though the
money or intelligence should happen to be intercepted. For the party in sending
did all he could; the treason was complete on his part, though it had not the
effect he intended So ruled in the case of William Greg, and in the case of Dr.
Hensey.
.

The cases cited in the margin did not in truth turn singly upon the rule here
laid down, though I think the rule may be very well supported. For Greg was
indicted for compassing the death of the queen, and also for adhering to her
enemies; and Hensey's indictment was in the same form, and so was lord
Preston's cited in the last chapter. And the writing and sending the letters of
intelligence, which in the cases of Greg and Hensey were stopped at the post
office, was laid as an overt act of both the species of treason. So that
admitting for argument's sake, which is by no means admitted, that it was not
an overt act of adhering, since the letters never came to the enemies hands,
and consequently no aid o^ comfort was actually given, yet the bare writing and
sending them to the post office in order to be delivered to the enemy, was
undoubtedly an overt act of the other species of treason. In Greg's case the
judges did resolve that it was an overt act of both the species of treason
charged on him. And in Hensey's the court adopted that opinion, and cited it
with approbation.

Though the cases of these men were in substance the same, the charge against
them varied in one particular. Greg's indictment charge that the letters were
sent from the place where the venue is laid into parts beyond the seas (IN
parts transmarinas) to be delivered to the enemy. Hensey's, with much greater
propriety, and agreeable to the truth of the case, charge that the letters
were sent from the place where the venue is laid, to be delivered in parts
beyond the seas to the enemy. As the letters never went abroad, this was
undoubtedly the safer way of laying the charge.

Sect. 9. An assembly armed and arrayed in a warlike manner for any treasonable
purpose is bellum levatum, though not bellum percussum. Listing and marching
are sufficient overt acts without coming to a battle or action. So cruising on
the king's subjects under a French commission, France being then at war with
us, was held to be adhering to the king's enemies, though no other act of
hostility was laid or proved.

Sect. 10. Attacking the king's forces in opposition to his authority upon a
march or in quarters, is levying war against the king. But if upon a sudden
quarrel, from some affront given or taken, the neighborhood should rise and
drive the forces out of their quarters, that would be a great misdemeanor, and
if death should ensue, it may be felony in the assailants: But it will not be
treason, because there was no intention against the king's person or government.

Sect. 11. Holding a castle or fort against the king or his forces, if actual
force be used in order to keep possession, is levying war. But a bare detainer,
as suppose by shutting the gates against the king or his forces, without any
other force from within, Lord Hale conceives will not amount to treason. But
if this be done in confederacy with enemies or rebels, that circumstance will
make it treason; in the one case under the clause of adhering to the king's
enemies, in the other under that of levying war. So if a person having the
custody of a castle or fort deliver it up to the rebels or enemies, by
treachery and in combination with them, this is high treason within the act: in
the former case it is levying war, in the latter it is adhering to the king's
enemies. But mere cowardice or imprudence, though it might subject a commander
in such case to death by the martial law, will not amount to treason.

Sect. 12. States in actual hostility with us, though no war be solemnly
declared, are enemies within the meaning of the act. And therefore in an
indictment on the clause of adhering to the king's enemies, it is sufficient to
aver that the prince or state adhered to is an enemy, without showing any war
proclaimed. And the fact, whether war or no, is triable by the jury; and public
notoriety, is sufficient evidence of the fact. And if the subject of a foreign
prince in amity with us, invadeth the kingdom without commission from his
sovereign, he is an enemy. And a subject of England adhering to him is a
traitor, within this clause of the act. Or if an alien amy acts in a hostile
manner against us under a commission from a prince or state at enmity with us,
he is an enemy within the act. And adhering to him is treason within this
clause.

So if a subject of England makes actual war on the king's allies engaged with
him against the common enemy, as was the case of the States General in our wars
against France in the time of king William and the late queen, this is adhering
to the king's enemies, though no act of hostility is committed against the king
or his forces. For by this the common enemy is strengthened, and the king's
hands are weakened.

Sect. 13. In prosecution for these treasons, as well as for that of comparing
the death of the king, an overt act of the treason must, as I have already
observed, be charged in the indictment and proved. This rule is grounded on the
words of the statute, which being a declaratory act must strictly be pursued.
The words to this purpose are, Where a man does compass, etc. -- or if a man
does levy war against our lord the king in his realm, or be adherent to the
kfng's enemies in his realm, giving them aid or comfort in his realm or
elsewhere, and thereof be [ provablement, i. e. upon full proof] attainted of
open deed. And therefore it will not be sufficient to allege generally that
the defendents did levy war or adhere. But in the former case it must be
alleged that they did assemble with a multitude armed and arrayed in a warlike
manner, and levied war. And in the latter, acts of adherence must be set forth.

But the particular facts done by the defendants, or a detail of the evidence
intended to be given, need not be set forth in either case. The common law, as
I have already said upon a like occasion, never required this exactness: and
the statute of king William does not make it necessary to charge particular
facts, where it was not necessary before."

The question will now occur, Are we bound by these decisions, founded in
constructions given to the clause of "levying war?" The decisions of the judges
are only evidence of law, not the law itself. Where the decision is
unreasonable, it cannot be the law. There is a higher evidence against it, than
the opinion in its favor; viz. the general reason of the human mind. Yet
decisions ought to be regarded, as the judgments of wise men, responsa
prudentum, and in some cases, to be followed as undeviatingly as the law
itself. For instance, where under a decision, that has taken place, a principle
has been settled in the tenure of estates, by grant, devise, or in personal
contracts, which must be supposed in view, at the time of the grant, devise, or
contract. It would operate with an effect, ex post facto, to depart from the
decision. Nothing of this can exist in the case of a decision on the criminal
code, where it is in favor of the accused. The court is, quo ad hoc the
government, and a rigorous construction does not bind. It may relax. But a
liberal construction given, concludes against a more rigorous one in future
cases. Because every person is supposed to know the decision, and to be told
that in the cognizance of offenses, hitherto the law will go, and no further.

Are we then at liberty to depart from the constructions given by the English
judges to the clause of "levying war?" I have no doubt of it, nay think that
pursuing the meliorating spirit of the constitution, and of our legislature, we
are bound to depart from them in all cases, warranted by reason.

Are there any cases where the decisions appear unreasonable? There are.

In order illustrate this, I first observe that a "war levied" is of two sorts,
1st. Expressly and directly, as raising war against the king, or his general
and forces; or to surprise and injure the king's person, or to imprison him, or
to go to his presence to enforce him to remove any of his ministers or
counselors, and the like. 2d. Interpretatively and constructively, as when a
war is levied to throw down enclosures generally, or to enhance servants wages,
or to alter religion established by law, and many instances of like nature
might be given. This has been resolved to be a war against the king, and
treason within this clause 1 Hale. 137
. The first resolution, says Sir Matthew Hale, that I find of this
interpretative levying war, is a resolution cited by my lord Coke, in the time
of Henry VIII, for enhancing servants wages; and the next in time was that of
Burton, 39 Elizabeth, for raising an armed force to pull down enclosures
generally. This is now settled by these instances, and some of the like kind
hereafter mentioned. The preceding against Burton and his companions, was not
upon the statute of 25 Edward III, which required that in new cases, the
Parliament should be first consulted; but upon the statute of 13 Elizabeth; for
conspiring to levy war, which has not that clause of consulting the parliament
in new cases, and therefore seems to leave a latitude to the judges, to make
constructions greater than was left by the statute or 25 Edward III.

These resolutions being made and settled, we must acquiesce in them, but in my
opinion, if new cases happen for the future, that have not an express
resolution in point, nor are expressly within the words of 25 Edward III, though
they may seem to have a parity of reason, it is the safest way, and most
agreeable to the wisdom of the great act of 25 Edward III, first to consult the
Parliament, and have their declaration, and to be very wary in multiplying
constructive and interpretative treasons; for we know not where we will end
Hale. 13^
.

Will it not sound harshly in a common ear, to hear it said that in a wrong
construction of the law, where even life is in question, we must acquiesce? yet
this is the language of the humane sir Matthew Hale.

There was a special verdict found at the Old Bailey, 20 Car. 11. That A, B,
and C, with diverse persons to the number of one hundred, assembled themselves,
modo guerino, to pull down bawdy houses; and they marched with a flag upon a
staff, and weapons, and pulled down certain houses in prosecution of their
conspiracy. This by all the judges assembled, but one Sir Matthew Hale.
, was ruled to be levying war, and so treason within this statute; and
accordingly they were executed. But the reason that made the doubt to him that
doubted it, was 1st, Because it seemed but an un^uly company of apprentices,
amongst whom that custom of pulling bawdy houses had long obtained, and
therefore was usually repressed by officers, and not punished as traitors. 2d,
Because the finding to pull down bawdy houses, might reasonable be intended
here or there particular bawdy houses, and the indefinite expression in materia
odiosa, be construed either universally, or generally. And 3d, Because the
statute of 1 Mary, chapter 12; though now discontinued, makes assemblies of
above 12 persons, and of as high a nature, only felony, and that not without a
continuance together an hour after proclamation made; as namely, an assembly to
pull down bawdy houses, burn mills, or to abate the rent of any manors, lands,
or tenements, or the price of ^^ctuals, or (...), etc.

Yet the greater opinion obtained as was fit, says the author, and these
apprentices him judgment, and some of them were executed as for high treason.

The decision in the case of pulling down the meeting houses of dissenters, by
which decision it was construed treason, followed the case of the bawdy houses.
The distinction would have been invidious, to have made it treason to invade
brothels, and to make it less, to demolish churches.

The construction was not equally rigid in the case of the insurrection of the
weavers, in 1675, on which occasion the judges were assembled to consider. Five
of them thought this treason; ^^ve dissented Hale. 13^.
. They thought it not like the design of altering religion, laws, pulling down
enclosures generally, nor to destroy any trade; but only a particular quarrel
and grievance between men of the same trade, against a particular engine that
they thought a grievance to them; which though it was an enormous riot, yet it
would be difficult to make it treason 1 Hale. 1^6.
. The five judges who were for making it treason had relied on Burton's case.
The decision in that of the bawdy houses, did not then exist; it was five years
after.

I conceive the question fairly open for discussion; what ought to be the
construction of the clause of "levying war." I mean taking up the subject, as
certainly we have a right to do, unshackled by the decisions of the English
judges.

Taking up the subject on first principles, it might be said, that even a
simple trespass tends to the subversion of the government; and every breach of
the peace is said to be against the peace and dignity of the commonwealth. But
where the trespass is with numbers, and with arms, it is arrayed more formally
against the order of society, and might be construed treason. It was with a
view to such construction that the statute of 25 Edward III, provides that "if
any man ride armed openly, or secretly with men of arms, against any other, to
slay or to rob him, till he made fine for his deliverance, it is not the mind
of the king, nor his council, that in such a case it shall be judged treason;
but it shall be judges felony or trespass according to the law of the land, of
old time used, and according as the case requires."

It was on this principle the boundary of construction was settled by the
judges generally; that, "risings to maintain a private claim of right, or to
destroy particular enclosures; or or to remove nuisances, which affect, or were
thought to affect in point of interest the parties assembled for those
purposes, or to break prisons in order to release particular persons, without
any other circumstance of aggravation, have not been holden to amount to
levying war, within the statute."

It must be therefore an insurrection which in judgment of law is intended
against the government, to overthrow it; as you would break a machine to
pieces, or to stop the motion of it, by breaking or obstructing some wheel or
spring that is necessary for its operation. Yet resistance to an officer in the
execution of his process, by the law of the land, is but an aggravated
trespass. With a view to such construction, our statute has provided, "that if
any person shall knowingly and wilfully obstruct, resist, or oppose any officer
of the United States, in serving or attempting to serve, or execute an mesne
process, or warrant, or order of any of the courts of the United States, or any
other legal or judicial writ, or process whatsoever, or shall assault, beat, or
wound any officer, or other person duly authorized, in serving or executing any
writ, rule, order, process, or warrant aforesaid, every person so knowingly and
wilfully offending in the premises, shall, on conviction thereof, be imprisoned
not exceeding twelve months, and fined not exceeding three hundred dollars Laws
of the United States
."

I would in the first place lay aside constructive treasons altogether, and
confine the law to a direct attack upon the government, and in the second place
I would confine it to an attack, animo subvertendi. Will it not be easy then to
meditate the overthrowing the government, and go on to execute it by a
resistance to a law, and by risings for indirect purposes, without a
possibility of making proof of an animus subvertendi, or conspiracy to
overthrow? Let it be left to the jury to presume, or infer from the acts
themselves, what the intention was; but let it always be in view as the essence
of the act, that there was a directly looking forward in the mind of the
person, to a subversion of the government, before it be construed treason.
Every outrage, without this essential expedent may be repressed, and punished
under the idea of a riot, subjecting to fine, pillory, imprisonment, and hard
labor. This will be more agreeable to the common sense and feelings of
mankind, who must be struck with a sense that the outrage is a riot, but to
whom it cannot be obvious, that it was meditated as an attempt upon the
government itself, amounting to high treason. It is only by deduction and
inference, that it becomes so.

There will be no evidence, that any of those concerned in the attack of the
house of the inspector of the revenue, general Neville, ever thought of
subverting the government, or had an idea that the act would be construed
treason. Whatever the ultimate views of these may have been, who projected the
taking the magazine at Pittsburgh, certain it is, that the bulk had no looking
forward of mind to more than a redress of what they called grievances, under
the government. If the construction therefore for which I have contended, is
supportable, either of these acts will amount to a riot only.

It will be said that our legislature, in excerpting the very words of the
clause from the statute 25 Edward III, must be supposed at the time to have had
an eye to the construction given to this clause by the decisions of the English
courts; and by adopting the terms, has sanctioned the interpretation. The
presumption doubtless exists. But it does not necessarily follow* and in favor
of life, unless it necessarily follows, let ^ot the construction govern. The
legislature may have attended to the constructions, or they may not; the
q^estion admits a doubt. This being the case, it is contrary to the law maxims
of humanity, to establish the presumption. The legislature intent upon
restraining the treason law to a single clause, may not at the same time, have
pursued the constructions of that clause in their minds. It is not probable
they did. It was not necessary. The judges had the power to construe these
words, on principle of reason, with the same license as if they never had been
in a treason table of England. The ultimate question then will be, whether it
be necessary for the preservation of the government, that the treason law be
carried so for as to make the circumstances in the case of Neville's house, or
the march to Braddock's fields, amount to that offense.

I admit that by the decision of the English judges, the attack upon the house
of the inspector, is clearly treason. For though it was not destroying all
inspection offices, yet it was for a purpose of a public nature, and in which
the insurgents had no special or individual interest Foster. 2.1.
, exclusively of the community.

I also must admit that the march to Braddock's field, by the same
construction, must be treason; for though the expelling individuals would be
but a violent trespass in itself; yet connected, as it was, with a view to the
operation of a law which these men were supposed to countenance and support, it
will be brought to the same thing. But the question may be made, whether it be
necessary for the preservation of the government, that these or like cases be
adjudged treason, where no evidence is alleged of an avowed intention to bring
about a revolution.

Elementary writers, at the head of whom is the marquis de Beccaria, have with
great plausibility, questioned the right of society to punish, by taking life
at all. They stand on surer ground, who question only the necessity. By the
Russian code, and that of Tuscany, it has been reduced to an experiment; and
capital punishment is found not necessary. The only use of this at present, is
to enforce a leaning of the mind toward a construction of the law, that will
restrain it to the highest species of treason, and what alone ought to bear the
name; a conspiracy to overthrow the government.

As our treason law stands, it is more the interest of the government in point
of reparation from the offender, to have the act considered in the light of an
aggravated riot only, than to have it made treason; in which case there is no
forfeiture of property "No condition or judgment, for any of the offenses
aforesaid, shall work corruption of blood, or any forfeiture of estate." Laws
of United States, 151.
. Reasons of policy would therefore lead to that construction of the clause,
for which I have contended.

Nothing can be right that is contrary to the feelings of the human heart, and
at that which the reason of the common mind revolts. Let it be told one of
these accused, that the essence of the charge against him is an attempt to
shake the foundations of the government to which he had sworn allegiance, and
to overturn, as far as in him lay, the existing order of society, with all the
advantages of security to person, property, and fame; and to bring about
anarchy at first, and tyranny of one or a few in the end. He would say, I never
had such a thought. Others will believe him; and they cannot feel an
acquiescence with the law that would by construction fix this design upon him.

In every other crime, it is known and contemplated to the extent, what the
individual is about to perpetrate. In homicide, he knows he is about to kill a
man; in burglary, to break a house; in larceny, to steal an article. The fact
in its nature and consequences exists clearly to his mind. He is under no
necessity of construing and inferring, in order to know what he is about. It is
the quo animo, the mind with which a thing is done, that is all at all times to
be considered. And if it cannot be found that the mind meant the act, it cannot
be considered as the act of the mind, which is the man.

I would therefore understand our law, as having in view only a fixed, formed,
deliberate intention of subverting the government, as that offense which it
will construe high treason, and punish with the loss of life itself. The
accused h^d meditated death to the government, and the law in this case, and
this case only, will meditate death to him.

The legislature of the United States contemplating precisely such a case as
that of the insurrection of the western country, has provided for the
suppressing it by an act of May 2d, 1790. "Whenever the laws of the United
States, shall be opposed, or the execution thereof obstructed in any state, by
combinations too powerful to be suppressed, by the ordinary course of judiciary
proceedings, or by the power vested in the marshall, by this act; the same
being notified to the President of the United States by an associate justice,
or the district judge, it shall be lawful for the President of the United
States to call forth the militia of such state, to suppress combinations, and
shall cause the laws to be duly executed. And if the militia where such
combinations may happen, shall refuse, or be insufficient to suppress the same,
it shall be lawful for the President, if the legislature of the United States
be not in session, to call forth and employ such numbers of the militia of any
other state or states, most convenient thereto as may be necessary, until the
expiration of thirty days, after commencement of the ensuing session." The
"opposing the laws, or obstructing the execution," are the phrases; not that of
traitorously conspiring to subvert the government. So that it would seem to
have had in view, an insurrection for a purpose of an inferior nature, and
calls it, "an unlawful combination," which though tending in its consequence to
overthrow the government, yet had not that for its object in the contemplation
of the actors. We are relieved, therefore, by this act, from an objection which
might exist, that unless such outrages as these were construed treason, the
power of the federal government could not move to suppress them. On the ground,
therefore, of the preservation of the union, I see no necessity to carry our
construction of the clause of "levying war," so far as to embrace the late acts
in the western country within the crime of treason.

If, in any case, proof can be directly made, or if the jury, from the facts
themselves, cannot but presume that a subversion was intended, it may be so
construed, but not otherwise.

Let it be understood, that the above are the notes of the arguments, I had
projected in my mind, had I appeared in defense of the prisoners.

On the Expediency of Pardoning in the present Instance.
I HAVE heard of a brother of the bar, who was of the militia that marched to
suppress the insurrection, and though not actually borne upon men's shoulders
in a palanquin, in the manner of the Asiatics, yet was conducted with such
softness in the mess of a commanding officer, as to render it impossible to
have sustained any great fatigue, or to have suffered much from the campaign;
yet is said to have expressed himself with passion, on hearing, that in all
probability, none of the prisoners would suffer death. "What!" said he, "after
all that I have suffered, none of them be hanged!" He had suffered little else,
but the pleasure of a ride, in good company on the road, yet expressed chagrin
at the prospect of not having some hanged. I may be said to have suffered a
good deal, and to have a better ground of resentment against those who were the
immediate cause of it; yet I have never wished any of them hanged. My express
object in these observations is to prevent it. Who has a better right to speak?
I have been a suppresser of the insurrection. None of those who marched to
fight, or were here to council, in their individual capacity, have done more.

I admit that of all who felt pain, the President of the United States, must
have felt most. He saw the glory of his acquirements at stake; for shake the
foundation of the government, and where were the honors of having raised the
fabric? To what use had his toils been applied? The labors and watchings of
years, were about to perish under his own administration. I figured to myself
often his solicitude, and could enter into his feelings fully. His pain must
have been exquisite. Yet I will venture to say, he had no abstract wish that
any of them should be hanged; nor has he any wish now. The only question will
be, How shall it be avoided?

The President by the constitution, has the power "to grant reprieves, and
pardons, for offenses against the United States." This supposes cases, in which
it will be his duty to grant reprieves or pardons. Let us examine if the late
insurrection be one. It will be considered, that it was difficult for the
common mind of this country, to distinguish an attack upon the officers,
appointed to carry a law, odious to them, into execution, from that opposition
which the officers under the stamp act of Great Britain had received, at a more
early period. They could see no difference in the case of John Neville, and
Zachariah Hood Stamp master-general.
. The law was said to be grievous in both cases; and that was all they knew
about it. In the case of the tea duty also, an opposition by force, took place,
which is celebrated to this day, amongst the first acts of patriotism. Could
you expect an accurate conception of the distinction which exists; those acts
being against laws that were void, because they were unconstitutional; and
these being against a law, which though unequal, is constitutional? It
astonishes them to this hour, why the authors of our revolution from Great
Britain, should be celebrated, and yet talk of hanging these that were doing
nothing more than opposing what was wrong, amongst ourselves. I know, to use
the expression of one or them, "they thought that in taking up arms to oppose
the excise laws, they were doing God's service." The language of humanity, then
would be, "forgive them, for they knew not what they did." It is a hard case to
punish where the mind is not criminal. The gradual improvement of education by
public schools, may inform the mass of the people, and correct a mistake of
principles. The example of the people of France, rushing to extremes, and these
being the subject of the elogium of the day, have misled the common people
here, and forms in the mind of a reflecting person, a palliation of their
excesses. They have seen things in a mass, and have not developed principles.

Language of conversation and writings, in our own stat^, for a considerable
time past have bordered on licentiousness; and have been calculated to impel
the common mind beyond the boundary of correct thinking. I was struck with a
proof of this, in an expression of a rifleman, who came from the camp, as we
called it, to our committee of battalions on Braddock's field, and being
informed that we were deliberating apart; I do not understand, said he, this
way of counselling in mystery. I saw that he had heard of the objections to the
Senate keeping their doors shut, or of the President of the United States
keeping his negociations with foreign powers secret. Yet this man, whose name I
have since discovered, was from an extreme of the frontier country, and little
above a mere hunter of the woods, in point of information.

The long established prejudices of the country against the excise law, forms a
mitigation in the moral nature of the acts of individuals in opposition to it.
By the contagion of opinion and example, it was thought to be virtue. The
outrage were the offspring more of common misunderstanding, than of particular
vice. When we consider, then, that the amnesty has embraced the greater part,
and that it was in some degree a matter of accid^^^ that the others did not
embrace it, not having equal opportunity o^ information, it will lead us to be
reconciled with the idea o^ throwing them and their punishment out of view
als^* The execution of the present prisoners in custody, would be nothing more
than punishing the madness of a multitude, not in the persons of the most
guilty, but of the least fortunate. It would answer the same end to hang an
unfleshed skeleton, and call it Tom the Tinker.

Taking into view what has been said on the construction of the clause of
"levying war," it would seem that should the judges conceive themselves bound
on principle of precedent, or reason by established construction, yet there
would be a ground for the legislature to make another grade in treason, viz. a
distinction of the highest species of "levying war," on a conspiracy to effect
a revolution; from that of a particular outrage tending to this end yet not
projected with an ultimate view of that nature. The first might remain capital
as high treason; the second punishable by loss of liberty and goods. Until such
a reformation can take place, let the rigor of the code be mitigated by the
clemency of the executive.

A sufficient lesson has been given to the public mind of the demerit of the
outrages in this country, and of the power to punish. That being done, every
object is accomplished. The life of a man is something to himself; and why take
it from him, if it can do the society no good?

Has any one been heard to say that the government would be afraid to shed
blood in the case of this insurrection? has any one been heard to insinuate,
that the popular nature of the constitution, and the prevailing temper of the
people, will render it impolitic to ^^end the democratic mind, by putting any
one to death who has been engaged in these disturbances? it is not impossible
but that suggestions may be made, but surely not believed by a single person,
that has the least ray of sense. Yet it was such suppositions as these that put
a pardon out of all possibility with the executive in the case of Carlisle and
Roberts, who were executed for high treason in Pennsylvania in the year 1778.
The British at New York, and the tor^^es, as they were called, in Philadelphia,
were said to have insinuated that our government would not dare to execute
these persons. I was present at passing sentence on Carlisle. The overt act of
treason of which he had been found guilty, was the accepting and exercising
some commission of police, in or about the city, when the British had
possession of it. When asked what he had to say, why sentence should not be
pronounced upon him, I was struck with the simple, natural, and apparently true
language of the man; viz. "that what he had done was merely to save a little
matter of property, and he recommended himself to the mercy of the government."
I had at that time an acquaintance with some of the members of the executive,
and had said what occurred to induce a pardon for him. I was led to understand,
that the Council had a favorable leaning in his case; but that these ideas of
the enemy at home and abroad, rendered it necessary to establish a conviction
of our confidence in the event of our struggle, by hanging traitors: which
would be as much as to say, Do your worst; we are not afraid that you will ever
have it in your power to hang us.

There was a farther reason in this case; it was pendente lite, during the
contest, and might be necessary to save from all accession of force to the
enemy, by any voluntary act of service, during the temporary occupation of a
place. But in the case of this insurrection, all is prostrate before the
government. There is not a germ of resistance remaining. Why kill a thing, if I
may use a catachresis, after it is dead?

Some one may turn to me and ask, Does it not betray a consciousness of having
contributed to the error of these people, and the misfortune of their present
situation, to manifest a zeal for their deliverance? Is it wrong to manifest
it? do I not relieve myself at least from the charge of "deserting these
people". That was the rythm of my brother of the bar. Morgan had taken it up,
and in his address to the country, when he took his leave, talked of "bringing
the people into trouble, and then deserting them". If I had any hand in
bringing them into trouble, certainly I have not deserted them; I have stood by
them; I have made no separate peace; that was well seen from the great anxiety
manifested by government to extract testimony against me. I was willing to have
rendered service as an advocate in the court, if I had conceived that it would
have served them. I have now made these observations for their sake; is that
deserting them? But the fact is, I have not contributed to bring a single
individual into trouble. There is no one will accuse me of it. On the contrary,
there is no one who will not acquit me. It is therefore not a consciousness of
having in some remote degree contributed to their misfortunes, that prompts me
to relieve them; though even from this spring, my conduct would be laudable. It
is the same principle of abstract humanity with that which led me to interfere
in the case of Carlisle. This principle is aided, doubtless, by that local
partiality which imperceptibly arises, from vicinage of residence; but this is
not blamable.

The fact is, that the two convicted at the court in May, are not worth
hanging, on a charge of treason. I do not think that two more insignificant
creatures could be found in the western country. As to others, that are in
custody, they are of more note, but of better character; and should they be
found guilty, my observations may be of use to induce the public to interest
themselves for their pardon.

VOUCHERS.
Allegheny county, ss.
BEFORE me, Adamson Tannehill, esquire. one of the justices of the peace, in and
for the said county, came Samuel Evalt, high sheriff of Allegheny county, who
being sworn, says, that on the day of the burning of Neville's house, he was
asked by colonel Presly Neville, and major Lenox to go with them to judge
Wilkins; went, and was asked by judge Wilkins, whether this deponent thought he
could raise the posse of the county, to oppose the people coming to attack the
house. This deponent thought it could not be done. Judge Wilkins thought so
too; but proposed to meet at M'Lean's public house, and consult Mr.
Brackenridge. Did meet at the place, with judge Gibson and Judge M'Dowell, and
Mr. Brackenridge, who was asked what he thought of raising the posse. He
thought it was not practicable, as the greater part of the people of the county
were rather disposed to join them, than oppose them, and it might make the
matter worse; but proposed our going ourselves, to reason with them, which he
thought would answer a better end than force, and offered to be one himself,
that would go. It was agreed upon immediately that we should go; and in a very
short space of time, perhaps not fifteen minutes, Mr. Brackenridge had gone
home, got his horse, and was with us at the ferry to cross the river. After we
had crossed the river, Mr. Brackenridge asked the deponent, whether he did not
know any way to the place where the people were said to be, different from the
public road, as he was afraid the main road might be guarded by out parties,
who might apprehend us, and delay or prevent our going forward to the main
body. This deponent said, that he knew the old path that used to be the road to
Couche's fort, which was the place; and that there was little difference in the
distance of the two ways. Mr. Brackenridge mentioned his apprehensions to the
company, and it was agreed to take the old road. We rode with all the haste in
our power: The sun was not then more than an hour high, and we got within half
a mile of the place, which was about eight miles from Pittsburgh, a little
before sun set; we were there informed that the people had gone to Neville's
house; we rode on with haste to overtake them, until we came within a mile and
a half of the house, when we met some that were returning, and told what had
been done. Mr. Brackenridge thought it not prudent then to go further, as it
could be of no use, and there might be danger, the people misconstruing what we
came about; we all thought so, and returned home.

This deponent from that time, had frequent conversations with Mr Brackenridge,
about the affairs that took place, to the end of the disturbance, and always
knew his sentiments to be against any violation of the laws, and frequently
said, the authors will be brought to punishment. This deponent sometime about
the middle of the business, had been out in the country, and heard persons say,
speaking of the people that had undertaken to oppose the law, that if they
could get Mr. Brackenridge with them, he would be more to them than a thousand
men. This deponent mentioned this to Mr. Brackenridge in a conversation
directly after. His answer was, that they would never get that; he had no idea
of joining such folly, or words to this effect. In his riding through the
country as sheriff, he knows it to be the sense of the country, that Mr.
Brackenridge had never any concern in the insurrection, but all he did, was to
prevent disorders; and they applaud his knowledge and judgment of the times,
and the policy used by him in saving the town of Pittsburgh, and preventing the
country from being involved in war.

This deponent thinks it just to acknowledge, that it was in a degree owing to
Mr. Brackenridge's advice, that this deponent has kept himself so perfectly
cle^^ of all the disturbances, so as not to be in the least drawn in, any
manner whatsoever.

SAMUEL EVALT.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 18 th day of February, 1795.

A. TANNEHILL.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, John Wilkins, jun. one of the associate judges of the county of
Allegheny, state of Pennsylvania, came the subscriber, who being sworn, says,
that on the morning prior to the meeting of the committee, as they were said to
be, at a meeting house on Mingo creek, this deponent was called upon by Mr.
Brackenridge, and informed that he was about to go to that meeting, and wished
this deponent to acccompany him, which this deponent declined, considering the
delicate situation of affairs, in consequence of the violation of the laws,
which had taken place. Mr. Brackenridge then said, that he did not wish this
deponent to take any part on the occasion; but only to be a witness of the part
he should himself take; and that this deponent might be safe in going, as it
was at the request of col. Presly Neville, that he himself was about to go.
This deponent however declined.

About the 24th or 25th of July last, this deponent dined with Mr. Brackenridge
at his own house, at which time Mr. Brackenridge appeared to him, to be under
considerable anxiety of mind, declaring that he never had been in so delicate a
situation, in the course of his life; expressing himself in the following
terms, or to this effect: "The people are all going to the devil; they have
been guilty of rebellion, of treason, of arson; and I am afraid the matter is
not over yet." Mr. Brackenridge also said, that individuals had taken his
opinion as a lawyer, with respect to the nature and demerit of the conduct and
criminality of the persons who had burnt and destroyed the property of general
Neville; and that he had given it to this effect.

Mr. Brackenridge, speaking of the delicacy of his own situation, said, that if
he did not go with these people the lengths they wished, he would be obnoxious,
and in danger; and that if he did take part in their measures, he and they,
would all be involved in common ruin, and go to the devil together. That he was
opposed to the funding system, that he considered it as a dropsical system,
calculated to swell men's fortunes to an immeasurable size, in the course of a
single hour, and that it would thereby produce a degree of inequality in the
circumstances and situation of men, unfavourable to a republican government;
that this system was the tabescence of senility in our government. This
deponent farther says, that Mr. Brackenridge, in speaking of the spirit of
opposition that was likely to prevail, observed, that to oppose the government,
or any particular law, however obnoxious, was not only criminal in general, but
highly impolitic for this country, on four grounds, viz. the four western
counties, from the circumscription of the boundaries, constitute a basis too
small for a separate government; the country is too poor to support one; it has
no sea port; and can have no importation, independent of the eastern parts of
the continent; and finally, these counties are destitute of resources, both in
point of (...), and materials of war. So that should a contest ensue with the
United States* the disproportion of ability was in all respects so great, that
this country must be finally unsuccessful.

In consequence of these ideas, expressed by Mr. Brackenridge this deponent,
had considered him as a friend to the government, though opposed to the present
system of taxation, and was of this opinion at the time he left the country,
which was the morning before the assembling the people in Braddock's field. But
afterward this deponent, having heard when at Carlisle, in the state of
Pennsylvania, of a letter said to be treasonable, written by Mr. Brackenridge
to Tench Coxe, esquire. in Philadelphia, and by said Coxe brought forward to the
government. This deponent began to doubt, and from the reports which generally
prevailed, was led at length to conclude, that he must have been deceived. This
deponent is of opinion, however, that if the conduct of Mr. Brackenridge, from
the time of the meeting at Braddock's field, until the appearance of the
patriotic militia, has been as fair and unimpeachable, as it appeared to him
prior to that time, it must be a fair conclusion to consider the intentions of
Mr. Brackenridge to have been upright, and his conduct not to be censured; that
instead of meriting reproach, he has deserved well of his country.

SAMUEL J. MAHON.
Pittsburgh, 12 th February, 1795.

JOHN WILKINS, Jun.



Allegheny, county ss.
Before me, an associate judge for the county of Allegheny, John Hollingsworth,
sworn, says, that he arrived in Pittsburg on the 10th of July last, but had no
conversation with Mr. Brackenridge concerning the opposition to the revenue
law, which then began to appear in this country, until after the stopping of
the mail. A few days after he heard of that transaction, he was at the house of
Mr. Brackenridge, and spoke of it. Mr. Brackenridge declared his abhorrence of
that shameful breach of the law, and common faith, and in general terms
expressed his disapprobation of opposing laws by force. Conversing with him on
the evening of the second of August, Mr. Brackenridge used this expression, or
to this effect, " the country is now involved, and lenient measures on the part
of the government can alone save it."

Before Mr. Brackenridge went to the meeting at Parkinson's ferry, he informed
this deponent of his plan of having persons sent from that meeting to the
executive of the United States; who should give a true account of the
insurrection, and concert such measures as might save the country from a civil
war; showed this deponent an address which he had drawn up to the President, to
be offered at the meeting, and sent, if approved; expressing himself to this
effect, " I consider this as my country, and I must assist to avert the
calamities that are impending over it, to accomplish which the combination
formed against the laws must be sapped; to oppose it openly at this time, would
add strength to it; and ruin those who are well disposed." These words left an
impression on the mind of the deponent not easily to be effaced.

A few days after this conversation took place, this deponent attended the
meeting at Parkinson' ferry, where, as this deponent thinks, Mr. Brackenridge
pursued that line of conduct which he had marked out, before he left
Pittsburgh. The arrival of the commissioners of the United States, during the
time of the meeting precluded the necessity of sending persons to the
executive. From that time, until the middle of September, had many
opportunities of observing his conduct, and frequently conversed with him,
without observing any thing that induced this deponent to believe that he had
swerved from that duty which he owed his country; during that time was so
situated as to hear gentlemen high in office, and more capable of judging than
himself, speak of the conduct of Mr. Brackenridge during the troubles in this
country, and always with respect.

JOHN HOLLINGSWORTH.
Sworn and subscribed before me, at Pittsburgh, February 8 th, 1795.

JOHN WILKINS, Jun.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Alexander Addison, esquire. judge of the district courts, for the four
western counties of Pennsylvania, came Adamson Tannehill, one of the justices
of the peace in and for said county, who being sworn, says, that on the
morning preceding the meeting of the Mingo creek meeting house, Hugh Henry
Brackenridge, esquire. called on this deponent and asked him if he would accompany
him there, as he wished some person with him who might be an evidence of his
conduct. The deponent declined, alleging that the rioter^ who had burnt
general Neville's house, might tender an oath or something of the kind, to
support them, in what had been done, went away; returned a short time
afterward to Mr. Brackenridge's house, and found him and colonel Presly
Neville in conversation, on the same subject. Was again solicited to go, and
absolutely refused. Referred them to Josiah Tannehill, whom the deponent
thought might go, provided he could get a horse. Colonel Neville replied, he
should not want a horse, if that was all. The deponent says, that he understood
at the time, from the conversation that passed, that colonel Neville was
appri^ed of that meeting, from the anxiety he appeared to have, that some
person should go with Mr. Brackenridge. It was at length agreed, that Josiah
Tannehill and George Robinson should go, who the deponent believes did.

That on the evening preceding the meeting at Braddock's field, the
inhabitants of Pittsburgh had generally assembled, to consult on what measures
were necessary to pursue on the occasion. That before the people had proceeded
to take the matter up in any order, it was announced to them, that three or
four gentlemen had arrived from Washington county, with some alarming
information respecting the meeting of the people on the next day, at Braddock's
field. George Wallace, John Wilkins, jun. and Hugh Henry Brackenridge, esqs.
were immediately named to wait on them. On the return of those gentlemen, they
informed the people then assembled, that in consequence of letters being
intercepted in the mail, which had been taken, that certain persons were
proscribed as obnoxious to the people, who were to assemble at Braddock's field
on the next day; viz. James Bryson, Edward Day, and Abraham Kirkpatrick, and
that nothing short of their expulsion would sati^^^ the people, and save the
town. The question was then (...) the chairman, general John Gibson, whether
they should be expelled, or not; which was declared in the affirmative. The
mode of expulsion was the next consideration; which was to be done by a
committee of twenty-one, the choice of whom was vested in the chairman, who
named them generally; the chairman was named as one of the committee himself;
his name set down, (by the secretary, Matthew Ernest), and he appeared to
acquiesce in the appointment. The deponent understood at the time, that a
private suggestion was made the chairman by Mr. Brackenridge, that he, the
chairman was also obnoxious; on which he suffered his name to be erazed. Mr.
Brackenridge not thinking it prudent that he should be of the committee in
going to Braddock's field, and might introduce a suspicion of our sincerity in
having him of the committee. This the deponent understood from Mr.
Brackenridge, on that same evening.

Two of the persons proscribed were at the meeting; viz. James Bryson and
Edward Day, who appeared to acquiesce in the expulsion. Considering it for
their own safety, as well as that of the town, from the manner they expressed
themselves; and further* that particular friends of these gentlemen, were
pointed out to consult them on the expedience of their removal. The deponent
believes, that it was perfectly understood at the (...) be the most political
thing that could be done on the occasion^^^ order to take away any pretense
from the rioters at Braddock's field, of coming to the town to seize them, and
do other injury; and that the same policy and necessity led the people
generally to Braddock's field.

The deponent was one of the committee to Braddock's field, and on the route
there, Mr. Brackenridge expressed himself to the deponent to the following
effect, that after all that had been done, he did not consider it as perfectly
certain, that we might not suffer violence from the fury of the people, on
account of the prevailing odium against the town, knowing that however far we
had carried the appearance of a union in sentiment with the rioters, they would
see through the mask, and treat us ill on the first approach; under these
impressions Mr. Brackenridge proposed advancing with a flag. The deponent
objected to it, and observed that it was best not to seem to distrust. Mr.
Brackenridge then declined it.

That during the whole of the insurrection, so far as the deponent had
knowledge, Mr Brackenridge conducted himself as a friend to the government, and
showed great anxiety to have peace and good order restored in the country. That
his apprehensions appeared natural and unaffected. The deponent has further
heard the citizens of Pittsburgh generally speak of him in the most favorable
manner, for his activity and address in saving the town.

Being indisposed when judge Addison, before whom the deposition is drawn to be
taken, was in town, it is not made, but, in the mean time, I certify it to be
true.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.

Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, John Wilkins, esquire. an associate judge for the county of Allegheny,
came Peter Andrain, who being sworn, says, that from the beginning of the late
insurrection in this country, until the end of it, this deponent had very
frequent conversations with Mr. Brackenridge, on the subject of the
disturbances, and always found him very anxious to undeceive the people, and
bring them to order and obedience to the laws.

This deponent, the morning of the meeting at Mingo creek, was requested by Mr.
Brackenridge to accompany him to that meeting; hesitating very much, but
afterward seeing ^olonel Neville, was prevailed upon to go.

At that meeting, Mr. Brackenridge at the beginning of a speech he made on that
occasion, said that those concerned in the burning of general Neville's house
were guilty of treason; he powerfully opposed, and luckily defeated the
resolutions which was to support the brave fellows who had attended at the
burning general Neville's house; he advised to try by every possible means to
make peace with the government, and get an act of oblivion, and offered to go
himself to Philadelphia, if it was agreeable to the people. The turn he gave to
the business, saved us from the most delicate situation that this deponent ever
thought himself in; being apprehensive that if the question had been put, and
we had voted against it, we would have been in personal danger; and voting for
it, would involve us in a crime. After the speech of Mr. Brackenridge there was
a long silence, and most of the people went out. This deponent went out with
the other persons of Pittsburgh; and shortly after, on the suggestion of Mr.
Brackenridge, that some other delicate questions might be brought forward, it
was judged best to get off as speedily as possible. We went away, and Mr.
Brackenridge with us, as unobservedly as we could. We came to the house, about
half a mile, where we had left our horses; having taken dinner, and ordered our
horses, which had taken up an hour or more, it was suggested by some one
present, that we had come off abrubtly, and that a bad construction might be
put upon it, that we had been there as spies, it would be well for Mr.
Brackenridge, at least just to go back, and take leave; which he did, and
returned to us in as short a time as was necessary to go and come back.

At that meeting, this deponent did not see Mr. Brackenridge having private
conversation with Marshall or Bradford, or does he think it probable that he
could have any, from the shortness of the time we were there before the opening
of the meeting.

This deponent was one of the committee of twenty-one, appointed by a
town-meeting of the inhabitants of Pittsburgh, to carry into effect several
resolutions, on the expelling certain persons. With respect to these persons in
any act or language of Mr. Brackenridge, at that time or since, in all the
conversations on this subject, this deponent did not discover the least ground
to lead him to believe, that Mr. Brackenridge had any satisfaction in the
expelling them, or acted under any private resentment, whatever difference
might exist with any of them.

This deponent was one of the delegates sent by the people of Pittsburgh to
Parkinson's ferry, on the 14th of August. At that meeting, in all Mr.
Brackenridge did or said, his object appeared to be to conciliate to order,
suggesting the propriety of making terms with government, and obtain an act of
oblivion.

In general this deponent can say, that in the affair of Braddock's fields, Mr.
Brackenridge acted, as far as this deponent knows, with good policy to save the
town; and on other occasions, to get an indemnity for the people, and save them
from a war with government.

PETER AUDRAIN.
Pittsburgh, 19 th February, 1795.

JOHN WILKINS, Jun.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Alexander Addison, president of the court of common pleas, etc.
came George Robinson, chief burgess of the borough of Pittsburgh, who being
duly sworn, deposes and says, that at the request of Mr. Brackenridge, he
went to the meeting of Mingo creek. Mr. Brackenridge had informed him that it
was at the request of col. Presly Neville, that he himself was going. Mr.
Brackenridge said he wished this deponent to go, as being a public officer, the
chief burgess of the town, as he wished to have some persons to bear testimony
of his conduct, as the situation might be delicate. This deponent found the
situation delicate enough, when a motion was brought forward to support what
had been done at burning general Neville's house, and which was warmly
supported. This deponent being much alarmed at the time, lest the question
should be put on this account, that by voting in the affirmative, we should be
drawn in as accomplices, and by voting against it we might be in personal
danger. After an inflammatory speech by a certain person, there was a silence
for some time. During this time, the deponent was in great anxiety, lest the
question should be put, when Mr. Brackenridge addressed the meeting in a speech
of some length, and as appeared with great anxiety of mind. The speech, in the
opinion of this deponent, appeared to be calculated to parry the question. He
informed them, that we were not delegated by the town to do any act for them,
and therefore if we gave any vote, it could only be as individuals. That as an
individual, he would give his opinion. Here Mr. Brackenridge explained the
nature and consequences of what had been done; he plainly told them, that all
concerned were guilty of treason, that it would be better not to draw any more
in, as they could be of more use as mediators with the government, than as
accomplices; that the well known lenity of the President of the United States,
gave reason to suppose that an accommodation might be brought about, before, he
would proceed to extremities; that the present meeting was but an
inconsiderable part of the four counties; that a larger meeting might be
called, by delegates regularly appointed, and that commissioners might be sent
to the President, in order to bring about an accommodation; that though it would
not be convenient for him to go at that time, yet if such a measure was
adopted, he was willing to go, and to render any service in his power. This
deponent does not recollect particularly, but has some recollection of Mr.
Brackenridge mentioning, that the damage done must be repaired.

After Mr. Brackenridge closed his speech, there appeared to be an adjournment,
without a motion made for that purpose. During this interval, Mr. Brackenridge
urged us to get off as undiscoveredly as possible, lest we shoud be drawn
further in. During the time that we were out, after the speech of Mr.
Brackenridge, there was a good deal of murmuring amongst the people, and this
deponent supposes this had given Mr. Brackenridge apprehensions, and he had
informed this deponent since, that it was what alarmed him. We went away on
this, and Mr. Brackenridge slipped after us. As we crossed a final run a short
distance from the meeting house, we were called after by some persons to come
back; but we hurried off as fast as possible to the house where we had left our
horses. While there, it was suggested by some of the company, that as we had
come off so abruptly, it might be well if Mr. Brackenridge, or some one, should
return and make some excuse. Mr. Brackenridge took his horse, and said he would
just ride over and make some excuse. He rode over, and came back in a very
short time, so that we wondered that he could have been there and come back,
and said he had found them just breaking up. In our way home, this deponent
mentioning to Mr. Brackenridge the fortunate escape we had made, Mr.
Brackenridge made use of this expression "he had never been in so delicate a
situation before in his life, and he would be damned if he would have been
drawn in to be guilty of high treason, for ten thousand pounds." The deponent
has been present at other meetings since, in the town of Pittsburgh, and heard
Mr. Brackenridge's sentiments on various occasions, and observed his conduct,
and can say, to the best of his knowledge, that with respect to the people that
were expelled from the town, and every thing else that was done, he acted from
no selfish motive of resentment or disposition to hurt any man; but from
motives of policy, to moderate matters and prevent mischief; and this deponent
knows this to be the general sentiment of the people of Pittsburg, and they
consider themselves indebted to his policy in a great degree for the safety of
the town in the affair of Braddock's field, when we were led to apprehend
plunder and destruction from the fury of the people that had met there.

GEORGE ROBINSON.
Sworn before

ALEX. ADDISON.



At the time of Marshal Lennox, being at Pittsburgh, about the 13th, or 14th,
of July last; being a few days before the attack on general Neville's house, I
was in the office of Mr. Brackenridge, on some business with him, was asked by
him about the constitution of the Mingo creek society, and laughing at some
parts of it, he asked me, what could put it into the people's heads, to form
such a one; I said, the people had been all running wild, and talked of taking
Neville prisoner, and burning Pittsburgh: and this forming the society was
thought of by moderate persons, to turn the people off to remonstrating and
petitioning, and giving them something to do that way, to keep them quiet. Mr.
Brackenridge asked, what could put it into their heads to think of burning
Pittsburgh. I said, I did not know, but they have talked of it. I am of
opinion, that at the time of the march to Pittsburgh, there was great danger
After the burning of Neville's house, I had mentioned this information of
M'Donald as a matter I thought nothing of at the time, but as a proof that the
town was in danger. It has been the ground of a calumny that I had previous
knowledge of the attack upon the house.
. I was at the Mingo creek meeting house, at the time of the meeting there,
after the burning of general Neville's house, and numbers of people were
dissatisfyed, at Mr. Brackenridge's speech there; as it appeared, that he was
unwilling to engage to support what was done, and supposed to be on the side of
the government.

May, 12 th, 1795.
Before me, William Meetkirk, esquire. one of the justices of the peace, in and for
the county of Washington, in the state of Pennsylvania, came John M'Donald, and
made oath according to law, that the foregoing statement is just and true

JOHN M'DONALD The secretary of the Mingo creek committee.
.
Sworn and subscribed before me,

WILLIAM MEETKIRK.



Being about to go to Pittsburgh, fell in with a body of people collecting for
the burying captain John M'Farlane, who had fallen at burning general Neville's
house; David Hamilton had been deputed by a committee of those people to go to
Pittsburgh, to return the pistols taken from the marshall, and to have a
fulfillment from him of what had been agreed upon, on his part. Understoood from
Hamilton, that he had consented to go, in order to prevent the people coming in
themselves, and doing mischief; for there was danger of their going in, at that
time. Went with Hamilton to Pittsburgh, and met the marshall and colonel
Neville. Hamilton explained his business, returning the pistols, and required a
fulfillment of what was agreed upon; viz. that he would serve no further writs,
and not return those that were served. The marshall said, he had not agreed not
to return the writs. A query was then in the mind of Hamilton, what effect the
returns would have. At his request, I went to Mr. Brackenridge, to ask his
opinion as a lawyer. He said it was a delicate point, and he would talk to the
marshall. On this he went out, and came in with the marshall and colonel
Neville. Upon that I went out, and after some time returned; and Mr.
Brackenridge said he was not much acquainted with the practice of the federal
courts, but would consult, and give his opinion in the morning.

He gave his opinion in writing; which Hamilton thought would not be
satisfactory to the committee. It was understood the committee would be sitting
till he returned. It was proposed to return by Neville's house; and it was our
wish that some of the gentlemen of Pittsburgh would go with us; we wished to
see whether a man that was missing, was dead there, and from what had happened,
did not wish to go there ourselves. General Gibson, Doctor Bedford, Mr.
Brackenridge, and others had consented to go. The day looking for rain, or for
other cause, some declined going. Mr. Brackenridge came; I understood him to be
about to go forward to the committee, to see if he could not satisfy the
people, in respect of the marshall. In my conversation with Mr. Brackenridge
with respect to the burning of general Neville's house, he said it was an
unhappy affair, and was afraid it would turn out a civil war, and that
government would call out the militia, and we were the militia ourselves, and
have to be at war with one another. He did not say a word to approve what was
done, as to the burning the house, or any act of violence.

Pennsylvania, ss.
Before me, William Meetkirk, esquire. one of the justices of the peace, in and for
the county of Washington, came John Black, and made oath according to law, and
says, that the foregoing statement, to the best of his knowledge and
recollection, is just and true.

JOHN BLACK.
Sworn and subscribed before me, May 18 th, 1795.

WILLIAM MEETKIRK.



Was at Pittsburgh at the request of a committee, in order to converse with
marshall Lenox, on the subject of the agreements entered by him with the
people, after the burning of Neville's house; recollect no private conversation
with Mr. Brackenridge, nor any conversation, but on the question which had been
put to him, respecting the return of the writs, which question was put to him
by the consent of Mr. Lenox.

Same day after my return home, I wrote a note to Mr. Brackenridge, informing
him of a meeting to be at Mingo creek, wishing him to come up; it was our
concern to mend what was done, and get advice from him as from others, to make
what was bad, better; for we had a sense that every thing was not right;
received no answer, but Mr. Brackenridge came; did not understand Mr.
Brackenridge as approving of what was done; in giving his opinion in the case
of the writs, it appeared to be his wish to compromise the matter between the
marshall and the people.

City of Philadelphia, ss.
Personally appeared David Hamilton, of Washington county, in the commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, who being sworn, deposes, that to the best of his knowledge,
recollection, and belief, the contents of the foregoing writing are just and
true.

DAVID HAMILTON.
Sworn 19 th day of May, 1795, before me,

HILARY BAKER, one of the aldermen of Phila.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me came Robert Johnston, late deputy revenue officer, who being duly
sworn, says* that on the 17th day of July, 1794, being the second day after
the destruction of general Neville's house, this deponent, being in Pittsburgh,
was told by David Hamilton, that the committee was then sitting at the battle
ground, to wit, general Neville's; and that if this deponent would ride out
with him, and give a resignation of his commission to the committee, that this
deponent would be protected from any further violence.

This deponent went in company with Hamilton, John Black, and Mr. Brackenridge.
After riding a considerable part of the road, was surprised to hear Robert
Shochan's made mention of as the place where the committee was sitting; I
believe by Mr. Brackenridge; which occasioned this deponent to ask Hamilton,
where the committee was sitting. He said they were not then sitting any where;
but would meet some way toward Pigeon creek, to hear the report that he would
make of his adventure; viz. the demanding general Neville's commiss^on, and
some demands he had made of the marshall. David Hamilton in his conversation at
this time, mentioned as the cause of his coming that way, that one of the men
was missing, that had been at the attack at Neville's house; that he was going
to see if he could be found; that he thought it probable he was killed. Coming
to the ground where general Neville's house had stood, riding round it, looking
for the man supposed to be killed, and not finding him, and being about to come
away, Hamilton or Black asked Mr. Brackenridge if he would not go further with
them. He said not; and then we parted, Hamilton and Black for Pigeon creek, and
Brackenridge and this deponent for Pittsburgh. M. Brackenridge and this
deponent, went from the ferry at Pittsburgh, and returned together, without
being any time apart.

I certify the above to be true, which I am willing to give testimony, if
required.

ROBERT JOHNSTONS The above certificate is taken, to obviate an insinuation
that I went from Pittsburgh with these persons, being in confidence with them;
whereas, in fact, I was led to believe by them, there was a committee sitting,
and to which they were going, by the way of Neville's house; and I went with
the privity of the marshall, in order to explain to that committee, his
situation; and induce them to be satisfied with the opinion I had given, which
was favorable to him; viz. that judgment could not be entered on the service
of the process, so as to be absolute, and bind their lands; that it was in the
nature of a subpoena, or sciere facias, to show cause, and there must be a
summons to found a judgment.
.

The deposition of JOSIAH TANNEHILL, ass^stant burgess of Pittsburgh.
That this deponent accompanied Mr. Brackenridge to the meeting at Mingo creek,
at the request of Mr. Brackenridge, who was going as this deponent understood,
at the request colonel P. Neville. Mr. Brackenridge, when he requested of this
deponent to go, said, that he wished persons to go that were capable to take
notice, and give information of what was said and done.

Early in the meeting an inflammatory speech was delivered by Mr. Bradford, to
induce the people to pledge themselves to support what had been done at general
Neville's house, which Mr. Brackenridge opposed by art and force of reasoning,
and finally baffled the proposition.

This deponent can say on this occasion, and on every other within his
knowledge, that Mr. Brackenridge to the best of his judgment, acted a part
favorable to the repressing the disorders of the time, and restoring order,
and good government.

JOSIAH TANNEHILL.
Sworn before me

ROBERT RICHEY.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, esquire. a justice of the peace, in and for said
county, came Isaac Gregg, of the town of Pittsburgh, merchant, who being sworn,
says, that about the 27th of July last, being at Mr. Brackenridge's house,
this deponent heard him say, (in conversation respecting the attack of general
Neville's house, which was a few days previous to that time), that it was a
very rash piece of business, and that he conceived the people to be mad (or
words to that effect) and that it would be attended with serious consequences
to them, as the government could not overlook it, but must take it up.

ISAAC GREGG.
Sworn and subscribed before me the 18 th Feb. 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



At a meeting at my house, in Washington, on the evening of the 30th of July
last, Mr. Bradford being there, said he wished he could get some safe hand to
take the mail hat had been intercepted to Pittsburgh, and deliver it to the
postmaster; as he said there were letters in it, that had money enclosed in
them to certain persons. Colonel Gabriel Blakeney said, he had that evening
received a letter from doctor Wilkins, requesting to see him in Pittsburgh, the
next day, and that he would take charge of it, and deliver it safe to the
postmaster, if any person would go in company with him. I offered my service,
as well as did doctor Band. Mr. Bradford delivered the mail the next morning to
colonel Blakeney and myself, there being some letters taken out, which was not
to be delivered to the postmaster, but shown to some people in the town of
Pittsburgh, and brought on to Braddock's fields the next day. We accordingly
went on to Pittsburgh, when we arrived there, a number of people came to the
house where we put up, to enquire, of us if we knew what object the people had
in view, that were to assemble at Braddock's fields? We informed them that it
was in consequence of letters that had been found in the mail, written by
several persons in that place to government, mistating their conduct (as they
termed it), and that the people conceived them to be very obnoxious characters;
particularly major Kirkpatrick, Mr. Brison, and Mr. Day, and it was our opinion
that if some of those that had written the letters, did not leave the town,
that it was in danger of being destroyed from the apparent rage of the people.
The same evening there was a town-meeting of the inhabitants of the place, as
we understood to take into consideration what was best to be done, for their
own safety. On hearing that we had come to town, they appointed a committee,
consisting of Mr. Brackenridge, doctor Wilkins, and judge Wallace, to confer
with us, and to have our opinion on the subject. We produced to them the
letters that had been taken out of the mail, viz. major Butler to general Knox;
general Gibson to governor Mifflin; Mr. Brison to the same; colonel Neville to
general Morgan; and one other, without any signature, to the secretary of
treasury, said to be hand writing of Edward Day; which were read in their
presence. They asked us what we thought was the intention of the people, that
were to assemble at Braddock's fields the next day. We gave it as our opinion,
that the town was in eminent danger of being destroyed, if some of the
obnoxious characters were not sent away, for that we ourselves had been
insulted on the road, coming there, by some of the people, when they understood
we were going into Pittsburgh; for they said we were going there as spies, to
tell the people to get out of the way, and that we ought to be taken prisoners,
and they actually raised a party to follow us for that purpose, as we were
afterward informed. Mr. Brackenridge asked us, who we thought appeared to be
the principal objects of the people's rage. We gave it as our opinion from what
we had discovered from them, that major Butler, major Kirkpatrick, Mr. Brison,
and Mr. Day, were the characters that the populace appeared to be the most
enraged at. Mr. Brackenridge replied, As to major Butler, it was out of the
question to have any think to do with him; he being a federal officer, and
entirely unconnected with the citizens. After receiving this information from
us, they returned to the town-meeting, and gave the information to them they
had received from us; in consequence of which they entered into resolutions to
expel certain persons, as will appear from the hand-bills published immediately
after. We went on the nex^ morning, to Braddock's fields, with great numbers of
people from Pittsburgh in company. When we came there, I discovered a great
number of people much dissatisfied, on the account that general Gibson and
colonel Neville were not also expelled. I was chosen a member of the committee,
which did not meet until the next morning; when Mr. Bradford produced the
letters that had been kept out of the mail, and read them before the committee
himself. He appeared much dissatisfied that general Gibson and colonel Neville
were not sent away; for he said they were as obnoxious to the people as any of
them that were gone, and that they ought not to be suffered to remain in the
country; for they were enemies to the people, and must be sent off. It was
motioned for them to be suffered to remain until the meeting that was to be at
Parkinson's ferry, on the 14th of August, and for them to come forward to the
meeting, and endeavor to exculpate themselves from the charges that were
against them; but it was over ruled. Mr. Brackenridge spoke particularly
against the expulsion of general Gibson, by observing that he was a man
advanced in years, and that he always had conceived him to be a man who could
do little harm, and therefore thought he might be suffered to remain, as he was
far from being a dangerous man, in his opinion. Mr. Brackenridge, in my
opinion, seemed to have a strong desire, that the expulsion of both general
Gibson and colonel Neville, should at least be postponed until the meeting
above alluded to, in order to give them an opportunity to acquit themselves of
the charges, that the people had advanced against them. It was all over ruled,
and I believe chiefly through the interposition of Mr. Bradford. Mr.
Brackenridge, to the best of my recollection, spoke much in favor of allowing
them some time to prepare themselves to move away, upon which it was agreed to
give them ten days.

Mr. Bradford then spoke concerning the expulsion of major Craig; for he said
he had been informed that major Craig should have said (immediately after the
burning of genesis Neville's house) that he would let the damned rascals see that
the excise law should be enforced, for that he would open an office of
inspection in his own house. Mr. Bradford was requested to give his author; he
replied that he could not recollect, but that he heard it mentioned among the
people. It was then referred to the gentlemen on the committee that represented
the people of Pittsburgh, viz. Dr. Wilkins, Mr. John M'Masters, and Mr.
Brackenridge. It appeared that neither of them could give any information on
this subject. Mr. Brackenridge further said, that he had but very little
conversation with major Craig; for he did not recollect of any since the
burning of general Neville's house, except what happened a day or two before
coming to Braddock's fields, when he mentioned that meeting major Craig in the
street of Pittsburg, Craig says, Mr. Brackenridge, what can be the intention of
the people collecting at Braddock's field? Brackenridge replied, he knew of no
other intention they could have, but that they conceived that Braddock at his
defeat sunk some pieces of artillery in the river, and that they intended to
raise them, and come and attack the garrison at Pittsburg; which was all the
conception he had at that time of the subject. It was then motioned, either by
Mr. Brackenridge, or seconded by him, that if major Craig was to be immediately
expelled, it would tend in all probability to defeat the measures of government
in their operation against the Indians; for major Craig having charge of the
whole of the quarter master's stores then at Pittsburgh, that if he was then
sent away and nobody there to supply his place, it might be attended with very
bad consequences to the community. Mr. Brackenridge farther said, that it would
be much better to suspend the expulsion of major Craig at this time, and wait
for an opportunity of applying to the President of the United States to have
him removed from office, and have some other person appointed in his place. No
objection was made to the proposition, by any of the members of the committee,
and after doing some trifling business more, the committee rose. In respect to
hea^^ng Marshall or Bradford say, that Mr. Brackenridge was privy to the
intercepting of the mail. I never heard any such conversation from either of
them, nor do I know any circumstance to induce a belief of it.

Washington county, ss.
Personally came before me, Alexander Addison, esquire. president of the courts of
common pleas in the fifth district of Pennsylvania, William Meetkirk, esquire. a
justice of the peace for the county of Washington, and collector of the revenue
in said county, who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says, that
the foregoing statement, to the best of his knowledge, is just and true.

WILLIAM MEETKIRK.
Sworn and subscribed at Washington before me this 27 th day Feb. 1795.

ALEXANDER ADDISON.



Sir,
At your request, I shall give you a short detail of the circumstances leading
to, and of the principal traits of your conduct, at Mingo meeting house. I
remember that it was the general opinion of the inhabitants of Pittsburgh, that
it would be prudent a number of persons should be collected from this place, to
meet those who were collecting from various parts of the country. No
instructions to my knowledge were given to those who went. But I understood the
general purport or intention of our going there, was to hear and report. You
asked me if I would make one of the number that would go; I hesitated for some
time, and until I had asked the opinion of colonel Presly Neville, which was,
"I see no harm in your going there, if you choose to venture; and if you do, I
will thank you to carry a letter for me to the chairman of the committee,
contradicting some false aspersions which have been industriously ci^^^lated,
respecting the marshall and myself, being released (...) our words of honor to
hold ourselves as prisoners o^ de^^nd, that night my father's house was
burned." I accepted the office, and came back to you, and told you I would go.
When we arrived at Jacob Friggly's house, near the meeting house, in the course
of various conversations, a tall man there, with red hair, frequently expressed
a warmth of affection for Presly Neville; seemingly commiserated his situation,
and took some credit to himself in rescuing him when he was made a prisoner the
night aforesaid; but at the same time was still making some sarcastic
observations on his father. I found the temper of the people were wound up to a
very high pitch, and I took this favorable opportunity of delivering colonel
Neville's letter to him, after finding that his name was Parkinson, and that he
had considerable influence; telling him that the colonel had desired me to
deliver his letter to him in case I could find him, and requested he would
deliver it to the chairman. He readily took it; and it was the first thing
brought upon the carpet, at the meeting. The secretary read the letter; but no
observations followed. After some silence, a person stood up, and made a
motion, that the burning of general Neville's house, and those concerned in it,
should be justified and supported. I could observe the people of the meeting
considerably agitated; colonel Marshall, of Washington, was the first who
ventured to oppose this motion; and he seemed to do so both with fear and
trembling. After this speech was over, David Bradford, esquire. arose and beckoned
to Mr. Benjamin Parkinson (as captain Josiah Tannehill informed me, who had
mixed with the crowd, and happened to sit down on the forms in the middle of
the church close by him), asked him if the relation which colonel Neville had
given in his letter, was true. To which question Mr. Parkinson putting his hand
to his breast answered, it is too true. Mr. Bradford then dropping the subject
of the letter, began a most violent and inflammatory oration in support of the
first motion. I observed Mr. Brackenridge in the course of this oration, who
being seated at the west end of the church, and opposite to the principal part
of the Pittsburghers, who had seated themselves at the east corner by
themselves, in great agitation, often throwing his head down on his hand, in
the attitude of study. At length Mr. Bradford's speech being ended* Mr.
Brackenridge advanced nearly to the middle of the house, and about opposite the
chairman, and began his speech; slowly irregular; for the current of the
people's prejudice seemed to be st^^ngly against him. He first opened the
reasons why the few ^^^sons from Pittsburgh came there; that they were not
instructed; nor had they any delegated powers to agree or disagree on any
proposition that might be made, they came only to hear and report. He took
various methods of diverting the attention of the audience from the speech that
preceeded his.

Sometimes he would give a sarcastical stroke at the excise, and the inventors
of it; and then tell some droll story thereto relating; in order, as I
apprehend, to unbend the audience's minds from the serious tone to which they
had been wrought up. He viewed the subject before him in various lights; and
then entered warmly on his main argument, which was to dissuade the audience
from the first proposition. He told them in direct words, "that he hoped they
would not involve the whole country in a crime which could not be called less
than high treason; that this would certainly bring the resentment of the
general government on us, and there would be none left to intercede."

The audience seemed petrified, thunderstruck with such observations; and when
he had done, not a person seemed desirous of renewing the arguments. Silence
ensued for some time, and then the company broke up, and some went to drink at
the spring, and others in little knots or clubs were dispersed over the green.
Those who came from Pittsburgh, finding that the audience was to be called to
the church once more, took this opportunity of making the best of their way to
Mr. Jacob Friggly's. The company met again; but I know not that they did any
business of consequence; for Mr. Brackenridge was soon with us, and we took our
horses, and rode to Pittsburgh.

I was also at the meeting of Parkinson's ferry, where Mr. Brackenridge did not
seem to be a principal among the speakers. I remember to have heard him make
two or three humorous observations, which set the people a laughing I have
represented myself as a principal speaker; and the fact is, that I was; but
speaking only at critical moments, and that in a few words, I did not seem to
be a principal, on the occasion.
.

Pittsburgh, 20 th, Sep. 1795. WILLIAM SEMPLE.

Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, esquire. one of the justices of the peace in and for
said county, came major John Irwin of the town of Pittsburgh, being sworn,
says, that on the evening before the meeting of Braddock's field, after the
town meeting of Pittsburgh, and the appointment of the committee of twenty one,
and the measures taken respecting the expelling Abraham Kirkpatrick, James
Bryson, and Edward Day, about 12 o'clock at night, was called upon out of bed,
as a member of the committee to meet again; did meet, and found the rest of the
committee chiefly met. The business of calling us together was explained, viz.
that Mr. Purviance, one of the messengers from Washington, had been alarmed on
Gibson and Neville not being to be sent away also, as they were equally
obnoxious, and it would not be safe for these gentlemen, or for the town, that
they should stay. Mr. Purviance was present and called upon to state this, and
he did so. On this it was agreed, that in the morning these gentlemen should be
informed of this. In all the transactions with respect to these persons, this
deponent discovered no evidence of any ill will of Mr. Brackenridge to these
persons, but the contrary; for an evening or two after Abraham Kirkpatrick left
the town, the second time, it was sta^ed that some persons had used Kirkpatrick
ill, in way laying or fireing upon him. At a general town meeting, Mr.
Brackenridge, in a speech, reprobated the conduct in the strongest terms, and
said they would be brought to punishment.

JOHN IRWIN.
Sworn and subscribed before me the 16 th of February, 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, esquire. one of the justices of the peace, in and
for said county, came James Clow, town clerk of the borough of Pittsburgh,
sworn, says, that he, this deponent, was a member of the committee of
twenty-one, appointed at the meeting of the inhabitants of Pittsburgh, general
John Gibson in the chair, the evening before the assembling at Braddock's
fields.

At a meeting of this committee, sometime after the day of Braddock's fields,
it was explained to the committee by Mr. Brackenridge, that the two gentlemen,
general John Gibson, and colonel Presly Neville, who were to leave the town by
order of the committee of battalions, of Braddock's fields, and which the
committee of Pittsburgh had undertaken to see carried into effect, (as this
deponent understood), wished that committee to appoint persons to go with them
on their way, as a guard, until they should be at such a distance as to think
themselves safe, and also to furnish them with passports.

At the opening of the meeting of the committee, John Wilkins, esquire. was first
in the chair, but leaving it to attend some business, this deponent was
appointed to the chair, but had some hesitation, as not knowing but it might
bring him into trouble. On which Mr. Brackenridge said, that it was at the
request of the gentlemen themselves, that the committee met, to give a guard
and passports, and that it was for their service, and not their injury, so
there need be no apprehension of giving offense; and that if this deponent did
not take the chair, and sign the passports, he himself was willing (if chosen)
to do it.

On this the deponent took the chair, and it was agreed that persons should be
appointed, and that the gentlemen themselves who were to go away should choose
who they would wish to go with them, and that any, or all of the committee,
would go with them to any distance.

Double passports were made out for each; the one of a few lines, the other of
a considerable length, dictated by Mr. Brackenridge to the clerk. The having
double passports was suggested by Mr. Brackenridge. The question being asked by
some person, what was the use of the double passport, Mr. Brackenridge to this
effect said, the one would serve as a mask, and show to the people in the
country, that the committee had done what they had undertaken to do, and would
serve as a safe guard to the persons sent away, as no one would molest persons
supposed to be under guard; and the other would explain to the people below,
how it was they were sent away, and for what cause, and that it was by the
people of Braddock's field, and not by the people of Pittsburgh, and that it
was not for any thing that could hinder them gaining a favorable reception,
where they went, it not affecting their characters.

This deponent in all the course of this business, did not discover the
smallest design in all Mr. Brackenridge's actions, but for the safety of those
gentlemen.

JAMES CLOW.
Sworn and subscribed before me, on the 10 th of February, 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, John Wilkins, jun. one of the associate judges of said county, came
Matthew Ernest, who being duly sworn, deposes as follows: That at the
town-meeting of the inhabitants of Pittsburgh, the evening previous to the
assembling at Braddock's fields, general John Gibson in the chair, and this
deponent acting as clerk. General John Gibson was taken down as one of the
committee of twenty-one, and his name afterward erazed, in consequence of Mr.
Brackenridge speaking in a low voice to general Gibson, in words to this
effect, you must not be on this committee; I have reasons for it which I shall
explain to you hereafter.

Afterward, the same evening, this deponent was present when the committee of
twenty-one drew up certain resolves, to be sent to the people at Braddock's
fields, it was perfectly understood that these resolves were not serious, but
for the moment, and the using the expression "the common cause," in one of the
resolves, produced a general laugh. In general, this deponent can say, that the
whole business of Braddock's fields, as far as respects the town of Pittsburgh,
was a mask, and the expelling certain persons, was for their own sakes, as well
as for the safety of the town. This deponent was present at the meeting of the
committee of twenty-one, who were called upon to furnish general John Gibson
and colonel Neville with passports and a guard, when they left the town of
Pittsburgh. That double passports were made out for them, dictated to this
deponent by Mr. Brackenridge; a private, and a public one; a public one for the
sake of the country, through which they had to pass, and a private one for the
people elsewhere, in order to show the real cause of their going away. In all,
this deponent could discover nothing in Mr. Brackenridge but good will, and a
disposition to serve these gentlemen.

Some time before the 21st of September last, this deponent thinks about three
weeks, or more, but does not remember precisely, but knows it must have been a
considerable time before the 21st, because this deponent on that day left this
country; Mr. Brackenridge understanding that this deponent was about to go
below, asked this deponent if he would venture to carry a letter to
Philadelphia, which he did not like to risk by the post, for fear of being
intercepted in this country, and that private persons were unwilling to carry
letters, lost they should be seized with them, and by that means, became
obnoxious themselves. This deponent said he would venture it, but did not go
for a considerable time after this; and so heard no more of it. But this
deponent has since understood from Mr. Brackenridge, that the letter he wanted
to send was for Tench Coxe, esquire.

MATTHEW ERNEST.
Pittsburgh, February 25 th, 1795.

JOHN WILKINS, Jun.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, one of the justices of the peace, in and for
said county, came Robert Richey, a justice of the peace for the said county,
who being duly sworn, says, that on the morning after the meeting at
Parkinson's ferry, early in the morning he came into Pittsburgh, purposely to
have some conversation with Mr. Brackenridge, from whom he thought he could get
information, and how to conduct in the situation of affairs.

Mr. Brackenridge advised this deponent, that it was best to be careful and say
but little. The government in a short time would come forward and support
itself. From the conversation of Mr. Brackenridge this deponent perfectly
understood him as disapproving of the irregularities that had taken place; but
that it was policy to conceal sentiments until it was safe to express them.
This deponent consulted Mr. Brackenridge, reposing confidence in him as a man
of judgment. On the day of submission, the 11th of September, Mr. Brackenridge
came to the meeting of the district in which the deponent lived; he said it had
been the fourth district he had been through that day, in order to advise the
people to sign the submission. At this meeting advised the signing the
submission, and seemed greatly anxious that all should submit.

ROBERT RICHEY.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 5 th day of March, 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, esquire. a justice of the peace, in and for said
county, came Andrew Watson, who being sworn, says, that living next door to
Mr. Brackenridge, and keeping a public house, Mr. Brackenridge was occasionally
there during the disturbance in the country, and this deponent heard his
sentiments, often conversing with the people, and they always were against the
opposition to the laws that had taken place. Once about the height of the
disturbance, Mr. Brackenridge was reasoning with a man from the country, and
not being able to convince him as he wished, Mr. Brackenridge broke out into a
great rage, and spoke with great passion, and told the man the people had been
guilty of high treason. The man seemed alarmed at this; and went away. This
deponent can say, that he has observed all that has been said or done by Mr.
Brackenridge, in the course of the disturbance to have been for peace, and not
at all favoring any opposition to government, so far as this deponent had an
opportunity of observing. This deponent was a member of the committee of
twenty-one, and was present at their deliberations, and never observed any
appearance of ill will in Mr. Brackenridge to the persons that were sent away,
but a disposition to save them, and the town. This deponent went to Braddock's
fields, and from what he saw and heard there, was so alarmed that he thought
the town would be burnt, and came hastily home, and dug a hole in the floor of
his cellar, and buried his books and papers.

ANDREW WATSON.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 16 th of February, 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Adamson Tannehill, a justice of the peace in and for said county,
came William Henry Beaumont, of the borough of Pittsburgh, who being sworn,
says, that sometime early last spring, or, in the last of the winter, this
deponent began to be employed occasionally by Mr. Brackenridge to write for him
in his office, and continued to be so through the whole of the late insurrection
in this country. That Mr. Brackenridge usually dictated his letters of
correspondence to this deponent; that during the whole of the insurrection, but
two letters were dictated by Mr. Brackenridge to this deponent that had the
least reference to any political subject; nor does this deponent know of any
written or sent by Mr. Brackenridge to any persons on any political subject
whatever, except these two letters which were to Tench Coxe, of Philadelphia,
both dictated to this deponent, viz. one of the 8th of August, 1794, and the
other of the 15th September, following.

At the time of the dictating and writing the first, this deponent suggested to
Mr. Brackenridge, that it was necessary to be cautious how he expressed himself
with regard to the country at that moment, as it was probable the mail might
again be robbed, and he might be rendered obnoxious to the people. His answer
was as nearly as this deponent can recollect, in words to this effect, That he
had taken care of that; that he meant to give government a real statement of
the ferment the country was in, but at the same time, had put in some things
that would save him from the people, should the letter fall into their hands.
This deponent understood at the time, that Mr. Brackenridge was apprehensive
the government might be misled, by wrong information ^especting the magnitude
of the danger, and the extent of the insurrection, and it was his wish that the
danger might be viewed in the light it appeared to himself, great and
momentuous, not trifling and insignificant; that measures might be taken
accordingly. That this deponent had that impression from the expressions of Mr.
Brackenridge at that time, as he expressed his apprehensions that a just
statement would not be given by the proscribed persons who were sent away. This
deponent did not understand Mr. Brackenridge as questioning the veracity of
those persons, but as suspecting from the temper of their minds, that they
would not see things in a proper view, being under the influence of chagrin.
That at the time Mr. Brackenridge dictated the second letter to this deponent,
he expressed with some warmth and irrit^^ion of mind, that his first letter
should have been misunderstood by the government, as he was informed it was;
that he wrote this second letter to explain it I believe this was not published.
.

That this deponent was one of those who ^^companied Mr. Brackenridge to the
meeting at Mingo creek, that it was at the request of Mr. Brackenridge that
this deponent went, in order to vouch for his conduct on that occasion, and
bear testimony of what should be said or done by him, considering the situation
as delicate.

This deponent found the situation sufficiently delicate; and on a motion being
brought forward early in the meeting, and strongly supported, this deponent was
greatly alarmed, being apprehensive of being brought in to give a vote on a
question of that nature, which was to pledge ourselves to support what had been
done; which as this deponent understood, was the violence and outrage that had
just before taken place. This deponent was alarmed, because to go away might
expose to insult and personal danger, as he understood the people of Pittsburgh
were considered in an unfavourable point of view by the people of the country;
and to vote against the question would be equally dangerous, or more so; and to
vote for it, this deponent could not think of, as it would involve in the
criminality.

In a speech of considerable length made at this juncture by Mr. Brackenridge,
he appeared to have the same impressions; and with all the art and address that
was in his power, wished to parry the question, without rendering himself
obnoxious to the multitude. The observations made by Mr. Brackenridge in the
course of the speech, were, as nearly as this deponent can recollect, to the
following purport: Those first made were of a nature to conciliate them (the
persons present) to the people of Pittsburgh, that they (the people of of
Pittsburgh) were not abettors of the excise more than other people, nor did
they undertake to support excise officers more than other people; they left
these matters to the government. But at the same time it was a very different
matter, not to support, and to oppose; that be this as it might, we did not
come as delegates from the town, but as individuals, and it would be of no use
for us to join in such a proposition, for it would not bind, as we represented
nobody. That he, M. Brackenridge, had no objection to give his own opinion in
these matters; that what was done, would be construed treason; it might be
morally right, but it was legally wrong, and would subject those concerned to
punishment, unless they had force enough to support an opposition to the laws;
the matter must terminate in a revolution, or a rebellion; if they had not
strength to make it a revolution, it ^^st be a rebellion; that that part of the
country was but a small part to undertake such an object, that they had not
even the four western counties, or neighboring counties of Penns^lvania, nor
the three counties of Virginia, nor Kentucky, if that could be of any use; and
that the undertaking affords no rational prospect of success. That the case was
not desperate; an accommodation might be brought about with government, and
that it would be much better for those not involved, to remain so, as they
would have more weight in their representations as advocates, than if involved
themselves; and could with propriety come forward as a mediating party between
government and them. That there was reason to conceive government would not be
rash in taking vigourous measures; that the militia must be drafted; that there
would be a reluctance in the militia of Pennsylvania to serve, and perhaps of
the neighboring states; that the President would reflect on this, and be
disposed to an accommodation; that taking into view the disposition of the
President, from what we had seen in the case of the British spoilations, it was
a natural conclusion that he would not wish to involve the country in war; and
his conduct also with respect to the Indian tribes in treating with them, to a
degree that has been blamed, when war had been thought better, gave reason to
suppose that (...) would not be hasty in using rigourous measures in a case
^^^e the present. That the late instance of his l^^^ity in the case of the
Presqu'isle establishment, to which the letters of C^r^planter had put a stop,
manifested the same thing. Here Mr. Brackenridge indulged some pleasantry on
the apprehensions of government in this case, and created a laugh. In this and
several parts of the speech, where Mr. Brackenridge indulged a vein of
pleasantry and humor, this deponent saw through it, and thought that it
manifested a great degree of management and address, to play with the fancy of
the people, and divert them from that intentness, in having the proposition
carried, which he was endeavoring to parry. The result was, Mr. Brackenridge
seemed to wish that all things should remain as they were, and be put in a
train of negotiation.

Mr. Brackenridge's speech ended; a pause ensued; most of the members of the
meeting left the meeting house for a short period of time. On being desired to
resume their seats, we thought it most prudent to retreat, Mr. Brackenridge
telling us, "we had better get off as soon as we can, or they will bring us
into some other disagreeable predicament."

This deponent went with Mr. Brackenridge, came away with him, had an
opportunity of seeing him through the whole of the time, and did not observe
him to have any private conversation with any person there present.

This deponent further says, that from the nature of his engagement with Mr.
Brackenridge, he had almost daily opportunities of hearing his sentiments on
the state of affairs in the country. That his sentiments were perfectly opposed
to the violations of the law, and his great object seemed to be, to restore
order, get an indemnity for the people, and at the same time serve the
government.

That this deponent knew it to be Mr. Brackenridge's intention, if order could
not be restored, and a war must ensue, to leave the country; and at a time,
when war appeared to be inevitable, just before the meeting at Red stone, Mr.
Brackenridge employed this deponent to go to the country, to collect money for
the purpose of leaving the country, and taking his family with him. That before
this time on other occasions, he had heard Mr. Brackenridge talk of having the
country, to get quit of the troubles, and that the place he meant to retire to,
was Philadelphia. That he thought those people peculiarly fortunate who had
been sent away, and wished himself in their situation. Mr. Brackenridge
expressed himself to this deponent to this effect, before colonel Presly
Neville went away, and wondered at his being dissatisfied at being sent away,
as he ought rather to consider it as a fortunate circumstance to be clear of
the difficulties of the times; for if a man went of himself, he would be
considered as a deserter, and his property destroyed, or perhaps himself
apprehended in going away, and brought back to punishment. Whereas when sent
away, it was the act of the people themselves, and they could not blame the
person for going. At the meeting at Mingo creek, this deponent recollects that
a letter was read from colonel Presly Neville, but does not recollect the
contents precisely; but to the best of this deponent's recollection, it related
to general Neville, major Kirkpatrick, major Craig, and colonel Neville
himself, with a view of placing their conduct in a favorable light.

Question to the deponent by Mr. Brackenridge. What do you mean when you say
that I was apprehensive the persons sent away, would not from the temper of
their minds see things in a proper point of view, being under the influence of
chagrin? being under the influence of passion, they would be disposed to state
things more strongly on that account, explain this?

Answer. In the course of the conversation at that time, this deponent
understood M. Brackenridge, that it would be natural for these persons to wish
a force sent at all events, and as it might alarm the government to be under
the necessity of sending a large force, they would be disposed to represent it
as suppressible by a small force. Whereas in Mr. Brackenridge's opinion, the
policy would be (...) accommodation in the first place, and if that should
sail, an efficient force; his observations were to that effect.

At the meeting at Mingo creek, this deponent recollects that at the time Mr.
Brackenridge was expressing himself with regard to the probability of an
accommodation with government, he declared that he himself would be willing to
be one to go to the executive, for the purpose of obtaining terms.

WILLIAM H. BEAUMONT.
Sworn and subscribed before me the 14 th Feb. 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



This deponent further says, that in all said or done by Mr. Brackenridge,
privately or publicly, in this deponent's hearing, or knowledge, he discovered
no symptom whatever, that would induce him to think Mr. Brackenridge exercised
private resentment with respect to the persons sent away; and particularly with
respect to James Brison, the prothonotary. No idea was ever suggested of having
him displaced from his office, or putting any one in his place. And no idea was
ever suggested to this deponent by Mr. Brackenridge, or any other person, that
this deponent might succeed to that office; nor did this deponent ever
entertain an idea of this kind himself. This deponent understood the sending
those persons away to be I have understood my brother of the bar had
insinuated, that I had procured the expulsion of the prothonotary, in order to
get in a favorite.
the policy of the moment, for the sake of saving themselves and the town,
which was obnoxious on their account.

WILLIAM H. BEAUMONT.
Sworn and subscribed before me, March 31 st, 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Washington, 25^^ February. Sir,
I received yours of 13th instant, requesting me to send you a statement of
what passed at Pittsburgh, between the committee that waited upon colonel
Baird, Mr. Meetkirk, and myself, at the time we took over the mail which was
intercepted on the road to Philadelphia.

For your satisfaction, I shall state to you the whole of the business as
precisely as I can recollect, which is as follows, viz. On the 29th or 30th
July last I came home to my house, after being out on the frontiers about ten
days. I had scarcely dismounted, before a messenger waited on me from the
courthouse, informing me to attend at a meeting of a large number of the
people there assembled. I attended, and found Mr. James Ross reading some
letters which had been taken out of the mail, which had been intercepted going
to Philadelphia. I was there informed that previous to the meeting, there had
been orders or letters sent among the people to attend at Braddock's field, but
for what purpose I could not then tell; but the order or letters being
countermanded by the persons that forwarded them, which I believe was attending
at the meeting, they made every effect to dissuade the people to attend, but to
no effect; they got the alarm, and wa^ determined to go forward next day. The
same evening, I believe, I was at Mr. Meetkirk's, when I told I had just
received a letter from general Wilkins, requesting me to be be open next day.
Mr. Bradford being present, requested me take over part of the intercepted
mail, my reply was that I would not; if I received the whole I would take
charge of it. He told me the part I had to take was of consequence, as there
was money in some of the letters; and the part remaining was only some letters
which were considered to be obnoxious, as the writers were conceived to be
enemies to this country. I refused taking them in part. The next morning
colonel James Marshall met me in the street, and requested me to take the mail.
I consented; we went to Mr. Bradford's, and received it. Mr. Meetkirk received
the loose letters. He, Baird, and myself, volunteered this business; we then
started to Pittsburgh, in company with Mr. Henry Purviance, and Mr.
Hollingsworth, who brought me the letter alluded to from general Wilkins, the
evening before. On the way where the road turns off to Braddock's field from
the Pittsburgh road, about eleven miles from this town, we were asked, which
way? as we there had to move forward, and they took the right, we answered, To
Pittsburgh. We were threatened by a Mr. Lock to have us stopped, but we treated
him with comtempt, and went on. When we arrived at Pittsburgh, by the time we
were dismounted, we were encircled by number of the inhabitants, asking the
news; among the rest was Mr. Edward Day; he enquired if the mail was safe. I
told him I believed it was, and that I had it in my saddle bags. He said there
was a letter of his to Baltimore, of consequence, I answered I did not know.
But there was one directed to Mr. Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the
treasury, without a signature to it, which was one of the obnoxious letters,
and I believed to be his hand writing. We then turned off without any more
questions. By this time the landlord took our horses, and we went up stairs.
Shortly afterward, general Wilkins, George Wallace, esquire. and yourself came in,
and introduced yourselves to us, as a committee appointed by the town meeting,
which was then sitting, to have the news; at the same time telling us, that
there was at that time a town meeting, in consequence of news they had received
from the country, viz. the meeting at Braddock's fields next day. We produced
the letters which were considered to be obnoxious. They were read, and this
committee were told by us to make what use they might think proper of them,
until to morrow, as we had engaged to have them at Braddock's field next day.
Your committee returned, as I understood, to the town meeting, and made report.
Your committee waited on us soon afterward, wishing us to point out in writing
the characters that must be expelled. The names was given by us, which was a
very delicate thing with us. But to save your town from destruction, we gave in
writing the persons names, which ought to be expelled for the safety of the
place, viz. major Kirkpatrick, Mr. Brison, and Mr. Day. I remember to mention
to your committee, that we had no real business at that time, but to save your
town. And if you did not comply with what was related, by the Lord, your town,
as I believed, would be laid in ashes, and those persons probably massacred. I
remember one question put by your committee which ought to have been inserted
sooner, which was this; after asking the news,

Question. What will you advise us to do for the real safety of this place.

Answer. Send off these characters; take your arms in your hands and meet the
people at Braddock's fields to morrow. There was but very little conversation
passed between your committee and us. As it appeared your committee waited on
us to get the news, and make report to your town meeting; which I understood
was then sitting. Colonel Pres^y Neville was present the most of the time, with
whom we had some conversation, which I do not recollect. In the mean time, you
may make use of this letter in any manner you may think proper. I don't care
what construction may be put on my conduct, by any man, or set of men. This
considered, if they have any thing to say, they will come forward and speak to
my face, as I am always at home, if I have due notice to answer for my conduct.

From, Sir, Your humble servant, GABRIEL BLAKENEY Commandant of the corpse of
militia raised in Washington county, to assist in keeping the peace after the
insurrection
.
H. H. Brackenridge, esquire.
P. S. If it is necessary that in a future day my deposition is necessary to be
taken on this subject, I will attend and depose what I have inserted.

G. B.


P. S. I remember that part of the conversation which I alluded to, with
colonel Neville in the above mentioned company was, that he asked us to give
him a pass, or a passport, so that he might leave the place, and travel without
being molested. I replied to colonel Neville, that we were not invested with
any such powers, that we were not committee men, and that we came of our own
accord to inform the people of Pittsburgh, of the impending danger they were
in; nevertheless, he repeated his desire to have a passport from us next
morning. True it is, had it been in my power to comply with his request,
nothing would have given me more pleasure, as I always considered him an old
fast friend. Yet I felt hurt at his request, and more so at his repetition,
after the answer he received from us. I wish to refer you to the gentlemen that
were in the room present, for the truth of this assertion.

G. BLAKENEY.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, a justice of the peace, for the said county, came Lewis Bond, late
lieutenant in the service of the United States, and now merchant in the
neighborhood of Pittsburgh, who being duly sworn, faith, that he was in the
country at the time of the attack upon general Neville's house, and from that
to the end of the late insurrection; and during all that time was frequently in
Pittsburgh, and occasionally conversed with Mr. Brackenridge, having business
in law with him, and frequently talking on the affairs of the country; and
always understood him to be opposed to the illegal proceedings that were taking
place, and greatly concerned on account of them; and one evening in particular
when he came over the river on a visit to my house, which was about the twenty
eighth day of July 1794, talking on the subject, he appeared to consider the
affair as very alarming; and said the disturbance was of more consequence than
the Indian war. The deponent at that time smiled in his own mind, thinking it
but a riot that could be easily suppressed; but had reason to think more
seriously of it afterward.

On the morning of the day on which the people were said to be coming from
Braddock's field, a number of small trunks and boxes were sent over to his
house across the river from the house of Mr. Brackenridge, containing, as this
deponent understood, papers and articles of value. They were sent by Mrs.
Brackenridge, who, as this deponent understood, had received word from Mr.
Brackenridge at Braddock's field, that the town was in danger, and that he
wished her to secure his papers.

LEWIS BOND.
Sworn and subscribed before me the 11 th of March 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



Having been forced by some circumstances to remain in Pittsburgh during the
time of the disturbances which have lately agitated that country, I was present
at a town meeting, which was convocated upon the news of a large party of
country people assembled at a place called Braddock's fields, whose intention
was to come to town the next day, to lay their hands upon several people of
Pittsburgh, and to destroy the place if they should meet with any resistance;
and I heard the discourse held by Mr. Brackenridge on that instance, in which
he contrived to persuade the interested persons to quit the town, in the
shortest time, to save the^^^^^es and the people from the danger^ which were
presented to them; and he advised the citizens to join the other part of the
people at the rendezvous, that they might be induced to believe them (...) in
their party; but particularly expressing, that far from ^^^ng to induce them to
undertake any thing against the government, these measures were only tending to
furnish time to concert with the government for means to recall the tranquillity.
I was the more struck by this insinuation, that (from the little time I had
been in the country, and the imperfect knowledge I had of that business) I was
supposing there existed a coalition, whose end was to obtain the redress of
grievances, which I did hear every day to be complained of, in that country
against the government. I thought I discovered a defect of good faith in Mr.
Brackenridge in this respect, and that he was rather inclined to support the
government, than to assist the people; but the rest of the business having soon
demonstrated to me, that the people in that country were acting without any
sense in their undertaking. I perceived that he was acting not against the
people, but against the measures they did employ; and I have often heard the
inhabitants of Pittsburgh acknowledge, that his skillful policy had saved the
place from the greatest danger.

I give the foregoing statement of opinions and facts, ascertaining them upon
my word of honor.

GEORGE BRON A French gentleman of information, who had resided some tim^ at
Pittsburgh.
.
Philadelphia, 24 th May, 1795.
Washington county, ss.
Before me, James Edgar, one of the associate judges for the said county, came
James Miller, who being duly sworn, deposes, that on the night of the
encampment at Braddock's fields, Mr. Brackenridge, about eleven or twelve
o'clock at night, came on horseback to the sire where this deponent and others
were, and was enquiring for the encampment of the Pittsburgh battallion, which
he said he could not find. This deponent knowing his voice jumped up and came
forward, and after some words, got a bottle and gave him a dram. One of the
company spoke out, and asked what the people of Pittsburgh had done with
Abraham Kirkpatrick. Mr. Brackenridge said, they had sent him away. And why the
devil did you let him go? said the person. Mr. Brackenridge said, it was not
his will; he would rather have kept him, to have punished him by law. The
people seemed to be in an ill humor, and suspicious of Mr. Brackenridge. This
deponent said in a low voice, Go, Go; and then, in a loud voice said, Come, Mr.
Brackenridge, take another dram, will not detain you, or words to this effect.
Mr. Brackenridge hastily rode off. After he was gone, some said he was a spy;
(...) this deponent said he was a friend to his country.

From the disposition of a great number of the people, talking of what they
would do next day at Pittsburgh, this deponent thought the town in great danger.

JAMES MILLER The anecdote to which the deposition of this gentleman has a
reference, was told by myself after the day of Braddock's field; and has been
since converted into a calumny against me, that I wished to incense the people
the night of Braddock's field against Abraham Kirkpat^ick.
.
Sworn and subscribed before me, this 24 th March, 1795.

JAMES EDGAR.



After the meeting at Braddock's field, and before the meeting at Parkinson's
ferry, I was with Mr. Brackenridge on some business in law, and found that
difficulties was in the way of his doing the business from the absence of the
prothonotary, Mr. Brison. A conversation then took place about the sending away
the persons that were gone. Mr. Brackenridge explained why it was the people of
Pittsburgh had acquiesced in it, or had seemed to favor it. It was to save the
town. That for his part, he could wish they could be allowed to come back, and
was anxious for this as to all, except Kirkpatrick, and as to him, did not care
if he never returned; for he had a long time been under an apprehension of a
private assassination from him. As to the prothonotary, it stagnated the
business of the county, and it would be his wish to get him back. Mr.
Brackenridge founded me with respect to the opinion of the people in suffering
Brison to return. My opinion was, that it would be a difficult matter, as he
was very obnoxious, on account of his speculating on the people. I was urged by
Robert Johnston, deputy under general Neville, to the best of my recollection,
to interest myself at the meeting that was to be held at Parkinson's ferry, in
behalf of Presly Neville. I had undertaken it, and was determined to do it; but
I found from the disposition of the people at the meeting, that as to him or
any one else coming back, it would only expose me to move it, and be useless.
And if they were to come back, it would only bring them into danger.

Washington county, ss.
Personally came before me, the subscriber, one of the justices of the peace,
in and for the county of Washington, in the state of Pennsylvania, John
Baldwin, and on his solemn affirmation, says, that the above writing is true,
to the best of his recollection.

JOHN BALDWIN.
Affirmed before me, 27 th May, 1795.

DAVID HAMILTON.



After the meeting at Braddock's fields the country was in a ferment, and every
body was afraid of another, to speak their minds. The people seemed to think
that law was at an end, every one was ready to fall upon another, where there
was a difference; it being supposed they could be called to no account for it.
Guns were fired into a house near me. I came into Pittsburgh, and talked over
this with Mr. Brackenridge; and as to myself, not knowing what to do, said,
many of the people talked, if matters got worse, of coming into town, if they
could be safe. Mr. Brackenredge said, " the town was obnoxious enough already;
that people taking refuge there, would make it be thought worse, and and the
country would rise against it; that it was not our interest, nor theirs, that
any should come into the town; that if we could stand it out a little while,
ma^ters might be got settled. I asked Mr. Brackenridge if he thought an army
could be got to come. He said it could; and he was afraid it would be necessary.

I talked freely to Mr. Brackenridge, because I had understood from my brother
Matthew Matthew M'Connel, esquire. of Washington county.
, what his sentiments were; he had told me, that in conversation
confidentially, M. Brackenridge had said, that unless matters could be settled,
we were all ruined, or words to this effect. -- The above to the best of his
recollection and knowledge.

ALEXANDER M'CONNEL.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 8 th of July 1795.

ADAMSON TANNEHILL.



I can certify, and am willing to make oath, if required, that a day or two
before general Gibson left Pittsburgh, when he was ordered to depart the
country by the committee at Braddock's fields, in conversation with Mr.
Brackenridge on the subject, Mr. Brackenridge expressed concern that general
Gibson intended taking his family with him, as he considered that he would soon
be enabled to return; and if not, that many more of ourselves would be obliged
to follow; and it would then be time enough to remove his family. Mr.
Brackenridge requested me to mention this to general Gibson, as his opinion. I
called on general Gibson that evening in company with general Wilkins, but did
not mention the conversation I had with Mr. Brackenridge, but advised him not
to take his family, for the same reasons. I never discovered any symptoms of
satisfaction in Mr. Brackenridge, on the expulsion of any of the persons, in
any manner whatever.

JOHN SCULL.
Pittsburgh, April 6 th, 1795.
Allegheny county, ss.
Before, me, John Wilkins, jun. one of the associate judges in and for said
county, came Samuel Jones, register and recorder for said county, who on his
solemn affirmation declares, that in the time of the insurrection in this
country, from the first to the last, he was often in private and public
conversation with Mr. Brackenridge, and always believed him to be a friend to
government, and is of opinion, that he was of great service during the time.

This affirmant remembers, that before the day of signing the submission, at a
large town-meeting of the people of Pittsburgh. Mr. Brackenridge made a speech,
and recommended signing the submission.

SAMUEL JONES.
Affirmed and subscribed before me, 2 d February, 1795.

JOHN WILKINS, Jun.



Allegheny county, ss.
Before me, Alexander Addison, president of the court of common pleas of the
county aforesaid, came John Lucas, and depose^h and says, that on the 12th or
13th day of last July, being lately returned home from a voyage he had
undertaken to the Illinois country, Hugh Henry Brackenridge, attorney at law,
living in Pittsburgh, Allegheny county, state of Pennsylvania, came to his
house, being one day or two before the first riot had taken place at general
Neville's house; and as it was the first time this deponent had seen Mr.
Brackenridge since his arrival, a miscellany of news reciprocally given, soon
became the whole topic of their conversation. This deponent perfectly
remembers, that amongst other things, he mentioned to Mr. Brackenridge, that
while he was passing through Kentucky, he had heard that numbers of people in
that state was displeased at the conduct of the federal government toward
them; that several committees had been held there, and had already went to a
great length; that this said deponent had read a printed paper, pasted up at a
public place in Kentucky, containing several resolves of a committee, and
especially one by which the people of Kentucky, were invited at large to meet,
and take in consideration the circumstances of the country; that some talked of
a separation from the union, others thought of other measures to be adopted.
Upon which account so given by this deponent to Mr. Brackenridge, he appeared
to this deponent to be highly displeased, and asking this deponent who might be
the leaders in that system of reform. This deponent says he answered him, that
he, this said deponent, had been told that several lawyers were amongst the
leaders; to which Mr. Brackenridge replied, he supposed these lawyers must be
trivial ones, probably shifting in that manner to obtain some notice from the
public. This deponent further says, that he told Mr. Brackenridge he had heard
of several lawyers, distinguished by their talents, who were at the head of
these committees, and many other persons of good standing in Kentucky; which
Mr. Brackenridge appeared to wonder at greatly, and seeming to sink into
himself with great concern in a deep reflection for a little while, this
deponent says, he soon expressed himself in the following manner, " I cannot
perceive what advantage the people of Kentucky could obtain by disturbing the
union. But should they separate, our situation in this part of the country,
would become very critical. On the one hand, the people of Kentucky would not
fail to interrupt our trade on the Ohio, should we refuse to join with them;
and should we join them, we would immediately lose the great advantages we
derive from the union." This deponent declares, that the first opportunity he
had of perceiving the disposition of Mr. Brackenridge in the last disturbances,
was a few days after the committee held at Mingo meeting house, when Mr.
Brackenridge said to this deponent, that on his going to meet with the
committee at Mingo meeting house, he fairly expected he would be able to defeat
any violent measures that could be proposed there; but to his astonishment, he
had met with a numerous assembly of men, respectable by their property, their
abilities, and the popularity great many of them enjoyed; that things seemed
going to take a more serious turn than he expected; and added, only that the
condition of an emigrant was but a sorry one, that for his part, he did not
like to emigrate. The deponent says, that the next opportunity he had after, of
perceiving the disposition of Mr. Brackenridge in the last disturbances, was on
the 14th of August last, at Parkinson's ferry, where the said Mr. Brackenridge
gave him to read (a little before the committee was formed) a piece of writing
intended to be, an address to the President of the United States, in behalf of
the people of the western part of Pennsylvania; which writing Mr. Brackenridge
told to this deponent, he would present to the then committee, and would exert
himself to make it be adopted. The deponent further says, that the object of
that draft, was to solicit from the executive to suspend its activity in
putting the excise law in force, until the next session of Congress, upon the
solemn promise from the people of the fourth survey, to obey and continue to
keep in force among them, without any interruption, all other laws, both of the
federal and state government. This deponent says, that Mr. Brackenridge told
him since, that he had not thought proper to present the said draft of address
to the committee, upon his hearing during the time the committee was holding,
that commissioners from the executive were arrived on the spot. This deponent
says also, that the third circumstance that drew his attention to the conduct
of Mr. Brackenridge, took place on the 21st day of August, when the committee
of twelve went to confer at Pittsburgh, with the commissioners in behalf of the
executive. The nine deputies from Westmoreland, Washington, and Allegheny
counties met together, and while they were waiting for the three deputies from
Fayette, who was not yet arrived, Mr. Brackenridge opened the conversation on
the momentous subject of resisting or acquiescing in the laws of the United
States; and this deponent, who was one of the three deputies from Allegheny
county, says, he witnessed Mr. Brackenridge saying openly, before any body had
given his opinion, that he thought that submission was the best step to be
taken; that for his part, he was fully determined to submit to the laws. The
deponent says, that amongst the many that were wishing secretly to see the
people returning to obedience to the laws, Mr. Brackenridge is the first man he
did hear speaking of submission after the insurrection. The deponent further
says, that he went the best part of the way from Pittsburgh to attend the
committee of Redstone, held on the 28th and 29th days of last August; and as
they were going along, the deponent saw in Mr. Brackenridge all the tokens of
distress, at the appearance of so many liberty poles raised through the
country, and so little corresponding with the pacific views he (Mr.
Brackenridge) was going with his other colleagues to propagate and support,
before the standing committee at Redstone.

This deponent says likewise, that after the report of the conference held on
the 21st, was made on the 28th, to the standing committee, and the said
commitee having adjourned to meet on the morrow, 29th, Mr. Gallatin came to Mr.
Brackenridge in the street, and in presence of this deponent Mr. Gallatin
proposed to Mr. Brackenridge to open the matter on the following day, which Mr.
Brackenridge declined, devolving the task on Mr. Gallatin, with promise he
would support him with all his might. This deponent says, that he went that
night to lodge at a neighboring farm with Mr. Brackenridge, that the said
Brackenridge gave to him the deponent during the whole evening, the most
persuasive tokens of anxiety and dissatisfaction, expressing repeatedly, how
unwell the good of the country appeared to be understood by many members of the
standing committee. This deponent says, that on the day following he attended
the committee as a member of it, and heard Mr. Brackenridge echoing there in
his own language, the cogent and powerful arguments first made use of by Mr.
Gallatin, and adding new ones of his own; all to the purpose of disposing the
committee to submit to the laws, and propagate that disposition among their
constituents.

This deponent recollects, that not long after the beginning of the late
disturbances, Mr. Brackenridge read to him a letter he had received from a
gentleman of Philadelphia, in answer to another one he had written first to
that gentleman, whose contents Mr. Brackenridge had mentioned in substance to
this deponent, who remembers that, amongst other things, Mr. Brackenridge told
him, he had written to this said gentleman of Philadelphia (which he told me
since was of the name of Tench Coxe) to wit, that government had perhaps as
much reason of being afraid of the western people, as the western people had of
fearing government; that should a few hundreds of the western insurgents
attempt to pass over the mountains, thousands greatly displeased at the funding
system and its effects, would immediately flock with the former ones, and like
a torrent would increase more and more, in their rapid course toward the seat
of government. This deponent declares, that this idea so suggested by Mr.
Brackenridge, seemed to him rather grounded upon exaggeration, at the early
period Mr. Brackenridge mentioned to him the contents of this letter to Mr.
Tench Coxe; but having been informed since by the most undoubtful reports; the
discontent that had pervailed through the minds of a considerable number of
people, in the counties of Bedford, Cumberland, Franklin, Northumberland, and
in some parts of Maryland, etc. this deponent is at present fully persuaded,
had the leaders of the insurgents thought of such measures, and given execution
to it, that what seemed to him an exaggeration at the first, might have been
literally a fact, and considers that the hint Mr. Brackenridge had so justly
given of the impending danger, to a gentleman near government, must have been
of a great use to the executive, if justly appreciated. The deponent says, that
Mr. Tench Coxe by his answer to the one of Mr. Brackenridge, Mr. Brackenridge
did repeatedly say to this deponent, that Mr. Tench Coxe had not understood him
upon many things he had expressed to Mr. Tench Coxe, to secure himself in case
his letter had been intercepted on this side the mountain. Lastly, the deponent
declares, that he knows Mr. Brackenridge since more than ten years; that during
that period of time he has cultivated his acquaintance without interruption, as
a literary and a philosophic man. That although he spoke seldom with him on
political subjects, nevertheless from some conversations he had with him
relating to politics, and from other circumstances, the said deponent has been
and is strongly impressed with the idea, that Mr. Brackenridge is a warm and a
zealous supporter of the present federal constitution, a real friend to the
union; and from some former instances, the deponent further says, that he
thinks Mr. Brackenridge is even an admirer of the federal constitution, or at
the least has been so perhaps in a greater degree, than many other persons from
this part of the country, who bare very deservedly in the opinion of this
deponent the name of good citizens.

JOHN B. LUCAS This gentleman, a son of the chief justiciar^ of Normandy, bred
to the ^ar, and admitted in the parliament of Paris, yet from philosophic pride
and and democratic principle, disdaining the setters of nobility and mon^^^^^,
and not hoping for so sudden a revolution in favor of liberty, adopted the
resolution to hide himself in the woods of America, and being recommended by
doctor Franklin from Paris, to his son in law Mr. Bache of Philadelphia, he
came to settle in this western country, whose acquaintance I have cultivated in
consideration of his integrity and philosophic knowledge, and knowledge of the
Roman civil law, and the local jurisprudence of France.
.
Sworn before

A. ADDISON.



The day before the meeting at Braddock's fields, I was in the office of Mr.
Brackenridge on some business, who asked what news. I said a great number of
people were ordered to meet at Braddock's field next day; was then asked, did I
know the intention of the meeting; said, I did not very well know, but had
enquired, and understood that particular characters were aimed at, but did not
know who they were. I understood Mr. Brackenridge, (and charged my memory
particularly with it) as disapproving of such proceedings. I took particular
notice of this, as wishing to hear the sentiments of persons who might know the
nature of things better than myself. Speaking of what had been done, the
burning of Neville's house, and so on, Mr. Brackenridge seemed to have
understood that I had been employed with an unusual number of hands in making
guns, and and asking me about this, I was alarmed at this report, and said I
had not.

I was a member of the meeting of battalions at Braddock's fields; and in the
case of expelling Gibson and Neville, saw that Mr. Brackenridge opposed it, as
long as it seemed to do any good. The danger seemed to be, that the people
would go into Pittsburgh, and take them themselves; parties of riflemen were
coming and going, and about us, and lastly, some of them said, we do not
understand this way of mystery; the men will wait no longer; do something
immediately, or we will go and execute ourselves. I was a member of the meeting
at Parkinson's ferry, and Mr. Brackenridge said some things to humor the
people (in my opinion) that might seem to favor them; but I saw that it was to
manage the minds of the people, to keep them from mischief; and I am of opinion
on the whole of what I have heard and saw, that Mr. Brackenridge being much in
the minds of the civilized people at that time, had it in his power, and did
render great service in keeping them from going to a war against the government.

Allegheny county, ss.
Came before me, personally, one of the justices of the peace for said county,
Jacob Ferree, and on his solemn oath, says, that the above as stated, is just
and true.

JACOB FERREE.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 3 d of June 1795.

ROBERT RICHEY.



Pittsburgh, 7 th April, 1795. Sir,
You desire me to detail the circumstances which led to the expulsion of the
citizens from Pittsburgh, by the committee of battalions on Braddock's fields.
As far as it came within my knowledge, I shall do it with pleasure: David
Bradford, who seemed to have all the power, and to exercise it in a very
tyrannical manner, opened the business by relating the preceding conduct of
the people, the robbing of the mail, and read and commented on the most
obnoxious letters. He charged the writers with having mistated the facts, and
to have misrepresented his conduct, and the conduct of the people to
government. He was warmly supported by many present, who were calling out for
liberty, whilst they were violently disposed to exercise great tyranny against
those who thought differently from themselves.

The writers of the letters had most of them mentioned Mr. Bradford's name in
an unfavourable manner, which was the cause of his immediate resentment; and
their banishment was the consequence. The popular fury was sure to be directed
against any man who offended him, during his reign. A motion was made to expel
general Gibson, and colonel Neville, whose letters had been intercepted in the
mail, against whom Bradford had previously declaimed with great vehemence. It
was thought by many people present, friendly to these two gentlemen, that they
might be saved by the question of their banishment being postponed, until the
meeting which was to be soon after, at Parkinson's ferry.

To accomplish this object, a motion was made to refer the case of general
Gibson to that place. This motion was supported by you; but opposed and
overruled by Bradford and others. David Bradford moved in addition to these
two, that major Craig should be expelled, saying it was reported, that he had
offered his house for an office of inspection, should another not be found.
Bradford called on the Pittsburgh members, to know if this was true. You
answered it was not true; and (...) some circumstances, tending to show the
falsehood of the (...). But notwithstanding Bradford and others pressed for
^^nishment; which in order to obviate, you mentioned that should be an injury
to the expedition then carrying on against (...) Indians, as he had charge of
the stores for the use of the ^^ps; and proposed that the committee should
address the se^^^tary at war to remove him; which I considered as manage^ent on
your part, to save major Craig.

It was determined that the people should march to Pittsburgh. ^very person
belonging to the town, was under great anxie^y for their families and property.
The town had every thing to fear from a violent mob of armed men, led by a few
inconsiderate fools. Previous to the rising of the committee, some of the most
violent exclaimed that major Kirkpatrick, Mr. Brison, and Mr. Day had not gone
away; or if they had, it was only for a day or two, and that they would return.
The Pittsburgh members, alarmed lest this suspicion might induce the mob, when
they came to town, to search for these gentlemen, not knowing what, the
consequence of such a search might he, pledged themselves that they were gone,
and would not return.

I never heard you express a wish for the banishment of any individual. I have
often heard you say, that the people had essentially served those they had
banished; that government would consider them as martyrs, and reward them.

I remember it was arranged, previous to the election of delegates for the
meeting to be held at Parkinson's ferry, to choose those who were the most
friendly to government. You mentioned to me, that you meant to propose at the
meeting, the sending the commissioners to the executive, to consult means of
composing the disturbances. You expressed a wish of being one of the
commissioners yourself. You showed me an address you had drawn up, to be
proposed at the meeting, to be sent to the President of the United States. You
often declared to the, that if the violence continued, you were determined to
leave the country, and go to Philadelphia. I had daily oppor^tunities of
observing your conduct, and conversing with you. ^ never had a doubt, but that
you were influenced by the pur^ motives, and was anxious for the restoration of
order, and (...) laws.

Am, Sir, Your most obedient, Humble servant, JOHN WILKIN

Hugh H. Brackenridge, esquire.
Washington county, ss.
Personally came before me, Alexander Addison, esquire. president of the court of
common pleas in the fifth district of Pennsylvania, David Reddick esquire.
prothonotory of the county of Washington, and being sworn on the holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, says, that during the late insurrection he
conversed with Mr. Brackenridge on the subject of the then prevailing
opposition to the laws, and that Mr. Brackenridge on all occasions discovered
to him both his disapprobation, and detestation thereof. Among other things, he
recollects Mr. Brackenridge saying, that he considered it as sound policy, to
appear to be with the people, in order to preserve a sufficient influence to
bring them back, when they should cool down to a certain point, or words to
this effect. He further says, that some time before the late general election
of October last, he (the deponent) spoke both to David Bradford esquire. and also
to colonel James Marshall, on the subject of electing Mr. Brackenridge to serve
in Congress; each of these gentlemen declared positively they would not vote
for him; and as the deponent had known them both to be remarkably well affected
to Mr. Brackenridge early in the summer preceding (at the June court in
Pittsburgh), he enquired of them severally, why they had changed their minds.
Their answers were nearly alike, their words are not precisely recollected, but
the purport was, that they were disobliged with him for the part he had taken
in the then late affairs of the country. The deponent afterward when
mentioning to Mr. Brackenridge, that Messrs. Bradford and Marshall, had altered
their determination respecting his election, since the time they had solicited
him to consent to be elected, Mr. Brackenridge replied to the deponent to the
following effect. That he did not wonder at Mr. Bradford being enraged at him,
as he considered him as a weak man; but that he was much surprised that colonel
Marshall, who was a man of good sense, could have ever for a moment believed
him (Mr. Brackenridge) to be disposed to use force against the government.

Further, this deponent recollects, that on the morning that colonel Blackeney,
doctor Baird, and William Meetkirk, esquire. set out for Pittsburgh with the
intercepted mail, he know that all those gentlemen of Pittsburgh, whose letters
had been found in the mail, unfavourable to what was then commonly called the
cause were marked for vengeance. He remembers to have heard by so^^ person (who
it was with certainty he cannot say) that Mr. Scull the printer was a good man,
that his letter to the governor was favorable, but that the others ought not
to be permitted to live in the country, or to such effect. That he recollects
well, that he was so anxious at the time for the safety of general Gibson,
(whose letter was inoffensive even if the country cause had been a good one),
and also for young Neville, whose letter was a private one to his
father-in-law; that he spoke to doctor Baird on the street, and he believes to
colonel Blackeney also, desiring them by all means to go to Pittsburgh (with
the mail) and warn the gentlemen who were thus in danger, of their perilous
situation, as well as that of the town, which was in danger on their account.
The deponent recollects further, in the conversation with colonel Marshall,
after the colonel's return from Mingo creek meeting, that he told the deponent
of a letter which colonel Presly Neville had written to that meeting, and spoke
of it as an insult to the people. Further at present he recollects not, but can
say that he never heard ei^^er colonel Marshall, Mr. Bradford, or any other
person concerned, say hat Mr. Brackenridge had any previous knowledge, or was
concerned in the intercepting the mail, the march to Braddock's field, or any
act or acts of violence whatever, either by advice, acquiescence, or otherwise.

DAVID REDDICK.
Sworn before

A. ADDISON.



Pittsburgh, September, 10 th, 1795. Sir,
I cannot answer your letter fully, as the conversations which I had with Mr.
Bradford, at New-Orleans, related generally to himself, and his own conduct
during the late unhappy troubles that prevailed in this country. I remember
that when I asked him if ever a private correspondence had ever existed between
himself and Mr. Brackenridge, during, or relating to the insurrection, he
declared in the most solemn manner, that no private written communication had
ever been made by either party, nor had any conversation ever been held by you,
with each other on that subject, except when others were present.

Your humble servant, JOHN HOLLINGSWORTH.

Mr. Brackenridge.
I do certify, and if legally called upon, will depose, that being elected a
delegate to the committee at Parkinson's ferry, the first meeting; on my way to
that meeting, fell in with Mr. Brackenridge, a few miles from the meeting; rode
with him, and had conversation, in which he explained his views in going
forward, on that occasion; that he had no idea of countenancing the violence of
the country, but to manag^ it, and by an indirect wa^ put a stop to it; that
opposing it directly, would be dangerous and useless; that it was on this
principle the people had gone from Pittsburgh to Braddock's fields; I remember
perfectly his saving, that it was a great object to get act ^usiness out of the
hands of the multitude, and bring it into committees, as matters could be
managed in these, better than with the bulk of the people. I at the time
approved of these ^e^^iments, and the idea struck me, that what led him to
communicate himself freely to me, was my answer to some questions ^e but to me;
viz. some questions with regard to the meeting of battalions on Braddock's
fields; particularly who the man was that came up from the camp at the time and
said, "if you do not go and settle matters quick, we would go on and settle
them ourselves;" also some questions with regard to the minds of the country.
He appeared to be founding me at first, but soo^ entered into a free
conversation, and explained himself in confidence* After the meeting at
Parkinson's ferry, in the evening of the first day, I had a conversation with
Mr. Brackenridge, and said to him, that I had liked all that he had said that
day, except some of the words in his last speech, as not consistent with what
he had explained in the morning as his intention; viz. that they see^ to
countenance the idea of war. His answer was, "Is it possible that you did not
see through it?" I said, Well, I (...) then; but I do now. His words had been
so^^ thing about di^playing columns and making a show of opposition, and
talking of war; but not going so far as to carry in in^^ e^ect.

The state of the country had been at that time, and was very ^readful. Threat^
of burning and destruction of property. It was a per^ thing to ^^ke matters out
of the mob state by committees. These were the salvation of the country. At
going to Braddock's fields, had great apprehension of the town being burned,
and nothing but the way that was taken by the people coming out, could have
sa^ed it, as it appeared to me. All these matters were talked over with Mr.
Brackenridge. I am fully of opinion, that opposing the violence of the people
at that time, directly, would have been as impossible as to create them. This
is the general opinion now, and was then of every reflecting person.

AARON LILE.
October 1 st, 1795. P. S. Mr. Brackenridge explained to me what he meant by
the words that seemed to favor war. It was an apology for those that were warm
for it; and by seeming to take their part and excuse the talking of war, he had
kept them from forcing the resolves upon the committee to take up arms It
surprised me that having given him the key to my system, he had not understood
me. It was owing to his not having attended to the resolves which some were
still anxious to force, and the motions in favor of preparation for actual war.
.



Sir,
In answer to a number of queries, I have received from you, I will observe,
that I well recollect that after the compromise between Virginia and
Pennsylvania, respecting ^o^^ and jurisdiction in this country, and perhaps in
the year 1^8^, a dissatisfaction, not without symptoms of violence, existed on
account of the compromise; and a strong party was formed, whose declared design
was to prevent the compromise taking effect, by establishing a state of our own
(as it was termed) independent of both Virginia and Pennsylvania. To this
proposition in all its parts and possible consequences, I know you were opposed
in word and deed, nor do I doubt my having a correct knowledge of your
sentiments on this occasion.

Again on the publication of the federal constitution, the part you took was,
in my estimation, decidedly favorable to its adoption; nor have I had any
reason from that day to this, to change this opinion. I believe it is correct.

To the third query, my opportunities of knowing your sentiments, since the
adoption of the federal constitution, have been a continuance of the
acquaintance and good degree of intimacy that had long before existed between
us. I have often heard you speak on the subject, not only publicly but
privately and confidentially. I have observed your actions to correspond with
your words; and upon the whole, have never discovered a disposition on your
part, to disturb or overthrow the government of the United States; far
otherways; nor has common fame, properly so called, ever expressed such an
opinion of you in my hearing, although some individuals have No individual ^^ur
had any ground to think so, it must have been the malicious or ignorant.
.

Lastly, It is true, I was an inhabitant of the town of Washington, during the
whole of the late disturbance, and seldom went out of it. I was not an
inattentive spectator of what was going forward, and I had what I think the
best information from almost all quarters; and upon all I have collected, the
impression on my mind is, that you had no privacy with the principal actors in
the outrages; that your advice, or promised, or expected support, never
encouraged them; but that they rather feared you* this has been my opinion
throughout the whole business. I have often declared it. It is my opinion now,
and will continue so to be, until I have testimony much stronger to the
contrary than I yet have.

I am, Your very humble servant. THOMAS SCOTT Late member of Congress from the
western country of Pennsylvania.
.
Washington, March, 30 th, 1795.
Hugh H. Brackenridge.
Sir,
I take the liberty of making to you a few queries relative to myself, in the
transaction of the late insurrection in this country, your answer to which will
oblige me.

1 st. Were you not in the town of Washington at the time of the return of
individuals to that place who had been at the meeting at Mingo creek; and what
was the impression which seemed to have been made on their minds with respect
to what was said by me at that meeting was it that of having supported or
evaded the proposition of Bradford, and the measures proposed by the more
violent?

2 d. At what point of the business did you come forward, and was present in
the committee of battallions on Braddock's field; and what was the impression
on your mind with respect to my conduct in the case of Neville, Gibson, and
Craig; and what do you recollect, or is your impression with respect to our
engagement, I mean those of the committee from Pittsburgh, with regard to
Abraham Kirkpatrick, and others that had been sent away; did we not pledge our
persons for theirs, that they had gone and would not return; and did not this
stipulation appear to you to be the result of necessity at that juncture, to
allay the rage of the people against the town, on account of those persons?

3 d. Shortly after the day of Braddock's field, do you recollect my stating to
you the delicacy of my situation, and wish to extricate myself from it; that I
had thought of procuring myself to be sent to the executive, on behalf of the
people of Pittsburg, to represent their situation, and the motives of their
conduct; and having done this, not to return; that with this view I wished you
to found some principal persons, and see whither it would seem that I could be
so appointed; and did you not give me information afterward, that you had
founded, and found an unwillingness that I should leave the town or the
country, but rather remain, in order to assist in ways of our general safety?

4 th. Before the election of delegates for the town of Pittsburgh to the
meeting at Parkinson's ferry, did I not express to you my determination of not
suffering my name to be mentioned as a delegate, recollecting with what
difficulty I had extricated myself at the Mingo meeting house; that it would be
better, in order to save appearances on the part of the town, to let some
person go forward who would not be expected to speak, or take any conspicuous
part in the business: Was it not rather your opinion, that it was a turning
point of the business to get forward as many as possible of moderation,
address, ability, and influence, in order to parry the desperate measures that
might be proposed; and did you not undertake to go to Washington, and
accomplish, as far as in your power, the procuring persons to be elected of
that description; and was it not upon this ground that I acquiesced, and
changed my determination?

5 th. At the meeting of Parkinson's ferry, did I not explain to you the plan I
had devised, which was that of sending commissioners to the executive; and did
not I show you an address I had prepared to the President, such as I thought
the people would be willing to send; but the commissioners sent would expose
the real state of the country, and devise measures for the pacification of it;
and did not I suggest to you, that the obtaining an amnesty for what was done,
would be the means; those that were desperate, from a sense of the violation of
the law, seeing then a prospect of safety, or a way of getting out; and did you
not, with my consent, take this address to read over, and show it to the
commissioners; as it would give them the same information which was intended
for the President?

6 th. At Parkinson's ferry, toward the close of the business, at what was
considered a delicate crisis, when it was agitated whether the commissioners
who had been announced as having arrived, should come forward to the people
there present, or a delegation be made of persons to confer with them at a
separate place; and was it not considered by us, that the coming forward there
would be fatal, as whatever propositions were brought forward, would probably
at this instant be rejected by the multitude; and when several speakers of the
moderate description seemed to have failed in advocating a separate conference,
was I not called upon by you, and addressed in these words, "This is the
turning point; you must now speak." I had a considerable time before that left
the circle, and was walking at some distance from the crowd. Did I not inform
you, that I despaired of it, so many others having spoke in vain; you said, I
could do it. Did I not then come forward, and with great difficulty accomplish
it, and returning to you from the crowd say, "The point is now gained; there is
a ground whereon to establish peace?"

7 thly. What, in general, is your impression of my zeal and fidelity, in
accomplishing the point which I had in view, of serving the people by saving
them with the government; and at the same time serving the government with them.

You may, if you please, annex your answers to these queries, or answer the
substance in a letter.

I am, Your humble servant, HUGH H. BRACKENRIDGE.
11 April, 1795.
James Ross, of the senate of the United States.
Pittsburgh, 11 th April, 1795. Sir,
Want of time before you leave this place, prevents my answering your queries
of this day so fully as I could wish, but I shall endeavor to state as
concisely as possible, my recollection of the facts to which they are pointed.

I lived in Washington at the time general Neville's house was destroyed, and
during the time of the late disturbances. On the return of the Washington
gentlemen from the Mingo creek meeting, I understood from them that a proposal
had been made in the meeting, that those guilty of the outrage should be
supported by force against all attempts to punish them, and that this had been
warmly advocated by some of our Washington people; but that you were of a
different opinion, and had stated, that in all probability the government might
be induced to forgive it, and that a combination of this sort would involve the
whole country, and oblige government to take notice of those who had
transgressed. This meeting ended by a proposal to have a more general one from
the four counties west of the mountains in Pennsylvania, and, as I understood,
the western counties of Virginia, were to be notified to attend on the 14th of
August at Parkinson's ferry. Before this day arrived, the mail was robbed,
several obnoxious letters were found in it; a project for taking the public
arms, ammunition and stores at Pittsburgh, was set on foot; this plan also
embraced the seizing and punishing in an exemplary manner, the writers of those
letters, who were called traitors to their country; and the militia were called
to assemble at Braddock's field, and to march from thence to Pittsburgh.

The names of those publicly denounced in Washington, in presence of the
troops (who were hesitating whether they would march, or not) were Thomas
Butler, Abraham Kirkpatrick, John Gibson, James Brison, and Edward Day. When
the troops were assembled at Braddock's field, a large committee was appointed
to consider and settle what should be done. This committee sat a long time, and
the soldiers became clamorous for a march to Pittsburgh. At this time I came to
the committee, who were at some distance from the main body. I then learned
that the design of attacking the fort was abandoned; that the committee had
resolved to petition the President for the removal of colonel Butler from the
command of the fort; that they had ordered the banishment of major Kirkpatrick,
Mr. Brison, and Mr. Day; and they were taking the question whether colonel
Neville, and general Gibson should not be banished. John Wilkins and you, made
a proposal to postpone their banishment until the meeting of the 14th August;
but this was negatived. I am not certain whether this proposal was confined to
these last named gentlemen, or extended to all, but rather think Neville and
Gibson only included. One of the committee then denounced major Craig, for
having said he would keep an inspection office in his own house, rather than
the excise law should be defeated. A good deal was said on this subject; his
expulsion was at last prevented by a proposal of yours, that a petition should
be sent to general Knox for his removal. It being very questionable whether
Butler would not protect him in the fort, as belonging to the army; and at all
events the public business would suffer from the want of a proper officer to
take care of the military stores. This was agreed to. The time within which the
bani^hed men must depart was fixed, and passports allowed them. The Pittsburgh
committee men were called upon to pledge themselves for the full execution of
the resolutions, which they did; but whether their own persons were pledged or
not, I do not recollect. After this was settled, one of the Washington members
rose, and proposed that the troops should march home through Pittsburgh, and
that they should all go in a body; professing his belief that they would do no
harm, and stating, that the news of five thousand men having marched through
that place, would strike terror into the minds of all below, who might dream of
punishing any thing that had been done. From the first of the meeting at
Braddock's field until this time, it had been my opinion, that we could prevail
with the troops to go home from thence; but finding a great majority of the
committee for marching to town, I doubted of the practicability of preventing
them, and it was evidently the best policy to carry the well disposed along
with the violent, in order to control them.

This was the opinion of all the well disposed part of the people assembled
there, and accordingly the unarmed, as well as the armed, were put in the ranks
and proceeded to Pittsburgh. These expulsions, and this march, were the result
of the meeting at Braddock's field; and nothing but the apparent consent of the
Pittsburgh people to all these measures, could have saved their property from
utter destruction. Almost all the inhabitants of the town were at the field,
and expressed to me their despair of saving the town, provided the insurgents
marched into it. You exerted yourself, amongst others, to the utmost, in order
to prevent this measure. But when it was resolved on, in my opinion, no person
who wished the safety of the place, would either have opposed the march by
force, or sent home the peaceable well disposed part of the militia.

The facts mentioned in your third, fourth, fifth, and sixth queries, are, to
the best of my recollection, correctly stated. I may forget words; but the
impressions made on me, and sentiments expressed by you, are substantially as
there stated; and it would be only a waste of time to repeat the several
subjects there alluded to. I saw many alarmed, and anxious for the safety of
their country, for the re-establishment of the government, and who expressed an
abhorence of all that was doing. I thought none of them more seriously so than
yourself; and when you came as a committee man to settle the terms of
submission, I am persuaded there is none will deny that you exerted yourself to
get every reasonable concession on the part of the government, in favor of
your constituents.

Finally, Sir, there is no impression on my mind, from any part of your conduct
in the late disturbances, which I have seen, nor from any thing I have heard
you say, that you attempted in any instance to inflame the minds of any of the
people against an individual, or to turn the force of others against a private
enemy.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. JAMES ROSS.

H. H. Brackenridge, esquire.
In answer to certain queries proposed to me by Hugh Henry Brackenrldge, esquire. I
can certify, and were it necessary at this time, could depose, as follows:

I resided at Washington during the disturbances which lately took place in the
four western counties of Pennsylvania, but was occasionally at some of the
public meetings, which were held in different parts of the same, in consequence
of those disturbances. I have had frequent opportunities of observing the
conduct of those who were most conspicuous in exciting the commotions, but
never had the least reason to suspect him of any privity or concert with those
leaders. On the contrary, from the period of my first conversation with him on
the subject, which was on the evening that the intercepted mail was carried
from Washington to Pittsburgh, throughout the whole of the transactions, he
expressed uniformly to me sentiments in opposition to the violence and outrages
which were taking place. My communications with him were frequent; and I am
persuaded with the most perfect confidence and sincerity on his part. Some were
made in company with James Ross, esquire. and others without the presence of any
third person; but in either situation, was that of a strong disapprobation of
the madness and folly which had taken place.

On the morning that the intercepted mail was brought to Washington,
immediately on hearing of it I went to Mr. Bradford's house, and in a few words
requested him to explain to me the meaning of what I had heard. His reply to me
was, "We have discovered that there are traitors and aristocrats (this I think
was the language, for it made a strong impression on me) who are forming
schemes to trample upon the liberties of the people;" and other conversation to
that effect, immaterial to be related. I asked him who they were, and what had
been discovered. He answered, that there was a certain Mr. Day, and a certain
Mr. Brison, also a certain general Gibson, who did not stand very fair, and
that Presly Neville had not behaved very well. I may err as to the precise
words, but am pretty certain as to the substance, and as to the persons above
mentioned. The letters were not shown to me by Mr. Bradford, nor did he proceed
to detail to me, what the particulars of the discovery were. The letters were
read the same day at a town-meeting in Washington; and also the next day, and
the writers of them denounced as aristocrats, and deserving punishment.

When I went in company with those who carried the mail from Washington to
Pittsburgh, which was the day previous to the assemblage of the people at
Braddock's fields, I certainly apprehended great danger of mischief to the
town, and also to the persons whose letters had occasioned the summoning of the
people to Braddock's field. My opinion was, that the best mode of averting this
danger was, for those people themselves to retire. General Gibson and colonel
Neville can perhaps remember my communicating to them my sentiments to this
effect. Though I felt all its harshness with respect to the individual^
themselves, who were this obliged to relinquish their families and country, I
compared it with what appeared to me the very probable dangerous consequences,
which were to result to the persons, and property of those persons, and of the
inhabitants of Pittsburgh, from their omitting to do so.

I was present at the conference between the gentlemen who took the intercepted
mail to Pittsburgh, and the delegates from the town-meeting of that place, then
sitting. As well as I can recollect, colonel Neville was there, if not all the
time, certainly a part of it, and while the business on which the former had
come was explained, which was done in a few words, and the letters which have
been mentioned were shown.

The gentlemen from Washington at this conference, certainly omitted to mention
the names of general Gibson and colonel Neville, as persons obnoxious on
account of their letters, as being in personal danger; or that their removal
was necessary for the safety of the town. My reason for remembering this is,
that I was astonished at the omission; and felt the greatest apprehensions for
these two gentlemen, and considered them as in danger if they should be kept
ignorant of their real situation. I also was alarmed for the safety of the
town, if the measure recommended by the gentlemen who carried the mail, and by
myself also, viz. "That those whose letters had rendered them obnoxious should
retire," was not adopted as to the whole of them.

I refrained with some difficulty from mentioning it to colonel Neville, and
was persuaded that a very dangerous delicacy toward him (...) account of his
presence, and no other (...) had prevented the mention of his name. I also felt
myself in ^ situation too delicate to interfere thus far (...) business; as I
had only gone to Pittsburgh accidentally, in (...) with (...) had the custody
of the mail, and was not considered as one to whom the business was in any
degree committed. My uneasiness however increased so much during the evening,
that I determined to interfere for what I conceived to be the safety of the
town, as well as of general Gibson and colonel Neville. I called upon Mr.
Brackenridge at near 12 o'clock that same night; told him of the omission, and
my opinion of its consequences. He immediately proceeded to call together as
many of the members of the town committee as could be procured. This was done.
They met at his house in perhaps an hour and a half; and I then communicated to
them what I have above stated to have been omitted, and I think that I also
mentioned major Craig as one in similiar circumstances with the other two
gentlemen, and told them my opinion of the consequences. It is my belief that
it was solely in consequence of my interfering in this manner, that those
gentlemen first came to know that they were considered as in danger, and that
general Gibson and colonel Neville were informed of their being considered as
obnoxious. What took place at Braddock's fields the next day in the committee,
confirmed my opinion of the night before, with respect to them.

I certainly did not observe in Mr. Brackenridge at any time during the
business, the least symptom of ill will, or a malignant disposition toward
those two gentlemen last mentioned. I remember shortly after the above
transaction, something like the following to have taken place between Mr.
Brackenridge and myself: I mentioned to him (in consequence of my having
frequently heard that he was on bad terms, if not with colonel Neville, with
some of the connections of the family) that it was probable the banishment of
colonel Neville, and perhaps I might have mentioned the burning of general
Neville's property, would by some be attributed to his means. He replied, that
he supposed it might be so, but that it would be a great mistake; for if he had
meant to serve them, he could not do it more effectually than by such conduct;
that it would make their fortunes, as the government would certainly pay them
well for all loss or injury.

My opinion of his conduct in public at the Redstone meeting, when the terms of
accommodation proposed by the commissioners were discussed, was, that it was
influenced by the sincerest desire to procure the accession of that committee
to the terms proposed; and his speech on that occasion, contained the most
unequivocal declarations of his sense of the propriety and necessity of
accepting them.

In private I do not recollect to have had any communication with him at that
time, or to have made any remarks upon his conduct or conversation out of the
committee.

At Braddock's field, as at Redstone, I had little communication with Mr.
Brackenridge. He was engaged as a member of the committee, and of course
principally taken up with those who were most immediately concerned in the
transactions of the day. I rode in company with him from Pittsburgh to
Braddock's field, on the day that the inhabitants of the town went to meet the
people there assembled, and had some conversation with him on the road relative
to the business; in which conversation his mind appeared to me strongly
impressed with the alarming situation of this country, and his sentiments and
intentions to be such as I wished to find them. My opinion of his conduct on
that day, formed partly from my subsequent conversation with himself on the
various transactions of it, and partly from conversation with James Ross, esquire.
and others there present, respecting the same is, that it had for its object,
the averting danger from the town of Pittsburgh.

My opinion of the whole of his conduct throughout the insurrection in this
country, I shall give without reserve: It appeared to me to have two objects;
to arrest the progress of the present violence; and to procure an amnesty for
that already committed, and thus prevent the flame from spreading beyond that
country in which it originated. Though in some instances during the
transactions, my opinion differed from his, with respect to the measures
adopted for the accomplishment of particular points, I never entertained any
doubt of the propriety of the principle which actuated him.

Whatever may be the solidity or justness of this, or any other opinion I have
here given of Mr. Brackenridge's conduct and principles, in the disturbances of
the western country, I can with safety vouch for the sincerity with which it is
given, and he is at liberty to make any use either public or private, of these
sentiments in reply to his queries.

HENRY PURVIANCE Attorney for the commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the county of
Washington, and appointed since the insurrection.
.

Sir,
I have received your letter, desiring me to state to you "my knowledge of your
sentiments and conduct, respecting the adoption of the federal constitution;
and of your disposition to support it since its adoption; and to state also
whether I have discovered from you, any idea of overthrowing it; or have any
reason to believe that you advised or countenanced any illegal opposition to
the excise law; or had any concern in exciting or supporting the late
disturbances."

In making this statement as sincerely and heartily as I can, I shall speak
from my observation of your conduct in an acquaintance of more than nine years,
and in your company in social and familiar conversation at the courts of this
circuit, within almost the whole of that time; from my confidence that your
conversation on political subjects is frank and sincere; and from my
opportunity of learning the opinions entertained of you by the judges my
associates, and other respectable citizens in the several counties of this
circuit.

Your approbation of the federal constitution from its publication, and your
exertions to conciliate the minds of the people toward it, and promote its
adoption, are notorious. Since its adoption, I believe that you have constantly
retained your respect and attachment to it; and I know nothing to induce any
suspicion of your conceiving an idea of overthrowing it.

It is impossible for me, without erazing all my impressions of your character
and conduct, to suppose that you ever advised or countenanced any illegal
opposition to the excise law; I think your sense of civil duty strong and
accurate, and believe you incapable of suggesting or approving any unlawful act.

During the disturbances here, until the first conference with the
commissioners at Pittsburgh, I was absent from this country. At the time of
that conference you there expressed to me the utmost disapprobation of the
preceding acts of violence, and regret for their effects; your perfect
satisfaction with the terms proposed by the commissioners, as the best that
could be offered, and your resolution to exert every endeavor to induce the
people to accept of them; and, if you should fail, to leave this country. I am
persuaded that you spoke your mind, all your subsequent conduct, so far as I
ever understood (and I knew much of it) uniformly corresponded with those
declarations; and I believe you contributed greatly to the restoration of peace
and civil submission in this country. It must be supposed, that the outrages
which had been committed, would be frequent subject conversation; but I have
never heard, from any man of understanding, information, and impartiality, that
you had any participation in the guilt of them.

The imputation of this to you was matter of surprise to me; and I am persuaded
that it arose from ignorance and misconception of your motives, or from
prejudice.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. ALEXANDER ADDISON.
Washington, 31 st March, 1795.
H. H. Brackenridge, esquire.
Dear Sir,
Annexed you have my answer to your queries, and limited to them here, I will
also state, that I was in your house on the ^th of September last, when you
received by post an answer from Mr. Tench Coxe to your letter to him. You
showed me a copy of your letter, and his answer. You expressed surprise that he
mistook the aim of your letter (which you said you had calculated, without
exposing yourself to the raging prejudices of the people here, to convey to
government an impression of the magnitude of the disturbances, and the
propriety of conciliatory, previous to coercive measures), and that he should
have thought it necessary to convince you of the necessity of submission; and
you observed, that he reasoned with you as if you were an insurgent. -- You may
consider this as part of my preceding letter, or not, and deal with the whole
as your interest may direct you.

ALEXANDER ADDISON.

Washington, February 16 th, 1795. Sir,
I received your letter of the 13th instant, and have no doubt but that you are
entitled, at least, to a full statement by letter, of your expressions to me in
Pittsburgh; but I much doubt the propriety of voluntarily going before a
magistrate, and making a deposition on the subject. And as it is an
extrajudicial business, I presume no magistrate will call upon me by subpoena,
for the purpose.

I know well you have enemies, and believe they are my friends. I respect them,
and regard you. It is not for me, therefore, on the one hand, by a voluntary
act of mine, to lose my friends, or wound their feelings, even though they be
your enemies; nor on the other hand, to retain their friendship, by withholding
an act of justice from you. I have therefore determined to do no more on either
side than strict justice, which will be effected by answering your letter. If
any man doubts my words, I presume he would not respect my oath; and I flatter
myself, that all who know me will doubt neither.

I recollect perfectly, that on the day I think previous to conference being
opened in Pittsburgh, between the commissioners on the part of the United
States, and the committee appointed by the deluded people, I entered without
reserve into a short conversation with you, relative to the situation of the
western country. Your sentiments I recollect fully coincided with mine on that
occasion. One sentiment of yours struck me, as strongly characteristic of your
opinion, which was, " that if the designs of individuals, or the obstinacy of
the multitude, should prevent submission to the government, you were determined
to leave the country; that the consequent sacrifice of your property should not
influence you; that the sacrifice would probably be but temporary; for that
obedience would, and ought to be enforced; that government had the power, and
no doubt would exert it on that occasion." One of us mentioned the necessity of
inducing Mr. Bradford to comply with the terms which might be proposed by the
commissioners. I suggested the propriety of the use of your influence with him.
You doubted whether you had any; and said, " the only way you ever could manage
him, was by pretending to anticipate his opinions; and thus persuade him to
come into measures as his own, than which nothing could be more foreign to his
thoughts; but that you would leave no means unessayed, to effect a change of
his mind."

It cannot be expected that I should now give the words of our conversation on
that occasion; but I am persuaded I have given the ideas. The belief that you
were directly or indirectly concerned in the late insurrection can only be
entertained by those, who from their distance from the scene of action have
been imposed upon by misrepresentations, and have therefore formed conclusions
upon ill founded premises; or by your enemies, whose prejudices have totally
prevented enquiry.

The dangerous and unpopular part I took in the late insurrection, and the
detestation I entertain for all those defamatory societies, who have for their
object the dissemination of jealousies against the government; and who, I have
no doubt, contributed greatly, (perhaps undesignedly), to the late dishonorable
insurrection, are, I hope, sufficient pledges of the truth of this statement,
even when it is made in favor of you, who, unfortunately by misrepresentation,
or partial statements of facts, have incurred the displeasure of, or at least
the suspicion of government.

I am, Sir, With respect, Your obedient servant. JOHN HOGE This gentleman, late
a member of the senate for the state of Pennsylvania, his character well known,
and his discernment will not be questioned.
.

Hugh H. Brackenridge.
A Copy of the Countermand by BRADFORD Referred to, Volume I, page 43.
.
Dear Sir,
Upon receiving some late intelligence from our runners, we have been informed
that the ammunition we were about to seize; was destined for general Scott; who
is just going out against the Indians. We therefore have concluded not to touch
it; I give you this early notice, that your brave sons of war need not turn out
till farther notice.

Yours, DAVID BRADFORD.

Col. David Williamson.
Letter to Tench Coxe, esquire.
Pittsburgh, August 8, 1794. Sir,
I have received no papers from you; your letter by the post is the first I
have heard from you. I take the opportunity to give you, in return, a summary
of the present state of this country, with respect to the opposition that
exists to the excise law. It has its origin not in any antifederal spirit, I
assure you. It is chiefly the principles and operation of the law itself, that
renders it obnoxious. Be this as it may, the facts are these:

The opposition, which for some time showed itself in resolves of committtees,
in representations to government, in masked attacks on insignificant deputy
excise officers, for only such would accept the appointment -- did at length,
on the appearance of the marshal in this country to serve process, break out
(...) an open and direct attack on the inspector of the revenue himself,
general Neville. These circumstances you will by this time have heard, from the
general himself, and from the marshall, major Lenox.

Subsequent to their departure from the country, notice was given of a meeting
on the Monongahela river, about eighteen miles from the town of Pittsburgh. Six
delegates, of whom I was one, were sent from this town. Nothing material was
done at this meeting, but the measure agreed upon of a more general meeting, on
the 14th of August, near the same place, to take into view the present state of
affairs of the country.

Subsequent to this, the mail was intercepted, characters in Pittsburgh became
obnoxious by letters found, in which sentiments construed to evince a bias in
favor of the excise law, were discovered.

In consequence of this, it was thought necessary to demand of the town that
those persons should be delivered up, or expelled, or any other obnoxious
character that might reside there: also, that the excise office still kept in
Pittsburgh, or said to be kept there, should be pulled down; the house of
Abraham Kirkpatrick, burnt or pulled down; other houses also, that were the
property of persons unfavourable to the cause. For this purpose, circular
letters were sent to the battalions of the counties, detachments from which met
on Braddock's field, to the amount of at least five thousand men, on the 2d of
the month. It was dreaded, on the part of the town, that from the rage of the
people involving the town in the general odium of abetting the excise law, it
would be laid in ashes. And I aver that it would have been the case, had it not
been for the prompt and decisive resolutions of the town, to march out and meet
them as brethren, and comply with all demands. This had the effect, and the
battalions marched into town on the 3d, and during their delay there, and
cantonment in the neighborhood, with a trifling exception of a slight damage
done to the property of Abraham Kirkpatrick, in the possession of his tenant,
which was afterward compensated In this I was mistaken; it had it been
proposed to compensate, but ha^ not been done. I have called it a slight
damage, as I presume the value of the house and grain destroyed, could not have
been more than 100 dollars; perhaps not so much.
, behaved with all the regularity and order of the French or American armies,
in their march through a town during the revolution with Great Britain.

The town of Pittsburgh will send delegates to the meeting of the 14th instant
-- what the result will be, I know not. I flatter myself, nothing more than to
send commissioners to the President with an address, proposing that he shall
delay any attempt to suppress this insurrection, as it will be styled, until
the meeting of Congress. This will be the object, simply and alone, with all
that labor to avert a civil war. On the part of the government, I would
earnestly pray a delay until such address and commissioners may come forward.
This is my object in writing you this letter, which I desire you to communicate
either by the Gazette, or otherwise.

It will be said, this insurrection can be easily suppressed -- it is but that
of a part of four counties. Be assured, it is that of the greater part -- and I
am induced to believe, the three Virginia counties, on this side the mountain,
will fall in. The first measure then will be, the organization of a new
government, comprehending the three Virginia counties, and those of
Pennsylvania, to the westward, to what extent I know not. This event, which I
contemplate with great pain, will be the result of the necessity of
self-defence. For this reason, I earnestly and anxiously wish that delay on the
part of government may give time to bring about, if practicable, good order and
subordination. By the time the Congress meets, there may be a favorable issue
to the negotiation, with regard to the navigation of the Mississippi, the
western posts, etc. A suspension of the excise law, during the Indian war, a
measure I proposed in a publication three years ago, in Philadelphia, may,
perhaps, suffice. Being then on an equal footing with other parts of the union,
if they submitted to the law, this country might also.

I anticipate all that can be said with regard to example, etc. I may be
mistaken, but I am decisive in opinion that the United States cannot effect the
operation of the law in this country. It is universally odious in the
neighboring parts of all the neighboring states, and the militia under the
law, in the hands of the President cannot be called out to reduce an
opposition. The midland counties, I am persuaded, will not even suffer the
militia of more distant parts of the union, to pass through them.

But the excise law is a branch of the funding system, detested and abhorred by
all the philosophic men, and the yeomanry of America, those who hold
certificates excepted. There is a growling, lurking discontent at this system,
that is ready to burst out and discover itself every where. I heartily and
decidedly tell you, the chariot of government has been driven Jehu-like as to
the finances; like that of Phaeton, it has descended from the middle path, and
is likely to burn up the American earth.

Should an attempt be made to suppress these people, I am afraid the question
will not be, whether you will march to Pittsburgh, but whether they will march
to Philadelphia, accumulating in their course, and swelling over the banks of
the Susquehanna like a torrent, irresistible, and devouring in its progress.
There can be no equality of contest, between the rage of a forest, and the
abundance, indolence, and opulence of a city. If the President has evinced a
prudent and approved delay in the case of the British spoilations, in the case
of the Indian tribes; much more humane and politic will it be to consult the
internal peace of the government, by avoiding force until every means of
accommodation are found unavailing. I deplore my personal situation; I deplore
the situation of this country, should a civil war ensue.

An application to the British is spoken of, which, may God avert. But what
will not despair produce?

Your most obedient servant, etc. HUGH H. BRACKENRIDGE.

Tench Coxe, esquire.
Extracts from the Notes of Mr. Rawle, Attorney for the District, taken in the
Course of the Trials; and inserted here to supply Omissions in my Narrative, or
illustrate some Parts of it.
ROBERT CALHOUN.
"SATURDAY before the 14th August, five persons for Mifflin township appointed
as delegates to Parkinson's ferry; thought necessary to instruct them; seven
persons appointed to draw up instructions; proposed to instruct, that a
remonstrance should be drawn up to the President, requiring him to suspend the
execution of the excise law; opposed with great violence; I. S. got up in a
great passion; said he would not sit with any fellow that would propose a
petition or remonstrance; that they had frequently petitioned and remonstrated;
always thrown under the table, and nothing done.

Some people looking in at the window, and hearing the motion made, broke in at
the window, and were going to lay on; slipped out of the house, got on my
horse, and was going away; was forced to return. When I came in again, I. S.
proposed that a declaration should be drawn up, stating, that we did not wish
to be struck off from the government, but would support it; and at the same
time would never submit to the excise law; but would defend our lives and
liberties with our fortunes; this I signed; nothing else could be done then;
read this to the people; generally pleased with it."

I have extracted the above as an instance, and a proof, of the violence of the
people at that period.

ANDREW BOGGS.
"July 4, 1794, went to a muster at colonel Parker's; people chiefly collected,
and in their ranks; went to a piece of ground; mustered; manoeuvered, and
returned to Parker's; ranged themselves in companies. A paper was produced for
every man to put his mark that opposed the excise law; one paper went through
two or three companies; saw, or heard of no man who refused signing it, but
one; the people much displeased with him; he was threatened; speeches made
against the excise law; said the power of Congress was such they did not know
where it would end; they had made a supplement to the former law, that there
should be but one office in each county; that they had lately erected an office
in Washington county, but found they could not support it; that in their
opinion they should not submit to the law at all; that it was better to take up
arms against it; urged the people in strong terms to hold out, and not submit
to it; asked a gentlemen, whom I thought a friend, what was best for me to do,
as the people had thrown out threats against me; said, he had been my friend;
but it was time for me to say something for myself; that the crisis was come
when they would have no such people, and I must be one way or the other.

A few days before this meeting, major -- mentioned to me, that it would not be
long before I would hear of a party of 400 or 500 who would join to suppress
the excise office in the county, and that they would march to general
Neville's. I communicated this, and what passed at the meeting, to colonel
Neville.

Had apprehensions both for my person and property; resolves passed at a
committee, against every one that entered stills, and general threats held out
against it. I understood they were to march to general Neville's house, and
take the papers from his office respecting the excise law."

The above is extracted to show the disposition to outrage, even before the
coming of marshal Lenox.

JAMES THERR.
"Was in a committee about 12 or 1 o'clock evening after the first attack on
Neville's house, J. M'F. B. P. J. S. J. B. and myself, the committee. J. B.
proposed that a sum of money be raised, and given to some ordinary persons to
ly in wait, and privately take the life of general Neville. A vote was taken;
majority against it. Next proposal to call out a greater force to meet at
Couche's; agreed."

JOHN HOLCROFT.
James Gallagher came to me; went round as an express to warn the inhabitants
to see what could be done; the marshall being there, "serving processes." I
went, and several others; considerable numbers; some armed; expresses went to
different parts; all turned out; myself appointed to command; a council chosen;
proposals made in regard to the business; no mention of general Neville; only
of the marshal at this time; the marshal to be taken, and brought; then to be
determined what to be done in regard to his sending precepts on the different
people; proposed if fired on, to burn or destroy any thing that came in our
way; resolved that a party of us go to the coal hill at Pittsburgh, to
intercept the marshal, and if taken, brought back. Captain Pearsol appointed,
and chose eight men; orders given by the council if they met with opposition to
return it; we set out to general Neville's at the same time; got there at day
break; drew up and counted; had 37 guns; dismounted; marched up to the house*
challenged by general Neville; said, were friends from Washington, come for a
guard for you; said stand off, and fired immediately; shot Oliver Miller, who
afterward died; some 25, some 50, or 60 yards from the house. Our party
returned the fire; a horn blowed; negroes fired on our rear; wounded several of
our people; retreated to Couche's fort; sent three men to recall the party from
the coal hill; went home; received a message that afternoon to come back with
what strength I could get; met at Couche's fort 300 guns; a body from C. came
after counting; council called; a flag to be sent to general Neville; proposals
that general Neville should resign his commission, be a good citizen, and
nothing else; marched; halted two miles from Neville's; M'Farlane appointed
commander; flag sent in; answer, general Neville not at home* at Neville's
house 5 or 600 men."

ARTHUR GARDNER.
"We were to go on with business, if general Neville did not give up the papers
relative to the excise law; expected he would give up his papers, by getting a
great body of people to go forward. If he had given up the smallest paper for
the people's satisfaction, I did not know that he was to be ill treated; nor
did I hear any body, except two vulgar expressions of injuring him in case he
refused."

JAMES M'ALLISTER.
Object of meeting at Couche's fort, was to consult as to what measures should
be taken, in regard to bringing about a compromise respecting those who had
made the attack, whether to be supported or given up; plan of proceeding to
general Neville's concerted there, and not thought of before; result, that we
should proceed to general Neville, demand the resignation of his office, on
doing which he would be received as a good citizen, and restored to the
confidence of the people; was present at Couche's fort* when the marshal was
about to be brought under obligation; he was taken out into Couche's yard to be
sworn; proposed that he should lay his hand on the dead man's beard, and swear;
objected. He was to swear, 1st. Never to make any returns to the writs he had
served. 2d. Never to cross the mountain to serve writs of that nature again.
3d. Give up the writs that were served. 4th. Never inform of those concerned in
the business. 5th. Have nothing to do with the excise office directly or
indirectly; am not sure that he took this oath.

JAMES WHERRY.
Prisoner (Thomas Miller) came to me to notify me to Braddeck's fields; said it
was to take the garrison, to furnish themselves with ammunition for the object
in view; urged me to go; said if I did not, I would rue it; they were now in a
way to know the whigs from the tories; I said it was a foolish thing to talk of
taking the garrison with small arms; he said they had sent to Wheeling for
cannon.

DAVID HAMILTON.
Went to Couche's fort; saw many people; did not enquire, nor do I believe they
knew themselves what was to be done. Sent with a message to general Neville,
that if he would come out into the field, and give the people satisfaction,
that is, not hold the office any longer, they would disperse. Second message I
carried was, that they wished him to resign the office; that if six good
reputable citizens should be admitted to go with Mr. Kirkpatrick to examine
papers, and give them up, no further damage should be done. Refused; but that
he would defend the house as long as he could; the people were for going
forward; I said there were women and children, it was proper to remove then;
agreed; time was given them to remove; firing began; house surrendered; saw
Kirkpatrick afterward in custody; took him away, and set him at liberty.

Colonel PRESLY NEVILLE.
Prior to this time (the attack upon the house of the inspector) two committees
at Pittsburgh; saw their proceedings made public; colonel Cannon, chairman;
Albert Gallatin, secretary.

I do not know that the opposition was more general afterward, than before;
but immediately after that meeting, the officers of the excise were treated
with disrespect; before that time some had been disrespectfully and injuriously
treated; my father before that time always treated with respect.

JOHN CANNON.
A person came and informed me of attack first day at Neville's. Asked the
informer what was expected of us; said, assistance; said, I was afraid their
proceeding* would bring us to trouble, it was rash; went to Washington; called
upon Bradford, Marshall, and others; told them of what messenger had informed;
proposed if they would go alone to prevent mischief, I would go with them to
Couche's fort; Bradford said he would not be concerned; let the people go their
own way.

JOHN HOLCROFT.
The marshal and his papers were the only object in the first attack on general
Neville; at the second meeting at Couche's, it was understood it was general
Neville who had fired and wounded some of the people; and they were determined
to have satisfaction of him; had not before this time heard of any attack
intended on him; his firing on the people was the reason of determining on the
second attack; did not know general Neville when fired first attack; he had
asked what we were; said a guard for you; we thought it was the marshall, and
meant a guard to conduct him to Couche's fort. The object the second day, was
to go to Neville, and oblige him to resign his commission. Question, Why fire
on the house, when you heard general Neville was not at home? We did not
believe that.

ALBERT GALLATIN.
30 writs served by the marshall in Fayette; meeting of distillers at Union
town; 22 met, on all of whom process had been served; question. What to be
done? Smiley and myself present; agreed to employ counsel, and appear to the
writs; money raised, and sent by young Rabb; agreed unanimously to enter
stills, or quit distilling; 19 determined to quit; 3 to enter; after this, some
said they would continue, if others did; extent of opposition not then known;
information of attack upon the marshal; Neville's house; Mingo creek meeting;
Braddock's fields; attack upon Well's deputy excise office; attack upon office
in the Glade^ in Westmoreland; drew a conclusion that there was a general
combination to expel the off^cers in that survey; till then thought it a mere
riot; but now perceive it was more dangerous.

Summoned to appear at the rendezvous of my company; was informed the people of
Washington were angry at the people of Fayette, because they had not stopped
the marshal; a liberty pole raised; asked the meaning of this; said, it was to
show they were for liberty; I wished they would not act like a mob; was asked
if I was acquainted with resolves in Westmoreland, that if any one called the
people a mob, he should be tarred and feathered.

Learned that several of the townships in Fayette had elected deputies to
Parkinson's ferry meeting; said I would go if elected; thought it perfectly
proper and right for the people of Fayette to send deputies there; was elected;
was convinced we must be involved in the general flame; a liberty pole at
Brownsville, inscription, " Liberty, and no excise."

At Parkinson's ferry meeting, a liberty pole; some concerned that did not
belong to the meeting; inscription, Liberty, and no excise; whether Equal
taxation, not certain; " United we stand, divided we fall. No asylum for
traitors or cowards." A small flag on the pole with six stripes; Mr. Findley
told me the majority of Westmoreland deputies were well disposed; some were
not. Peter Audrain (a deputy from Pittsburgh) asked me if there was any
probability that meeting at Parkinson's, would call back those who had been
exiled. I said we must be governed by circumstances; James Marshall showed me
these resolutions, which I disapproved highly; he seemed to waver; said it
would be well to give a power to a committee to call a meeting of the people,
if it should be necessary; saw he wished Cook, chairman, me secretary. I said I
had come with a design to oppose him and Bradford, and did not wish to be
secretary; people soon after met in a field; committee and people together;
Cook made chairman; myself secretary; first thing done was to recognize the
members of the committee; list given to me of those from respective counties;
43 from Allegheny; 93 from Washington; 2 Bedford; 33 Fayette; 40 Westmoreland;
6 Ohio; total 226; about as many more spectators; at large proportion of those
who had been active in the attack on Neville's house; about 20 miles from
thence to Neville's; my impression of the violence of the people was such as to
induce me to think that dissolving the meeting without doing any thing, would
be the best that could be done. Bradford opened the business; relating briefly
the cumcumstances which had happened in the coming of the marshall; Neville's
house, etc. read a copy of the flag sent in to Neville; apology for the
people's conduct; mentioning that Neville had fired first; placed every thing
in a favorable point of view; read the original letters intercepted in the
mail, from severals, mentioning a meeting at Mingo creek, in which Bradford had
moved to make a common cause with the people who had attacked Neville's house,
and opposed by Mr. Brackenridge; he did not deny the truth* but said he made no
motion, only a speech; said this question was to be determined by the people at
large; stated the expulsion of writers of these letters, by the people at
Braddock's fields, expelled as enemies to the common cause; only thing
remaining to be deliberated on was, the mode in which the common cause was to
be effectuated. Produced a proper stating what we were to do; purchase or
procure arms, and ammunition; subscribe money; raise volunteers, or draught
militia; appoint committees to have the superintendence of those departments;
Marshall supported this; don't remember his expressions. Marshall's first
resolution put and carried; second resolution read; opposed by me; said it was
not understood a regular army was coming; militia of the United States could
not be supposed hostile to the western country; foolish to oppose them;
question should be referred to a committee; wrong to proceed before we know
what government would do. Appeared to me from the temper of those that were
there, the question would be carried if put. Believe the major part may have
been disposed to peace, but would not have had the courage to act. Mr.
Brackenridge said, he hoped pacific measures would be proposed by government,
and arms would not be necessary; but did not seem to apprehend the same danger
from the resolve; would do no harm to talk of these things; wished something to
be adopted to meet the sentiments of every body; highly important to be
unanimous. I doubted his real intentions. He explained his meaning five or six
days afterward, (the first time we had a private conversation); he disapproved
the proceedings that had taken place, as much as I did; but was attempting to
do by art, what I had tried by direct means.

Marshall satisfied to have a committee to call forth the people; agreed by all
persons. It seemed to be generally approved; Bradford made no public
opposition; nor any one else; my resolution was understood to exclude the idea
of force, as I had spoken against it My idea was different. The putting the
question had been parried by me, and in such a manner, that those who were for
it, thought it was carried in effect; and those that were against it, thought
it was (...) Thus, that was done by art, which could not have been directly
done.
.

5th Resolve puzzled me a good deal; thought it be best to restrain ourselves
to exertions in support of the municipal laws of respective states. I was not
afraid of personal injury; but of want of success. This carried by a greater
show of hands than any other.

Findley came, wished to inform the meeting that commissioners were on their
way; thinks it was before second resolution being adopted. Committee of five to
draw the resolves; substance of which had been adopted; one from each county,
Brackenridge, Husbands, myself, Bradford, and --. Second resolution not so full
as before; Bradford dissatisfied; suggested additional words, "and in case of
any sudden emergency, to take such measures as they may think necessary:" I
suggested " sudden emergency," applying it to any measures, which might arise
in the country itself; agreed to in the committee, and so reported; believe
adopted without change; have kept no copy; remember no debate second day;
Corbley said remonstrance was useless; we had done it often; I said it would do
no harm.

Second day President's proclamation came to hand; I read this aloud, being
directed so to do; though on the whole, it had a bad effect, seemed to produce
anger; the idea of draughting the militia, and the charge of being guilty of
treason, seemed to make them suppose it necessary to arm themselves; Marshall
said nobody yet was killed; general clamor against adjourning; wanted to sit
till committee of conference had gone to Pittssburgh, and reported to them.

I said only two things, amnesty and repeal. The President^ might do the first;
could not the second.

Committee of sixty chosen out of the general committee.

Redstone; terms proposed not complied with; a company of militia came, threw
all into confusion; debates in the committee of conference; Brackenridge and I
for, Bradford on the other side, on the question; he alone at Pittsburgh
against submission; but second day, in the committee, said he saw the necessity
of inducing the people to submit* but at Redstone again took the other side.
Private meeting of members from Washington, second day of Redstone committee,
proposed by Bradford; supported by Brackenridge, Edgar and myself."

Revisionary Notes.
WHEN I say revisionary, I do not mean, that after having finished this
narrative, I have revised, at mature leisure, what has been written: that was
not in my power. I sent it to the press, at the distance of 300 miles, by the
post, weekly, as I wrote it. It is revisionary only by recollection.

I recollect to have mentioned judge Addison, as coming forward, at an early
period, with a strong publication, in favor of the excise law. It was not so
much in vindication of the principles of the law, as conciliating the public
mind to an acquiescence with it. I have represented him, as being under the
necessity "of taking in his sails, and slacking course." By that I do not mean
any dereliction of duty, but necessary prudence in not continuing an evangelist
of the law. For it must be acknowledged, that he did not fail to reprehend, in
his charges to the grand juries, the masked attacks upon excise officers, and
to recommend a strict cognizance of the offenses. In fact, the like sentiments
with those in his late charge published, were delivered years ago in the course
of his circuits. I mention these things the more minutely; because his
reputation has been attacked by insinuations, as not having acted with
sufficient firmness; or as winking at the outrages in their commencement; and
having made use of a voucher from him, it concerns me to have his conduct
understood.

I have given it, as my opinion, that the insurrection was not projected by any
one. It may seem strange with some, that this could be the case. It seems
strange to me that any one could suppose it otherwise. Are there any traces of
pre-concert? any evidence of conspiracy to subvert the government? has any
foreign correspondence been discovered? any ways and means devised of supplying
with arms and ammunition? they must have been weak men indeed, that could
project a revolution, and think of effecting it by committee meetings, and
resolves alone* I have always felt great indignation at the suggestion, that it
was projected by me; not only because I was unwilling to have it thought that I
was capable of devising so great an evil, but because I disdained the idea of
having projected a thing without, at the same time, projecting proper means of
accomplishing it. If it had been with a view of overthrowing the government, I
would have had some correspondence or intercourse of communication with the
discontented elsewhere. If a separation of this country, from the union, had
been intended, it would have been advisable to have founded the British and
Spaniards on the subject. It might have been well to have been at London,
before John Jay was. What could we have offered to the British? the posts and a
part of the western lands; what to the Spaniards? a guarantee of Louisiana from
ourselves. My mind would have run in some train of this nature; I would not
have depended on the efforts of a mob, without a system to give them efficacy
and continuance. I should have had no idea of making myself a Wat Tyler, or a
Jack Cade.

Did it not appear absurd to hear the British politicians, in the course of
last war, talk of our projecting independence, before the commencement of the
revolution? The destruction of the tea, etc. and, finally, the non-importation
agreement, might have convinced them of the contrary. Common sense, with that
project in view, would have led us to supply ourselves, with all articles as
fast as possible, previous to a contest. It appears equally absurd to us in the
western country to hear people talk of any one projecting the insurrection. It
was begun by people that never had a thought beyond driving the excise officer
out of his district, and keeping the marshal from serving or returning his
process. The subsequent acts were with a veiw to shield the first. Yet these
subsequent acts would naturally have led to others to shield them, and thus the
actors would have gone on to the utmost extremes, without thinking of the
second step, before they took the first. The rage which had at first burst
forth, had given way to desperation. This instinctively had catched hold of
others not involved, dragged them along to share their danger, and increase
their force. The success, surpassing expectation, gave way to ambition, and the
idea of reform began to embrace an extensive scope. This is the natural history
of the transaction. But there is a propensity in the human mind to resolve all
phenomena in physics, metaphysics, politics, etc. into some great cause that
produces them, instead of ten thousand that have contributed. Just as one
looking at the mouth of a river, would suppose i^ to have originated from a
large lake, instead of small springs fed by extractions from the ocean.

I was amused with the first account I had of the represention of the Nevilles
respecting me; that I was a man of extreme ingenuity, great subtility, infinite
address, and versability; the most dangerous man in the western country.
Gallatin and Finley were nothing to me. Like an evil spirit in the winds, I
could move a tempest without being seen myself; this was all preparatory to the
having me arrested on suspicion, and hanged without proof. It will be asked;
how is it possible that this connection should appear to have had a stronger
prejudice against me, than even against Bradford or Marshall, or the insurgents
concerned in burning the house? I answer this by asking a question. Whom do you
suppose, did the emigrant nobility at Coblentz, hate most, of all those whom
they left in France? doubtless the Marquis de la Fayette, because he was
attached to the people to a certain extent, and was unwilling to go with
Monsieur and the count de Arto's all lengths; and this offended their pride
more than if he had been against them altogether. Just so with the Nevilles
family in my case. They might suppose me to disapprove of the outrages
committed, or at least to have no concern in them; yet were enraged, because I
was reluctant to expose myself with them to an equal odium in popular opinion;
or because I had advised yielding measures, at the first, when they, in the
pride of their passion, were for the most violent. I deduce one principle,
that, let an insurrection happen when it will, an implicit confidence ought not
to be placed in the representation of emigrants. It will generally be against
the best men, who were those who had counseled moderate measures, and wise,
because moderate, that they will bear the most unfavourable testimony.

But independent of this principle, there was a misconception of my situation
and intentions; and antecedent to all this, they had resolved certain acts of
mine, in my professional capacity, into a spirit of malignity, and were
predisposed to unfavourable constructions of all I could do or say.

I have stated some things from a certain Miller relative to language of
general Neville, on the subject of Graham, the collector under the excise law.
My object was to show, that general Neville used to talk like other people
against the excise law; or if the relation of Miller is not true, it will prove
that speeches can be attributed to men that were never made.

I have introduced an incident of a certain Gaston, my client; it was to show
how easily an argument to the man, or the people, the quo animo not being
understood, may be made evidence against a person.

I have mentioned the sensibility with which I felt an expression of the
attorney general, commissioner Bradford. It was because I had expected no
distrust from him. I was some years with him at the same college, and some part
of the time, of the same chamber; and had maintained a friendship ever since. I
had said that I had not been involved in the insurrection, but came forward to
negociate for those who were. I thought he ought to have given an implicit
credit to my declaration. For my idea was, that all who knew me, must know,
that if involved, I would have had the spirit to have avowed it, and justified
it. My impressions were removed in the manner I have stated. The post of
yesterday has announced the death of that gentleman, which I sincerely regret,
and subscribe to that eulogium which the public gives of his virtues and
talents.

I have given some idea of the unfavourable impressions of the people of
Philadelphia, with regard to me, when in that city; there were instances of
individuals, no doubt, who had been better informed, and who were not averse;
but it was my choice to be at a distance from all, until my situation generally
was understood.

It will be asked me, How comes it that my brother of the bar and the Neville
connection stand well, notwithstanding the part taken by him in the first
committee? His procuring himself to be elected in that committee, was with a
view to an approaching election, at which he was a candidate against Findley
for the Congress. He was violent against the excise law, but meant nothing more
than to gain a momentary popularity. The Nevilles knew this, and excused him;
more especially as he pretended to them, that he had softened matters in the
committee from what they would otherwise have been. In addition to this, he has
been the family lawyer, in cases in which I have found myself under the painful
necessity of pressing some branches of the connection. There has also taken
place a conjunction of interest in certain co-purchases at sheriff's sales.
These causes may sufficiently account for a good understanding between them;
more especially when it is understood, that having sailed in his stroke at
popularity, by attacking the excise law, he had thrown himself back into the
bed of government, as hastily as possible. Nevertheless, as he had got his eye
to Congress once more, I am inclined to believe, that had he been in the
country at the beginning of the insurrection, he would have made a stroke at
popularity, and been with the insurgents. Even at the late point of the game at
which he came forward, I have no judgment of mankind, if it was not a matter of
hesitation with him, which part he should take. He was in balance until he saw
the game was up, by an acquiescence of the principal part, with the terms of
the commissioners.

It will be queried, How does it consist with my representation of the general
odium of the excise law, and the necessity of at least concealing favorable
sentiments with regard to an acquiescence under it, that Neville, the son of
the inspector, has been elected to the legislature from the county of
Allegheny, at three successive elections, and probably before this book
appears, will have been elected a^ a fourth? I answer, he is thought to be a
man of judgment, and possesses conciliating manners; independent of this, he
has been several years surveyor of the county, and has had it in his power to
serve many persons. He has been also brigade inspector, holding appeals in the
case of militia duties. He has had other occasional offices, such as the
employment of patroles for the frontiers, etc. His brother-in-law
quartermaster, and commissary at Pittsburgh, and in that capacity, having the
employment of great numbers of people in mechanical trades, in contracts of a
various nature, for public purposes, has influence. The office of inspector
itself, in the possession of general Neville, though generally odious, yet by
favor, or hope, is still able to attract interest. In addition to this, the
young man had the address at first, to have it understood, that he was against
the excise law, and disapproved of his father's accepting the office; at least
there were persons who propagated this in his favor; and there were of the
populace, weak enough to believe it. The rumor was, that he had engaged to
have the law repealed. At the same time he was supported by the Wilkins family,
strong also in influence of office, and there being no considerable person that
had yet sprung up amongst the people of this country, on whom they could fix,
he was suffered to be elected, and to continue. At the suppression of the
insurrection, and ever since, fear has done a great deal for him. The more
ignorant people do not know, but it may be construed high treason to vote
against him. In due time they will recover a sedate, and correct sense of
rights and duties, and will not ^ap republican principles, by suffering so
great an evil, as so many offices, with a legislative appointment, to meet in
one man, however respectable. As an individual, I have found myself restrained
in a considerable degree hitherto, from bearing that public testimony against
the evil, that might be thought due from me; at first, from the terms of good
will on which I thought myself with the candidate; and of late, lest it should
be resolved into malice against him. I have given my opinion against his
eligibility, but no more. The fact is, I have never heard any thing against him
or his father, but that avidity of office, which seems to possess them, as if
there were no persons out of their family, capable of holding offices; or who
ought to have the honor, or emoluments Major Craig at present is deputy
quartermaster of the state; deputy quarter master-general, under the United
States; deputy commissary-general, under the United States; commissary of the
military stores, and notary-public, etc.
. I hate to see things wrong in a government; let what will be alleged, that
is the only motive that prompts me Colonel Neville is surveyor of the county;
brigade inspector of militia; and agent for the United States, for receiving
and storing whiskey taken in kind for the excise; and a member of the
legislature of Pennsylvania. Kirkpatrick is commissary-general for the western
army. General Neville is inspector of the revenue.
.

In the course of the narrative, other particulars may occur to the reader,
which may seem to require explanation; but confident that I have drawn from
nature and the truth, in the representation I have made, I am persuaded there
is nothing which, on the most minute examination, will not be found consistent
and ^upportable.

I have stated, that at the meeting at Parkinson's, for the purpose of sending
delegates to the President, I favored the appointment of David Reddick rather
than of Albert Gallatin, and thus in accommodation to Bradford. But the
principal ground of preference was, that Gallatin had been with John Cannon of
the obnoxious committees; and Reddick not of any. I was struck at the time with
the bad policy of nominating either Gallatin or Findley; but did not choose to
make any opposition, as it might be thought I had a wish to go myself. Findley
was obnoxious with the government, and considered as one of those who had laid
the foundation of the opposition to the excise law, and therefore by no means a
proper person to send forward on that occasion. I nominated general Wilkins,
but he declined serving.

Captain Simeson late of the army, but now a student of the law, was introduced
to me at our last court, and appears to be a modest, well behaved young man*
and discovered no disposition to kill, according to former threats reported to
me.

I have had an interview with colonel Stephenson; and find that the ground of
h^^ ^rrest was more extensive than barely "to keep him from killing Randolph."
He has been refused a court martial.

Captain Randolph has compromised the suits against him, and thus we are like
to have all disputes terminated. The country knows that I have been as ready to
conciliate accommodation, as I was determined to bring the actions, and teach
the infractors of the laws lessons of subordination to the civil authority.

Corrections and Additions Made when the author was a few days in Philadelphia;
the work being then nearly printed.
.
Page 12. Vol. II. -- I have given it as my opinion, that the assembly of the
state had a right to instruct the senators from the state in the senate of the
United States. This will be questioned. But it all turns upon what is to be
understood by instructing. I understand no more by it than informing them, or
communicating wishes, and views. I have no idea that instructions ought to
bind; as in the case of an officer to his subordinate. The member from a
county, is a member for the state when elected; and instructions from the whole
state only, can be supposed to bind; and not even in that case, am I clear that
they ought to bind; because the delegate is the constituted authority to think
for the occasion. He is sent upon deck; he is put at the helm; it is his to
steer; but others upon deck or in the hold have a right to talk; and express
their ideas with regard to the steering. As to the expediency, that is another
question. I say only that constituents have a right to instruct; that is, to
inform or furnish with intelligence. I add also, that I do not consider the
state assemblies to be the constituents of the state senators, in the senate of
the United States. They are the organ of constituting; but when constituted,
the people of the state are the constituents.

Page 20. Vol. II. -- I speak of what Gallatin calls his political sin, as "a
thesis I should like to see discussed." It may be queried whether it amounted
to a misdemeanor cognizable by law. I do not see that an indictment on this
ground could be supported. I might publish with impunity, that I would
interchange no office of civility with one that would refuse a challenge; yet
there is a law prohibiting the giving or accepting a challenge. But on the
ground of abstract political virtue, there is greater ground of operation. It
is an attempt to defeat a law by non user. Now, if an individual is warrantable
in such a resolution, all are; and if with regard to one law, with regard to
all. It is the act of an individual determining to hold his breath, or refuse
food. It is suicide as certainly, though not so speedily, as by the positive
act of dispatching by a pistol ball. If one part of a community may resolve to
defeat one law, another part may resolve to defeat another by the force of
opinion, and the body politic may die. I know I shall be encountered by a
greater authority than that of the resolves of the Pittsburgh committee. It is
that of John Dickinson, James Wilson, and others, the primores of Pennsylvania,
at the adoption of the state constitution in 1776. I do not know that it was
resolved formally by them in committee to accept no appointment under the
constitution, and to frown upon those who did; but certainly it was understood
to be their determination, and their conduct. But I think the conduct wrong. It
became them to have reverenced the people, and submitted to the general will.

Page 21. Vol. II. -- On reflection, I am not perfectly satisfied with the
opinion of Montesquieu, if it is as I have understood him, that the office of a
collector of the revenue, in a republic ought not to be considered as an office
of honor; unless I make a distinction between an office of honor, and an
honorable office. The revenue is the spring of the government, and the
collection of it ought to be considered as a sacred duty; and he ought to be a
man of property who shall be entrusted with the possession of the public money.
The only sentiment which I can with confidence entertain on this subject, is,
that though no contempt ought to be attached to the office of collector, yet
certainly superior honor to that of a legislator. For any honest man that can
keep accounts is qualified for a revenue officer; but it requires extensive
knowledge, and distinguished judgment, to fit for the making laws: and a man
that has once had the honor from the people of being made their sovereign for
a period, ought to be forever above a mercenary employment, unless the
narrowness of his circumstances renders it impossible. It must be the meaning
of Montesquieu, that when the love of money prevails above the love of fame,
and when the public mind ceases to make a wide distinction in the grade of
estimation between an honorary and a mercenary office, virtue is lost in a
republic.

Page 19. Vol. III. -- I have spoken of my brother of the bar "mistaking a
figure for a threat." It may be understood that it is the sentence in the note
to which I allude. No. It was a sentence something like this: "Until our
remonstrances shall roll like a tempest to the head of the government."

Page 40. Vol. I. -- It has been ascertained in the course of the trials, that
the original object of the march to Braddock's fields, was the taking the
magazine.

Page 65. Vol. I. -- It appeared on the trials at York, that David Hamilton had
been dispatched by Bradford to the garrison with a request to be permitted to
march by it, without disturbance. I had heard nothing of this before. The
person sent by us was Matthew Ernest. But I am well persuaded, that at this time
there was nothing insidious in any message; nor any thing intended against the
magazine.

Page 99. Vol. I. -- Torence Campbell informs me, that the resolves which I
diverted him from offering at Parkinson's ferry, respected only the removal of
the associate judges, and not of the president of the circuit; that they did
not contemplate the restoring the justices.

Page 18. Vol. II. -- In the trials, Holcroft denied on oath, that he knew who
Tom the Tinker was. He had only copied some of the papers which had been put up
on trees.

Page 20. Vol. II. On the trials it appeared, that the submission paper torn at
Mingo creek, was a false one, (...) save the true one from the violent.

Page 32. Vol. III. -- On the best calculation, by enquiries from officers of
the ^ilitia, about 2000 abandoned the country with rifles in their hands, on
the approach of the army. If even these had occupied the passes of the
mountains, they might have given trouble.

Page 25. Vol. III. -- The Mingo creek Society was instituted February 28th,
1794. It was to consist of Hamilton's battalion; and to be governed by a
president and council. The council to consist of members chosen every six
months, by the people of the several captain's districts; the electors of every
such district to be from 18 years and upwards; a council man to be of the age
of 25 years; and shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that district in
which he shall be chosen. The members of council not to exceed one for every
district; in the case of a vacancy, notice to issue of an election to fill such
vacancy. The society to have a treasurer, secretary, and other officers; and to
choose deputies to confer occasionally with deputies from other societies of the
like nature, that might be formed; a majority of the society to constitute a
quorum; but a minority to have the power to adjourn, and to compel the
attendance of the absent members; two thirds to have the power of expelling.
The society to meet the first day of every month; to keep a journal of its
proceedings; the secretary and deputies to be rewarded at the discretion of the
society; the president, council, and deputies, for any speech or debate in the
society, not to be questioned in any other place. No person holding an office
of trust or profit under the state, or United States, to be a president, etc.
The societies to have the laws of the United States, minutes of Congress,
assembly of Pennsylvania, necessary books, etc. to have power to recommend
capable persons to the several legislative bodies; to hear and determine all
matters in variance, and disputes between party and party; encourage teachers
of schools; introduce the Bible and religious books into schools; to encourage
the industrious, and the man of merit. No money to be drawn from the society,
but in consequence of appropriations made by law; no district citizen to sue,
or cause to be sued before a single justice of the peace, or any court of
justice, a citizen of the district, before applying to the society for redress,
unless the business will not admit of delay; the president not to be under 25
years, and to be elected by ballot; in case of vacancy of president, a
temporary one to be appointed by the council. The president and council men to
be removable from office on impeachment, and conviction of bribery, and high
crimes, and misdemeanors. Nothing in this constitution to be so construed, as
to prejudice any claims of the state, or United States. The constitution to be
amendable by a convention called for that purpose.

Remarks.
I REPRESENT Bradford and Marshall as brought forward, and urged by the people.
I mean in the early stage of the business. The affair of the mail, and of
Braddock's field, was their own act; but it was done with a view to cover what
had been done, by making the opposition formidable to the government. I had the
same idea also; but contemplated a different mode, which was mediating with the
government.

I have seen a gentleman from New-Orleans (Mr. Hollingsworth) who had conversed
with Bradford, who averred to him, that this had been his ultimate object; and
that James Marshall knew it to be so. He was asked then by this gentleman, why
it was that having obtained terms from the commissioners, for the people and
himself, he pronounced an inflammatory speech at Brownsville against the
accepting them. He acknowledged it was because he saw the fur^ of the people
against the accepting, and was afraid to have it t^ought that he was for
submitting. This proves what I have said; that he wanted fortitude, as well as
good sense.

Mr. Hollingsworth also mentioned at this time the circumstance of Bradford,
acknowledging that he had no confidential intimacy with me, by letter or
otherwise, in the course of the insurrection. I desired Mr. Hollingsworth to
give me a certificate of this, which he did by letter, and which I have
inserted. It was in the hurry of the court business at Pittsburgh, and I had
the opportunity of but a few seconds conversation with Mr. Hollingsworth, in
the few days that he detained at that place. James Ross and general Wilkins had
more, and I am informed by them since, that Mr. Hollingsworth mentioned to
them, that Bradford acknowledged to him, that shortly after my address to him
at Parkinson's ferry meeting, in the case of the exiles, Brison and others, he
discovered that I was managing him, and that though I suggested difficulties,
and abused the men, my real scope was to carry a resolution for their recall.
Mr. Hollingsworth had descended the river before I had the information, or I
would have requested him specially to have certified this, in the letter which
he had promised to leave for me. For it would support my statement of my
management of Bradford, and which otherwise some might think was more plausible
than true. But it is well known in the western country, that before this time,
I had managed him in the same manner, and prevailed with him to do what was
right, of which I could give many instances. Sometimes I have failed, even in a
point of honor and interest for himself, of which I could give one very
extraordinary example. -- It (...) ^n the knowledge of judge Addison.

The outrages on the revenue officers, in the insurrection, always struck me in
bulk, as, by the decisions of the judges of the English courts, amounting to
the crime of high treason. In the first trials of the prisoners at
Philadelphia, I understood this to be admitted by the council, and so directed
by the court. In the last trials at York, there was no pleading* and no
direction by the court. The evidence was submitted to the jury. But after the
close of the testimony in the last case, William Lewis, of counsel for the
prisoners, expressed himself to me, that on a view of all the facts, now fully
come out in evidence, he had no hesitation in asserting, that no treason had
been committed in the country; and that had an argument with the jury taken
place, he had been prepared to show this.

I have seen him since in Philadelphia, and he has expressed himself with
confidence to the same effect, and that on the trials of the indictment for
misdemeanors, which are laid, as in aid of this treason, he will be prepared to
contend, that no treason had been committed, in aid of which any thing could
have been done or said. If it should so appear, let it be considered that it
has been no object of my publication to discuss this question. Nor could I have
done it without having that testimony with the most perfect exactness, which
has been obtained in court. But I presume i^ a report of these trials, this
question will be discussed with advantage, from the argument of that very able
lawyer, and distinguished philanthopist, whose name I have taken the liberty of
introducing in this case. I have not mentioned his opinion of the homicide
committed by the inspector at the first attack upon his house, whether
justifiable, or in strictness of law, criminal; but with regard to this, he
expressed himself with the same confidence. This may come into view indirectly,
on the question of treason. All I choose to say in general is, that if the
inspector of the revenue had, in the first advance of the rioters to his house,
acted l^ss ^^stily, no farther outrage would have taken place; and I aver, that
on the second (...) had Kirkpatrick yielded with good policy, for the moment,
to what the mob requested, there would have been no in urrection; and I know
that any man then engaged in the outrages, would have yielded, when the fury
had subsided, to the civil authority of the country; and I am confident, that
this would have been competent to preserve the peace. After the country had
became generally involved in desperate acts, the civil authority would not have
been competent. I saw all this fully, when I gave my advice to Neville the
younger, to parry the tempest, by advising his father to surrender the paper,
which the mob had it in view to demand. I do not arrogate to myself a superior
judgment to these men; but my mind was cool, theirs was inflamed, and pride
opposed the acting judiciously.

Notwithstanding the instant, decisive, and humane interposition of general
Morgan in favor of my life, when his dragoons were within a few seconds of
dispatching me, yet he had no objection to the having me conducted out of this
troublesome world in a legal way. Some time in the winter succeeding the
insurrection, coming into Pittsburgh he communicated it as a profound secret,
that he was in possession of what would settle the business with me, a
treasonable correspondence with Daniel Hamilton. It is not possible, said the
person; I have the papers, said the general, in my possession.

The fact was, that a number of the refugees, or those who had absconded, at
the coming of the army, had returned, and surrendered themselves to him. His
reception of them was not barely civil, but hospitable; and it appeared to be a
leading object, to discover something from them against me. Daniel Hamilton who
was one of these, and frequently at his table, perceiving this wish of the
general, actually palmed upon him some papers, as my hand writing; but which on
being laid before the board at Pittsburgh, I presume were found not to be
genuine; and recollecting the foux pas, in the case of a letter addressed to
William Bradford, it was thought proper to bury the circumstance. Daniel
Hamilton, however, alarmed at the detection thought proper to abscond a second
time, and not return.

But let the motive have been what it might, I perfectly appreciate the conduct
of the general, in the case of the assassination meditated upon me; and I wish
it to have all the praise that humanity deserves.

It will be ^^^ed, What the use of marking these incidents? Merely to show the
avi^s (...) the scene, whether founded in mistake, or design.

Anecdotes.
At the trials of the indictments for the misdemeanor of attacking the
commissioners at Greensburgh, it came out in evidence, that the rioters had
been at first at a loss for a leader; no one wishing to take upon him so
ostensible, and, of consequence, so responsible a part; at length, a certain
Spangler came forward and accepted it. "I will undertake it," said he, "I have
nothing to lose."

A man in the western country, lately applied to me for advice in the case of a
surveyor, who wished to run a line within his survey on an adverse warrant. I
thought he might hinder him as a trespasser. "Ah!" said he, "but will not that
bring the militia upon us?" I relate this to show the prostrate state of the
public mind. Ignorance is arrogant on false appearances, and abject when
reduced.

Another instance of this nature I had last winter, when I had given an opinion
with regard to the eligibility of Neville the younger for the state
legislature, and which was, that he was ineligible, holding the office of
surveyor, etc. which, by the constitution, disqualified him. This opinion was
published. A friend of mine, a mechanic, came to me, "Oh!" said he, "you will
be ruined now. Cannot they make that out treason?" No, no, said I; I know what
is treason, and what is not. "It is well for you," said he, "that you do; for
our part that do not, we are afraid to say any thing." This is a proof that
licentiousness leads to the loss of liberty.

Of the Errata.
A Part of the preceding publication was transmitted to the Printer in my own
handwriting, which not being easily legible, errors have taken place; some
part of it was transmitted in the hand of a copyist, who, in copying, had made
mistakes, overlooked by me; so that it did not come correct to the press; some
errors may be supposed to have taken place there: Hence it is, that the
publication will be found with a number of errors, some affecting the grammar,
others the sense. Of these I remark the most material that have struck my eye
on revisal.

Vol. I.
p. 17. l. 9, from bottom, insert have before afforded. p. 21. l. 22. dele, we
did not. p. 22. l. 9. read Evalt for Gralt. p. 42. l. 25. actor for actors. p.
68. l. 28. yourselves for yourself. p. 72. l. 2, and 3. Aba Joseph, for A^a
Joseph. p. 73. l. 8. read on the head, for in the head. p. 77. l. 21. in the
garrison, for in the middle of the garrison. p. 78. l. 4. began for begun. l.
14. request undertook to sound, for request to sound. p. 92. l. 1. it did NOT
seem to do, for it did seem to do. p. 108. l. 8. from bottom, dele if. p. 109.
l. 28. murmur for rumor. p. 124 l. 9. from bottom, philanthropy for
philosophy.
Vol. II.
p. 14. l. 11. read applications for application. p. 26. l. 16. a for the. p.
29. l. 13. my for by. p. 34. l. 1. came for come. p. 55. l. 8. appeared for
appear. p. 60 and 61. troop for troops.
Vol. III.
p. 30. l* 11. from bottom, False ideas, for ideas. p. 41. Title of Appendix,
Law for Laws.
Note, It was at first intended to publish this work in three volumes, with an
appendix to each volume; hence the word Appendix, is put at the end of the
first volume, page 124. But this plan was relinquished, and it was judged best
to publish the whole in one volume.

FINIS.

