THE ART OF SPEAKING.

CONTAINING,

I. An ESSAY; in which are given Rules for expressing properly the principal
Passions and Humors, which occur in Reading, or public Speaking; and

II. LESSONS taken from the Ancients and Moderns (with Additions and
Alterations where thought useful) exhibiting a variety of Matter for Practice;
the emphatical Words printed in Italics; with Notes of Direction referring to
the ESSAY.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, A TABLE of the LESSONS, and an INDEX of the various
PASSIONS and HUMORS in the ESSAY and LESSONS.

Neque vero mihi quidquam praestabillus videtur, quam posse dicendo tenere
hominum coetus, ^entec allicere, volu^^^tes impeliere quo velit, unde autem
v^li: deducere.

CICERO. PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY THOMAS HALL, FOR JAMES WHITE, COURT STREET, AND
EBENEZER LARKIN, CORNHILL. MDCCXCV.

AN ESSAY ON THE ART OF SPEAKING.
THAT oratory is an art of great consequence, will hardly be questioned in our
times, unless it be by those (if any are so ignorant) who do not know, that it
has been taught, and studied, in all countries, where learning has gained any
ground, ever since the days of Aristotle. That the manner or address of a
speaker, is (...) the utmost importance, and that a just and pleasing manner in
delivering either one's own compositions, or those of others, is difficult of
acquisition, and but too much neglected among us, seems unquestionable from the
deficiencies we so commonly observe in the address of our public speakers, much
more than in the matter uttered by them, and from the little effect produced by
their labors.

Of the learning necessary for furnishing matter; and of the art of arranging
it properly; of invention, composition and style, various writers among the
Greeks, Romans, French, Italians, and English, have treated very copiously. It
is not my design to trouble the world with any thing on these branches of
oratory. I shall confine myself merely to what the prince of orators pronounced
to be the first, second, and third part, or all that is most important in the
art, viz. delivery, comprehending what every gentleman ought to be master of,
respecting gesture, looks, and command of voice.

What is true of most of the improvements, which are made by study, or culture,
is peculiarly so of the art of speaking. If there is not a foundation laid for
it in the earlier part of life, there is no reasonable ground of expectation,
that any great degree of skill in it should ever be attained. As it depends
upon, and consists in practice, more than theory (...) requires the earlier
initiation: that practice may (...) full scope, before the time of life
arrives, in which there may be occasion for public exhibition. Mankind must
speak from the beginning, therefore ought, from the beginning, to be taught to
speak rightly; else they may acquire a habit of speaking wrong. And whoever
knows the difficulty of breaking through bad habits, will avoid that labor by
prevention. There is a great difference between speaking and writing. Some, nay
most of mankind, are never to be writers. All are speakers. Young persons ought
not to be put upon writing (from their own funds, I mean) till they have
furnished their minds with thoughts, that is, till they have gotten funds: but
they cannot be kept from speaking.

Suppose a youth to have no prospect either of sitting in parliament, of
pleading at the bar, of appearing upon the stage, or in the pulpit; does it
follow, that he need bestow no pains in learning to speak properly his native
language? Will he never have occasion to read, in a company of his friends, a
copy of verses, a passage of a book, or newspaper? Must he never read a
discourse of Tillotson, or a chapter of the Whole Duty of Man, for the
instruction of his children and servants? Cicero justly observes, that address
in speaking is highly ornamental, as well as useful, even in private life Cic.
de ORAT. L. i. p. 83.
The limbs are parts of the body much less noble than the tongue. Yet no
gentleman grudges a considerable expense of time and money to have his son
taught to use them properly. Which is very commendable. And is there no
attention to be paid to the use of the tongue, the glory of man? Supposing a
person to be ever so sincere and zealous a lover of virtue, and of his country;
without a competent skill and address in speaking, he can only sit still, and
see them wronged, without having it in his power to prevent, or redress the
evil. Let an artful and eloquent statesman harangue the house of commons upon a
point of the utmost consequence to the public good. He has it greatly in his
power to mislead the judgment of the house. And he, who sees through the
delusion, if he be awkward in delivering himself, can do nothing toward
preventing the ruinous schemes, proposed by the other, from being carried into
execution, but give his single vote against them, without so much as explaining
to the house his reasons for doing so. The case is the same in other smaller
assemblies and meetings, in which volubility of tongue, and steadiness of
countenance, often carry it against solid reasons, and important considerations.

To offer a help toward the improvement of youth in the useful and ornamental
accomplishment of speaking properly their mother tongue, is the design of this
publication; to set about which I have been the more excited by experiencing,
in my own practice, a want of such a collection as the following. What I
proposed to myself at first, was only to put together a competent variety of
passages out of some of the best writers in prose and verse, for exercising
youth in adapting their general manner of delivery to the spirit or humor of
the various matter they may have occasion to pronounce. Such a collection, I
thought, might be acceptable to the public, in consideration of its furnishing
at an easy expense, a general variety of examples for practice, chosen and
pointed out, without trouble to masters. A design, which as far as I know, has
not before been executed. The PRECEPTOR, a work in two volumes, 8vo. has some
lessons for practice; but not the variety of humors or passions, which my
design takes in; nor the notes of direction for expressing them properly,
Besides that the PRECEPTOR is a book of price, and fitter for the rea^^^'s use,
than the pupil's; so that I do not think it answers the purpose I had in view
in this publication. If it did, I should have used it. Otherwise I think it an
useful book, and am glad to find that it well received.
On farther consideration, it occurred to me, that it might render such a
publication more useful, if I prefixed some general observations on the method
of teaching pronunciation, and put the emphetical words in italics, and
marginal notes showing the various humors or passions, in the several
examples, as they change from one to another, in the course of the speeches.
All masters of places of education are not, I fear, sufficiently aware of the
extent of this part of their duty; nor of the number of particulars to be
attended to, which render it so difficult to bring a young person to deliver in
a completely proper manner, a speech containing a considerable variety of
different humors or passions. So that some masters, as well as all pupils, may
find their account in using this collection, till a better be published.

Whoever imagines the English tongue unfit for oratory, has not a just notion
of it. That, by reason of the disproportion between its vowels and consonants,
it is not quite so tractable as the Italian, and consequently, not so easily
applied to amorous, or to plaintive music, is not denied. But it goes better to
martial music, than the Italian. And in oratory and poetry, there is no tongue,
ancient, or modern, capable of expressing a greater variety of humors, or
passions, by its sounds (I am not speaking of its copiousness, as to
phraseology) than the English. The Greek, among the ancient, and the Turkish
and Spanish, among the modern languages, have a loftier sound, though the
gutturals in them, of which the English is free (for it is probable, that the
ancient Greeks pronounced the letter ch gutturally) are, to most ears,
disagreeable. But there is not in those languages, the variety of sound which
the English affords. They never quit their stiff pomp, which, on some
occasions, is unnatural. Nor is there, as far as I know, any language more
copious, than the English; an eminent advantage for oratory. And if we must
fall out with our mother tongue, on account of some hard and un-liquid
syllables in it, how shall we bear the celebrated Roman language itself, in
every sentence of which we find such sounds as tot, quot, sub, ad, sed, est,
ut, et, nec, id, at, it, sit, sunt, dant, det, dent, dabat, dabant, daret,
darent, hic, haec, hoc, fit, fuit, erat, erunt, fert, duc, fac, dic, and so on.

It is greatly to our shame, that, while we do so little for the improvement of
our language, and of our manner of speaking it in public, the French should
take so much pains in both these respects, though their language is very much
inferior to ours, both as to emphasis and copiousness.

It is true, there is not now the same secular demand for eloquence, as under
the popular governments of ancient times, when twenty talents (several
thousands of pounds) was the fee for one speech; Pliny says, Isocrates was paid
that sum for one oration.
when the tongue of an orator could do more than the scepter of a monarch, or
the sword of a warrior; and when superior skill in the art of haranguing was
the certain means for elevating him, who possessed it, to the highest honors
in the state. Even in our own country, this is partly the case; for the
instances of bad speakers rising to eminent stations in the government, are
rare. But it must be owned, our politics now turn upon other hinges, than in
the time when Greek and Roman eloquence flourished. Nor are we, accordingly,
like to bestow the pains which they did, for consummating ourselves in the art
of speaking. We shall hardly, in our ages, hear of a person's shutting himself
up for many months in a cell under ground, to study and practice elocution
uninterrupted; or declaiming on the seashore, to accustom himself to harangue
an enraged multitude without fear; or under the points of drawn swords fixed
over his shoulders, to cure himself of a bad habit of shrugging them up; which
with other particulars, are the labors recorded to have been undertaken by
Demosthenes, in order to perfect himself, in spite of his natural
disadvantages, of which he had many in the art of elocution. What is to be
gained by skill in the art of speaking may not now be sufficient to reward the
indefatigable diligence used by a Demosthenes, a Pericles, an Aeschines, a
Demetrius Phalereus, an Isocrates, a Carbo, a Cicero, a M. Antony, an
Hortensius, a Julius, an Augustus, and the rest. Yet it is still of important
advantage for all that part of youth, whose station places them within the
reach of a polite education, to be qualified for acquitting themselves with
reputation, when called to speak in public. In parliament, at the bar, in the
pulpit, at meetings of merchants, in committees for managing public affairs, in
large societies, and on such like occasions, a competent address and readiness,
not only in finding matter, but in expressing and urging it effectually, is
what, I doubt not, many a gentleman would willingly acquire, at the expense of
half his other improvements.

The reader will naturally reflect here upon one important use for good
speaking, which was unknown to the ancients, viz. for the ministerial function.
I therefore have said above, page 7, that we have not the same secular demand
for elocution, as the ancients; meaning, by reservation, that we have a moral,
or spiritual use for it, which they had not.

And no small matter of grief it is to think, that, of the three learned
professions, real merit is there the most ineffectual toward raising its
possessor, where it ought to be most; which must greatly damp emulation and
diligence. An able physician, or lawyer, hardly fails of success in life. But a
clergyman may unite the learning of a Cudworth with the eloquence of a
Tillotson, and the delivery of an Atterbury: but, if he cannot make out a
connection with some great man, and it is too well known by what means they are
most commonly gained; he must content himself to be buried in a country curacy,
or vicarage at most, for life.

If nature unassisted could form the eminent speaker, where were the use of art
or culture; which yet no one pretends to question? Art is but nature improved
upon and refined. And before improvement is applied, genius is but a mass of
ore in the mine, without luster, and without value, because unknown and
unthought of. The ancients used to procure for their youth, masters of
pronunciation from the theaters Quint. C. x.
and had them taught gesture and attitude by the palaestritae. These last
taught what is, among us, done by the dancing master. And, as to the former, no
man ought to presume to set himself at the head of a place of education, who is
not in some degree capable of teaching pronunciation. However, I could wish,
that gentlemen, who have made themselves perfect masters of pronunciation and
delivery, would undertake to teach this branch at places of education, in the
same manner as masters of music, drawing, dancing, and fencing, are used to do.

It is well when a youth has no natural defect or impediment, in his speech.
And, I should by no means, advise, that he, who has, be brought up to a
profession requiring elocution. But there are instances enough of natural
defects surmounted, and eminent speakers formed by indefatigable diligence in
spite of them. Demosthenes could not, when he began to study rhetoric,
pronounce the first letter of the name of his art. And Cicero was long necked,
and narrow-chested. But diligent and faithful labor, in what one is in earnest
about, surmounts all difficulties. Yet we are commonly enough disgusted by
public speakers lisping, and stammering, and speaking through the nose, and
pronouncing the letter R with the throat, instead of the tongue, and the letter
S like Th, and screaming above, or croaking below all natural pitch of human
voice; some mumbling, as if they were conjuring up spirits; others bawling, as
loud as the vociferous vendors of provisions in London streets; some tumbling
out the words so precipitately, that no ear can catch them; others dragging
them out so slowly, that it is as tedious to listen to them, as to count a
great clock; some have got a habit of shrugging up their shoulders; others of
see-sawing with their bodies, some backward and forward, others from side to
side; some raise their eyebrows at every third word; some open their mouths
frightfully; others keep their teeth so close together, that one would think
their jaws were set; some shrivel all their features together into the middle
of their faces; some push out their lips, as if they were mocking the audience;
others hem at every pause; and others smack with their lips, and roll their
tongues about in their mouths, as if they labored under a continual thirst.
All which bad habits they ought to have been broken of in early youth, or put
into ways of life, in which they would have, at least, offended fewer persons.

It is through neglect in the early part of life, and bad habits taking place,
that there is not a public speaker among twenty, who knows what to do with his
eyes. To see the venerable man, who is to be the mouth of a whole people
confessing their offenses to their Creator and Judge, bring out these awful
words, "Almighty and most merciful Father," etc. with his eyes over his
shoulder, to see who is just gone into the pew at his elbow; to observe this,
one would imagine there was an absolute want of all feeling of devotion. But it
may be, all the while, owing to nothing but awkwardness; and the good man looks
about him the whole time he is going on with the service, merely to keep
himself in countenance, not knowing, else, where to put his eyes.

Even the players, who excel, beyond comparison, all other speakers in this
country, in what regards decorum, are, some of them, often guilty of monstrous
improprieties as to the management of their eyes. To direct them full at the
audience, when they are speaking a soliloquy, or an aside-speech, is
unsufferable. For they ought not to seem so much as to think of an audience, or
of any person's looking upon them, at any time, especially on those occasions;
those speeches being only thinking aloud, and expressing what the actor should
be supposed to wish concealed. Nor do they always keep their eyes fixed upon
those they speak to, even in impassioned dialogue. Whether it is from
heedlessness, or that they are more out of countenance by looking one another
steadfastly in the face, I know not; but they do often ramble about with their
eyes in a very unmeaning and unnatural manner.

A natural genius for delivery supposes an ear; though it does not always
suppose a musical Yet Quintilian would have his orator by all me^ study music,
C. viii.
ear. I never heard poetry, particularly that of Milton, better spoken, than by
a gentleman, who yet had so little discernment in music, that he has often told
me, the grinding of knives entertained him as much as Handel's organ.

As soon as a child can read, without spelling, the words in a common English
book, as the SPECTATOR, he ought to be taught the use of the stops, and
accustomed, from the beginning, to pay the same regard to them as to the words.
The common rule, for holding them out to their just length, is too exact for
practice, viz. that a comma, is to hold the length of a syllable, a semicolon,
of two, a colon of three, and a period of four. In some cases, there is no stop
to be made at a comma, as they are often put merely to render the sense clear;
as those, which, by Mr. Ward, and many other learned editors of books, are put
before every relative. It likewise often happens, that the strain of the matter
shows a propriety, or beauty, in holding the pause beyond the proper length of
the stop; particularly when any thing remarkably striking has been uttered; by
which means the hearers have time to ruminate upon it, before the matter, which
follows can put it out of their thoughts. Of this, instances will occur in the
following lessons.

Young readers are apt to get into a rehearsing kind of ^notony; of which it is
very difficult to break them. Monotony is holding one uniform humming sound
through the whole discourse, without rising or falling. Cant, is, in speaking,
as psalmody and ballad in music, a strain consisting of a few notes rising and
falling without variation, like a peal of bells, let the matter change how it
will. The chaunt with which the prose psalms are half-sung, half-said, in
cathedrals, is the same kind of absurdity. All these are unnatural, because the
continu^lly varying strain of the matter necessarily requires a continually
varying series of sounds to express it. Whereas chaunting in cathedrals,
psalmody in parish-churches, ballad music put to a number of verses, differing
in thoughts and images, and cant, or monotony, in expressing the various matter
of a discourse, do not in the least humor the matters they applied to; but on
the contrary, confound it. See S^^^TATON. NO. ^8.


Young people must be taught to let their voice fall at the ends of sentences;
and to read without any particular whi^ cant, or draw^, and with the natural
inflections of vo^, which they use in speaking. For, reading is nothing but
speaking what one sees in a book, as if he were expressing his own sentiments,
as they rise in his mind. And no person ^s well, till he comes to speak what he
sees in the book before him in the same natural manner as he speaks the
thoughts, which arise in his own mind. And hence it is, that no one can read
properly what he does not understand. Which lea^ is me to observe, that there
are many books much fitter for improving children in reading, than most parts
of scripture, especially of the Old Testament. Because the words of our English
Bible are, many of them, absolete: the phraseology, as of all bare
translations, stiff, the subjects not familiar to young persons, and the
characters grave and forbidding. Fables and tales, founded upon good morals,
and select parts of history and biography, and familiar dialogues, are more
pleasing and suitable to children under seven and eight years of age. And such
familiar reading, as co^ing near to their own chat, is most likely to keep them
from, or cure them of a can^ing, whining, drawling, or u^-animated manner.

They must be taught, that, in questions, the voice is often to rise toward
the end of the sentence, contrary to the manner of pronouncing most other sorts
of matter; because the emphatical word, or that, upon which the stress of the
question lies, is often the lust in the sentence. Example. "Can any good come
out of Nazareth?" Here the emphatical word is Nazareth; therefore the word
Nazareth is to be pronounced in a higher note than any part of the sentence.
But in pronouncing the following, "By what authority do thou these things;
and who gave thee this authority?" the emphatical words are authority and who:
because what the Jews asked our Savior was, by what power or authority, he did
his wonderful works; and how he came by that power. And in all questions, the
emphasis must, according to the intention of the speaker, be put upon that word
which signifies the point, about which he inquires. Example. "Is it true that
you have seen a noble lord from court today, who has told you bad news?" If
the inquirer wants only to know, whether myself, or some other person, has seen
the supposed great man; he will put the emphasis upon you. If he knows, that I
have seen somebody from court, and only wants to know, whether I have seen a
great man, who may be supposed to know what inferior persons about the court do
not, he will put the emphasis upon noble lord. If he wants to know, only
whether the great man came directly from court, so that his intelligence may be
depended upon, he will put the emphasis upon court. If he wants only to know,
whether I have (...) scen^ today, or yesterday, he will put the (...) upon to
day If he knows, that I have seen a great man from court, today, and only
wants to know, whether he has told me any news, he will put the emphasis upon
news. If he knows all the rest, and wants only to know, whether the news I
heard was bad, he will put the emphasis upon the word bad.

The matter contained in a parenthesis, or between commas instead of a
parenthesis, which authors and editors often use, and between brackets, [] is
to be pronounced with a lower voice, and quicker than the rest, and with a
short stop at the beginning and end; that the hearer may perceive where the
strain of the discourse breaks off, and where it is resumed; as, "When,
therefore, the Lord knew, that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made, and
baptized more disciples than John (though Jesus himself did not baptize, but
his disciples) he departed from Judea, and returned to Gallilee." John iv. 1,
2, 3.


A youth should not only be accustomed to read to the master, while the general
business of the school is going on, so that none, but the master, and those of
his own class, can hear him; but likewise to read, or speak, by himself, while
all the rest hear. This will give him courage, and accustom him to pronounce
distinctly, so that every syllable shall be heard (though not every syllable
alike loud, and with the same emphasis) through the whole room. For it is one
part of the judgment of a public speaker, to accommodate his voice to the
place, he speaks in, in such a manner as to fill it, and, at the same time, not
stun the hearers. It is matter of no small difficulty to bring young readers to
speak slow enough. There is little danger of their speaking too slow. Though
that is a fault as well as the contrary. For the hearers cannot but be
disgusted and tired with listening much longer than is necessary, and losing
precious time.

In every sentence, there is some word, perhaps several, which are to be
pronounced with a stronger accent, or emphasis, than the others. Time was, when
the emphatical word, or words, in every sentence, were printed in Italics. And
a great advantage it was toward understanding the sense of the author,
especially, where there was a thread of reasoning carried on. But we are now
grown so nice, that we have found, the inter-mixture of two characters deforms
the page, and gives it a speckled appearance. As if it were not of infinitely
more consequence to make sure of edifying the reader, than of pleasing his eye.
But to return to emphasis, there is nothing more pedantic than too much laid
upon trifling matter. Men of learning, especially physicians, and divines, are
apt to get into a fulsome, bombastic way of uttering themselves on all
occasions, as if they were dictating, when perhaps the business is of no
greater consequence, than What Is a clock? Or how is the wind?
Whose coach is ^ha^ we have left behind?
SWIFT.

Nor can an error be more ridiculous, than some that have been occasioned by an
emphasis placed wrong. Such was that of a clergyman's curate, who having
occasion to read in the church our Savior's saying to the disciples, Luke
xxiv. 25. "O fools and slow of heart" [that is, backward] "to believe all that
the prophets have written concerning me!" placed the emphasis upon the word
believe; as if Christ had called them ^ols for believing. Upon the rector's
finding fault; when he read it next he placed the emphasis upon all; as if it
had been foolish in the disciples to believe all. The rector again blaming this
manner of placing the emphasis, the good curate accented the word prophets. As
if the prophets had been persons in no respect worthy of belief.

A total want of energy in expressing pathetic language is equally blameable. I
have often been amazed how public speakers could bring out the strong and
pathetic expressions, they have occasion to utter, in so cold and un-animated a
manner. I happened lately to hear the tenth chapter of Joshua read in a church
in the country. It contains the history of the miraculous conquest of the five
kings, who arose against the people of Israel. The clergyman bears a very good
character in the neighborhood. I was therefore grieved to hear him read so
striking a piece of scripture-history in a manner so un-animated, that it was
fit to lull the whole parish to sleep. Particularly I shall never forget his
manner of expressing the twenty second verse, which is the Jewish general's
order to bring out the captive kings to slaughter. "Open the mouth of the cave,
and bring out those five kings to me out of the cave;" which he uttered in the
very manner he would have expressed himself, if he had said to his boy, "Open
my chamber door and bring me my slippers from under the bed."

CICERO De Orat. L. III. p. 144. Tom. I. "H^abeat tamen illa in dicendo," etc.
very judiciously directs, that a public speaker remit, from time to time,
somewhat of the vehemence of his action, and not utter every passage with all
the force he can; to set off, the more strongly, the more emphatical parts; as
the painters, by means of shades properly placed, make the figures stand off
bolder. For if the speaker has uttered a weaker passage with all the energy he
is master of, what is he to do, when he comes to the most pathetic parts?

The ease, with which a speaker goes through a long discourse, and his success
with his audience, depend much upon his setting out in a proper key, The word
key (taken from music) means that note, in the scale, which is the lowest of
those that are used in a particular piece, and to which the others refer; and
has nothing to do with loudness, or softness. For a piece of music may be sung
or played louder or softer, whatever its key is.
and at a due pitch of loudness. If he begins in too high a tone or sets out
too loud, how is he afterward to rise to a higher note, or swell his voice
louder, as the more pathetic strains may require? The command of the voice,
therefore, in this respect, is to be studied very early.

The force or pathos, with which a speech is to be delivered, is to increase as
the speech goes on. The speaker is to grow warm by degrees, as the chariot
wheel by its continued motion; "Quid insuavius, etc. What is more offensive to
the ear, than for a pleader to open his cause in a boisterous manner." A^CT. AD
HEREN. L. III. N. XII.
not to begin in a pathetic strain; because the audience are not prepared to go
along with him.

False and provincial accents are to be guarded against, or corrected. The
manner of pronouncing, which is usual among people of education, who are
natives of the metropolis, is, in every country, the standard. For what Horace
"Quem penes arbitrium est, et jus et norma loquendi." HOR. ART PORT.
says, of the choice of words, viz. that the people, by their practice,
establish what is right, is equally true of the pronunciation of them.

Nature has given to every emotion of the mind its proper outward expression,
in such a manner, that what suits one, cannot by any means be accommodated to
another. Children at three years of age express their grief in a tone of voice,
and with an action totally different from that, which they use to express their
anger; and they utter their joy in a manner different from both. Nor do they
ever, by mistake, apply one in place of another. From hence, that is, from
nature, is to be deduced the whole art of speaking properly. What we mean, does
not so much depend upon the words we speak, as on our manner of speaking them;
and accordingly, in life, the greatest attention is paid to this, as expressive
of what our words often give no indication of. Thus nature fixes the outward
expression of every intention or sentiment of the mind.

Art only adds gracefulness to what nature leads to. As nature has determined
that man shall walk on his feet, not his hands: Art teaches him to walk
gracefully.

Every part of the human frame contributes to express the passions and emotions
of the mind, and to show in general its present state. The head is sometimes
erected, sometimes hung down, sometimes drawn suddenly back with an air of
disdain, sometimes shows by a nod, a particular person, or object; gives
assent, or denial, by different motions; threatens by one sort of movement,
approves, by another, and expresses suspicion by a third.

The arms are sometimes both thrown out, sometimes the right alone. Sometimes
they are lifted up as high as the face, to express wonder, sometimes held out
before the breast, to show fear; spread forth with the hands open, to express
desire or affection; the hands clapped in surprise, and in sudden joy and
grief; the right hand clenched, and the arms brandished, to threaten; the two
arms set a-kimbo, to look big, and express contempt or courage. With the hands,
as Quintilian INST. ORAT. p. 455. "Annon his poscimus," etc.
says we solicit, we refuse, we promise, we threaten, we dismiss, we invite, we
entreat, we express aversion, fear, doubting, denial, asking, affirmation,
negation, joy, grief, confession, penitence. With the hands we describe and
point out all circumstances of time, place, and manner of what we relate; we
excite the passions of others, and sooth them, we approve and disapprove,
permit, or prohibit, admire or despise. The hands serve us instead of many
sorts of words, and where the language of the tongue is unknown, that of the
hands is understood, being universal, and common to all nations.

The legs advance, or retreat, to express desire, or aversion, love, or hatred,
courage, or fear, and produce exultation, or leaping in sudden joy; and the
stamping of the foot expresses earnestness, anger, and threatening.

Especially the face, being furnished with a variety of muscles, does more in
expressing the passions of the mind, than the whole human frame besides. The
change of color (in white people) shows, by turns, anger by redness, and
sometimes by paleness, fear likewise by paleness, and shame by blushing. Every
feature contributes its part. The mouth open, shows one state of the mind,
shut, another; the gnashing of the teeth, another. The forehead smooth, and
eyebrows arched and easy, show tranquillity or joy. Mirth opens the mouth
toward the ears, crisps the nose, half-shuts the eyes, and sometimes fills
them with tears. The front wrinkled into frowns, and the eyebrows over-hanging
the eyes, like clouds, fraught with tempest, show a mind agitated with fury.
Above all, the eye shows the very spirit in a visible form. In every different
state of the mind, it assumes a different appearance. Joy brightens and opens
it. Grief halfcloses, and drowns it in tears. Hatred and anger, flash from it
like lightning. Love, darts from it in glances, like the orient beam. Jealousy
and squinting envy, dart their contagious blasts from the eye. And devotion
raises it to the skies, as if the soul of the holy man were going to take its
flight to heaven.

The ancients AUCT. AD HEREN. L. III. N. XV. Quintil. INST, ORAT. p. 457.
used some gestures which are unknown to us, as, to express grief, and other
violent emotions of the mind, they used to strike their knees with the palms of
their hands.

The force of attitude and looks alone appears in a wonderously striking
manner, in the works of the painter and statuary; who have the delicate art of
making the flat canvas and rocky marble utter every passion of the human mind,
and touch the soul of the spectator, as if the picture, or statue, spoke the
pathetic language of Shakespeare. It is no wonder, then, that masterly action,
joined with powerful elocution, should be irresistible. And the variety of
expression by looks and gestures, is so great, that, as is well known, a whole
play can be represented without a word spoken.

The following are, I believe, the principal passions, humors, sentiments, and
intentions, which are to be expressed by speech and action. And I hope, it will
be allowed by the reader, that it is nearly in the following manner, that
nature expresses them.

Tranquillity, or apathy, appears by the composure of the countenance, and
general repose of the body and limbs, without the exertion of any one muscle.
The countenance open; the forehead smooth; the eyebrows arched; the mouth just
not shut; and the eyes passing with an easy motion from object to object, but
not dwelling long upon any one.

Cheerfulness adds a smile, opening the mouth a little more. Mirth or laughter,
opens the mouth still more toward the ears; crisps the nose; lessens the
aperture of the eyes, and sometimes fills them with tears; shakes and convulses
the whole frame; giving considerable pain, which occasions holding the sides.

Raillery, in sport, without real animosity, puts on the aspect of
cheerfulness. The tone of voice is sprightly. With contempt, or disgust, it
casts a look a-squint, from time to time, at the object; and quits the cheerful
aspect for one mixed between an affected grin and sourness. The upper lip is
drawn up with an air of disdain. The arms are set a-kimbo on the hips; and the
right hand now and then thrown out toward the object, as if one were going to
strike another a slight back-hand blow. The pitch of the voice rather loud, the
tone arch and sneering, the sentences short; the expressions satirical, with
mock praise intermixed. There are instances of raillery in scripture itself, as
1 Kings xviii. and Isa. xliv. And the excellent Tillotson has not scrupled to
indulge a strain of that sort now and then, especially in exposing the mock
solemnities of that most ludicrous (as well as odious) of all religions,
popery. Nor should I think raillery unworthy the attention of the lawyer; as it
may occasionally come in, not unusefully, in his pleadings, as well as any
other stroke of ornament, or entertainment -- ridie^lunt acri
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque sceat res.
HOR.
.

Buffoonery assumes an arch, sly, leering gravity. Must not quit its serious
aspect, though all should laugh to burst ribs of steel. This command of face is
somewhat difficult; though not so hard, I should think, as to restrain the
contrary sympathy, I mean of weeping with those who weep.

Joy, when sudden and violent, expresses itself by clapping of hands, and
exultation, or leaping. The eyes are opened wide; perhaps filled with tears;
often raised to heaven, especially by devout persons The countenance is
smiling, not composedly, but with features aggravated. The voice rises, from
time to time, to very high notes.

Delight, or pleasure, as when one is entertained, or ravished with music,
painting, oratory, or any such elegancy, shows itself by the looks, gestures,
and utterance of joy; but moderated.

Gravity, or seriousness, the mind fixed upon some important subject, draws
down the eyebrows a little; casts down or shuts, or raises the eyes to heaven;
shuts the mouth and pinches the lips close. The posture of the body and limbs
is composed, and without much motion. The speech, if any, slow and solemn; the
tone unvarying.

Enquiry into an obscure subject, fixes the body in one posture, the head
stooping, and the eye poring, the eyebrows drawn down.

Attention to an esteemed, or superior character, has the same aspect; and
requires silence; the eyes often cast down upon the ground; sometimes fixed on
the face of the speaker; but not too pertly.

Modesty, or submission, bends the body forward; levels the eyes to the breast,
if not to the feet, of the superior character. The voice low; the tone
submissive; and words few.

Perplexity, or anxiety, which is always attended with some degree of fear and
uneasiness, draws all the parts of the body together; gathers up the arms upon
the breast, unless one hand covers the eyes, or rubs the forehead; draws down
the eyebrows; hangs the head upon the breast; casts down the eyes, shuts and
pinches the eyelids close; shuts the mouth, and pinches the lips close, or
bites them.

Suddenly the whole body is vehemently agitated. The person walks about busily;
stops abruptly. Then he talks to himself, or makes grimaces. If he speaks to
another, his pauses are very long; the tone of his voice unvarying, and his
sentences broken, expressing half, and keeping in half of what arises in his
mind.

Vexation, occasioned by some real or imaginary misfortune, agitates the whole
frame, and, besides expressing itself with the looks, gestures, restlessness,
and tone of perplexity, it adds complaint, freting, and lamenting.

Pity, a mixed passion of love and grief, looks down upon distress with lifted
hands; eyebrows drawn down; mouth open; and features drawn together. Its
expression, as to looks, and gesture, is the same with those of suffering, (see
suffering) but more moderate, as the painful feelings are only sympathetic, and
therefore one remove as it were more distant from the soul than what one feels
in his own person.

Grief, sudden, and violent, expresses itself by beating the head; grovelling on
the ground, tearing of garments, hair, and flesh; screaming aloud, weeping,
stamping with the feet, lifting the eyes, from time to time, to heaven;
hurrying to and fro, running distracted, or fainting away, sometimes without
recovery. Sometimes violent grief produces a torpid sullen silence, resembling
total apathy. Curae leves loquuntur; ingentes stupent. Seneca HIPP.


Melancholy, or fixed grief is gloomy, sedentary, motionless. The lower jaw
falls; the lips pale, the eyes are cast down, half-shut, eyelids swelled and
red, or livid, tears trickling silent, and unwiped; with a total inattention to
every thing that passes. Words, if any, few, and those dragged out, rather than
spoken; the accents weak, and interrupted sigh^ breaking into the middle of
sentences and words.

Despair, as in a condemned criminal, or one who has lost all hope of
salvation, bends the eyebrows downward; clouds the forehead; rolls the eyes
around frightfully; opens the mouth toward the ears; bites the lips; widens the
nostrils; gnashes with the teeth, like a fierce wild beast. The heart is too
much hardened to suffer tears to flow; yet the eye balls will be red and
inflamed, like those of an animal in a rabid state. The head is hung down upon
the breast. The arms are bended at the elbows, the fists clenched hard: the
veins and muscles swelled; the skin livid; and the whole body strained and
violently agitated; groans, expressive of inward torture, more frequently
uttered than words. If any words, they are few, and expressed with a sullen,
eager bitterness; the tone of voice often loud and furious. As it often drives
people to distraction, and self-murder, it can hardly be over-acted by one, who
would represent it.

Fear, violent and sudden, opens very wide the eyes and mouth; shortens the
nose; draws down the eyebrows; gives the countenance an air of wildness; covers
it with deadly paleness; draws back the elbows parallel with the sides; lifts
up the open hands, the fingers together, to the height of the breast, so that
the palms face the dreadful object, as shields opposed against it. One foot is
drawn back behind the other, so that the body seems shrinking from the danger,
and putting itself in a posture for flight. The heart beats violently; the
breath is fetched quick and short; the whole body is thrown in a general
tremor. The voice is weak and trembling; the sentences are short, and the
meaning confused and incoherent. Imminent danger, real, or fancied, produces,
in timorous persons, as women and children, violent shrieks, without any
articulate sound of words; and sometimes irrecoverably confounds the
understanding; produces fainting, which is sometimes followed by death.

Shame, or a sense of one's appearing to a disadvantage, before one's
fellow creatures, turns away the face from the beholders; covers it with
blushes; hangs the head; casts down the eyes; draws down the eyebrows; either
strikes the person dumb, or, if he attempts to say any thing in his own
defense, causes his tongue to falter, and confounds his utterance; and puts him
upon making a thousand gestures and grimaces, to keep himself in countenance;
all which only heighten the confusion of his appearance.

Remorse, or a painful sense of guilt, casts down the countenance, and clouds
it with anxiety; hangs down the head, draws the eyebrows down upon the eyes.
The right hand beats the breast. The teeth gnash with anguish. The whole body
is strained and violently agitated. If this strong remorse is succeeded by the
more gracious disposition of penitence or contrition; then the eyes are raised
(but with great appearance of doubting and fear) to the throne of heavenly
mercy; and immediately cast down again to the earth. Then floods of tears are
seen to flow. The ^nees are bended; or the body prostrated on the ground. The
arms are spread in a suppliant posture, and the voice of deprecation is uttered
with sighs, groans, timidity, hesitation, and trembling.

Courage, steady, and cool, opens the countenance, gives the whole form an
erect and graceful air. The accents are strong, full mouthed and articulate,
the voice firm and even.

Boasting or affected courage, is loud, blustering, threatening. The eyes
stare; the eyebrows drawn down; the face is red and bloated; the mouth pouts
out; the voice hollow and thundering; the arms are set a-kimbo; the head often
nodding in a menacing manner; and the right fist clenched, is brandished, from
time to time, at the person threatened. The right foot is often stamped upon
the ground, and the legs take such large stri^^s, and the steps are so heavy,
that the earth seems to tremble under them.

Pride assumes a lofty look, bordering upon the aspect and attitude of anger.
The eyes open, but with the eyebrows considerably drawn down; the mouth pouting
out; mostly shut, and the lips pinched close. The words walk out a-strut, with
a slow, stiff, bombastic affection of importance. The arms generally a-kimbo,
and the legs at a distance from one another, taking large tragedy-strides.

Obstinacy adds to the aspect of pride, a dogged sourness, like that of malice.
See Malice.

Authority opens the countenance; but draws down the eyebrows a little, so far
as to give the look of gravity. See Gravity.

Commanding requires an air a little more peremptory, with a look a little
severe or stern. The hand is held out, and moved toward the person, to whom the
order is given, with the palm upwards, and the head nods toward him.

Forbidding, on the contrary, draws the head backward, and pushes the hand from
one with the palm downward, as if going to lay it upon the person, to hold him
down immovable, that he may not do what is forbidden him.

Affirming, especially with a judicial oath, is expressed by lifting the open
right hand, and eyes, toward heaven; or, if conscience is appealed to, by
laying the right hand upon the breast.

Denying is expressed by pushing the open right hand from one; and turning the
face the contrary way. See Aversion.

Differing in sentiment, may be expressed as refusing. See Refusing.

Agreeing in opinion, or conviction, as granting. See Granting.

Exhorting, as by a general at the head of his army, requires a kind,
complacent look; unless matter of offense has passed, as neglect of duty, or
the like.

Judging demands a grave, steady look, with deep attention; the countenance
altogether clear from any appearance of either disgust or favor. The accents
slow, distinct, emphatical, accompanied with little action, and that very grave.

Reproving, puts on a stern aspect, roughens the voice, and is accompanied with
gestures not much different from those of threatening, but not so lively.

Acquitting is performed with a benevolent, tranquil countenance, and tone of
voice; the right hand, if not both, open waved gently toward the person
acquitted, expressing dismission. (See dismissing.)

Condemning assumes a severe look, but mixed with pity The sentence is to be
expressed as with reluctance.

Teaching, explaining, inculcating, or giving orders to an inferior, requires
an air of superiority to be assumed. The features are to be composed to an
authoritative gravity. The eye steady, and open, the eyebrow a little drawn
down over it; but not so much as to look surly or dogmatical.

The tone of voice varying according as the emphasis requires, of which a good
deal is necessary in expressing matter of this sort. The pitch of voice to be
strong and clear; the articulation distinct; the utterance slow; and the manner
peremptory. This is the proper manner of pronouncing the commandments in the
communion office. But (I am sorry to say it) they are too commonly spoken in
the same manner as the prayers, than which nothing can be more unnatural.

Pardoning differs from acquitting, in that the latter means clearing a person
after trial of guilt; whereas the former supposes guilt, and signifies merely
delivering the guilty person from punishment. Pardoning requires some degree of
severity of aspect and tone of voice, because the pardoned person is not an
object of entire unmixed approbation; otherwise its expression is much the same
as granting. See Granting.

Arguing requires a cool, sedate, attentive aspect, and a clear, slow,
emphatical accent, with much demonstration by the hand. It differs from
teaching (see Teaching) in that the look of authority is not wanting in arguing.

Dismissing, with approbation, is done with a kind aspect and tone of voice;
the right hand open, gently waved toward the person: with displeasure, besides
the look and tone of voice which suit displeasure, the hand is hastily thrown
out toward the person dismissed, the back part toward him, the countenance at
the same time turned away from him.

Refusing, when accompaned with displeasure, is expressed nearly in the same
way. Without displeasure, it is done with a visible reluctance, which occasions
the bringing out the word slowly, with such a shake of the head, and shrug of
the shoulders, as is natural upon hearing of somewhat, which gives us concern.

Granting, when done with unreserved good will, is accompanied with a
benevolent aspect, and tone of voice; the right hand pressed to the left
breast, to signify, how heartily the favor is granted, and the benefactor's
joy in conferring it.

Dependence. See Modesty.

Veneration, or worshipping, comprehends several articles, as ascription,
confession, remorse, intercession, thanksgiving, deprecation, petition, etc.
Ascription of honor and praise to the peerless and supreme Majesty of heaven,
and confession and deprecation, are to be uttered with all that humility of
looks and gesture, which can exhibit the most profound self-abasement and
annihilation, before One, whose superiority is infinite. The head is a little
raised, but with the most apparent timidity, and dread; the eye is lifted; but
immediately cast down again, or closed for a moment; the eyebrows are drawn
down in the most respectful manner; the features, and the whole body and limbs,
are all composed to the most profound gravity; one posture continuing, without
considerable change, during the whole performance of the duty. The knees
bended, or the whole body prostrate, o^ if the posture be standing, which
scripture Mark xi. 25.
does not disallow, bending forward, as ready to prostrate itself. The arms
spread out, but modestly, as high as the breast; the hands open. The tone of
the voice will be submissive, timid, equal, trembling, weak, suppliant. The
words will be brought out with a visible anxiety and diffidence approaching to
hesitation; few, and slow; nothing of vain repetition, Matthew. vi. 7.
haranguing, flowers of rhetoric, or affected figures of speech; all
simplicity, humility, and lowliness, such as becomes a reptile of the dust,
when presuming to address Him, whose greatness is tremendous beyond all created
conception. In intercession for our fellow creatures, which is prescribed in
the scriptures, Matthew. v. 44. Luke vi. 28.
and in thanksgiving, the countenance will naturally assume a small degree of
cheerfulness, beyond what it was clothed with in confession of sin, and
deprecation of punishment. But all affected ornament of speech or gesture in
devotion, deserves the severest censure, as being somewhat much worse than
absurd.

Respect for a superior, puts on the looks and gesture of modesty. See Modesty.

Hope brightens the countenance; arches the eyebrows; gives the eyes an eager,
wishful look; opens the mouth to half a smile; bends the body a little forward,
the feet equal; spreads the arms, with the hands open, as to receive the object
of its longings. The tone of the voice is eager and unevenly inclining to that
of joy; but curbed by a degree of doubt and anxiety. Desire differs from hope,
as to expression, in this particular, that there is more appearance of doubt
and anxiety in the former, than the latter. For it is one thing to desire what
is agreeable, and another to have a prospect of actually obtaining it.

Desire expresses itself by bending the body forward, and stretching the arms
toward the object, as to grasp it. The countenance smiling, but eager and
wishful; the eyes wide open, and eyebrows raised; the mouth open; the tone of
voice suppliant, but lively and cheerful, unless there be distress as well as
desire: the expressions fluent and copious; if no words are used, sighs instead
of them; but this is chiefly in distress.

Love (successful) lights up the countenance into smiles. The forehead is
smoothed, and enlarged; the eyebrows are arched; the mouth a little open, and
smiling; the eyes languishing and half-shut, dote upon the beloved object. The
countenance assumes the eager and wishful look of desire (see Desire above) but
mixed with an air of satisfaction, and repose. The accents are soft, and
winning; the tone of voice persuasive, flattering, pathetic, various, musical,
rapturous, as in joy. (See Joy.) The attitude much the same with that of
desire. Sometimes both hands pressed eagerly to the bosom. Love, unsuccessful,
adds an air of anxiety and melancholy. (See Perplexity and Melancholy.)

Giving, inviting, soliciting, and such like actions, which suppose some degree
of affection, real or pretended, are accompanied with much the same looks and
gestures as express love; but more moderate.

Wonder, or amazement (without any other interesting passion, as love, esteem,
etc.) opens the eyes, and makes them appear very prominent; sometimes raises
them to the skies; but oftener, and more expressively, fixes them on the
object; if the cause of the passion be a present and visible object, with the
look, all except the wildness, of fear. (See Fear.) If the hands hold any
thing, at the time, when the object of wonder appears, they immediately let it
drop, unconscious; and the whole body fixes in the contracted, stooping posture
of amazement; the mouth open; the hands held up open, nearly in the attitude of
fear. (See Fear.) The first access of this passion stops all utterance. But it
makes amends afterward by a copious flow of words and exclamations.

Admiration, a mixed passion, consisting of wonder, with love or esteem, takes
away the familiar gesture, and expression of simple love. (See Love.) Keeps the
respectful look and attitude. (See Modesty and Veneration.) The eyes are opened
wide, and now and then raised toward heaven. The mouth is opened. The hands are
lifted up. The tone of the voice rapturous. This passion expresses itself
copiously, making great use of the figure hyperbole.

Gratitude puts on an aspect full of complacenc^. (See Love.) If the object of
it is a character greatly superior, it expresses much submission. (See
Modesty.) The right hand pressed upon the breast accompanies, very properly,
the expression of a sincere and hearty sensibility of obligation.

Curiosity, as of a busy-body, opens the eyes, and mouth, lengthens the neck,
bends the body forward, and fixes it in one posture, with the hands nearly in
that of admiration. See Admiration. See also Desire, Attention, Hope, Enquiry,
and Perplexity.

Persuasion puts on the looks of moderate love. (See Love.) Its accents are
soft, flattering, emphatical, and articulate.

Tempting, or wheedling, expresses itself much in the same way; only carrying
the fawning part to excess.

Promising is expressed with benevolent looks, the nod of consent, and the open
hands gently moved toward the person, to whom the promise is made; the palms
upwards. The sincerity of the promiser may be expressed by laying the right
hand gently on the breast.

Affectation displays itself in a thousand different gestures, motions, airs,
and looks, according to the character, which the person affects. Affectation of
learning gives a stiff formality to the whole person. The words come stalking
out with the pace of a funeral procession; and every sentence has the solemnity
of an oracle. Affectation of piety turns up the goggling whites of the eyes to
heaven, as if the person were in a trance, and fixes them in that posture so
long that the brain of the beholder grows giddy. Then comes up, deeb-grumbling,
a holy groan from the lower parts of the thorax; but so tremendous in sound,
and so long protracted, that you expect to see a goblin rise, like an
exhalation through the solid earth. Then he begins to rock from side to side,
or backward and forward, like an aged pine on the side of a hill, when a brisk
wind blows. The hands are clasped together, and often lifted, and the head
often shaken with foolish vehemence. The tone of the voice is canting, or
sing-song lullaby, not much distant from an Irish howl; and the words godly
doggerel. Affectation of beauty, and killing, puts a fine woman by turns into
all sorts of forms, appearances, and attitude, but amiable ones. She undoes, by
art, or rather by awkwardness (for true art conceals itself) all that nature
had done for her. Nature formed her almost an angel, and she, with infinite
pains, makes herself a monkey. Therefore this species of Affectation is easily
imitated, or taken off. Make as many, and as ugly grimaces, motions, and
gestures, as can be made; and take care that nature never peep out; and you
represent coquetish affectation to the life.

Sloth, appears by yawning, dosing, snoring, the head dangling sometimes to one
side, sometimes to the other, the arms and legs stretched out, and every sinew
of the body unstrung, the eyes heavy, or closed; the words, if any, crawl out
of the mouth, but half-formed, scarce audible to any ear, and broken off in the
middle by powerful sleep.

People, who walk in their sleep (of which our inimitable Shakespeare has in his
tragedy of MACBETH, drawn out a fine scene) are said to have their eyes open;
though they are not, the more for that, conscious of any thing, but the dream,
which has got possession of their imagination. I never saw one of those
persons; therefore cannot describe their manner from nature; but I suppose,
their speech is pretty much like that of persons dreaming, inarticulate,
incoherent, and very different, in its tone, from what it is, when waking.

Intoxication shows itself by the eyes half-shut, sleepy, stupid, inflamed. An
idiot smile, a ridiculous surliness or affected bravado, disgraces the bloated
countenance. The mouth open tumbles out nonsense in heaps, without articulation
enough for any ear to take it in, and unworthy of attention, if it could be
taken in. The head seems too heavy for the neck. The arms dangle from the
shoulders, as if they were almost cut away, and hung by shreds. The legs totter
and bend at the knees, as ready to sink under the weight of the reeling body.
And a general incapacity, corporeal and mental, exhibits human nature sunk
below the brutal.

Anger (violent) or rage, expresses itself with rapidity, interruption, noise,
harshness, and trepidation. The neck stretched out; the head forward, often
nodding and shaken in a menacing manner, against the object of the passion. The
eyes red, inflamed, staring, rolling, and sparkling; the eyebrows drawn down
over them; and the forehead wrinkled into clouds. The nostrils stretched wide;
every vein swelled; every muscle strained; the breast heaving and the breath
fetched hard. The mouth open, and drawn on each side toward the ears, showing
the teeth, in a gnashing posture. The face bloated, pale, red, or, sometimes
almost black. The feet stamping; the right arm often thrown out, and menacing
with the clenched fist shaken, and a general and violent agitation of the whole
body.

Peevishness, or ill nature, is a lower degree of anger; and is therefore
expressed in the above manner, only more moderate; with half sentences, and
broken speeches, uttered hastily; the upper lip drawn up disdainfully; the eyes
asquint upon the object of displeasure.

Malice, or spite, sets the jaws, or gnashes with the teeth, sends blasting
flashes from the eyes; draws the mouth toward the ears; clenches both fists and
bends the elbows in a straining manner. The tone of voice and expression, are
much the same with that of anger; but the pitch not so loud.

Envy is a little more moderate in its gestures, than malice; but much the same
in kind.

Revenge expresses itself as malice.

Cruelty. See Anger, Aversion, Malice, and the other irascible passions.

Complaining, as when one is under violent bodily pains, distorts the features;
almost closes the eyes; sometimes raises them wishfully; opens the mouth;
gnashes with the teeth; draws up the upper lip; draws down the head upon the
breast, and the whole body together. The arms are violently bent at the elbows,
and the fists strongly clenched. The voice is uttered in groans, lamentations,
and violent screams. Extreme torture produces fainting and death.

Fatigue, from severe labor, gives a general langour to the whole body. The
countenance is dejected. (See Grief.) The arms hang listless; the body, if
sitting, or lying along be not the posture, stoops; as in old age. (See
Dotage.) The legs, if walking, are dragged heavily along, and seem at every
step ready to bend under the weight of the body. The voice is weak, and the
words hardly enough articulated to be understood.

Aversion, or hatred, expressed to, or of any person, or thing, that is odious
to the speaker, occasions his drawing back as avoiding the approach of what he
hates: the hands, at the same time, thrown out spread, as if to keep it off.
The face turned away from that side toward which the hands are thrown out; the
eyes looking angrily and asquint the same way the hands are directed; the
eyebrows drawn downward; the upper lip disdainfully drawn up; but the teeth
set. The pitch of the voice loud; the tone chiding, unequal, surly, vehement.
The sentences short, and abrupt.

Commendation, or approbation, from a superior, puts on the aspect of love,
(excluding Desire, and Respect) and expresses itself in a mild tone of voice;
the arms gently spread, the palms of the hands toward the person approved.
Exhorting, or encouraging, as of an army by a general, is expressed with some
part of the looks and action of courage.

Jealousy would be likely to be well expressed by one, who had often seen
prisoners tortured in the dungeons of the inquisition, or who had seen what the
dungeons of the inquisition are the best earthly emblem of; I mean Hell. For
next to being in the pope's, or in satan's prison, is the torture of him who is
possessed with the spirit of jealousy. Being a mixture of passions directly
contrary to one another, the person, whose foul is the seat of such confusion
and tumult, must be in as much greater misery than Prometheus, with the vulture
tearing his liver, as the pains of the mind are greater than those of the body.
Jealousy is a ferment of love, hatred, hope, fear, shame, anxiety, suspicion,
grief, pity, envy, pride, rage, cruelty, vengeance, madness, and if there be
any other tormenting passion, which can agitate the human mind. Therefore to
express jealousy well, requires that one know how to represent justly all these
passions by turns (See Love, Hatred, etc.) and often several of them together.
Jealousy shows itself by restlessness, peevishness, thoughtfulness, anxiety,
absence of mind. Sometimes it bursts out in a piteous complaint and weeping;
then a gleam of hope, that all is yet well, lights up the countenance into a
momentary smile. Immediately the face, clouded with a general gloom, shows the
mind overcast again with horrid suspicions and frightful imaginations. Then the
arms are folded upon the b^^ast; the fists violently clenched; the rolling,
bloody eyes dart fury. He hurries to and fro; he has no more rest, than a ship
in a troubled sea, the sport of winds and waves. Again he composes himself a
little to reflect on the charms of the suspected person. She appears to his
imagination like the sweetness of the rising dawn. Then his monster-breeding
fancy represents her as false, as she is fair. Then he roars out as one on the
rack, when the cruel engine rends every joint, and every sinew bursts. Then he
throws himself on the ground. He beats his head against the pavement. Then he
springs up, and with the look and action of a fury, bursting hot from the
abyss, he snatches the instrument of death, and, after ripping up the bosom, of
the loved, suspected, hated, lamented, fair one, he stabs himself to the heart,
and exhibits a striking proof, how terrible a creature a puny mortal is, when
agitated by an infernal passion.

Dotage, or infirm old age, shows itself by talkativeness, boasting of the
past, hollowness of eyes and cheeks, dimness of sight, deafness, tremor of
voice, the accents, through default of teeth, scarce intelligible; hams weak,
knees tottering, head paralytic, hollow coughing, frequent expectoration,
breathless wheezing, laborious groaning, the body stooping under the
insupportable load of years, which soon will crush it into dust, from whence it
had its origin.

Folly, that is, of a natural idiot, gives the face an habitual thoughtless,
brainless grin. The eyes dance from object to object, without ever fixing
steadily upon any one. A thousand different and incoherent passions, looks,
gestures, speeches and absurdities, are played off every moment.

Distraction opens the eyes to a frightful wildness; rolls them hastily and
wildly from object to object; distorts every feature; gnashes with the teeth;
agitates all the parts of the body; rolls in the dust; foams at the mouth;
utters, with hideous bellowings, execrations, blasphemies, and all that is
fierce and outrageous; rushes furiously on all who approach; and, if not
restrained, tears its own flesh, and destroys itself.

Sickness has infirmity and feebleness in every motion and utterance. The eyes
dim, and almost closed; cheeks pale and hollow; the jaw fallen; the head hung
down; as if too heavy to be supported by the neck. A general inertia prevails.
The voice trembling; the utterance through the nose; every sentence accompanied
with a groan; the hand shaking, and the knees tottering under the body; or the
body stretched helpless on the bed.

Fainting, produces a sudden relaxation of all that holds the human frame
together, every sinew and ligament unstrung. The color flies from the
vermillion cheek; the sparkling eye grows dim. Down the body drops, as
helpless, and senseless, as a mass of clay, to which, by its color and
appearance it seems hastening to resolve itself. Which leads me to conclude with

Death, the awful end of all flesh; which exhibits nothing in appearance
different from what I have been just describing; for fainting continued ends in
death; a subject almost too serious to be made a matter of artificial imitation.

Lower degrees of every passion are to be expressed by more moderate exertions
of voice and gesture, as every public speaker's discretion will suggest to him.

Mixed passions, or emotions of the mind, require a mixed expression. Pity, for
example, is composed of grief and love. It is therefore evident, that a correct
speaker must, by his looks and gestures, and by the tone and pitch of his
voice, express both grief and love, in expressing pity, and so of the rest.

There may be other humors or passions, besides these, which a reader, or
speaker, may have occasion to express. But these are the principal. And, if
there be any others, they will occur among the following examples for practice,
taken from various authors, and rules will be given for expressing them. And
though it may be alleged, that some of these passions, or humors, are such,
as hardly ever come in the way of the speaker at the bar, in the pulpit, or
either house of parliament, it does not therefore follow, that the labor of
studying and practicing the proper ways of expressing them is useless. On the
contrary, every speaker will find his account in enlarging his sphere of
practice. A gentleman may not have occasion every day, to dance a minuet: but
he has occasion to go into company every day: and he will go into a room with
much the better grace for his having learned to dance in the most elegant
manner. The orator may not have actual occasion to express anger, jealousy,
malice, and some few others of the more violent passions, for which I have here
given rules. But he will, by applying his organs of elocution to express them,
acquire a masterly ease and fluency, in expressing those he has actually
occasion to express.

It is to be remembered, that the action, in expressing the various humors and
passions, for which I have here given rules, is to be suited to the age, sex,
condition, and circumstances of the character. Violent anger, or rage, for
example, is to be expressed with great agitation (see Anger) but the rage of an
infirm old man, of a woman, and of a youth, are all different from one another,
and from that of a man in the flower of his age, as every speaker's discretion
will suggest.

A hero may show fear, or sensibility of pain: but not in the same manner as a
girl would express those sensations. Grief may be expressed by a person reading
a melancholy story, or description, in a room. It may be acted upon the stage.
It may be dwelt upon by the pleader at the bar; or it may have a place in a
sermon. The passion is still grief. But the manner of expressing it will be
different in each of the speakers, if they have judgment.

A correct speaker does not make a movement of limb, or feature, for which he
has not a reason. If he addresses heaven, he looks upward. If he speaks to his
fellow creatures, he looks round upon them. The spirit of what he says, or is
said to him, appears in his look. If he expresses amazement, or would excite
it, he lifts up his hands and eyes. If he invites to virtue and happiness, he
spreads his arms, and looks benevolence. If he threatens the vengeance of
heaven against vice, he bends his eyebrow into wrath, and menaces with his arm
and countenance. He does not needlessly saw the air with his arm, nor stab
himself with his finger. He does not clap his right hand upon his breast unless
he has occasion to speak of himself, or to introduce conscience, or somewhat
sentimental. He does not start back, unless he wants to express horror or
aversion. He does not come forward, but when he has occasion to solicit. He
does not raise his voice, but to express somewhat peculiarly emphatical. He
does not lower it, but to contrast the raising of it. His eyes, by turns,
according to the humor of the matter he has to express, sparkle fury; brighten
into joy; glance disdain; melt into grief; frown disgust and hatred; languish
into love; or glare distraction.

But to apply properly, and in a masterly manner, the almost endlessly various
external expressions of the different passions and emotions of the mind, for
which nature has so curiously fitted the human frame -- hic labor -- here is
the difficulty. Accordingly a consummate public speaker is truly a phoenix. But
much less than all this, is generally speaking, sufficient for most occasions.

There is an error, which is too inconsiderately received by many judicious,
persons, viz. that a public speaker's showing himself to be in earnest, will
alone secure him of duly affecting his audience. Were this true, the
enthusiastic rant of the fanatic, who is often very much in earnest, ought to
please the judicious; in whom, on the contrary we know, it excites, only
laughter, or pity. It is granted, that nature is the rule by which we are to
speak and to judge of propriety in speaking. And every public speaker, who
faithfully, and in a masterly manner, follows that universal guide, commands
attention and approbation. But a speaker may, either through incurable natural
deficiency, or by deviating into some incorrigible absurdity of manner, express
the real and the warm sentiments of his heart, in such an awkward way as shall
effectually defeat his whole design upon those who hear him, and render himself
the object of their ridicule. It is not enough, as Quintilian INST. ORAT. p.
442.
says, to be a human creature, to make a good speaker. As, on one hand, it is
not true, that a speaker's showing himself in earnest is alone sufficient, so
on the other, it is certain that if he does not seem to be in earnest, -- Si
vis me flere, dolendum est
Prius ipsi tibi.
HOR.
he cannot but fail of his design.

There is a true sublime in dilivery, as in the other imitative arts; in the
manner as well as in the matter, of what an orator delivers. As in poetry,
painting, sculpture, music, and the other elegancies, the true sublime consists
in a set of masterly, large, and noble strokes of art, superior to florid
littleness; so it is in delivery. The accents are to be clear and articulate;
every syllable standing off from that which is next to it, so that they might
be numbered as they proceed. The inflections of the voice are to be so
distinctly suited to the matter, that the humor or passions might be known by
the sound of the voice only, where there could not be one word heard. And the
variations are to be, like the full swelling folds of the drapery in a fine
picture, or statue, bold and free, and forcible.

True eloquence does not wait for cool approbation. Like irresistible beauty,
it transports, it ravishes, it commands the admiration of all, who are within
its reach. If it allows time to criticize, it is not genuine. It ought to hurry
us out of ourselves, to engage and swallow up our whole attention; to drive
every thing out of our minds, besides the subject it would hold forth, and the
point, it wants to carry. The hearer finds himself as unable to resist it, as
to blow out a conflagration with the breath of his mouth, or to stop the stream
of a river with his hand. His passions are no longer his own. The orator has
taken possession of them; and with superior power, works them to whatever he
pleases.

There is no earthly object capable of making such various, and such forcible
impressions upon the human mind, as a consummate speaker. In viewing the
artificial creations, which flow from the pencil of a Raphael, the critical eye
is indeed delighted to a high pitch, and the delight is rational, because it
flows from sources, unknown to beings below the rational sphere. But the ear
remains wholly unengaged and unentertained.

In listening to the raptures of Corelli, Geminiani, and Handel, the flood of
pleasure which pours upon the ear, is almost too much for human nature. And
music applied to express the sublimities of poetry, as in the oratorio of
Samson, and the Allegro and Pensoroso, yields a pleasure so truly rational,
that a Plato, or a Socrates, need not be ashamed to declare their sensibility
of it. But here again, the eye has not its gratification. For the opera (in
which action is joined with music, in order to entertain the eye at the same
time with the ear) I must beg leave, with all due submission to the taste of
the great, to consider as a forced conjunction of two things, which nature does
not allow to go together. For it never will be other than unnatural, to see
heroes fighting, commanding, threatening, lamenting, and making love in the
warblings of an Italian song.

It is only the elegant speaker, who can at once regale the eye with the view
of its most amiable object, the human form in all its glory; the ear with the
original of all music, the understanding with its proper and natural food, the
knowledge of important truth; and the imagination with all that, in nature, or
in art, is beautiful, sublime or wonderful. For the orator's field is the
universe, and his subjects are all that is known of God, and his works; of
superior natures, good and evil, and their works; and of terrestrials, and
their works.

In a consummate speaker, whatever there is of corporeal dignity, or beauty,
the majesty of the human face divine, the grace of action, the piercing glance,
or gentle languish, or fiery flash of the eye; whatever of lively passion, or
striking emotion of mind, whatever of fine imagination, of wise reflection, or
irresistible reasoning; whatever of excellent in human nature, all that the
hand of the Creator has impressed, of his own image upon the noblest creature
we are acquainted with, all this appears in the consummate speaker to the
highest advantage. And whoever is proof against such a display of all that is
noble in human nature, must have neither eye, nor ear, nor passion, nor
imagination, nor taste, nor understanding.

Though it may be alleged, that a great deal of gesture, or action, at the
bar, or in the pulpit, especially the latter, is not wanted, nor is quite in
character; it is yet certain, that there is no part of the man, that has not
its proper attitude. The eyes are not to be rolled along the cicling, as if the
speaker thought himself in duty bound to take care how the flies behave
themselves. Nor are they to be constantly cast down upon the ground, as if he
were before his judge, receiving sentence of death. Nor to be fixed upon one
point, as if he saw a ghost. The arms of the preacher are not to be needlessly
thrown out, as if he were drowning in the pulpit; or brandished, after the
manner of the ancient pugiles, or boxers, exercising themselves by fighting
with their own shadow, to prepare them for the Olympic contests. Nor, on the
contrary, are his hands to be pocketed up, nor his arms to hang by his sides as
lank as if they were both withered. The head is not to stand fixed, as if the
speaker had a perpetual crick in his neck. Nor is it to nod at every third
word, as if he were acting Jupiter, or his would-be-son Alexander. With
ravished ears
The monarch hears;
Assumes the god,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the spheres.
DRYDEN'S O^E.


A judicious speaker is master of such a variety of decent and natural motions,
and has such command of attitude, that he will not be long enough in one
posture to offend the eye of the spectator. The matter, he has to pronounce,
will suggest the propriety of changing from time to time, his look, his
posture, his motion, and tone of voice, which if they were to continue too long
the same, would become tedious, and irksome to the beholders. Yet he is not to
be every moment changing posture, like an harlequin, nor throwing his hands
about, as if he were showing legerdemain tricks.

Above all things, the public speaker is never to forget the great rule, ARS
EST CELARE ARTEM. It would be infinitely more pleasing to see him deliver
himself with as little motion, and no better attitude, than those of an
Egyptian mummy, than distorting himself into all the violations of decorum,
which affectation produces. Art, seen through, is execrable.

Modesty ought ever to be conspicuous in the behavior of all, who are obliged
to exhibit themselves before the eye of the public. Whatever of gesture, or
exertion of voice, such persons use, they ought to appear plainly to be drawn
into them by the importance, spirit or humor of the matter. If the speaker uses
any arts of delivery, which appear, plainly to be studied; the effect will be,
that his awkward attempt to work upon the passions of his hearers, by means, of
which he is not master, will render him odious and contemptible to them. With
what stiff and pedantic solemnity do some public speakers utter thoughts, so
trifling, as to be hardly worth uttering at all? And what unnatural and
unsuitable tones of voice, and gesticulations, do others apply, in delivering
what, by their manner of delivering, one would be apt to question, not only
whether it is their own composition, but whether they really understand it.

The clergy have one considerable apology from the awkwardness of the place
they speak from. A pulpit is, by its very make, necessarily destructive of all
grace of attitude. What could even a Tully do in a tub, just big enough for him
to stand in, immersed up to the armpits, pillowing his chin upon its cushion,
as Milton describes the sun upon the orient wave? But it is hardly to be
expected, that this, or any other impropriety in sacred matters, of which there
are many greater, should be altered. Errors in them, become, by long
establishment, sacred. See the writings of many of the clergy themselves to
this purpose as Dr. Clark, ^^are ^^adly, Whiston, Clayton, etc. the CANDID
DISQUISITIONS and the CO^^ESSIONAL
And I doubt not, but some of the narrower part of the clergy, as well as of
the people, would think any other form of a pulpit, than the present, though
much fitter for exhibiting the speaker to an advantage, an innovation likely to
prove dangerous to religion, and which is worse, to the church.

Nor is it to be expected, that decorum of manner, in preaching, should be
carried to any great perfection in England, while reading is thought to be
preaching. If the Greek and Roman orators had read their sermons, the effect
would have been, I suppose, pretty much the same as that which sermons produce
among us. The hearers might have, many of them, dropped asleep. In some foreign
countries, preachers are so much aware of the disadvantage of reading, that
such, as have weak memories, have a prompter behind, in the pulpit, out of
sight. However, it must be owned, that, if preachers would bestow a little
pains in committing to the memory the substance of their discourses, so as not
to be slaves to written notes, and endeavor to gain a tolerable readiness at
extemporary amplification (which at the bar is indispensible) their discourses
might have effect, though the eye should now and then be cast upon the notes,
if not in a clumsy manner, and with hesitation. Quintilian Inst. Orat. L. x C.
vii.
himself will not object to so much use of notes, as I have here allowed;
though he absolutely requires his orator to be possessed of a memory. Dean
Swift, in his Letter to a young Clergyman, writes on this subject, as follows:

"I cannot but think, that what is read differs as much from what is repeated
without book, as a copy does from an original. At the same time I am fully
sensible. what an extreme difficulty it would be upon you to alter this; and
that if you did, your sermons would be much less valuable than otherwise, for
want of time to improve and correct them: I would therefore gladly come to a
compromise with you in this matter."

He then goes on to advise, that he should write his sermons in a large fair
hand, and read them over several times before delivering them, so as to be
able, with the help of an eye cast down now and then upon the paper, to
pronounce them with ease and force.




To hear a judicious and elegant discourse from the pulpit, which would, in
print, make a noble figure, murdered by him, who had learning and taste to
compose it, but having been neglected as to one important part of his
education, knows not how to deliver it otherwise than with a tone between
singing and saying, or with a nod of his head, to enforce, as with a hammer,
every emphatical word, or with the same unanimated monotony, in which he was
used to repeat Quae genus, at Westminster school; what can be imagined more
lamentable! Yet what more common! Were the educators of youth, intended for the
ministry, of the opinion of the prince of orators, viz. that delivery is the
first, second and third part of oratory, they would spare some time from the
many less necessary parts of school learning, to apply it to one so very
essential; without which the weight of the most sacred subject, the greatest
depth of critical disquisition, the most unexceptionable reasoning, the most
accurate arrangement of matter, and the most striking energy of style, are all
lost upon an audience; who sit unaffected, and depart unimproved. From hence it
is, that while places of public worship are almost empty, theaters are crowded.
Yet in the former the most interesting subjects are treated. In the latter all
is fiction. To the former all are invited without any expense. The charge and
trouble of attending the latter are considerable. But it will not be otherwise,
so long as the speakers in the former take no more pains to enforce their
public instructions, than if they delivered fictions, and those in the latter
bestow so much to make fictions seem true. It may be said, this observation has
often been made before. The more is the pity. And it ought to be often made
again, and to be dwelt upon, till the fault is amended.

Did preachers labor to acquire a masterly delivery, places of public
instruction would be crowded, as places of public diversion are now. Rakes and
infidels, merely to show their taste, would frequent them. Could all frequent
them and none profit?

It is common to hear complaints, from the clergy of the inattention of their
hearers, even to dozing, and sometimes to profound sleep. But where does this
complaint fall at last? Even upon the preachers themselves, who address their
hearers with such coldness and indifference as to leave them nothing to do, but
to go to sleep. Let the preacher but exert himself properly, and he may defy
his hearers to go to sleep, or withdraw their attention for a moment.

The clergy are likewise very full of their complaints of the little effect
their labors produce. Infidelity and vice, they cry, prevail more than ever.
Churches are poorly filled. And those, who attend for fashion's sake, are not
much better than their neighbors.

But what is the plain English of this lamentable outcry? Why, truly, that they
find people loath to go to the places of public instruction to be disgusted or
lulled to sleep. And, that, when they have them there, they cannot persuade
them to quit their vices and follies by lolling twenty minutes upon a velvet
cushion, and reading to them a learned discourse. That they cannot warm them to
the love of virtue by a cold, ill-read, pulpit harangue. That they cannot win
their affections whilst they neglect all the natural means for working upon the
human passions. That they cannot kindle in them that burning zeal which suits
the most important of all interests, by talking to them with the coolness of a
set of Stoic philosophers, of the terrors of the Lord, of the worm that never
dies, and the fire that is not quenched, and of future glory, honor, and
immortality, of everlasting kingdoms, and heavenly thrones.

I know it is common for preachers to plead, in excuse of the frigidity of
their manner, in addressing their audiences, their modesty, and fear of being
accused of affectation. But are these any hinderance to the elocution of the
actors, or even of the actresses; who, by study, and practice, come to get the
better of timidity, and to attain an elegant and correct utterance (and are
indeed, the only speakers we have in England) without any appearance of
affectation; which would render them unsufferable. But do our preachers, in
general, bestow any thought, or use any means, of any kind, for improving
themselves in speaking? The younger part of the players rehearse, and practice
over, and over, many a time, and are long under the tuition of the principal
actors, before they appear in public. But there are, I believe, no other public
speakers among us, who take such pains; though they bestow great pains in
improving themselves in learning; which shows, that the neglect of this
accomplishment is more owing to the want of a due sense of its usefulness, than
to any other cause. And yet, of the two, learning is much less necessary to a
preacher, than skill in persuading. Quintilian Quint. Inst. Orat. L. vi. C. ii.
makes this latter the supreme excellence in his orator.

Let the reader only consider, that a shoemaker, or a tailor, is under a master
seven years, at least, before he sets up for himself. But the preacher goes
into the pulpit at once, without ever having had one lesson, or article of
instruction in that part of his art, which is the chief and most weighty, and
without which all his other accomplishments are worth nothing, toward gaining
the end of preaching

It may be alleged, that the clergy cannot be expected to be great orators for
fifty or an hundred pounds a year, which poor pittance is as much as many
hundreds, I may say thousands, of them, have to maintain themselves and their
families. The more is the pity.

But there are many players who do not get more than the lower clergy. And yet
they study hard, for no greater encouragement, and actually acquire such skill
in working upon the passions of mankind, that, for my part, if I wanted to have
a composition of mine well spoken, I would put it into the hands of a
second-rate player, rather than of any preacher I ever heard.

What could be imagined more elegant, if entertainment alone were sought; what
more useful, if the good of mankind were the object, than the sacred function
of preaching properly performed? Were the most interesting of subjects treated
with proper perspicuity and adequate judgment, and well wrought discourses
delivered to listening crowds with that dignity which becomes a teacher of
divine truth, and with that energy, which should show, that the preacher spoke
from his own heart, and meant to speak to the hearts of his hearers, what
effects might not follow? Mankind are not wood or stone. They are undoubtedly
capable of being roused and startled. They may be drawn, and allured. The voice
of an able preacher, thundering out, the divine threatenings against vice,
would be in the ear of the offender, as if he heared the sound of the last
trumpet summoning the dead to judgment. And the gentle call of mercy
encouraging the terrified, and almost despairing penitent to look up to his
offended heavenly Father, would seem as the song of angels. A whole multitude
might be lifted to the skies. The world of spirits might be ^pened to the eyes
of their minds. The terrors of that punishment, which awaits vice; the glories
of that state, to which virtue will, through divine savor, raise the pious,
might be, by a powerful preacher, rendered present to their understandings,
with such conviction, as would make indelible impressions upon their hearts,
and work a substantial reformation in their lives. Quintilian (INST. ORAT. L.
vi. C. ii.) makes the knowledge and command of the pathetic, the main
instrument of persuasion, which, according to him, is the great business of the
o^tor.


The convincing and irrefragable proof, that real and important effects might
be produced by preachers by a proper application of oratory to the purposes of
instructing and amending mankind, is, That oratory has been in all times, known
actually to produce great alterations in men's ways of thinking and acting. And
there is no denying facts. To bring instances of this in a copious manner, as
the subject might deserve, would be to quote more history than could be
comprehended in such a volume as this. Nor can any reader imagine, an art could
have been, in all free governments, so laboriously cultivated by statesmen, had
they not found it useful in the state. Do we not, in our own times, see the
effects produced by it in the British parliament? But if any one should
allege, that there is nothing in the power of preachers by means of oratory;
does it not follow, that then the whole function of preaching may as well be
laid aside? For, if good speaking will have no effect upon mankind, surely bad
will have none.

Reasoning a priori, one would conclude, that we should see both the study, and
the effects of oratory, carried to a pitch beyond what they reached in the
ancient times of Heathenism. Have we not the advantage of those noble models,
which the ancients struck out by the mere force of natural unassisted genius?
Ought we not to exceed those models? But do we come up to them? Have we not
incomparably clearer views of nature, and of all knowledge, than the ancients
had? Have we not whole sciences of which they knew nothing? The Newtonion
philosophy alone! to what sentiments does it lift the mind! How do the ideas,
it gives us, of immensity filled with innumerable worlds revolving round
innumerable sons; those worlds themselves the centres of others secondary to
them; all attracting; all attracted; enlightening, or receiving light; at
distances unmeasurable, but all under one law! -- How do these ideas to^^ to
raise our conceptions of the Author of such a work? Caught not our productions
to exceed theirs, who had no such helps to enrich and enliven their
imaginations? But, above all, as much as the heavens are higher than the earth,
so much ought the views which revelation presents us with, to ennoble all our
productions above those of the ancients, on whom that glorious light never
shone. What had a Demosthenes, or a Cicero, to inspire so divine an ardor into
their addresses to the people, compared with those sublime doctrines, which
angels desire earnestly to pry into? If the poetical description of Jupiter
shaking heaven with his nod, warmed the imagination of a Phidias to such a
pitch, as enabled him to produce the most majestic piece of statuary, that ever
was beheld; and if the imagination of the author Hom. vid. II. 1.
of that poetical description was exalted by the scenes he saw, and the
learning he acquired by traveling into Egypt, and other parts; how ought the
genius of the christian orator to be elevated, how ought both his compositions,
and his manner of delivering them, to shine superior to all that antiquity ever
saw; a^ he enjoys superior advantages for ennobling all his sentiments and
giving dignity and spirit to all he composes, and utters! If we find a Plato,
or a Cicero, whenever they touch upon the sublime doctrine of a future state,
rise above themselves, warmed with -- shall I say the prospect? no -- with the
possibility, or at most, with the hope of immortality; how animate ought our
descriptions to be, how forcible our manner of treating of what we pretend
firmly to believe; of what we know the Author of our religion confirmed by
actually rising from the grave, triumphing gloriously over death, and ascending
visibly to heaven.

Poor were the motives, and cold the encouragements which they could offer, to
excite their hearers to bravery, and to virtue, compared with those which we
have to propose. For, if they put them in mind of their country, their wives,
their children, their aged and helpless parents; if they called upon them to
show themselves worthy descendants of their illustrious ancestors; if they
roused their shame, or their sense of honor; if they held forth the prize of
deathless fame; all these are as cogent arguments now, as they were then. What
advantage our Christian orators have over them, toward gaining their end of
alarming, persuading, and reforming mankind, appears from considering how
little chance we should have of producing any good effect upon a people
strongly attached to pleasures, riches, and honors, by telling them, that if
they continued to pursue these their beloved objects by unlawful means, they
might expect, after their death, to be carried before Minos, Rhadamanthus, and
Aeacus, who would condemn their souls to Tartarus, where the soul of Ixion was
tied upon a when, and whirled about without rest; where Prometheus had his
liver gnawed by a vulture, which grew again as fast as it was devoured; and
where Danaus's fifty daughters had a set of barrels with holes in their bottoms
to keep continually full to the top, and where all wicked souls would be
condemned to some such punishment; but if, on the contrary, they would act the
part of honest and worthy men, and exert themselves to the hazard, and,
perhaps, loss of their lives, in defense of the liberties of their country,
their souls would be ordered, by the judges of the dead, to be placed in the
Elysian fields, where were pleasant greens, and lucid streams, and fragrant
groves; and where they should amuse themselves with the innocent pleasures,
which delighted them while here. Had our Christian orators no better motives to
urge, than such as could be drawn from the consideration of certain imaginary
rewards and punishments to be distributed in a certain possible, but doubtful
future state, in some unknow subterranean region; it might be expected, that
their zeal in urging them would be but cold, and the effects of their addresses
to the people, inconsiderable. But the ancient orators had no better motives,
from futurity, than these which I have mentioned, and those they could draw
from other considerations were the same, which we may use now. What accounts
should we have had of the power with which they spoke, and of the effects of
their speeches, if they had had the awful subjects to treat of, and the
advantages for treating of them with effect, which our preachers have! O shame
to modern times! A Pericles, or a Demosthenes, could shake all Greece, when
they warned their countrymen against an invasion, or alarmed them about the
danger of their liberties! Whilst we can hardly keep our hearers awake, when we
stand forth to warn them, in the name of God, against the consequences of vice,
ruinous to individuals, ruinous to nations; the cause not only of the
subversion of states and kingdoms, when luxury, and corruption spread their
fatal contagion and leave a people the unthinking prey of tyranny and
oppression; but of utter irretrievable destruction of the souls and bodies of
half a species "Strait is the gate, and narrow the way, that leads to life,
and few there be who find it." Matt. vii. 14.
from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power, at that tremendous
day, when the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, and when he
shall sit upon the throne of judgment, from whose face heaven and earth shall
fly away; Rev. xx. 11.
whose voice shall pronounce on the wicked the dreadful sentence, "Depart, ye
cursed;" and whose breath shall blow up the unquenchable flame, in which
rebellious angels and men shall be irrecoverably swallowed up and destroyed.

It may, perhaps, be objected here, that sacred truth needs no ornament to set
it off, no art to enforce it. That the apostles were artless and illiterate
men; and yet they gained the great end of their mission, the conviction of
multitudes, and the establishment of their religion. That therefore, there is
no necessity for this attention to delivery, in order to quality the preacher
for his sacred office, or to render his labors successful.

To all this the answer is ready, viz. First, the apostles were not all artless
and illiterate. St. Paul, the greatest and most general propagator of
christianity, is an eminent exception. He could he no mean orator, who
confounded the Jews at Damascus, Acts ix. 22.
made a prince, before whom he stood to be judged, confess, that he had almost
persuaded him to become a convert to a religion every where spoken against;
Acts xxvi. 28. xxviii. 22.
threw another into a fit of trembling, as he sat upon his judgment seat; Acts
xxiv. 25.
made a defense before the learned court of Areopagus, which gained him for a
convert a member of the court itself; Acts xvii. 34.
struck a whole people with such admiration, that they took him for the god of
eloquence; Acts xiv. 12.
and gained him a place in Longinus's "It was with no small pleasure I lately
met with a fragment of Longinus, which is preserved, as a testimony of that
critic's judgment, at the beginning of a manuscript of the New Testament in the
Vatican library. After that author has numbered up the most celebrated orators
among the Grecians, he says, "Add to these Paul of Tarsus, the patr^ "an
opinion not yet fully proved." Spect. No. 633.
list of famous orators. Would the cold-served-up monotony of our English
sermon-readers have produced such effects as these? But farther, the apostles
might very well spare human accomplishments; having what was worth them all,
viz. the Divine gift of working miracles; which if our preachers had, I should
not have much to say about their qualifying themselves in elocution. But, as it
is, public instruction is the preacher's weapon, with which he is to combat
infidelity and vice. And what avails a weapon without skill to wield it?

Medicines the most salutary to the body are taken with reluctance, if nauseous
to the taste. However, they are taken. But the more necessary physic for the
soul, if it be not rendered somewhat palatable, will be absolutely rejected.
For we are much less prudent in our care for the most valuable part of
ourselves than for the least. Therefore the preacher, ought, above all other
public speakers, to labor to enrich and adorn, in the most masterly manner, his
addresses to mankind; his views being the most important. What grand point has
the player to gain? Why, to draw an audience to the theater. I deny not, that
the theater is capable of being made a school of virtue. But it must be put
under regulations, other than we have ever yet seen it; and those (...) various
to be specified here; so numerous are the particulars, which want reformation,
much more being at present wrong than right.
The pleader at the bar, if he lays before the judges and jury, the true state
of the case, so as they may be most likely to see where the right of it lies,
and a just decision may be given, has done his duty; and the affair in
agitation is an estate, or at most, a life, which will soon, by course of
nature, be extinct. And of the speaker in either house of parliament, the very
utmost, that can be said, is, that the good of his country, may, in great
measure, depen^ upon his tongue. But the infinitely important object of
preaching is, the reformation of mankind, upon which depends their happiness in
this world, and throughout the whole of their being. Of what consequence is it,
then, that the art of preaching be carried to such perfection, that all may be
drawn to places of public instruction, and that those, who attend them, may
receive benefit! And if almost the whole of preaching be delivery, how
necessary is the study of delivery! That delivery is incomparably the most
important part in public instruction, is manifest from this, that very
indifferent matter well delivered will make a considerable impression. "A proof
of the importance of delivery," (says Quintilian) may be drawn from the
additional force, which the actors give to what is written by the best poets,
so that what we hear pronounced by them gives infinitely more pleasure than
when we only read it." And again, "I think, I may affirm, that a very
indifferent speech, well set off by the speaker, shall have a greater effect,
than the best, if destitute of that advantage." Quint Inst. Orat. p. 441.
"Documento sunt vel sceni^i," etc.
But bad utterance will defeat the whole effect of the noblest composition ever
produced.

While exorbitant appetite, and unruly passion within, while evil example, with
alluring solicitation without (to say nothing of the craft and assaults of the
grand enemy of mankind) while these invite and ensnare the frail and
thoughtless into guilt; shall virtue and religion hold forth no charms to
engage votaries? Pleasure decks herself out with rich attire. Soft are her
looks, and melting is the sweetness of her voice. And must religion present
herself with every disadvantage? Must she appear quite unadorned? What chance
can she then have in competition with an enemy so much better furnished with
every necessary invitation and allurement? Alas! our preachers do not address
innocents in paradise; but thoughtless and often habituated sinners. Mere cold
explaining will have but little effect on such. Weak is the hold, which reason
has on most men. Few of mankind have able heads. All have hearts; and all
hearts may be touched, if the speaker is master of his art. The business is not
so much, to open the understanding, as to warm the heart. There are few who do
not know their duty. To allure them to the doing of it, is the difficulty. Nor
is this to be effected by cold reasoning. Accordingly, the scripture-orators
^^e none of them cold. Their addresses are such as hardly any man can utter
without warmth. "Hear, O heavens! Give ear, O earth! To thee, O man, I call; my
voice is to the sons of men: As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked; but rather that he turn from his wickedness, and live.
Turn ye, turn ye, Why will ye die? O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest
the prophets, and stonest them who are sent unto thee! How often would I have
gathered thy children, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye
would not. Had thou, in this thy day, known the things which belong to thy
peace! -- But now they are hid^ from thine eyes."

It is true, the preacher is carfully to avoid ostentation; he is not to preach
himself; but Christ. But at the same time he is to "stir up every gift that is
in him; to cry aloud, and not to spare, to lift up his voice like a trumpet; to
reprove, correct, and instruct; to be instant in season and out of season; to
become (innocently) all things to all men," consequently to become an orator,
if men are not to be affected by simple unadorned truth, however weighty.

What can the people think of the sincerity of the preacher, who is cold and
lauguid in his public instructions, while he is as warm and zealous, as other
men, in the defense of an inconsiderable part of his property? Would he plead
as calmly for his life, as he does with his people in the cause of virtue and
religion. Coolness in a matter of the last importance, and about which one is
really in earnest, is so unnatural, as to be hardly practicable. Therefore,
Cicero Tuistue, M. Calidi nisi singeres, sic ageres?

Cic. Brut. p. 181. Tom. 1.
takes it for granted, that Calidius could not have addressed the senate in so
indifferent, and unanimated a manner, if what he wanted to persuade them to
believe had not been mere fiction. And Demosthenes, when one came to him,
begging, that he would plead his cause, against a person who had used him
cruelly, of which usage he gave Demosthenes a very cold and unanimated account,
could not believe, that he had been so injured; till, upon his signifying his
suspicion, the man was roused to some warmth; and then the orator was
convinced, that his complaint was well founded, and immediately undertook his
defense. Plut in. vit. Demosth.


If it should be said by preachers, "The people will be as much offended with
us, if we overact our part, as they are now indifferent about attending our
ministry; so that it will avail nothing to study a more lively delivery;" to
this I must beg leave to answer, that there is no reason to fear any thing from
it. Because a manner of preaching may be used, which shall have ten times more
life and vivacity in it, than the present, and yet (if it be not unnatural or
incorrect) be very safe from all danger of exceeding due bounds as to vivacity
and force. And, farther, we do in fact observe, that no preacher is admired (I
do not mean by the mob, but by people of education) whose delivery is dull and
unanimated; let his matter be what it will.

Lest any reader should think, I have been too severe upon the deficiencies of
men of sacred characters, as to delivery, either in leading the devotions of
the people, or in instructing them in their duty; I will add, by way of apology
for what I have said, some passages, to the same purpose, from the SPECTATOR.

"SIR,
The well reading of the common prayers is of so great importance, and so much
neglected, that I take the liberty to offer to your consideration some
particulars on that subject. And what more worthy your observation, than this?
A thing so public, and of so high consequence. It is indeed wonderful, that the
frequent exercise of it should not make the performers of that duty more expert
in it. This inability, as I conceive, proceeds from the little care, that is
taken of their reading while at school, where, when they are got into Latin,
they are looked upon as above English, the reading of which is wholly
neglected, or, at least, read to very little purpose, without any due
observation made to them of the proper accent and manner of reading. By this
means they have acquired such ill habits, as will not easily be removed."


The writer of the letter then goes on to mention the advantage he himself
found from being led in his devotions by an elegant performer of the service at
St. James's Garlick-hill church.

"My eyes and my thoughts (says he) could not wander as usual; but were
confined to my prayers. -- The confession was read with such a resigned
humility, the absolution with such a comfortable authority, the thanksgivings
with such a religious joy, as made me feel those affections of the mind in a
manner I never did before. To remedy, therefore, the grievance above complained
of, I humbly propose, that this excellent reader, upon the text, and every
annual assembly of the clergy at Sion College, and all other conventions,
should read prayers before them. For then those, that are afraid of stretching
their mouths, and spoiling their soft voices, will learn to read with
clearness, loudness, and strength. Others, who affect a rakish negligent air,
by folding their arms, and lolling upon their hook, will be taught a decent
behavior. Those who read so fast as if impatient of their work, may learn to
speak deliberately. There is another sort, whom I call Pindaric readers, as
being confined to no set measure. These pronounce five or six words with great
deliberation, and the five or six subsequent ones with as great celerity; the
first part of a sentence with a very exalted voice, and the latter very low.
Sometimes with one sort of tone, and immediately after with a different one.
These gentlemen will learn of my admired reader an evenness of voice and
delivery. And all, who are innocent of these affectations, but read with such
an indifferency, as if they did not understand the language, may be informed of
the art of reading movingly and fervently; how to place the emphasis, and give
the proper accent to each word, and how to vary the voice, according to the
nature of the sentence. There is certainly a difference between reading a
prayer and a gazette. These are often pretty classical scholars, and would
think it an unpardonable sin to read Virgil, or Martial, with as little taste,
as they do divine service."

Spect. No. 147.
And the same standard author, in his 407th paper, complains as follows.

"Our preachers stand stock still in the pulpit; and will nof so much as move a
finger to set off the best sermons in the world. We meet with the same speaking
statues at our bars, and in all public places of debate. Our words flow from us
in a smooth continued stream, without those strainings of the voice, motions of
the body, and majesty of the hand, which are so much celebrated in the orators
of Greece and Rome. We can talk of life and death in cold blood, and keep our
temper in a discourse, which turns upon every thing that is dear to us.

"It is certain, that proper gestures, and vehement exertions of the voice,
cannot be too much studied by a public orator. They are a kind of comment, upon
what he utters, and enforce every thing he says, with weak hearers" [and surely
the bulk of hearers are weak] "better than the strongest argument he can make
use of. They keep the audience awake, and fix their attention to what is
delivered to them; at the same time, that they show, the speaker is in earnest,
and affected himself with what he so passionately recommends to others --

"How cold and dead a figure in comparison of these two great men" [Demosthenes
and Cicero] "does an orator often make at the British bar, holding up his head
with the most insipid serenity, and stroking the sides of a long wig," etc.

Dean Swift (who was no friend to over-doing on the serious side) advises his
young clergymen as follows:

"I take it for granted that you are already desirous to be seen in a pulpit.
But, I hope, you think it prudent to pass quarantine among the desolate
churches five miles round this town, where you may at least learn to read and
speak, before you venture to expose your parts in a city congregation. Not that
these are better judges; but, because, if a man must needs expose his folly, it
is more safe and discreet to do so before few witnesses, and in a scattered
neighborhood. And you will do well, if you can prevail with some intimate and
judicious friend to be your constant hearer, and to beg of him to give you
notice, with the utmost freedom, of whatever he finds amiss either in your
voice or gesture. For want of such early warning, many clergymen continue
defective, and sometimes rediculous, to the end of their lives. Neither is it
rare to observe, among excellent and learned divines, a certain ungracious
manner, or unhappy tone of voice, which they have never been able to shake
off." LETTER TO A YOUNG CLERGYMAN.

Are the faults complained of by these authors, who wrote almost fifty years
ago, amended, or likely to be amended? Let the answer to this question be
collected from the following verses, by Dr. Byram, prefixed to Fordyce's ART OF
PREACHING, published a few years ago.

For, what is a sermon, good, or bad,
If a man reads it like a lad?
To hear some people when they preach,
How they run over all parts of speech,
And neither raise a word nor sink;
Our learned bishops, one would think,
Had taken schoolboys from the rod,
To make ambassadors of God.
And afterward, In point of sermons, it is confessed,
Our English clergy make the best:
But this appears we must confess,
Not from the pulpit, but the press.
They manage with disjointed skill,
The matter well, the manner ill;
And, what seems paradox at first,
They make the best, and preach the worst.


If there is, as we have seen, so much room to lament the deficiences of those
who are to lead the devotions of congregations, and to instruct them in their
duty, and whose business it is to win them, by every engaging and powerful art,
to the faithful performance of it; if there is so much reason to wish that
those failures might be made up, and those errors amended, which are
undoubtedly a great cause of the reluctance we observe, in many to attend, and
their coldness and indifferency in, places of public worship and instruction;
if the clergy are so deficient in their public performances, what is left for
me to say of those devotion-confounding, ear-splitting pests of our churches, I
mean the parish-clerks and parish-children? I would only ask, whether, if we
had declared a final and irreconcilable hostility against common decency, not
to say propriety, and had set ourselves to find out the most effectual means
possible for turning worship into burlesque; I would ask, I say, whether, if
this was our design, there could be a more certain way to gain it, than to
place a set of people in every church, who should come in between every two
sentences spoken by the minister, with a squawl as loud as the sound of ten
trumpets, and totally discordant from one another, and from the key in which
the minister speaks. If the minister speaks properly, why do not the clerk and
the charity-children speak in concord with him? If the clerk speaks properly,
why do not the minister and the children speak in the same key with him? Or if
the children are right, why do not the minister and clerk scream as high, or,
at least, take a concordant key with theirs? They cannot be all right, and all
different, from one another. How much more rational would it be to spend the
time, which is now so ridiculously thrown away in teaching the poor children to
set the ears of the whole parish on edge, in making them understand thoroughly
what they so often repeat by rote, without understanding, I mean the answers to
those useful questions in their catechism, "What is your duty to God?" and,
"What is your duty to your neighbor?" This would be of service to them all
their lives; whereas the other answers no end, that has the least connection
with common-sense.

It is by keeping clear of every thing disagreeable or grating, and by
consulting all that may please, entertain, and strike, that the sagacious Roman
Catholics keep up in their people, a delight in the public services of their
foolish religion. If we were wise, and as much in earnest as we ought, we
should imitate them in this. But what avails it to attempt to oppose that which
has power to make wrong right, and absurdity proper, I mean, the irresistible
tyrant, CUSTOM, whose dominion is in no nation, more absolute (where there are
so many so capable of judging) than in this our dear country.

LESSONS.
I. HISTORICAL NARRATION. Narration requires very little of what is properly
called expression, in pronouncing it; I have, however, ordered the emphatical
words in this, and all the lessons, to be printed in Italics, for the reader's
help. See in the ESSAY, Narration, and the other passions put upon the margin
of the lessons.

THE Trojans Of the manner of pronouncing matter contained in a parenthesis,
see the ESSAY, p. 14.
(if we may believe tradition) were the first founders of the Roman
Commonwealth; Narration
who under the conduct of Aeneas, having made their escape from their own
ruined country, got to Italy, and there for some time lived a rambling and
unsettled life, without any fixed place of abode, among the natives, and
uncultivated people, who had neither law nor regular government, but were
wholly free from all rule or restraint. This mixed multitude, however, crowding
together into one city, though originally different in extraction, language and
customs, united into one body, in a surprising A small elevation of the voice
will be proper here, to express moderate wonder. See Wonder.
short space of time. And as their little state came to be improved by
additional numbers, by policy, and by extent in territory and seemed likely to
make a figure among the nations; according to the common course of things, the
appearance of prosperity drew upon them the envy of the neighboring states: so
that the princes and people who ^^rdered upon them, began to seek occasions of
quarrelling with them. The alliances they could form, were but few: for most of
the neighboring states avoided embroiling themselves on their account. The
Romans seeing, that they had nothing to trust to, but their own conduct, found
it necessary This sentence is to be spoken somewhat quicker than the rest, to
express earnestness.
to bestir themselves with great diligence, to make vigorous preparations to
excite one another, to face their enemies in the field, to hazard their lives
in defense of their liberty, their country, and their families. And when, by
their valor, they repulsed the enemy, they gave assistance to their allies,
and gained friendships by often giving, The words, often giving and seldom
demanding, being antith^sist to one another, must be expressed with such an
emphasis, as may point out the a^tit^^ss, or opposition.
and seldom demanding favors of that sort. They had, by this time established
a regular form of government, to wit, the monarchical. And a senate, consisting
of men advanced in years, and grown wise by experience, though infirm of body,
consulted with their kings upon all important matters, and, on account of their
age, and care of their country, were called Fathers. Afterward when kingly
power, which was originally established for the preservation of liberty, and
the advantage of the state, came to degenerate into lawless tyranny, they found
it necessary to alter the form of government, and to put the supreme power into
the hands of two chief magistrates, to be held for one year only; hoping, by
this contrivance, to prevent the had effects naturally arising from the
exorbitant licentiousness of princes; and the indefeasible tenure by which they
generally imagine they hold their sovereignty, etc. [ Sal. The reader is, once
for all desired to take notice, that I have not scrupled to alter both the
sense and the words in many, if not most, of the following passages, taken both
from the ancients and the moderns. For my design was to put together a set of
lessons useful for practice, which did not restrict me to the very words of any
author. I have endeavored to make each lesson a complete piece; which obliged
me to insert matter of my own I have excluded improper sentiments, and have
substituted modern expressions, for some antiquated ones, which I thought young
people would be puzzled to understand; and I have inserted a few fancies, which
occured to me in copying out some of the passages, to render them more
diverting to youth, whose taste long experience has given me some knowledge of.
BELL. CATILINAR.]

II. NARRATION.
DAMON and Pythias, Narration.
of the Pythagorean sect in philosophy, lived in the time of Dionysius the
tyrant of Sicily. Their mutual friendship was so strong, that they were ready
to die for one another. One of the two (for it is not known which) being
comdemned to death by the tyrant, obtained leave to go into his own country, to
settle his affairs, on condition that the other should consent to be imprisoned
in his stead, and put to death for him, if he did not return before the day of
execution. The attention of every one, and especially of the tyrant himself,
was excited to the highest pitch^^ as every body was curious to see what should
be the event of so strange an affair. Doubting.
When the time was almost elapsed, and he, who was gone, did not appear, the
rashness of the other, whose sanguine friendship had put him upon running so
seemingly desperate a hazard, Confidence.
was universally blamed. But he still declared that he had not the least shadow
of doubt in his mind, of his friend's fidelity. The event showed how well he
knew him. Courage.
He came in due time, and surrendered to that fate, which he had no reason to
think, he should escape; and which he did not desire to escape by leaving his
friend to suffer in his place. Such fidelity softened even the savage heart of
Dionysius himself. He pardoned the condemned. He gave the two friends to one
another; and begged that they would take himself in for a third. [Val. Max.
Cic.]

III. NARRATION.
Narration.
DIONYSIUS, the tyrant of Sicily, showed how far he was from being happy, even
whilst he abounded in riches, and all the pleasures, which riches can procure.
Damocles, one of his flatterers, was complimenting him upon his power, his
treasures, and the magnificence of his royal state, and affirming, that no
monarch ever was greater, or happies, than he. "Have you a mind, Questioning.
Damocles," says the king, "to taste this happiness, and know by experience,
what my enjoyments are, of which you have so high an idea?" Damocles gladly
accepted the offer. Upon which the king ordered, that a royal banquet should be
prepared, and a gilded couch placed for him, covered with rich embroidery, and
side-boards, loaded with gold and silver plate of immense value. Pages of
extraordinary beauty were ordered to wait on him at table, and to obey his
commands with the greatest readiness, and the most profound submission. Neither
ointments, chaplets of flowers, nor rich perfumes were wanting. The table was
loaded with the most exquisite delicacies of every kind. Damocles fancied
himself amongst the gods. In the midst of all his happiness, he sees let down
from the roof exactly over his neck, The ancients, every body knows, lay on
conches at table.
as he lay indulging himself in state, Fear.
a glittering sword hung by a single hair. This may be spoken with as much of
the action proper to fear, (See Fear in the ESSAY, p. 23) as can be
conveniently applied.
The sight of destruction thus threatening him from on high, soon put a stop to
his joy and revelling. The pomp of his attendance, and the glitter of the
carved plate, gave him no longer any pleasure. He dreads to scretch forth his
hand to the table. He throws off the chaplet of ^oses. Tripidation or ^^^rry.
He hastens to remove from his dangerous situation, and at last begs the king
to restore him to his former humble condition, having no desire to enjoy any
longer such a dreadful kind of happiness. [ Cic. TUSC. QUEST.]

IV. NARRATION.
THE praeter had given up to the triumvir, Narration.
a woman of some rank, condemned for a capital crime, to be executed in the
prison. He, who had charge of the execution, in consideration of her birth, did
not immediately put her to death. He even ventured to let her daughter have
^ess to her in prison; carefully searching her, however, as she went in, lest
she should carry with her any sustenance; concluding, that in a few days, the
mother must, of course, perish for want, and that the severity of putting a
woman of family to a violent death, by the hand of the executioner, might thus
be avoided. Some days passing in this manner, the triumvir began to wonder,
that the daughter still came to visit her mother, and could by no means
comprehend, how the latter should live so long. Watching, therefore, carefully,
what passed in the interview between them, he found to his great astonishment,
Wonder
See Admiration, in the ESSAY, page 29^
that the life of the mother had been, all this while, supported by the milk of
the daughter, who came to the prison every day, to give her mother her breasts
to suck. The strange contrivance between them was represented to the judges,
and procured a pardon for the mother. Nor was it thought sufficient to give to
so dutiful a daughter the forfeited life of her condemned mother, but they were
both maintained afterward by a pension settled on them for life. And the
ground, upon which the prison stood, was consecrated, and a temple to Filial
Piety built upon it.

Declamation
What will not filial duty contrive, or what hazards will it not run; if it
will put a daughter upon venturing, at the peril of her own life, to maintain
her imprisoned and condemned mother in so unusual a manner. Pity.
For what was ever heard of more strange, than a mother sucking the breasts of
her own daughter? It might even seem so unnatural, as to render it doubtful,
whether, it might not be, in some sort, wrong, if it were not, that duty to
parents is the first law of nature: [Val. Max. Plin.]

V. HISTORICAL DESCRIPTION.
LUCIUS CATALINE, by birth a Patrician, was, by nature, endowed with superior
advantages both bodily and mental: Aversion.
but his dispositions were corrupt and wicked. From his youth, his supreme
delight was in violence Enumeration requires a short pause between the
particulars.
slaughter, rapines, and intestine confusions; and such works were the
employment of his earliest years. His constitution qualified him for hearing
hunger, cold, and want of sleep, to a degree exceeding belief. His mind was
daring, subtle, Wonder.
unsteady. There was no character which he could not assume and put off at
pleasure. Rapacious of what belonged to others; prodigal of his own; violently
bent on whatever became the object of his pursuit. He possessed a considerable
share of eloquence; but little solid knowledge. His insatiable temper was ever
pushing him to grasp at what was immoderate, romantic, and out of his reach.

About the time of the desturbances raised by Sylla, Narration.
Cataline was seized with a violent lust of power; nor did he at all. hesitate
about the means, so he could but attain his purpose of raising himself to
supreme dominion. Horror.
His restless spirit was in a continual ferment, occasioned by the confusion of
his own private affairs, and by the horrors of his guilty conscience; both
which he had brought upon himself by living the life above described. Aversion.
He was encouraged in his ambitious projects by the general corruption of
manners, which then prevailed amongst a people infected with two vices, not
less opposite to one another, in their natures, than mischievous in their
tendencies, I mean luxury, and avarice. [Sal. BELL. CATILINAR.]

VI. ARGUING. See in the ESSAY, the articles Arguing, Teaching, etc. page 26.

NO one, who has made the smallest progress in mathematics, can avoid
observing, that mathematical demonstrations are accompanied with such a kind of
evidence, as overcomes obstinacy, insuperable by many other kinds of reasoning.
Hence it is, that so many learned men have labored to illustrate other
sciences with this sort of evidence; and it is certain, that the study of
mathematics has given light to sciences very little connected with them. But
what will not wrong-headed men abuse! This advantage, which mathematical
reasoning has, for discovering truth, has given occasion to some to reject
truth itself, though supported by the most unexceptionable arguments.
Contending, that nothing is to be taken for truth, but what is proved by
mathematical demonstration, they, in many cases, take away all criterion of
truth, while they boast, that they defend the only infallible one.

But how easy is it to show the absurdity of such a way of philosophising? Ask
those gentlemen, whether they have any more doubt, that there were, in former
times, such men, as Alexander and Caesar, than whether all the angles of a
plain triangle amount to the sum of one hundred and eighty degrees; they cannot
pretend, that they believe the latter at all more firmly than the former. Yet
they have geometrical demonstration for the latter, and nothing more than mere
moral evidence for the former. Does not this show, that many things are to be
received, are actually received, even by themselves, for truth, for ce^ truth,
which are not capable of mathematical demonstration?

There is, therefore, an evidence, different from mathematical, to which we
cannot deny our assent; and it is called by latter philosophers, moral
evidence, as the persuasion arising from it is called moral certainty; a
certainty as real, and as much to be depended upon, as mathematical, though of
a different species. Nor is there any more difficulty in conceiving how this
may be, than in conceiving, that two buildings may be both sufficiently
substantial, and to all the intents and purposes of buildings, equally so,
though one be of marble, and the other of Portland stone.

The object of mathematics is quantity. The geometrician measures extension;
the mechanic compares forces. Divinity, ethics, ontology, and history, are
naturally incapable of mathematical disquisition, or demonstration. Yet moral
subjects are capable of being inquired into, and truths concerning them
determined in that way which is proper to them, as well as mathematical in
theirs; in the same manner as money is reckoned by tale, bullion by weight, and
liquors by measure, etc. [ Graves Orat. conc. Evid. MATHEM. ELEM. NOT. PHIL.]

VII. ARGUING.
THE regularity of the motions and revolutions of the heavens, the sun, the
moon, and numberless stars; Every body knows, that all the ancients from
Aristotle's time, held the Ptolemaic system, viz. of the earth's being
unmovable in the center of the universe, and the whole heavens turning round
her.
with the distinction, variety, beauty, and order of celestial objects; the
slightest observation of which seems sufficient to convince every beholder,
that they cannot be the effect of chance; these afford a proof of a Deity,
which seems irrefragable. If he, who surveys an academy, a palace or (...)
court of justice, and observes regularity, order, and oeconemy, prevailing in
them, is immediately convinced, that this regularity must be the effect of
authority and discipline, supported by persons properly qualified; how much
more reason has he who find himself surrounded by so many and such stupendous
bodies, Wonder.
performing their various motions and revolutions, without the least deviation
from perfect regularity, through the innumerable ages of past duration; how
much more reason has he to conclude, that such amazing revolutions are governed
by superior wisdom and power!

Contempt.
Is it not therefore astonishing, that any man should ever have dreamed of the
possibility, that a beautiful and magnificent system might ^rise from the
fortuitous concourse of certain bodies carried toward one another by, I know
not what, imaginary impulse! I see not, why he, who is capable of ascribing,
the production of a world to a cause so inadequate, may not expect, from the
fortuitous scattering about of a set of letters of ivory, or metal, a regular
history to appear. But I believe, he who hopes to produce, in this way, one
single line, will find himself for ever disappointed. If the casual concourse
of atoms has produced a whole universe, how comes it, that we never find a
city, a temple, or so much a^ a portico, which are all less considerable works,
produced in the same manner? One would imagine, they, who prate so absurdly,
about the origination of the world, had no eyes, or had never opened them to
view the glories of this immense theater.

The reasonings of Aristotle, on this point, Arguing.
are excellent. "Let us suppose, says he, certain persons to have been born,
and to have lived to mature age, under ground, in habitations accommodated with
all the conveniences, and even magnificence of life, except the sight of this
upper world. Let us suppose those persons to have heard by fame, of superior
beings, and wonderful effects produced by them. Wonder.
Let the earth be imagined suddenly to open, and expose to the view of those
subterraneans this fair world, which we inhabit. Delight.
Let them be imagined to behold the face of the earth diversified with hills
and vales, with rivers and woods; the wide extended ocean; the lofty sky; and
the clouds carried along by the winds. Let them behold the sun, and observe his
transcendent brightness and wonderful influence, as he pours down the flood of
day over the whole earth, from east to west. And when night covered the world
with darkness, let them behold the heavens adorned with innumerable stars. Let
them observe the various appearances of the moon, now horned, then full then
decreasing. Let them have leisure to mark the rising and sitting of the
heavenly bodies, and to understand that their established courses have been
going on from age to age. When they have surveyed and considered all these
things, what could they conclude, but that the accounts they had heard in their
subterranean habitation, of the existence of superior beings, must be true, and
that these prodigious works must be the effect of their power?"

Thus Aristotle. To which I will add that it is only our being accustomed to
the continual view of these glorious objects that prevents our admiring them,
and endeavoring to come to right conclusions concerning the Author of them. As
if novelty were a better reason for exciting our inquiries, than beauty and
magnificence. [Cic. NOT. DEOR. Lib. II.]

VIII. SNEER. The gravity of look and manner is to be kept up as much in
reading this, as if it were Aristotle's or Horace's serious directions on the
same subject.

Receipt to make an Epic Poem.
Teaching.
FOR the fable. Take out of any old poem, history-book, romance, or legend (for
instance, Geoffry of Monmouth or Don Belianis of Greece) those parts of the
story, which afford most scope for long descriptions. Put these pieces
together, and throw all the adventures into one tale. Then take a hero, whom
you may choose for the sound of his name, and put him into the midst of these
adventures. There let him work for twelve books; at the end of which you may
take him out ready to conquer, or to marry: it being necessary that the
conclusion of an epic poem be fortunate.

For the machines. Take of deities male and female as many as you can use.
Separate them into two equal parts, and keep Jupiter in the middle. Let Jun^
put him in a serment, and Venus moll^sy him. Remember on all occasions to make
use of volatile Mercury. If you have need of devil, draw them from Milton; and
extract your spirits from Tasso. When you cannot extricate your hero by any
human means, or yourself by your wits, seek relief from heaven; and the gods
will help you out of the scrape immediately. This is according to the direct
prescription of Horace in his ART OF POETRY.

Nec deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit. That is to say, A poet
has no occasion to be at a loss, when the gods are always ready at a call.

For the descriptions, as a tempest, for instance. Take Eurus, Zephyrus,
Austre, and Boreas, and cast them together in one verse. Add to these, of rain,
lightning and thunder, (the loudest you can get) quantum sufficit. Mix your
clouds and billows, till they foam; and thicken your description here and there
with a quicksand. Brew your tempest well in your head, before you set it a
blowing.

For a battle. Pick half a dozen large handfuls of images of your lions, bears,
and other quarrelsome animals, from Homer's Iliad, with a spice or two from
Virgil. If there remain an overplus, lay them by a skirmish in an odd episode,
or so. Season it well with similes, and it will make an excellent battle. For a
burning town, if you choose to have one, old Troy is ready burnt to your hands,
etc. [ Swift, Vol. v. p. 132.]

IX. REMONSTRANCE and CONTEMPT of Pride.
Quest.
DOES greatness secure persons of rank from infirmities either of body or mind?
Will the head-each, the gout or fever, spare a prince any more than a subject?
When old age comes to lie heavy The word heavy to be dragged out as expressing
distress. See Complaining, page 32.
upon him, Fear.
will his engineers relieve him of the load? This sentence [ Can his guards,
etc.] to be spoken with fear. See Fear, page 23.
Can his guards and sentinels. by doubling and trebling their numbers, and
their watchfulness, prevent the approach of death? Contempt.
Nay, if jealousy, or even ill-humour, disturb his happiness, will the cringes
of his fawning attendants restore his tranquillity? What comfort has he, in
reflecting (if he can make the reflection) while the cholic, like Prometheus's
vulture, tears his bowels, Anguish.
that he is under a canopy of crimson velvet fringed with gold? When the pangs
of the gout, or stone, extort from him screams of agony, Boasting.
do the titles of highness or majesty come sweetly into his ear? If he is
agitated If he is agitated, etc. to be spoken full-mouthed, as boasting. See
Boasting, page. 24.
with rage, does the sound of Serene, or Most Christian, prevent his staring,
reddening, and gnashing with his teeth, like a madman? Would not a twinge of
the toothache, Contempt.
or an affront from an inferior, make the mighty Caesar forget, that he was
emperor of the world? [Montaigne.]

X. HORRORS of War.
NOW had the Grecians snatched a short repast, Trepid.

And buckled on their shining arms in haste,
Troy roused as soon; for on that dreadful day, Perplexity.

The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusty plain; Trepid.

Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground;
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.
To be spoken quick and loud.
And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
Host against host their shadowy legions drew;
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
Victories and vanquished join promiscuous cries:
Triumphant shouts To be spoken boldly,
and dying groans To be spoken faintly, and with pity. See Pity page 22.
arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are died, Horror.

And slaughtered heroes, swell the dreadful tide.
Long as the morning beams increasing bright,
Over heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
Promiscuous death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
To be spoken slowly and with veneration. See Veneration, page 27.
The Sire of Gods his golden scales suspends
With equal hand. Awe.
In these explores the fate
Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight.
Pressed with its load the Grecian balance lies
Law sunk on earth; the Trojan strikes the skies.
Horror.
To be spoken hollow and full-mouthed.
Then Jove from Ida's top his horror spreads,
The clouds burst dreadful over the Grecian heads;
Thick lightenings flash; the mutt'ring thunder rolls;
Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls. Fear.

Before his wrath the To be spoken with a quivering voice.
trembling host retire,
The gods in terror, and the skies on fire.
[ Pope's HOM. II. B. viii. v. 67.] XI. PETITIONING with DEJECTION.
Passages taken from sundry petitions Though petitions are commonly presented
in writing, yet they may be imagined to be addressed to the prince viva v^^e,
and sometimes (...)
presented to the French king by a disgraced minister.

[ Pens. Ing. Anc. Mod. p. 167.] Dejection.
BEING weary of the useless life I live at present, I take the liberty of
imploring with profound submission, your Majesty, that I may have leave to seek
an honorable death in your Majesty's service. After the disappointments, and
reverses of fortune, which I have had to struggle with, my expectations of
rising again to prosperity, are brought low enough. But it would be a
satisfaction to me, Humble Remonstrance.
that my real character were known to your Majesty; which if it were, I flatter
myself, I should have your Majesty's indulgence, Beseeching.
nay your esteem. Refuse not, most gracious Sovereign, the means, for gaining
this end, to a man, who is ready to shed his blood, in proof of his loyalty and
affection to your Majesty. Were my own private interest alone concerned, I
should be peculiarly cautious, how I intruded upon your Majesty with these
solicitations. But as the only happiness I desire in this world, is, Earnest
Solicitation
to have an opportunity of serving my king and country; I humbly hope, I may be
forgiven, though I urge my suit with some warmth and importunity. I do not
presume, Sire, Remorse
to claim a total exemption from hardship. I pretend to no right to live a life
of indulgence. All I ask, is, Beseeching.
to change one punishment for another. And I beseech your Majesty to have some
consideration for my past services; and that a year's imprisonment, five years
exile, the ruin of my fortune, the submission with which I have borne these
punishments, and the zeal I still am ready to show for your Majesty's service,
may plead in my favor, and disarm your Majesty of your indignation against me.
It is true, that in making your Majesty the offer of my life, Humble
Remonstrance.
I offer what is of little value even to myself. But it is all I have to offer.
Dejection.
The misfortune I have lain under, these six years, of your Majesty's
displeasure, has rendered life so insipid to me, that besides the honor of
losing it in your Majesty's service, the prospect of an end, being, by death
put to my vexations, makes the thought of my dissolution pleasing to me.
Profound Submission.
If it should seem good to your Majesty to finish my distresses the other way,
I mean, by your most gracious pardon, the obligation will be still greater; and
to the zeal I have for your Majesty's interest, I shall think myself obliged to
add gratitude suitable to so important a favor. Resolution.
And with such sentiments there is nothing I shall not be willing to enterprise
for your Majesty's service. Devotion.
May heaven touch the heart of your Majesty, that you may at last forgive your
sincerely penitent subject. Humble Remonstrance.
No one knows better than your Majesty, that it is as great to forgive as to
punish. If I alone am doomed to have no benefit from that goodness, which
extends to so many, my lot must be peculiarly calamitous.

XII. PRAISE under the appearance of Blame. This is to be spoken in the same
manner as if one was finding fault in earnest. For it is the character of
Humor to mean the contrary of what it seems to mean. And though the matter was
originally part of a Letter, it may be imagined as spoken.

Voiture's whimsical commendation of the Marquis de Pisany's courage.

[Pens. Ing. Anc. Mod. p. 152.] Congratulation.
I AM extremely glad to hear that you are grown so hardy, that neither labor,
watching, sickness, lead, nor steel can hurt you. I could not have thought,
Wonder.
that a man, who lived on water gruel, should have so thick a skin; nor did I
imagine you had a spell, by which you was powder-proof. To account, how you
come to be still alive, after the desperate hazards you have run, is more than
I can pretend to. Congratulation.
But I had rather, it were by the help of the Devil himself, than that you were
as poor Attichy, or Grenville; if you were embalmed with the richest drugs of
the Fast. Disapprobation.
To tell you my opinion plainly, Sir; let a man die for his country, or for
honor, or what you please, I cannot help thinking he makes but a silly figure,
The speaker will naturally utter these words, silly figure, with a shrug.
when he is dead. It seems to me great pity, Concern.
that some people should be so careless about their lives, as they are. For
despicable as life is, a man when he has lost it, Remonstrance.
is not worth half what he was when he had it. In short, a dead king, a dead
hero, or even a dead demi-god, is in my mind, but a poor character; and much
good may it do him, who is ambitious of it.

XIII. A lovesick Shepherd's COMPLAINT. See Melancholy, page 22.

AH well-a-day! how long must I endure. Lamentation

This pining pain? The words pining pain cannot be spoken too slowly. See
Complaining, page 32.
Or who shall speed my cure?
Fond love no cure will have; seeks no repose; Anguish.

Delights in grief, nor any measure knows.
These four lines are to be spoken slowly; and with a torpid uniformity of tone.
Lo! now the moon begins in clouds to rise, Complaint.

The bright'ning stars bespangle all the skies.
The winds are hushed. The dews distill; and sleep
Has closed the eyelids of my weary sheep.
The speaker is to seem toused here, as by a sudden pang.
I only with the prowling wolf constrained
These four words to express extreme anguish.
All night to wake. With hunger he is pained, Anguish.

And I with love. His hunger he may tame;
But who can quench A stop before and after the words, O cruel love, which are
to be expressd with acclamations of anguish.
O cruel love! thy flame?
Lamentation
Whilom did I, all as this popular fair,
Up-rise my heedless head, devoid of care;
Among rustic routs the chief of wanton game;
Nor could they merry make, till Lobbin came.
Who better seen than I Am shepherd's arts,
To please the lads, and win the lasses' hearts?
How deftly to mine oaten reed so sweet
Wont they upon the green to shift their feet
And wearied in the dance how would they yearn
Some well devised tale from me to learn!
For many a song, and tale of mirth, had I
To chase the loit'ring sun adown the sky.
But ah! since Lucy coy deep wrought her spite
Within my heart, unmindful of delight,
The jolly youths I fly; and all alone
To rocks and woods pour forth my fruitless moan.
Deprecation.
Oh! leave thy cruelty, relentless fair;
E're lingering long, I perish through despair.
Complaint.
Had Rosalind been mistress of my mind,
Though not so fair, she would have proved more kind.
O think, unwitting maid! while yet is time,
Advice.
How flying years impair the youthful prime!
Thy virgin bloom will not for ever stay,
And flowers though left ungather'd, will decay.
The flowers, anew, returning seasons bring;
But faded beauty has no second spring.
Despair.
A long pause.
-- My words are wind! -- She, deaf to all my cries,
Takes pleasure in the mischief of her eyes.
[A. Philips.] XIV. REMONSTRANCE.
Part of Socrates's speech to Montaigne, in the French DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD.

[ Pens. Ing. Anc. Mod. p. 117.] Teaching.
ANTIQUITY is an object of a peculiar sort: Distance magnifies it. If you had
been personally acquainted with Aristotle, Phocion, and me; you would have
found nothing in us very different from what you may find in people of your own
age. What commonly prejudices us in favor of antiquity, is that we are
prejudiced against our own times. We raise the ancients, Disapprobation.
that we may depress the moderns. When we ancients were alive, we esteemed our
ancestors more than they deserved. And our posterity esteem us more than we
deserve. But the very truth of the matter is, our ancestors, and we, and our
posterity, are all very much alike.

XV. AUTHORITY and FORBIDDING.
Jupiter forbids the gods and goddesses taking any part in the contention
between the Greeks and Trojans.

AURORA now, fair daughter of the dawn, Narration.

Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn;
When Jove convened the senate of the skies,
Where high Olympus' cloudy tops arise, Awe.

The Sire of gods his awful silence broke;
The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke;
" Celestial states! immortal gods! give ear; Authority.
There are three pretty long pauses to be made in this line, at the words,
states, gods, and ear. The words, Celestial states! may be spoken with the
right arm extended, the palm upwards, and the look directed toward the right,
as addressing that part of the assembly. The words immortal gods! with the left
arm extended, in the same manner, (the right continuing likewise extended) and
the look directed toward the left hand part of the assembly. And the words,
give ear, with the look bent directly forward. See Authority, page 25.

Hear our decree; and reverence what ye hear;
The fixed decree, which not all heaven can move;
Thou Fate! fulfill it; and ye, Powers approve.
Threatening.
At the words, What god shall enter, the left arm, which should continue
extended, with the right, to the beginning of this fourth line of the speech,
may be drawn in, and placed upon the hip, while the right is brandished with
the clenched fist, as in threatening. See Boasting, page 24.
What god shall enter yon' forbidden field,
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield.
Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven,
Gash'd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven
The speaker will naturally here point downward with the fore finger of his
right hand.
Or from our sacred hill with fury thrown
Deep, in the dark Tartarian gulf shall groan;
With burning chains fixed to the brazen floors,
And locked by hell's inexorable doors;
As deep beneath the infernal center hurled,
As from that center to the athereal world.
"Let each," etc.] The speaker may here again extend both arms as before, the
open palms upwards, casting a look over the whole room, suppose to be filled
with the gods.
Let each, submissive, dread those dire abodes,
Challenging.
Nor tempt the vengeance of the God of gods.
League all your forces, then, ye powers above;
Your strength unite against the might of Jove.
Let down our golden everlasting chain,
Whose strong embrace holds heaven and earth and main.
Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth,
To drag by this the thund'rer down to earth.
The speaker will do well here, to have his arms in any other posture, rather
than extended; because, after the pause in the middle of the line, the right
arm must be extended with great solemnity.
Ye Contempt.
strive in vain, if I Challenging.
but stretch this hand,
I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land.
I fix the chain to great Olympus' height,
And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight.
For such I reign unbounded, and above;
And such are men, and gods compared to Jove.
XVI. SUBLIME DESCRIPTION.
An Ode, from the xixth Psalm.

[ Spect. No. 465.] I.
THE lofty pillars of the sky,
And spacious concave raised on high, Admiration.

Spangled with stars, a shining frame,
Their great original proclaim.
The unwearied sun, from day to day,
Pours knowledge on his golden ray, Veneration.

And publishes to every land
The work of an Almighty hand.
II.
Soon as the evening shades prevail, Admir.

The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly to the listening earth
Repeats the story of her birth;
Whilst all the stars, that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings, as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
III.
What, Quest.
though in solemn silence all
Move round the dark terrestrial ball?
What though no real voice, nor sound
Amid their radiant orbs be found?
In Reason's ear they all rejoice, Veneration.

And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever singing, as they shine,
"The hand, that made us, is divine."
XVII. DESCRIPTION, sublime, and terrible.
The fight about Patroclus's body, broke off by Achilles's appearing on the
rampart, unarmed, and calling aloud.

[ Pope's Hom. II. xviii. Admiration.
v. 241.] THE hero rose,
Her Aegis Pallas over his shoulder throws;
Around his brows a golden cloud she spread;
A stream of glory flamed above his head
As when from some beleagur'd town arise,
The smokes high-curling to the shaded skies
(Seen from some island over the main afar
When men distressed hang out the sign of war)
With long projected beams the seas are bright,
And heav'en's wide arch rejects the ruddy light;
So from Achilles' head the splendors rise,
Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.
Forth marched the chief, and distant from the crowd,
High on the rampart The reader will hardly need to be told, that such matter
ought to be expressed with a raised voice.
raised his voice aloud.
With her own shout Minerva swells the sound;
Terror.
Troy starts astonished, and the shores rebound.
As the loud trumpet's brazen mouth from far,
With shrilling clang or sounds the alarm of war,
Trepidation.
So high his dreadful voice the hero reared;
These three lines to be spoken quicker than the rest.
Hosts dropped their arms and trembled as they heard;
Terror.
And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
Aghast they see the living lightning play,
And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
Thrice from the trench his brazen voice he raised;
And thrice they fled confounded and amazed.
Twelve in the tumult wedged untimely rushed
On their own spears, by their own chariots crushed:
While shielded from the darts the Greeks obtain
The long disputed carcass of the slain.
XVIII. COMPLAINT.
Humorous petition of a French gentleman to the king, who had given him a
title, to which his income was not equal, by reason of the weight of the taxes
levied from his estate.

[ Pens. Ing. Anc. Mod. p. 428.] [After acknowledging the honor done him by the
king's conferring on him a title, he goes on as follows.]

YOUR Majesty has only made me more unhappy by giving me a title. Complaining
For there is nothing more pitiable than a gentleman loaded with a knapsack.
This empty sound, Vexation.
which I was such a fool as to be ambitious of, does not keep away hunger. I
know well enough, that glory makes us live after we are dead; but in this
world, a man has but a poor time on 't, if he has not a bit of bread to put in
his mouth. I had but a little bit of land on the banks of the Rhone, on which I
made a shift to live. But as it is now taxed, any body may have it for me;
Apprehension.
for I suppose I shall soon, with my title and estate, be glad of an almshouse
for my seat. I have no resource, if there be a prosecution commenced against
me, as they threaten, but in your Majesty's goodness. If indeed, my fate is to
be decided by that, Comfort.
I am in no danger, Deprecation
but shall laugh at them all. If your Majesty were to seize my poor patrimony
whole, what would a few acres of marsh-land be to the Pomp.
mighty monarch of France and Navarre? It Contempt.
bears nothing but willows, Submission.
and your Majesty values no trees but the laurel. I, therefore, beseech your
Majesty to give me leave to enjoy what my little spot brings in, without
deduction. Entreating.
All that a poor subject asks of your Majesty is -- That your Majesty would ask
nothing of him.

XIX. TERRIBLE DESCRIPTION.
Narration.
IN elder days, ere yet the Roman bands
Victorious, this our distant world subdued,
A spacious city stood with firmest walls
Sure mounded, and with numerous turrets crowned,
Aeriel spires and citadels, the seat
Of kings and heroes resolute in war;
Famed Ariconium; uncontrol'd and free,
Till all-subduing Latian arms prevailed.
Then likewise, though to foreign yoke submiss,
Unlevel'd she remained; and even till now
Perhaps had stood, of ancient British art
A pleasing monument, not less admired
Than what from Attic or Etruscan hands
Awe. Narration.
Arose; had not the heavenly powers averse
Decreed her final doom. And now the fields
Labored with thirst. Aquarius had not shed
His wonted showers, and Sirius parched with heat
Solstitial the green herb. Hence 'gan relax
The earth's contexture. Hence Tartarian dregs,
Horror.
Sulphur and nitrous spume, enkindling fierce
Bellowed tremendous in her darksome caves,
More dismal than the loud disploded roar
Of brazen enginry, that ceaseless storm
The bastion of a well built city deemed
Impregnable. The infernal winds, till now
Closely imprisoned by Titanian warmth
Dilating, and with unctuous vapor feed,
Disdained their narrow cells; and, their full strength
Collecting, from beneath the solid mass
Up-heav'd, and all her castles rooted deep
Shook from their lowest seat. Old Vaga's stream
Forced by the sudden shock, her wonted track
Forsook, and drew her humid train aslope,
Wrinkling her banks. And now the lowering sky, Awe.

The baleful lightning, and loud thunder, voice
Of angry heaven, fierce roaring, with dismay
The boldest hearts appal'd. Trepidation.
To be spoken quick from the words, Where should to desolation.
Where should they turn
Distressed? Whence seek for aid? When from below
Hell threatens; Despair.
and when fate supreme gives signs
Of wrath and desolation. Vain were vows,
And plaints, and suppliant hands to heaven erect!
Yet some to temples fled, Contempt.
and humble rites
Performed to Thor and Woden, fabled gods,
Who with their vot'ries in one ruin shared,
Overwhelmed and crushed. Others in frantic mood, Trepidation.

Run howling through the streets. Their hideous yells
Rend the dark welkin. Horror.
Horror stalks around
Wild staring, and his sad concomitant
Despair, of abject look. Trepidation.
At every gate
The thronging populace with hasty strides
Press furious, and, too eager of escape,
Obstruct the spacious way. The rocking street
Deceives their footsteps. To and fro they reel
Horror.
Astonished, as with wine o'ercharg'd. When lo!
The parched earth her riven mouth disparts
Horrible chasm profound! With swift descent
Old Ariconium sinks; and all her tribes,
Heroes and senators, down to the realms
Of endless night. Mean while the loosened winds
Infuriate, molton rocks and globes of fire
Hurled high above the clouds; till all their force
Consumed, her ravenous jaws, earth, satiate closed. [A Philips.]
XX. RIDICULE.
Swift on Transubstantiation. A pupil, in order to his expressing properly this
lesson, must be let a little into the author's plot; that by Peter is meant the
Pope, by Martin, the Lutheran church, and by Jack, the Calvinists. That in this
passage he exposes the doctrine of the wafer's being transubstantiated into the
real body of Christ; the Papists refusing the cup to the laity; the arrogance
of the Popes; and the evils arising from persecution.


[ Tale of a Tub, Sect. IV.] Scene, Lord Peter's house; a table covered with
plates, knives, and forks, and a brown loaf in the middle of the table. Lord
Peter, Martin, Jack. Peter. Dictating.
BREAD, gentlemen, bread is the staff of life. In bread is contained inclusive,
the quintessence of beef, mutton, veal, venison, patridge, plumb-pudding, and
custard; and, to render all complete there is intermingled a due quantity of
water, whose crudities are corrected by yeast, and which therefore becomes, to
all intents and purposes, a wholesome fermented liquor diffused through the
mass of the bread. Therefore he, who eats bread, at the same time eats the best
of food, and drinks the best of liquors. Come on brothers, Inviting.
the cause is good; fall to, and spare not. Here is a shoulder of excellent
Banstead mutton [pointing to the brown loaf] as ever was cut with knife. Here
you may cut and come again. But, now I think on it, I had better help you
myself, now my hand is in. Young people are bashful. Come, brother Martin, let
me help you to this slice.


Martin. My lord! Surprise. Submission
[so Peter ordered his brothers to call him] I doubt, with great submission,
here is some little mistake. In my humble....


Peter. What you are merry? Come then, Peevishness.
let us hear this jest, your head is so big with.


Martin. No jest indeed my lord. Submission
But unless I am very much deceived, your lordship was pleased, a little while
ago, to drop a word about mutton; and I should be glad to see it upon the table.


Peter. How! I don't comprehend you. Peevishness.



Jack. Why, my lord, my brother Martin, Submission.
I suppose, is hungry, and longs to see the shoulder of Banstead mutton, you
spoke of, come to table.


Peter. Pray explain yourselves, gentlemen. Peevishness.
Either you are both out of your wits, or are disposed to be merry a little
unseasonably. You had better keep your jokes till after dinner Brother Martin,
Recollection.
if you don't like the slice I have helped you to, I will cut you another;
though I should think it the choice bit of the whole shoulder.


Martin Quest.
What then, my lord, is this brown loaf a shoulder of Banstead mutton all this
while? Wonder. Reproving.



Peter. Pray, Sir, leave off your impertinence and eat your victuals, if you
please. I am not disposed to relish your wit at present.


Martin. Affirmation.
May I then, my lord, be soused over head and ears in a horse-pond, if it seems
to my eyes, my fingers, my nose, or my teeth, either less or more, than a slice
of a stale six-penny brown loaf.


Jack. If I ever saw a shoulder of mutton in my life look so like a six-penny
brown loaf, I am an old basket-woman.


Peter. Reproving.
Look you, gentlemen, to convince you what a couple of blind, positive,
ignorant puppies, you are, I will use but one plain argument. Execration.
The d -- l roast both your souls on his grid^r^n to all eternity, if you don't
believe this [clapping his hand upon the brown loaf] to be a shoulder of as
good mutton as ever was sold in Leaden Hall market.


Martin. Recollection.
Why truly, upon more mature consideration......


Jack. Why, ay, now I have thought better on the thing, your lordship seems to
be in the right.


Peter. Reconciliation.
O now you are come to yourselves. Boy fill me a bumper of claret. Come
brothers, here is good health to you both.


Martin and Jack. Submission.
Thank your good lordship, and shall be glad to pledge you.


Peter. That you shall, my boys. I am not a man to refuse you any thing in
reason. A moderate glass of wine is a cordial. Giving.
There, [giving them a crust each,] There is a bumper a piece for you. Surprise.
True natural juice of the grape. None of your nasty balderdash vintners'
brewings -- What now! [Observing them to stare,] are you at your doubts again?
Threatening
Here boy. Call neighbor Dominic Saint Dominic was the inventor of the
inquisition.
the blacksmith here. Bid him bring his tongs with him. Red hot -- do you hear.
I Will teach you to doubt.


Martin. To be spoken quick to the end.
Come Jack. Trepidation.
This house is like to be too hot for you and me soon. He is quite raving mad.
Let Us get away Separation of the Protestants from the Romish church.
as fast as we can.


Jack. A plague on his crazy head. If ever I put my nose within his door again,
may it be pinched off in good earnest. [Exeunt running.]


XXI. EXHORTATION. Prologue to Cato, by Mr. Pope.
TO wake the soul by tender strokes of art, Teaching.

To raise the genius, and to mend the heart; The words, mend the heart, may be
expressed with the right hand laid upon the breast.

To make mankind in conscious virtue bold, Courage.

Live over each scene, and be what they behold;
For this the tragic muse first trod the stage, Teaching.

Commanding tears to stream through every age.
Tyrants no more their savage nature kept,
And foes to virtue wondered how they wept. Wonder. Contempt.

I question whether all readers of this line [ Our author shuns, etc.]
understand it as the author meant it. The sense, in plain prose, would be, "Our
author thinks it beneath him to endeavor to affect you by the common subject
of tragic distress, as the fall of a prince or statesman, or the misfortunes
occasioned by love."
Our author shuns by vulgar springs to move,
The hero's glory, or the virgin's love.
In pitying love, we but our weakness show,
And wild ambition well deserves its woe,
Exciting.
Here tears shall flow from a more generous cause,
Such tears as parriots shed for dying laws.
He bids your breast with ancient ardors rise,
And calls forth Roman drops from British eyes,
Virtue confessed in human shape he draws,
Veneration.
What Plato thought, and godlike Cato was;
No common object to your sight displays;
Awe. Esteem.
But what with pleasure heaven itself surveys,
A brave man struggling in the storms of fate,
And greatly falling with a falling state,
While Cato gives his little senate laws,
Earnestness.
What bosom The words, What bosom beats not, may be spoken with the right hand
pressed to the breast.
beat not in his country's cause?
Who sees him act, but envies every deed?
Who hears him groan, and does not wish to bleed?
Contempt.
Even when proud Caesar midst triumphal cars,
The spoils of nations, and the pomp of wars,
Ignobly vain, and impotently great,
Showed Rome her Cato's figure drawn in state,
Dejection.
As her dead father's reverend image past,
The pomp was darkened, and the day overcast;
Grief. Contempt.
The triumph ceased. Tearegush'd from every eye,
The world's great victor passed unheeded by.
Her last good man dejected Rome adored,
Grief. Teaching.
And honored Caesar's less than Cato's sword.
Britons attend! Be worth like this approved,
And show, you have the virtue So may the word, virtue.
to be moved.
Contempt.
With honest scorn the first famed Cato viewed
Rome learning arts from Greece, whom she subdued.
Our scene precariously subsists too long
On French translation and Italian song,
Dare to have sense yourselves: Assert the stage, Exciting.

Be justly warmed with your own native rage.
Such plays alone should please a British ear,
As Cato's self had not disdained to hear.
XXII. Humorous scene between Dennis the critic (satyrically represented by
Swift, as mad^ and the Doctor.
Scene, Dennis's garret. Dennis, Doctor, Nurse, Lintot the bookseller, and
another author. Dennis. [Looking wise, and bringing out his words slowly and
formally.]

BEWARE, Doctor, that it fare not with you, Warning.
as it did wish your predecessor, the famous Hippocrates, whom the mistaken
citizens of Abdera sent for, in this very manner, Prides
to cure the philosopher Democritus. He returned full of admiration at the
wisdom of the person, whom he had supposed a lunatic. Behold, Doctor, it was
thus that Aristotle himself, and all the great ancients, spent their days and
nights wrapped up in criticism, and beset all round with their own writings. As
for me, be assured, I have no disease, besides a swelling in my legs, of which
I say nothing, since your art may farther certify you.


Doctor. Pray, Sir, Questioning.
how did you contract this swelling?


Dennis. By Criticism.


Doctor By Criticism! Wonder.
That Is a distemper I have never heard nor read of.


Dennis. Death Sir! A distemper! Sudden anger.
It is no distemper; but a noble art. I have sat fourteen hours a day at it,
and are you a doctor, Contempt.
and don't know, that there is a communication between the brain and the legs?


Doctor. Question.
What made you sit so many hours, Sir?


Dennis. ^arnest.
Cato, Sir.


Doctor. Sir, I speak of your distemper. What gave you this tumor?


Dennis. Peevish. Entreat.
Cato, Cato, Cato. He published Remarks on Cato, in the year 1712.



Nurse. For God's sake, Doctor, name not this evil spirit; it is the whole
cause of his madness. Grief.
Alas! poor master will have his fits again. [Almost crying.]


Lintot. Wonder.
Fits! with a pox; a man may well have fits and swelled legs, that sits writing
fourteen hours in a day. The Remarks, the Remarks, have brought all his
complaints upon him.


Doctor. Question. Wonder. Peevishness.
The Remarks! What are they?


Dennis. Death! have you never read my Remarks? I Will he hanged if this
niggardly bookseller has advertised the book as it should have been.


Lintot. Not advertise it, quotha! Pox! I have laid out pounds after pounds in
advertising. There has been as much done for the book, as could be done for any
book in Christendom.


Doctor. Cautioning.
We had better not talk of books Sir: I am afraid, they are the fuel that feed
his delirium. Mention books no more.

I desire a word in private with this gentleman. Question.
I suppose, Sir, you are his apothecary?


Gent. Sir, I am his friend.


Doctor. I doubt it not. What regimen have you observed, since he has been
under your care? You remember, I suppose, the passage in Celsus, which says,
"If the patient, on the third day, have an interval, suspend the medicaments at
night. Teaching.
" Let fumigations be used to corroborate the brain. I hope, you have, upon no
account, promoted sternutation by Hellebore?


Gent. Sir, you mistake the matter quite. Pride and anger.



Doctor. What! An apothecary tell a physician, he mistakes! You pretend to
dispute my prescription! Pharmacopola componat. Medicus solus praescribat.
Fumigate him, I say, Authority.
this very evening, while he is relieved by an interval.


Dennis. Death Sir! Anger.
Do you take my friend for an apothecary! A man of genius and learning for an
apothecary! Know, Sir, that this gentleman professes, like myself, Authority,
the two noblest sciences in the universe, Criticism, and Poetry. By the
immortals, he himself is author of three whole paragraphs in my Remarks, had a
hand in my Public Spirit, and assisted me in my description of the Furies and
infernal regions in my ^ppius.


Lintot. He is an author. You mistake the gentleman, Doctor. He has been an
author these twenty years, to his bookseller's knowledge, if to no one's else.
Sneer.



Dennis. Is all the town in a combination! Vexation.
shall poetry fall to the ground! Must our reputation in foreign countries be
quite lost? Anguish.
O Destruction! Perdition! Cursed Opera! Confounded Opera! He wrote a Treatise
to prove, that the decay of public spirit proceeds from the Italian Opera.
As poetry once raised cities, so, when poetry fails, cities are overturned,
and the world is no more.


Doctor. He raves, he raves. Anxiety.
He must be pinioned, he must be strait-waistcoated, that he may do no mischief.


Dennis. O I am sick! I am sick to death. Vexation.



Doctor. Comfort.
That is a good symptom; a very good symptom. To be sick to death (says the
modern theory) is symptom praeclarum. When a patient is sensible of his pain,
Question.
he is half cured, Pray, Sir, of what are you sick?


Dennis. Peevishness.
Of every thing. Of every thing. I am sick of the sentiments, of the diction, of
the protasis, of the epitasis, and the catastrophe. Alas, for the lost drama!
The drama is no more.


Nurse. If you want a dram, Sir, I will bring you a couple of penn'orths of gin
in a minute. Obsequiousness.
Mr. Lintot has drank the last of the noggin.


Dennis. Peevishness.
O scandalous want! O shameful omission! By all the immortals, here is not the
shadow of a peripetia! No change of fortune in the tragedy.


Nurse. Pray, Sir, don't be uneasy about change. Obsequious.
Give me the sixpence, and I Will get you change immediately at the gin-shop
next door.


Doctor, Hold your peace, good woman. His fit increases. We must call for help.
Mr. Lintot a -- hold him, Directing.
pray, [Doctor gets behind Lintot.]


Lintot. Fear.
Plague on the man! I am afraid, he is really mad. And, if he be, who, the
devil will buy the Remarks? Anxiety.
I wish [scratching his head] he had been b^sh -- t rather than I had meddled
with his Remarks.


Doctor. He must use the cold bath, and be cupped on the head. The symptoms
seem desperate. Directing. Anxiety.
Avicen says, "If learning be mixed with a brain, that is not of a contexture
fit to receive it, the brain ferments, till it be totally exhausted." We must
endeavor to eradicate these indigested ideas out of the pericranium, and to
restore the patient to a competent knowledge of himself.


Dennis. Caitiffs, stand off! Unhand me, miscreants! [The Doctor, the nurse,
and Lintot, run out of the room in a hurry, and tumble down the garret stairs
altogether.] Is the man, whose labors are calculated to bring the town to
reason, Mad? Is the man, who settles poetry on the basis of antiquity, mad? See
Longinus in my right hand, and Aristotle in my left! [Calls after the Doctor,
the bookseller, and the nurse from the top of the stairs.] I am the only man
among the moderns, that support the venerable ancients. And am I to be
assassinated? Shall a bookseller, who has lived upon my labors, take away that
life, to which he owes his support? [Goes into his garret, and shuts the door.]


XXIII. ADORATION.
Milton's Morning Hymn.

[PARAD. LOST. B. V. v. 153.] THese are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Veneration.

Almighty! Thine this universal frame, Admiration.

Thus wondrous fair! Thyself " Thyself how wondrous," etc. The sense, in
prose, would be, "If thy works be so wonderfully excellent, thine own original
excellence is unspeakable, and inconceivable." It is not, I believe, generally
understood so, else readers would not (as I have heard many) make a pause
between the word then and unspeakable.
how wondrous then
Unspeakable! who sitt'st above the heavens, Veneration.

To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; Love with Veneration.
yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels! For The reader need scarce be told, that such matter ought to be
expressed with as much smoothness and liquidity of utterance as possible.
ye behold him, Sacred Rapture.
and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night;
Circle his throne rejoicing. "Ye in heaven." This is generally ill pointed.
These words are a complete sentence. The meaning is, "I call on you [Angels] to
praise God in your celestial habitation." And then the poet goes on to call on
the terrestrials to join their humble tribute.
Ye in heaven!
On earth join all ye creatures to extol
Him first, him last, Him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet! praise him in thy sphere,
While morn arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Admiration.
"Thou sun of this," etc. To be spoken a little more ore rotundo, or
full-mouthed, than the foregoing, to image the stupendous greatness of a world
of fire, equal as supposed by astronomers, to a million of earths.
Thou son, of this great world both eye and soul,
Lowly Submission.
Acknowledge Him thy greater. Sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,
And when high moon have gained, and when thou fall'st,
Rapture.
Moon, that now meet'st the orient sun, now fly'st
With the fixed stars, fixed in their sphere on high,
And ye five other wandering orbs, that move
In mystic dance, not without song! resound
His praise, who out of darkness called up light
Air, and ye elements, the eldest birth
Of nature's womb, that in quaterion run
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye mists, and exhalations, that now rise
From hill, or streaming lake, dusky or gray,
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honor to the world's great Author rise;
Whether to deck with clouds, the uncolour'd sky,
Or cheer with falling showers the thirsty ground,
Rising, or falling, still advance his praise.
His praise, ye winds that from four quarters blow
Breathe soft or loud,; and wave your tops, ye pines,
With every plant, in sign of worship wave,
Fountains, and ye that warble as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise,
Join voices, all ye living souls. Ye birds,
That singing up to heaven's high gate ascend,
Bear on your wings, and in your notes his praise^.
Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep.
Witness, if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill, or valley, fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord! Be bounteous still, Profound Submission.

To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed,
Disperse it, as now day the dark dispels.
XXIV. PEEVISHNESS.
The scene between Priuli, a Venetian senator, and Jaffier, who had married his
daughter without his consent, and being afterward reduced to poverty, and
soliciting his father-in-law to relieve his distress, receives the following
treatment.

[VENICE PRESERVED.] Priuli and Jaffier. Pr. NO more! I Will hear no more. Be
gone, Peevishness.
and leave me.

Jaff. Not hear me! Courage.
By my sufferings but you shall.
My lord! my lord! I am not that abject wretch
You think me. Where Is the difference, Remonstr.
throws me back
So far behind you, that I must not speak to you?

Pr. Peevishness. Courage.
Have you not wronged me?

Jaff. Could my nature ever
But have endured the thought of doing wrong,
Distress.
I need not now thus low have bent myself
To gain a hearing from a cruel father.
Remonser. Peevishness.
You cannot say that I have ever wronged you.

Pr. I say you have wronged me in the nicest point,
Remoust.
The honor of my house. You cannot defend
Your baseness to me. When you first came home,
From travel, I with open arms received you.
Pleased with your seeming virtues; sought to raise you.
My house, my table, fortune, all was yours.
Chiding.
And in requital of my best endeavors,
You treacheously practiced to undo me;
Seduced the joy of my declining age,
My only child, and stole her from my bosom.

Jaff. Remonstr.
Is this your gratitude to him who saved
Your daughter's life? You know, that, but for me,
Self-Defence
You had been childless. I restored her to you,
When sunk before your eyes amidst the waves,
I hazarded my life for here is; and she
Has richly paid me with her generous love.

Pr. Reproaching
You stole her from me, like a thief you stole her,
At dead of night. That cursed hour you chose
To rifle me of all my heart held dear.
Execration.
But may your joy in her prove false as mi^
May the hard hand of pinching poverty
Oppress and grind you; till at last you find.
The curse of disobedience all your fortun^
Chiding.
Home, and be humble. Study to retren^h.
Discharge the lazy vermin of thy hall,
Those pageants of thy folly
Reduce the glittering trappings of thy wise
To humble weeds fit for thy narrow state.
Then to some suburb-cottage both retire,
And with your starveling brats enjoy your misery.
Home, home, I say. [Exit.]

XXV. CONTEMPT of the common objects of pursuit. From Mr. Pope's ESSAYS ON MAN.
HONOR and shame from no condition rise; Teaching.

Act well your part: There all the honor lies.
Fortune in men has some small difference made;
One flaunts in rags; one flutters in brocade;
The cobbler apron'd, and the parson gown'd;
The friar hooded, and the monarch crowned.
" What differ more (you cry) than crown and cowl? Quest.
"
This line [I'll tell you, friend," etc.] may be expressed in a sort of
important half-whisper, and with significant looks, and nods, as if a grand
secret was told.
I Will tell you, friend! A wise man and a fool. Informing. Teaching.

You Will find, if once the wise man acts the monk:
Or, cobbler like, the parson will be drunk;
Approba.
Worth makes the man, and Contempt.
want of it the fellow;
The rest is all but leather or prunella.
Stuck over with titles, Sneer.
and hung round with strings,
That thou may be by kings, or whores of kings,
Boast the pure blood of an illustrious race
In quiet flow from Lucrece to Lucrece: Contempt.

But by your father's worth if yours you rate,
Count me those only, who were good and great.
Go! if your ancient, but ignoble blood.
Has crept through scoundrels ever since the flood:
Go! and pretend, your family is young,
Nor own, your fathers have been fools so long.
What can ennoble sots, or slaves, or cowards?
Quest.
Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards.
Sneer.
Look next on greatness. Say, where greatness lies?
Where, but among the heroes and the wise.
Heroes are all the same, it is agreed,
Contempt.
From Macedona's madman to the Swede.
The whole strange purpose of their lives to find,
I have put a pause after make, though contrary to general rule, to mark the
antithesis between find and make, more distinctly.
Or make -- an enemy of all mankind
Not one looks backward: onward still he goes;
Yet never looks forward, farther than his nose.
No less alike the politic and wise;
"All sly, slow things," to be pronounced very slowly, and with a cunning look.
All sly, slow things, with circumspective eyes
Men in their loose, unguarded hours they take;
Remon.
Not that themselves are wise; but others weak.
But grant that those can conquer; these can cheat;
Aversion.
It Is phrase absurd to call a villain great.
Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
Approbation.
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave
Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
Or, failing, smiles in exile, or in chains,
Admiration. Seperior Neglect.
Like good Aurelius let him reign; or bleed
Like Socrates; that man is great indeed.
What Is fame? A fancied life, in others' breath;
A thing beyond us, even before our death.
Just what you hear's your own; and what is unknown,
The same (my lord!) if Tully's, or your own.
All, that we feel " All that we feel," etc. to be expressed with the right
hand laid upon the breast.
of it, begins and ends
In the small circle of our foes, or friends;
To all besides as much an empty shade,
An Eugene living, as a Caesar dead;
Alike or when, or where, they shone, or shine, Contempt. Approbation.

Or on the Rubicon, or on the Rhine.
A wit's a feather, and a chief a rod;
An honest man's the noblest work of God. Aversion.

Fame, but from death a villain's name can save,
As justice tears his body from the grave; Blaming.

When what is oblivion better were resigned,
Is hung on high, to poison half mankind.
All fame is foreign, but of true desert; Superior Neglect.

Plays round the head; but comes not to the heart. Contempt. Admiration.
-- " Comes not to the heart," to be spoken with the right hand laid upon the
breast. And -- "Marcellus exiled feels," below.

One self-approving hour whole years outweighs
Of stupid starers, and of loud hu^^a^; Contempt. Quest. Respect.

And more true joy Marcellus exiled feels,
Than Caesar with a senate at his heels.
In parts superior what advantage lies? Concern.

Tell (for you can) what is it to be wise?
It Is but to know, how little can be known;
To so all others' faults, and feel our own;
Condemned in business, or in arts to drudge
Without a second, and without a judge.
Truths would you teach, to save a sinking land, Suffering.

All fear; none aid you; and few understand.
Painful pre-eminence! Arguing.
yourself to view
Above life's weakness, and its comforts too.
Bring then these blessings to a strict account;
Make fair deductions: see to what they 'mount.
How much of other each is sure to cost;
How each for other often is wholly lost;
How inconsistent greater goods with these;
How sometimes life is risqu'd, and always ease;
Think. And if still such things thy envy call,
Quest. Contempt.
Say, would thou be the man to whom the fall?
To sigh for ribbands if thou art so silly,
Mark how they grace Lord Umbra or Sir Billy.
Is yellow dirt the passion of thy life
Look but on Gripus, or on Gripus wife.
Concern.
If parts allure thee, think how Bacon shined,
The wisest, brightest -- meanest of mankind:
Contempt. Aversion. Teaching.
Or ravished with the whistling of a name,
See Cromwell damned to everlasting fame:
If all united thy ambition call,
From ancient story learn to scorn them all.
XXVI. CLOWNISH BASHFULNESS, and AWKWARDNESS.
The meeting between Humphry Gubbin, and Mr. Pounce.

[Tend. Husb.] Humph. Foolish. Wonder.
HOW prettily this park is stocked with soldiers, and deer, and ducks, Quest.
and ladies. -- Ha! Where are the old fellows gone? Where can they be, trow?
I Will ask these people. -- A -- a -- a -- you pretty young gentleman to
[Fainlove] did you see Vather?


Fain. Your father, Sir?


Humph. Ey, my Vather, weezel-faced cross old gentleman with spindle shanks?


Fain. No, Sir.


Humph. Attention. Question.
A crab stick in his hand.


Pounce. We have met no body with these marks. But, sure, I have seen you
before -- Are not you Mr. Humphry Gubbin, son and heir to Sir Harry Gubbin?


Humph. Ey, ey, an that were all, I'se his son; but how lung I shall be his
heir, I cannot tell: for a talks O'disinheriting on ma every day.


Pounce. Joy.
Dear Sir, I am glad to see you. I have had a desire to be acquainted with you
ever since I saw you clench your sist at your father, when his back was turned
toward you. I love a young man of spirit.


Humph. Why, Sir, Vexation.
would it not vex a man to the very heart, blood and guts on him, to have a
crabbed old fellow snubbling a body every minute before company?


Pounce. Why, Mr. Humphry, Exciting.
he uses you like a boy.


Humph. Like a boy, quotha! Complaining
He uses me like a dog. A lays me on now and then, even as if a were a breaking
a hound to the game. -- You cannot think what a tantrum a was in this morning,
because I boggled a little at marrying my own born cous^


Pounce. A man cannot be too scrupulous, Cautioning.
Mr. Humphry; a man cannot be too scrupulous.


Hump. Why, Sir, Complaining
I could as soon love my own flesh and blood. We should squabble like brother
and sister, not like man and wife. Quest.
Do you think we should not Mr. --. Pray, gentlemen, may I crave your names?


Pounce. Sir, I am the very person, Curiosity.
that has been employed to draw up the articles of marriage between you and
your cousin.


Humph. Ho, ho! say you so? Wonder.
Then mayhap, you can tell one some things one wants to know. -- A -- a --
pray, Sir, what estyeate am I heir to?


Pounce. To fifteen hundred pounds a year, Information.
intailed estate.


Humph. 'Sniggers! Joy.
I'se glad on it with all my heart. And -- a -- a -- can you satisfy ma in
another question -- Pray, how old be I? Quest. Information. Vexation.



Pounce. Three and twenty last March.


Humph. Plague on it! As sure as you are there, they have kept ma back. I have
been (...) the stone pig stie was built; and every body knows the pig stie in
the back close is three and twenty years old. I Will be duck'd in a horse-pond,
if here has not been tricks played ma. But, Quest. Information.
pray, Sir, may not I crave your name?


Pounce. My name, Sir, is Pounce, at your service.


Humph. Pounce with a P --?


Pounce. Yes, Sir, and Samuel with an S.


Humph. Earnestness.
Why, then, Mr. Samuel Pounce, [chuckling, and wringgling, and rubbing his hands
earnestly] do you know any clever gentlewoman of your acquaintance, that you
think I could like? For I Will be ^ang'd like a dog, an I have not taken a right
down aversion to my cousin, ever since Vather proposed her to ma. And since
every body knows I came up to be married, I should not care to go down again
with a flea in my ear and look balk'd, do you see.


Pounce. Plotting.
[After a pause.] Why, Sir, I have a thought just come into my head. And if you
will wall along with this gentleman and me, where we are going, I will
communicate it.


Humph. ^oy.
With all my heart good Mr. Samuel Pounce. [Exeunt.]


XXVII. MOURNFUL DESCRIPTION.
From Aeneas's account of the Sack of Troy.

[ Dryd. Virg. Aen. II.] Attention.
ALL were attentive to the godlike man,
When from his lofty couch he thus began:
Respect.
Great queen! What you command me to relate
And every woe the Trojans underwent;
A pop'lous city made a desert place;
All that I saw, and part of which I was;
Not even the hardest of our foes could hear,
Nor stern Ulysses tell without a tear.
* * * * * * * *
'Twas now the dead of night, Horror
when sleep repairs
Our bodies worn with toils, our minds with cares,
When Hector's ghost The words, "Hector's Ghost," may be spoken with start, and
the attitude of fear. See Fear, page 23.
before my sight appears;
Shrouded in blood he stood, and bathed in tears, Pity.

Such as when by the fierce Pelides slain,
Thessalian coursers dragged him over the plain.
Swollen were his feet, as when the thongs were thrust
Through the pierced limbs: his body black with dust.
Unlike that Hector, who returned from toils
Of war triumphant in Aeacian spoils
Of him who made the fainting Greeks retire, Courage.

Hurling "Hurling," to be expressed by throwing out the arm. with the action of
hurling.
amidst their fleets the Phrygian fire,
His hair and beard were clotted stiff with gore, Pity.

The ghastly wounds, he for his country bore,
Now streamed afresh. Grief.

I wept to see the visionary man,
And whilst my trance continued thus began.
" O light of Trojans," etc. to be expressed by opening the arms with the
action of welcoming.
O light of Trojans, and support of Troy, The words, "sad remembrance," may be
spoken with a sigh, and the right hand laid upon the breast.

(...) grace
Deforms the manly honors of thy face?
Horror.
"The spectre," etc. These two lines, and the ghost's speech, are to be spoken
in a deep and hollow voice, slowly and solemnly, with little rising or falling,
and a torpid inertia of action.
"He said, and," etc. Here the voice resumes its usual key.
The spectre, gnawing from his inmost breast,
Warning.
This warning in these mournful words expressed;
Haste goddess born! Escape by timely flight,
The flames and horrors of this fatal night.
The foes already have possessed our wall;
Troy nods from high, and totters to her fall.
Enough is paid to Priam's royal name,
Enough to country, and to deathless fame.
If by a mortal arm my father's throne
Could have been saved -- this arm the feat had done.
Troy now commends to thee her future state,
And gives her gods companions of thy fate.
Directing.
Under their Umbrage hope for happier walls,
And follow where thy various fortune calls,
(2)He said, and brought, from forth the sacred choir,
The gods, and relics of the immortal fire.
Now peals of shouts came thundering from afar, Trepidation.

Cries, threats, and loud lament, and mingled war.
The noise approaches, though our palace stood
Aloft from streets, embosom'd close with wood;
Louder and louder still, I hear the alarms
Of human cries distinct, and clashing arms.
And (...)
The palace of Deiphobus ascends
In smoky flames, and catches on his friends.
Ucalegon burns next; the seas are bright
With splendors not their own, and shine with sparkling light.
New clamours, and new clangors now arise,
The trumpet's voice, with agonizing cries.
With frenzy seized I run to meet the alarms, Courage.

Resolved on death, resolved to die in arms.
But first to gather friends, with whom to oppose
If fortune favored and repel the foes,
By courage roused, by love of country fired,
With sense of honor and revenge inspired. Trepidation.

Pantheus, Apollo's priest, a sacred name,
Had 'scap'd the Grecian swords, and passed the flame.
With relics loaded, to my doors he fled,
And by the hand his tender grandson led.
What hope, O Pantheus? Quest.
Whither can we run?
Where make a stand? Or what may yet be done?
Scarce had I spoke, when Pantheus, with a groan,
" Troy is no more," Such short periods, comprehending much in a few words, may
often receive additional force by a pause (not exceeding the lenght of a
semicolon) between the nominative and the verb, or between the verb and what is
governed by it; which, otherwise, is contrary to rule.
Troy -- is no more! Her glories now are gone. Grief.

The fatal day, the appointed hour is come,
When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom
Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands: Awe.

Our city's wrapped in flames: the foe commands.
Horror.
To several posts their parties they divide;
Some block the narrow streets, some scour the wide.
The bold they kill; the unwary they surprise;
Who fights meets death, and death finds him who flies, etc.
XXVIII. RUSTICITY. AFFECTATION.
The scene of Humphry Gubbin's introduction to his romantic cousin.

[Tend. Husb.] Humphry; Aunt, Cousin Biddy. Humph. Respect. Question.
AUNT, your saarvant -- your saarvant aunt. -- Is that -- ha, aunt?


Aunt Infor. with Satisfaction.
Yes, cousin Humphry, that is your cousin Bridget. Well, I Will leave you
together.


[Ex. Aunt. They sit.] Humph. Quest.
Aunt does as she would be done by, cousin Bridget, does not she, cousin? [A long
pause, looking hard at her. Wonder.
] What, are you a Londoner, Indifference.
and not give a gentleman a civil answer, when he asks you a civil question? --
Look ye, do you see, cousin, the old volks resolving to marry us, I thought it
would be proper to see how I liked you. For I don't love to buy a pig in a
poke, as we sayn in the country, he, he, he.


[Laughs.] Biddy. Stiff Affect.
Sir, your person, and address bring to my mind the whole story of Valentine and
Orson. What would they give me, for a lover; a Titanian, Affected Delicacy.
a son of the earth? Pray, answer me a question or two.


Humph. Ey, ey, as many as you please, cousin Bridget, Indiff.
an they be not too hard.


Biddy. What w^^d were you taken in? Affectat. Wonder. Question. Surprise.
Quest. Wonder.
How long have you been caught?


Humph. Caught!


Biddy. Where were your haunts?


Humph. My haunts!


Biddy. Are not clothes very uneasy to you? Quest.
Is this strange dress the first you ever wore? Wonder.



Humph. How!


Biddy. Are you not a great admirer of roots, Quest.
and raw flesh? -- Let me look upon your nails, Affectat. of Fear.
I hope you will not wound me with them.


Humph. Whew! [Whistles] Hoity, toity! Wonder.
What have we got? Is she betwattled? Or is she gone of one-side.


Biddy. Can thou deny, Affected.
that thou were suckled by a wolf, or at least by a female satyr? Aversion.
Thou have not been so barbarous, I hope, since thou came among men, as to
hunt thy nurse. Pity.



Humph. Hunt my nurse! Ey, ey, it is so, she is out of her head, poor thing, as
sure as a gun. [Draws away.] Poor cousin Bridget! Fear.
How long have you been in this condition?


Biddy. Condition! Offense.
What do thou mean by condition, monster?


Humph. How came you upon the high ropes? Quest. with Pity.
Was you never in love with any body before me?


Biddy. I never hated any thing so heartily before thee. Affected Aversion.



Humph. For the matter of that cousin, Indifference.
an if were not a folly to talk to a mad-woman, there is no hatred lost, I
assure you. Quest. Earnest. Aversion.
But do you hate me in earnest?


Biddy. Do think any human being can look upon thee with other eyes, than
those of hatred?


Humph. There is no knowing what a woman man loves or hates, by her words.
Desire.
But an you were in your senses, cousin, and hated me in earnest, I should be
main contented, look you. For, may I be well horse-whipt, if I love one bone in
your skin, cousin; and there is a fine woman I am told, who has a mouth's mind
to ma.


Biddy. Aversion.
When I think of suc^ a consort as thee, the wi^^ boar shall defile the cleanly
e^mine, or the tiger be wedded to the kid.


Humph. An I marry you, cousin, the pole-cat shall catter-waul with the civet.


Biddy. Romantic Affectation.
To imagine such a conjunction, was as unnatural as it would have been to
describe Statira in love with a chimney sweeper, or Oroondates with a nymph of
Billingsgate; to paint, in romance, the silver streams running up to their
sources in the sides of the mountains; to describe the birds on the lea^ ^ghs
uttering the hoarse sound of roaring b^ars, to represent knights errant
murdering distressed ladies; whom their profession obliges them to relieve; or
ladies yielding to the suit of their enamoured knights before they have sighed
out half the due time at their feet.


Humph. Clownish Pity.
If this poor gentlewoman be not out of herself, may I be hanged like a dog.


[Exit.] XXIX. ASKING. REPROOF. APPROBATION.
From Mr. Pope's TEMPLE OF FAME. The pupil, if he has not read the TEMPLE OF
FAME, must be informed of the plot of the poem, viz. The author represents
numbers of the pursuers of fame, as reparing, in crowds, to the temple of that
goddess, in quest of her approbation, who are differently received by her,
according to their respective merits, etc.

A Troop came next, who crowns and armor wore,
And proud defiance in their looks they bore.
"For thee, Cringing.
" (they cried) "amidst alarms and strife,
We sailed in tempests down the stream of life;
For thee whole nations filled with fire and blood,
And swam to empire through the purple flood.
"Those ills," etc. The meaning of this line (which is not too obvious) is,
"Our being guilty of such extravagancies, shows how eager we were to obt^i^
(...) name."
Those ills we dared, thy inspiration own;
What virtue seemed, was done for thee alone.
Ambitious fools! Reproof
" (the Queen replied and frowned)
"Be all your deeds in dark oblivion drowned.
There steep forget, with mighty Tyrants gone*
Your statues moulder'd, and your names unknown."
A sudden cloud straight snatched them from my sight, Wonder

And each majestic phantom sunk in night.
Then came the smallest tribe I yet had seen;
Plain was their dress, and modest was their m^n.
" Great idol of mankind! Indifference.
We neither claim
The praise of merit, nor aspire to fame;
But safe in deserts from the applause of men,
Would die unheard of as we lived unseen.
It Is all we beg thee, to conceal from sight
Those acts of goodness, which themselves requite.
Delight.
O let us still the secret joy -- "The secret joy," to be expressed with the
hand laid upon the breast.
partake,
To follow virtue even for virtue's sake."
Wonder.
"And live there men, who slight immortal fame?
Who then with incense shall adore our name?
Information.
But, mortals! know, it is still our greatest pride
To blaze those virtues, which the good would hide.
Exciting.
Rise, Muses! Rise! Add all your tuneful breath!
Pleasing Description.
These must not sleep in darkness, and in death."
She said. To be spoken as melodiously as possible.
In air the trembling music floats,
And on the winds triumphant swell the notes;
So soft, though high; so loud, and yet so clear;
Even listening angels lean from heaven to hear.
To farthest shores the ambrosial spirit flies,
Sweet to the world, and grateful to the skies.
While thus I stood intent to see and hear,
One came, methought, and whispered in my ear;
Quest. with Reproof.
" What could thus high," etc. ^st o^ spoken with a lower voice than the
foregoing.
" What could thus high thy rash ambition raise?
Art thou, fond youth! a candidate for praise?"
Apology.
It Is true, said I, not void of hopes I came;
Concern.
For who so fond, as youthful bards, of fame?
But few, alas! the casual blessing boast,
So hard to gain, so easy to be lost.
How vain that second life in others breath,
The estate, which wits inherit -- after death.
Ease, health, and life, for this they must resign
(Unsure the tenure, and how vast the fine!)
The great man's curse, without the gains endure,
Though wretched, flattered, and though envied, poor.
All luckless wits their enemies professed,
And all successful, jealous friends at best.
Nor fame I slight, nor for her favors call; Indifference.

She comes unlooked for, if she comes at all.
But if the purchase costs so dear a price, Apprehension of evil.

As soothing folly, or exalting vice;
And if the Muse must flatter lawless sway,
And follow still, where fortune leads the way;
Or if no basis bear my rising name,
But the fa^'n ruins of another's fame;
Then teach me, Heaven, to scorn the guilty boys, Deprecation.

Drive from my breast that wretched lust of praise.
Unblemished let me live, or die unknown;
O grant me honest fame; or grant me none.
XXX. POLITE CONVERSATION.
The scene between Mr. Bevil and Indiana, in which she endeavors to find out
whether he has any other regard for her, than that of rational esteem, or
Platonic love.

[CONSC. LOV.] Bev. MADAM, your most obedient. Respect.
How do you do today? I am afraid you wished me gone last night before I went.
But you were partly to blame. For who could leave you in the agreeable humor
you was in?


Ind. If you was pleased, Sir, we were both pleased. For your company, which is
always agreeable, was more peculiarly so last night.


Bev. My company, Madam! You rally. I said very little.


Ind. Too little you always say, Sir, for my improvement, and for my credit; by
the same token, that I am afraid, you gave me an opportunity of saying too much
last night; and unfortunately when a woman is in the talking vein, she wants
nothing so much as to have leave to expose herself.


Bev. I hope, Madam, I shall always have the sense to give you leave to expose
yourself, as you call it, without interruption.


[Bowing respectfully.] Ind. If I had your talents, Sir, or your power, to make
my actions speak for me, I might be silent, and yet pretend to somewhat more
than being agreeable. But as it is --


Bev. Humility.
Really, Madam, I know of none of my actions that deserve your attention. If I
might be vain of any thing, it is, that I have understanding enough to mark you
out, Madam, from all your sex, as the most deserving object of my esteem.


Ind. Anxiety.
[Aside,] A cold word! Though I cannot claim even his esteem. [To him.] Did I
think, Respect.
Sir, that your esteem for me proceeded from any thing in me, and not
altogether from your own generosity, I should be in danger of forfeiting it.


Bev. How so, Madam?


Ind. What do you think, Sir, would be so likely to puff up a weak woman's
vanity, as the esteem of a man of understanding? Esteem is the result of cool
reason; the voluntary tribute paid to inward worth. Who, then, would not be
proud of the esteem of a person of sense, which is always unbiassed; whilst
love is often the effect of weakness. [Looking hard at Bevil, who casts down
his eyes respectfully.] Esteem arises from a higher fource, the substantial
merit of the mind.


Bev. True, Madam -- And great minds only can command it, [bowing
respectfully.] The utmost pleasure and pride of my life, Madam, is, that I
endeavor to esteem you as -- I ought.


Ind. [Aside.] As he ought! Apprehension
Still more perplexing! He neither saves nor kills my hope. I will try him a
little farther. [To him.] Now, I think on it, I must beg your opinion, Sir,
Question.
on a point, which created a debate between my aunt and me, just before you
came in. She would needs have it, that no man ever does any extraordinary
kindness for a woman, but from selfish views.


Bev. Well, Madam, I cannot say, Respect.
but I am in the main, of her opinion; if she means, by selfish views, what
some understand by the phrase; that is, his own pleasure; the highest pleasure
human nature is capable of, that of being conscious, that from his superfluity,
an innocent and virtuous spirit, a person, whom he thinks one of the prime
ornaments of the creation, is raised above the temptations and sorrows of life;
the pleasure of seeing satisfaction, health and gladness, brighten in the
countenance of one he values above all mankind. What a man bestows in such a
way, may, I think, be said, in one sense, to be laid out with a selfish view,
as much as if he spent it in cards, dogs, bottle companions, or loose women;
with this difference, that he shows a better taste in expense. Nor should I
think this any such extraordinary matter of heroism in a man of an easy
fortune. Every gentleman ought to be capable of this, and I doubt not but many
are. For I hope, there are many, who take more delight in reflection, Sudden
Recollection.
than sensation; in thinking, than in eating -- But what am I doing? [Pulls out
his watch hastily] My hour with Mr. Myrtle is come. -- Madam, I must take my
leave abruptly. But, if you please, will do myself the pleasure of waiting on
you in the afternoon. Till when, Madam, your most obedient.

[Exit.]
XXXI. SERIOUS MEDITATION. From Dr. Young's NIGHT THOUGHTS.
Alarm.
THE clock strikes one. We take no note of time,
But by its loss. To give it then a tongue
Is wise in man. As if an angel spoke,
I feel the solemn sound. If heard aright,
It is the knell of my departed hours.
Where are they? -- With the years beyond the flood.
It is the signal that demands dispatch.
How much is still to do! My hopes and fears
Start up alarmed, and over life's narrow verge
Look down -- on what? -- A fathomless abyss.
Admiration.
How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
How complicate, how wonderful is man!
How passing wonder He, who made him such!
Who centered in our make such strange extremes,
From different natures marvellously mixed,
Connection exquisite of distant worlds!
Distinguished link in Being's endless chain,
Midway from nothing to the One Supreme.
A beam aetherial -- sullied, and absorpt!
Though sullied and dishonored, still divine!
Dim miniature of Greatness absolute!
An heir of glory! A frail child of dust!
Helpless immortal! Insect infinite!
A worm! A God! I tremble at myself!
What can preserve my life? or what destroy?
An Angel's arm cannot snatch me from the grave,
Legions of angels cannot confine me there.
XXXII. SEEMING CIVILITY.
The meeting between the knight of the Red Cross, attended by Truth, with
Hypocrisy.

[Spenser's Fairie Queen.] The edition from which this is taken, viz.
Church's, is in my opinion, incomparably preferable, for correctness, to all
the others.
AT length they chaunst to meet upon the way
An aged sire Hypocrisy.
in long black weeds yclad, Description.
Clothed.

His feet all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,
And by his belt his book he hanging had.
Sober he seemed, and very sagely sad,
And to the ground his eyes mere lowly bent,
Simple of show, and void of malice bad.
And all the way he prayed as he went.
And often knocked his breast as one that did repent.
He fair the knight saluted louting Bowing.
low,
Who fair him quited, Returned his salution.
as that courteous was,
And after asked him, if he did know
Of strange adventures which abroad did pas.
" Ah my dear son, Civility.
" (quoth he) "how should, alas,
Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell,
Bidding his beads Saying his prayers.
all day for his trespass,
Tidings of war, and worldly trouble tell?
With holy father fits not with such things to mell. Meddle.

But if of danger which hereby does dwell
And homebred evil ye desire to hear,
Alarm.
Of a strange man I can you tidings tell,
That wastes all this country far and near."
"Of such" (said he) "I chiefly do inquere.
And shall thee well reward to show the place,
In which that wicked Wight Creature.
his days does wear. Pass.

Threatening
For to all knighthood it is foul disgrace,
That such a cursed creature lives so long a space."
Fear.
"Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wilderness
His dwelling is, by which no living wight
May ever pass, but thorough great distress."
Advising.
"Now" said the lady Truth.
" draws toward night,
And well I wot, Know.
that of your later fight
Ye all forwearied be: for what so strong,
But, wanting rest, will also want of might?
The sun, that measures heavens all day long,
At night does bait his steeds the ocean waves among.
Then with the sun, take, Sir, your timely rest,
And with new day new work at once begin,
Untroubled night, they say, gives counsel best."
" Right well, Sir knight, Inviting.
ye have advised bin,"
Quoth then that aged man; "The way to win Conquer.

Is wisely to advise; now day is spent;
Therefore with me you may take up your In
For this same knight." The knight was well content:
So with that godly father to his home the went.
XXXIII. TREPIDATION. VEXATION.
The humorous scene of craming Sir John Falstaff into the basket of foul linen,
to prevent his being caught by jealous Ford. In teaching the right utterance of
this scene, the pupil must be let into the plot of it, if he has not read or
seen the play. He must be made to understand, that Falstaff, a fat, old,
humorous, worthless, needy knight, has, in the former part of the play, made
love to Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page, with a view, merely, of getting money of them,
and that they concert this interview, and its consequences, on purpose to be
revenged on him for his attempt to corrupt them; while Ford is jealous in
earnest; and Falstaff from time to time, communicates to him, under the name of
Brook, not knowing him to be Mrs. Ford's husband, an account of his intrigues
and their bad success.
[Shakespear's Merry Wives of Windsor.] Falstaff, Mrs. Ford. Serve. [Without.]
MADAM, Madam, Haste.
Madam! Here is Mrs. Page, sweating and blowing, and looking wild, and says she
must speak with you immediately.


Fall. Fear.
She shall not see me. I will ensconce me behind the arras.


Mrs. Ford. Directing.
Pray do. She is a very tattling woman.


Enter Mrs. Page. Mrs. Ford. Question. Alarm.
What Is the matter? How now?


Mrs. Page. O Mrs. Ford! What have you done! You're shamed; you're overthrown;
you're undone for ever. Fear.



Mrs. Ford. What Is the matter, good Mrs. Page?


Mrs. Page. Reproof.
O well-a-day, Mrs. Ford! Having an honest man to your husband, to give him
such cause of suspicion.


Mrs. Ford. Quest. Reproof.
What cause of suspicion?


Mrs. Page. What cause of suspicion! Out upon you! How I Am mistaken in you! I
could not have thought you capable of such a thing.


Mrs. Ford. Anxiety.
Why, alas! What is the matter?


Mrs. Page. Alarm.
Matter! Why, woman, your husband is a coming hither, with all the officers of
Windsor, to search for a gentleman, that is here now in the house, by your
consent, to take an ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.


Mrs. Ford. Fear. Warning.
It is not so, I hope.


Mrs. Page. Pray heaven it be not so, that you have a man here. But it is most
certain, that Mr. Ford is coming with half Windsor at his heels, to search the
house. I came before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, I am glad of it.
But if you have any body here, convey him out as fast as you can. Be not
amazed. Call your senses to you. Defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your
happiness for ever.


Mrs. Ford. What shall I do? There is a gentelman here, my dear friend.
Trepidation.
And I fear not mine own shame, so much as his peril. I had rather than a
thousand pounds he were safe out of the house.


Mrs. Page. Never stand crying: Exciting.
You had rather! You had rather. Your husband's at hand. Bethink you of some
conveyance. In the house you cannot hide him. Look, Advising.
here is a basket. If he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here,
and you may throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking. It is
whitening time; send him by your two men to Datchet-mead.


Mrs. Ford. He is too big to go in there. Confution.
What shall I do?


Enter Falstaff from behind the arras. Falst. Let me see it. Let me see it.
Hurry.
I Will in. I Will in. Follow your friend's counsel. I Will in.


Mrs. Page. What Sir John Falstaff! Surpr. and Reproach. Apology.
Is this the love you professed to me in your letters?


Falst. I do love you for all this. Help me out of this scrape. I Will convince
you how much I love you. [He goes into the basket. They cover him with foul
linen.]


Mrs. Page. [To Falstaff's boy. Haste.
] Help to cover your Master, sirrah. [To Falstaff. Reproaching
] Ah, you are a sad dissembler, Sir John. [To Mrs. Ford.] Call your men, Mrs.
Ford. Quick, quick. Haste. Ordering.



Mrs. Ford. What, John, Robert, John. -- Why John, I say. Make haste, and take
up these clothes here. Where Is the cowl-staff? How you gape! Carry them away
directly to Mrs. Plash, the laundress, at Datchet-mead. [They carry away the
basket. Ford meets them. Is prevented searching the basket. Mrs. Ford and Mrs.
Page retire, and enjoy the punishment, they had inflicted on Falstaff.]


Scene changes to the Inn. Enter Falstaff just out of the Thames. Falst.
Bardolph, I say.


Bard. Confusion.
Here, Sir.


Falst. Vexation.
Go, fetch me a quart of sack. Put a toast in it. (Exit Bard.) Have I lived to
be carried in a basket, like a barrow of butchers' offal, Self-Condemnation.
and to be thrown into the Thames? Well, if ever I let myself be served such
another trick, I Will have my brains, if there be any in my skull, taken out, and
buttered, to be given my dog Jowler for his breakfast on new year's day.
Vexation.
The rogues chucked me into the river with as little remorse, as they would
have drowned a bitch's blind puppies fifteen in the litter. And then a man of my
weight must have a comfortable alacrity in sinking. If the bottom had been on a
level with the bed of the river Styx, down I should have gone. For that matter,
I had been fairly drowned, if the shore had not been so kind as to shelve it a
little in my favor. And then to think, only to think of my being drowned! -- A
man of my size! For your fresh water swells you an ordinary man to the size of
your middling porpuss. As for me, an I were to be drowned, I suppose there is
never a whale of them all, that would not be out of countenance at the sight of
me. -- Bardolph -- Is the sack brewed?


To him enter Ford. Ford. Bless you, Sir.


Falst. Now, Master Brook. Civility.
You come to know what has passed between me and Ford's wife.


Ford. That is indeed my business, Sir John.


Falst. Master Brook, I will not lie to you. I was at her house at the hour she
appointed me.


Ford. And you sped, Sir.


Falst. Very ill-favour'dly, Mr. Brook. Vexation. Surprise. Vexation.



Ford. How, Sir, did she change her mind?


Falst. No, Master Brook. But the mischievous old cuckold, her husband, Master
Brook, dwelling in a continual alarm of jealousy, comes provoked and instigated
by his distemper, and at his heels a whole rabble of people, to search the
house for his wife's love.


Ford. What! While you were there? Surprise.



Falst. While I was there, Master Brook.


Ford. And did he search for you, Question.
and could not find you?


Falst. Master Brook, you shall hear. Information with Vexation.
As good luck would have it, comes in one Mrs. Page, gives intelligence of
Ford's approach; and by her invention, and Ford's wife's direction, I was
conveyed into a buck-basket.


Ford. A buck-basket! Wonder. Vaxation. Remembrance.



Falst. Yea; a buck-basket; (...) with (...) and smock, sweaty sack^, (...)
greasy night cups, and infants about^ fresh from their stinking tails; that,
Master Brook, there was as great a variety of villainous smells, as there was
of living things in Noah's ark. There I suffered the pangs of three unnatures
deaths. First, the intolerable fear of being detected by a jealous old
bell-weather; next, to be coil'd up, like an overgrown snake in a dunghill;
rolled round within the circumference of a peck, hilt to point, heel to head;
thirdly, and lastly, Master Brook, to be stopped in, like a strong distillation,
with stinking clothes, that fermented in their own grease. Think of that,
Master Brook, a man of my body; that am as liable to melt as a lump of Epping
butter exposed to the sunbeams on the twentieth of June at noonday. Think of
that, Master Brook, and that, while I was in the midst of this high salivation,
from which that I escaped without suffocation, is neither more nor less than a
miracle; while I was in the height of of this hot bath, I say, with my very
bones melted almost to the consistency of calves-foot-^elly, to be flung into
the Thames, cooled glowing hot, as I was, case hardened at once; think of that,
Master Brook; hissing hot; think of that Master Brook.


XXXIV. VARIOUS CHARACTERS.
From Mr. Pope's MORAL ESSAYS.

[Epist. I.] Sneer, or Mock-Praise
IT IS from high life high characters are drawn:
A saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn.
A judge is just; a chanc'lor -- juster still;
A gownman learned; a bishop -- what you will;
Wise, if a minister; but if a king,
More wise, more just, more learned more every thing. --
Teaching.
It Is education forms the common mind;
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined.
Though these lines contain descriptions, or characters, they may be expressed
with action, almost as if they were speeches. This first line, " Boastful and
rough," etc. may be spoken with the action of Boasting. See Boasting in the
Essay, page 24. The next with that of tempting. See Tempting, page 30. The
soldier's character may be represented by the arms a-kimbo, the lips pouting
out, and a blustering manner of reading the line. The scrivener's with the eyes
turned a squint: a low voice, and the action of shame. See Shame, page 23. The
Quaker's with the words spoken through the nose, and the appearance of
affectation of piety. See Affectation, page 30.
Boastful and rough, your first son is a 'squire; Boasting.

The next a tradesman, meek, and much a liar; Smooth. Strut.

Tom struts a soldier, open, bold and brave;
Will sneaks a scriv'ner, an exceeding knave. Sneaking.

Is he a churchman? Then he is fond of power; Pride.

A Quaker? Form.
Sly. A Presbyterian? Peevish.
Sour;
A smart free-thinker? All things in an hour. --
Manners with fortunes, humors turn with climes, Teaching.

Tenets with books, and principles with times.
Search then the ruling passion: There alone
The wild are constant, and the cunning known.
This clue once found unravels all the rest;
The prospect clears, and Wharton stands confessed;
Wharton! the scorn, Contempt.
and wonder, Admirat.
of our days,
Whose ruling passion was the lust of praise.
Born with whatever could win it from the wise,
Women and fools, must like him or he dies, Eagerness. Admiration.

Though wondering senates hung on all he spoke, Contempt.

The club must hail him master of the joke.
Shall parts so various aim at nothing new?
He Will shine a Tully and a Wilmot too.
Then turns repentant, and his God adores,
With the same spirit as he drinks and whores.
Enough, if all around him but admire,
And now the punk applaud, and now tho friar. --
A salmon's belly, Helluo, English readers may not, perhaps, know, that Helluo
signifies Glutton.
was thy fate, That is, a surf^it of fresh salmon was thy death.

Trepidation. Deprecation.
The doctor called, declares all help too late.
"Mercy" (cries Helluo) " mercy on my soul!
Grief, with Sickness.
Is there no hope? -- Alas! -- then bring the jowl" -- The glutton will indulge
appetite (so indeed will every habitual offender in every kind) in spite of all
consequences.

Aversion.
" Odious! in woolen! 'Twould a saint provoke,"
(Where the last words that poor Narcissa spoke)
Weakness.
" No -- let a charming chintz, and Brussels lace,
Wrap these cold limbs, and shade this lifeless face.
One need not, sure, be ugly, though one's dead;
Expiring.
And -- Betty -- give this cheek -- a little -- red."
The courtier smooth, who forty years had shined
An humble servant to all human kind.
Just brought out this, when scarce his tongue could stir;
Civility, with Weakness. Grief.
"If -- where I Am going -- I could -- serve you Sir."
"I give, and I devise" (old Euclio said,
And sighed) "my lands and tenements to Ned."
"Your money, Sir" -- "My money, Sir! -- What -- all?
Weeping.
Why -- if I must" -- (then wept) -- "I give it Paul."
"The manor, Sir?" -- "The manor -- Hold -- " (he cried)
"I cannot -- must not part with that" -- and died. Weakness.

And you brave Cobham! at your latest breath
Shall feel your ruling passion strong in death. Dignity.

Such in that moment, as in all the past,
"O save my country, Heaven! Praying.
" -- shall be your last.
XXXV. RECONCILIATION.
The scene between Mr. Bevil and Mr. Myrtle. [Consc. Lov.] Bev. SIR, Complais.
I am extremely obliged to you for this honor.


Myrt. The time, the place, Anger.
our long acquaintance, and many other circumstances, which affect me on this
occasion, oblige me, without ceremony, or conference, to desire, that you will
comply with the request in my letter, of which you have already acknowledged
the receipt.


Bev. Sir, Complais.
I have received a letter from you in a very unusual style. But, as I am
conscious -- " conscious of the integrity," etc. may be expressed with the
right hand laid on the breast.
of the integrity of my behavior with respect to you, and intend that every
thing in this matter, shall be your own seeking, I shall understand nothing,
but what you are pleased to confirm face to face. You are therefore to take it
for granted, that I have forgot the contents of your epistle.


Myrt. Your cool behavior, Mr. Bevil, Anger.
is agreeable to the unworthy use, you have made of my simplicity and frankness
to you. And I see, your moderation tends to your own advantage; not mine; to
your own safety; not to justice for the wrongs you have done your friend.


Bev. Offense. Reproach. Displeasure.
My own safety! Mr. Myrtle.


Myrt. Your own safety, Mr. Bevil.


Bev. Mr. Myrtle, there is no disguising any longer, that I understand what you
would force me to. Firmness.
You know my principle upon that point; and you have often heard me express my
disapprobation of the savage manner of deciding quarrels, which tyrannical
custom has introduced, to the breach of all laws, both divine and human.


Myrt. Reproaching
Mr. Bevil, Mr. Bevil! It would be a good first principle, in those, who have so
tender a conscience that way, to have as much abhorrence at doing injuries, as
-- [Turns away abruptly.]


Bev. As what?


Myrt. Irritating. Self-vindication.
As fear of answering them.


Bev. Mr. Myrtle, I have no fear of answering any injury I have done you;
because I have meant you none; for the truth of which I am ready to appeal to
any indifferent person, Seriousness.
even of your own choosing. But I own, I am afraid of doing a wicked action, I
mean of shedding your blood, Pious Veneration.
or giving you an opportunity of shedding mine, cold. I am not afraid of you,
Mr. Myrtle. But I own, I am afraid of Him, who gave me this life in trust, on
other conditions, and with other designs, than that I should hazard, or throw
it away, because a rash inconsiderate man is pleased to be offended, without
knowing, Courage.
whether he is injured, or not. No -- I will not, for your, or any man's
humor, commit a known crime; a crime, which I cannot repair, or which may, in
the very act, cut me off from all Possibility of repentance.


Myrt. Mr. Bevil, I must tell you, Rage. Irritating.
this coolness, this moralizing, shall not cheat me of my love. You may wish to
preserve your life, that you may possess Lucinda. And I have reason to be
indifferent about it, if I am to lose all that, from which I expected any joy
in life. But I shall first try one means toward recovering her, I mean, by
showing her what a dauntless hero she has chosen for her protector.


Bev. Show me but the least glimpse of argument that I am authorized to contend
with you at the peril of the life of one of us, Firmness.
and I am ready upon your own terms. If this will not satisfy you, and you will
make a lawless assault upon me, I will defend myself as against a ruffian.
There is no such terror, Mr. Myrtle, in the anger of those, who are quickly
hot, and quickly cold again, they know not how, or why. I defy you to show
wherein I have wronged you.


Myrt. Mr. Bevil, Irritating.
it is easy for you to talk cooly on this occasion. You who know not, I
suppose, what it is to love, and from your large fortune and your specious
outward carriage, have it in your power to come, without much trouble or
anxiety, to the possession of a woman of honor; you know nothing of what it is
to be alarmed, Jealousy.
distracted with the terror of loosing what is dearer than life. You are happy.
Sarcasm.
Your marriage goes on like common business, and, in the interim, you have for
your soft moments of dalliance, your rambling captive, your Indian princess,
your convenient, your ready Indiana.


Bev. You have touched me beyond the patience of a man: Angerroused
and the defense of spotless innocence, will, I hope, excuse my accepting your
challenge, or at least my obliging you to retract your infamous aspersions. I
will not, if I can avoid it, shed your blood, nor shall you mine But Indiana's
purity, Authority.
I will defend. Who waits?


Serve. Submission.
Did you call, Sir?


Bev. Command.
Yes, go call a coach.


Serve. Trep. with Submission.
Sir, -- Mr. Myrtle -- Gentlemen -- You are friends -- I am but a Servant --
But --


Bev. Anger.
Call a coach.

[Exit Serve.] [A long pause. They walk sullenly about the room.] Recollection.
[Aside.] Shall I (though provoked beyond sufferance) recover myself at the
entrance of a third person, and that my servant too; and shall I not have a due
respect for the dictates of my own conscience; To be spoken with the right hand
on the breast.
for what I owe to the best of fathers, and to the defenseless innocence of my
lovely Indiana, whose very life depends on mine?

[To Mr. Myrtle.] I have, thank heaven, had time to recollect myself, and have
determined to convince you, by means I would willingly have avoided, but which
yet are preferable to murderous duelling, that I am more innocent of nothing,
than of rivalling you in the affections of Lucinda. Remonst.
Read this letter; and consider, what effect it would have had upon you to have
found it about the man you had murdered.

Sullenness.
[Myrtle reads.] "I hope it is consistent with the laws a woman ought to impose
upon herself to acknowledge, that your manner of declining what has been
proposed of a treaty of marriage in our family, Surprise.
Rising
and desiring, that the refusal might come from me, Hope.
is more engaging than the Smithfield courtship of him, whose arms I am in
danger of being thrown into, Joy.
unless your friend exerts himself for our common safety and happiness." In
reading the letter, the countenance of Myrtle ought to quit, by degrees, the
look of anger, and to pass to those marked on the margin.
-- O, Shame.
I want no more, to clear your innocence, my injured worthy friend. -- I see
her dear name at the bottom. Remorse.
-- I see that you have been far enough from designing any obstacle to my
happiness, while I have been treating my benefactor as thy betrayer -- O Bevil,
Confusion. Benevolence.
with what words shall I --


Bev. There is no need of words. To convince is more than to conquer. If you
are but satisfied that I meant you no wrong, all is as it should be.


Myrt. But can you -- forgive -- such madness? Anguish. Remorse.



Bev. Have not I myself offended? Benevolence and Forgiving.
I had almost been as guilty as you, though I had the advantage of you, by
knowing what you did not know.


Myrt. That I should be such a precipitate wretch? Anguish. Remorse.



Bev. Prithee no more. Forgiving. Self-Congr. with Horror.



Myrt. How many friends have died by the hand of friends, merely for want of
temper! What do I not owe to your superiority of understanding! What a
precipice have I escaped! Entreating, with Remorse.
O my friend; -- Can you ever -- forgive -- Can you ever again look upon me --
with an eye of favor?


Bev. Why should I not? Benevolence
Any man may mistake. Any man may be violent, where his love is concerned. I
was myself. Admiration.



Myrt. O Bevil! You are capable of all that is great, all that is heroic.


[Enters a servant to Bevil, and gives a letter.] XXXVI. CHARACTERS.
From Mr. Pope's MORAL ESSAYS.

[Epist. III.] Narration.
WHERE London's column, pointing to the skies,
Like a tall bully, lifts its head, and lies,
There dwelt a citizen of sober fame,
A plain, good man, and Balaam was his name;
Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth;
His word would pass fore more than he was worth.
One solid dish his weekday meal affords;
An added pudding solemnized the Lord's,
Constant at church, and change. His gains were sure,
His givings rare, save farthings to the poor.
Vexation.
The Devilish was piqu'd such saintship to behold,
And longed, Earnest. Narration.
to tempt him, like good Job of old;
But Satan now is wiser than of yore,
And tempts by making rich; not making poor.
Roused by the prince of air the whirlwinds sweep
The surge, and plunge his father in the deep;
Then full against his Cornish lands they roar;
And two rich shipwrecks bless the lucky shore.
Pride.
Sir Balaam now! He lives like other folks;
He takes his chirping pint, and cracks his jokes.
"Live like yourself," was soon my lady's word;
And lo! two puddings smoked upon the board.
Asleep, and naked, as an Indian lay,
An honest factor stole a gem away;
And pledged it to our knight. Our knight had wit,
He kept the di'mond, and the rogue was bit.
Some scruple rose. But thus he eased his thought, Anxiety.

"I Will now give sixpence where I gave a groat; Affected Pity.

Where once I went to church, I Will now go twice,
And am so clear, too, of all other vice."
The tempter saw his time; Craft.
the work he plied;
Stocks and supscriptions pour on every side; Earnest.

Till all the demon makes his full descent,
In one abundant shower of cent per cent;
Sinks deep within him, and possesses whole;
Then dubs director, and secures his soul. Pride.

Behold! Sir Balaam, now a man of spirit,
Ascribes his gettings to his parts and merit.
What late he called a blessing, now was wit,
And God's good providence, a lucky hit.
Things change their titles, Narration.
as our manners turn;
His compting-house employs the Sunday morn.
Seldom at church ('it was such a busy life)
But duly sent his family and wife.
There (so the Devilish ordained) one Christmas-tide
My good old lady caught a cold, and died.
A nymph of quality admires our knight.
He marries; bows at court; and grows polite;
Leaves the dull cits and joins (to please the fair)
The well-bred cuckolds in St. James's air.
First, for his son a gay commission buys,
Who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies.
His daughter struts a viscount's tawdry wife;
And bears a coronet, and p -- x for life.
In Britain's senate he a seat obtains;
And one more pensioner St. Stephen's gains.
My lady takes to play; so bad her chance,
He must repair it. Takes a bribe from France.
Confusion.
The house impeach him. Coningsby harangues,
The court forsake him; and Sir Balaam hangs.
Wife, Son, and daughter, Satan! are thy own;
His wealth, yet dearer, forfeit to the crown.
The devil and the king divide the prize,
And sad Sir Balaan curses God, and dies.
XXXVII. ANXIETY. RESOLUTION.
Cato sitting in a thoughtful posture. In his hand Plato's book on the
immortality of the soul. A drawn sword on the table by him. After a long pause,
he lays down the book, and speaks. Deep Contemplation.
IT must be so -- Plato thou reason'st well --
Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire; -- "this fond desire," may
be spoken with the right hand laid on the breast.

Comfort. Desire. Fear.
This longing after immortality?
Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror
Of falling into naught? -- Why shrinks the soul*
Back on herself, and startles at destruction?
Awe.
It Is the Divinity that stirs within us;
It Is Heaven itself that points out an Hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man.
" Eternity! -- thou pleasing," etc. requires an eye fixed with profound
thoughtfulness, on one point throughout this line.
Eternity! -- thou pleasing Satisfact.
-- dreadful Apprehen.
thought! --
Curiosity.
Through what variety of untried being,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass?
The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before me;
Anxiety.
But shadows, clouds, and darkness, rest upon it.
Courage.
Here will I hold. Veneration
If there is a Power above us;
And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works -- He must delight in virtue.
And that, which He delights in, must be happy. Satisfact. Anxiety.

But when! -- or where! -- This world was made for Caesar.
I Am weary of conjectures. -- Courage.
This must end them.
[Laying his hand on his sword. Firmness.
] Thus am I doubly armed. -- "My death, my life." etc. Long pauses between, and
pointing, or looking at the sword, in pronouncing "my death," and at the book,
in pronouncing "my life." and so in "my bane, and antidote." and in the two
following lines.
My death, my life;
My bane and antidote: are both before me;
This -- in a moment, brings me to an end. Apprehen. Comfort.

Whilst this informs me, I shall never die.
The soul, "The soul," etc. may be pronounced with the right hand laid upon the
breast.
secured in her existence, Noble.
smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point. Pride. Triumph.

The stars "The stars," etc. may be spoken with the eyes raised toward Heaven,
and the arms moderately spread.
shall fade away, the Sun himself
Grown dim with age, and nature sink in years;
But thou -- " thou shall flourish." etc. The right hand upon the breast.
shall flourish in immortal youth,
"Unhurt." etc. The arms spread again as before.
Unhurt amidst the war of elements,
The wreck of nature, and the crush -- "the crush," etc. The hands brought
together with force.
of worlds.
XXXVIII. ANGER. THREATENING.
Satan's speech to Death stopping his passage through the gates of hell; with
the answer.

[Milt. Parad. Lost. B. II. v. 681.] Quest. with Anger.
WHENCE, and what art thou, exterable shape,
That dare, thou grim and terrible, advance
Resolution.
Thy miscreated front athwart my way
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to pass, Contempt. Threatening

That be assured, without leave asked of thee.
Retire, "Retire," is to be spoken as a whole sentence, and with the greatest
force of threatening. See Anger, page 31.
or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with spirits of Heaven.
To whom the goblin full of wrath replied,
Anger.
"Art thou that traitor Angel, art thou He,
Who first broke peace in Heaven, and faith till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious army
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's sons,
Conjured against the Highest, for which both thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemned
Contempt with Anger.
To waste eternal days in woe and pain?
And reckon'st thou thyself with spirits of Heaven,
Hell-doom'd, and breathe defiance here, and scorn,
Pride. Threatening
Where I reign king, and to enrage thee more,
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, "and to thy speed," to be spoken quick.
and to thy speed add wings,
Lest with a whip of scorpion, I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart
Strange horror sieze thee, and pangs unfelt before."
XXXIX. DEPRECATION. RECOLLECTION.
The speech of Sin to Satan, to prevent an hostile encounter between the latter
and Death; with the effect of her speech.

[ Milt. PARA. LOST. B. II. v. 726.] " "O Father," etc. must be spoken quick,
as people do, when they mean to prevent imminent mischief.
O Father, what intends thy hand, Exclam.
" (she cried)
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son, Reproof.

Possesses thee to bend that mortal dart
Against thy father's head? And know for whom; Vexation.

For Him who sits above, and laughs the while
At thee ordained his drudge, to execute
What'er his wrath, which he calls justice bids;
His wrath; which one day will destroy ye both." Alarm. Narration.

She spoke, and at her words the hellish pest
Forbore. Then these to her Satan returned:
"So strange thy outery, Surprise.
and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand
Prevented, Recollect.
spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, Question.
thus double formed and why
In this infernal vale first met, thou call'st
Me father, and that phantasm call'st my son,
I know thee not; nor even saw, till now,
Sight more detestable than him and thee. Aversion.
"
XL. VEXATION. PERTNESS. CRINGING.
Part of Mr. Pope's complaint, of the impertinence of scribblers.

[From the PROLOGUE to his IMITATIONS of HORACE'S SATIRES.] Gratitude.
FRIEND Dr. Arbuthnot.
to my life! which did not you prolong,
Vexation.
"The world had wanted." -- Thus far ought to be spoken with great emphasis, as
if somewhat very important were coming; and the remaining part of the line,
"many an idle song," in a ludicrous manner.
The world had wanted -- many an idle song)
What drop, or nostrum, can this plague remove?
Or which must end me, a fool's wrath, or love?
A dire dilemma! Either way I Am sped;
If foes, they write, if friends, they read me dead.
Seized and tried down to judge, how wretched I;
Who cannot be silent, and who will not lie.
To laugh were want of goodness, and of grace;
And to be grave exceeds all power of face.
I sit with sad civility. I read
"With serious anguish," etc. may be spoken as if sick. See Sickness, page 35.
With serious anguish, and an aching head;
Then drop at last, but in unwilling ears,
Advising.
This saving counsel, "Keep your piece nine years," Alluding to Horace's
"Nonumque prematur in annum."

Off. with Surprise.
"Nine years!" cries he, who high in Drurylane,
Lulled by soft zephyrs through the broken pane,
Rhymes ere he wakes, and prints before term ends,
Obliged by hunger -- and request of friends;
"The piece, you think, is incorrect. Pertness.
Why take it, Cringing.

I Am all submission; what you would have it, make it."
Three things another's modest wishes bound; Vexation.

My friendship, and a prologue, and ten pound. Cringing.

Pitholeon Pitholeon. The name of a foolish ancient poet.
sends to me; "You know his Grace,
I want a patron -- ask him for a place. Offense.
"
"Pitholeon libelled me -- " Cringing.
But here is a letter
"Informs you, Sir, 'twas when he knew no better.
Dare you refuse him? "Curl invites," etc. Mr. Pope was, it seems, ill used by
Curl, a bookseller, by the writer of a Journal, Newspaper and by a "parson much
bemus'd in beer.
Curl invites to dine: Threatening.

He Will write a Journal, or he will turn divine."
Bless me! A packet! "'It Is a stranger fues; Surprise.

A virgin tragedy; an orphan muse."
If I dislike it, " Furies, death, and rage! Anger. Cringing. Comfort.
"
If I approve, " Commend it to the stage."
There, thank my stars, my whole commission ends!
The play'rs and I are, luckily, no friends,
Fired, that the house reject him, " 'Sdeath! Anger.
I Will print it,
And shame the fools -- Your interest, Sir, Cringing.
with Lintot."
" Lintot (dull rogue! Excuse.
) will think your price too much."
"Not if you, Sir, revise it and retouch. Cringing. Vexation.
"
All my demurs but double his attacks,
At last he whispers, "Do; and we go snacks. Wheeling.
"
Glad of a quarrel, straight I clap the door. Offense. Dismission with Anger.

" Sir, let me see you, and your works no more."
XLI. REFLECTION on lost happiness. SELF-CONDEMNATION. HORROR. DESPERATION.
Satan's Soliloquy.

[ Milt. PARAD. LOST B. IV. v. 32.] Admiration.
O Thou, that with surpassing glory crowned,
Look from thy sole dominion, like the god
Of this new world; at whose sight all the star.
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
Hatred.
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name,
O Sun, to tell thee, how I hate thy beams,
Painful. Reflection.
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell; how glorious once above thy sphere;
Self-Condemnation.
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heaven's matchless king.
Vindication of an Enemy
Ah wherefore! He deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that right eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
Self-Condemnation. Pride.
The easiest recompense and pay him thanks,
How justly due! yet all his good in me
Produced rank malice: lifted up so high,
Subjection I disdained thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
Self-Condemnation.
So burdensome still paying, still to owe.
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not, that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays: at once
Indebted, and discharged; what burden then?
Anguish.
O had his powerful destiny ordained
Me some inferior Angel! Reflection on lost happin.
I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition. Yet why not? some other power
As great, might have aspired, and me though mean,
Drawn to his part. But other powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within,
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Had thou the same free will, Self-Condemnation.
and power to stand?
Thou had: whom have thou then, or what t'accuse,
But Heaven's free love dealt equally to all?
Be then his love accursed! Blasphemy. Rage. Self-Condemn.
since love or hate
To me alike it deals eternal woe.
Nay cursed be thou; since against his, thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
O wretched spirit! Desperation.
which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair;
Which way I fly is Hell, myself am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell, I suffer, seems a Heaven --
O then, at last, relent. Essay toward Repentance.
Is there no place
Left for repentance? None for pardon left?
None left, but by submission; Pride
and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises, and other vaunts
Than to submit; boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent. Ay me! Anguish.
they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain;
Under what torments inwardly I groan,
While they adore me on the throne of Hell,
With diadent and scepter high advanced,
The lower still I fall, only supreme
In misery; such joy ambition finds.
Pride.
But say I could repent, and could obtain,
By act of grace, my former state; how soon
Would height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay.
What feigned submission swore? Ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
Malice.
For never can true reconcilement grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep;
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse,
And heavier fall: So should I purchase dear
Hopeless Anguish.
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher, therefore as far
From granting He, as I from begging peace:
All hope excluded thus, behold instead
Malice.
Of us outcast exiled, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for them this world.
Fixed Desperation.
So farewell hope; and with hope farewell fear,
Farewell remorse: all good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my good; by thee at least
Resolved.
Divided empire with heaven's King I hold,
Obdur.
By thee, and more than half, perhaps, shall reign;
Malice bent on Mischief.
As man, ere long, and this new world shall know.
XLII. WALKING IN SLEEP, and a DISTURBED CONSCIENCE. [MACBETH.
Enter Lady Macbeth, The pupil, if he has not seen MACBETH, must be informed,
that Duncan, one of the ancient kings of Scotland, was, according to Buchanan
and other historians, murdered by Macbeth, one of the nobles of that kingdom,
at the instigation of his lady, in their own house, in order to Macbeth's
ascending the throne; and that Shakespeare, in this scene, intends to represent
her troubled in her sleep with guilt and fear.
with a taper. Gent. Listening.
LOOK you! here she comes. This is her guise. Observe her. Stand close.


Doct. Her eyes are open. Wonder.



Gent. Ay, but their sense is shut.


Doct. What is it she does now? Attention.
Look how she rubs her hands.


Gent. It is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands. I
have known her continue this a quarter of an hour.


La. Macb. Yet here is a spot. Guilt.
There must be but little emphasis used in expressing what Lady Macbeth says,
because it is but dreaming.



Doct. Hark, she speaks. Attention. Guilt.



La. Macb. Out, cursed spot. Out, I say -- "One, two," must be spoken as
counting a great clock.
One, two. Horror. Encourag.
Now is the time to do it -- Hell is murky -- Fie, my lord! A soldier afraid!
What need we fear? Who knows it? Guilt.
Who has power to call us to account? -- But, who could have thought, the old
man had so much blood in him?


Gent. Do you mark that? Atten. with Suspicion. Guilt.



La. Macb. The Thane of Fife is a married man. Where is his wife now? Murdered,
did you say? Who could be so bloody to mangle such sweetness? -- What, will
these hands never be clean? No more of that, my lord; no more of that.
Encourag. Guilt.
You mar all with your starting. -- Here is the smell of blood still -- All the
perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh! Anguish.



Doct. What a sigh was there! Suspicion.
That heart is sorely charged. This disease is beyond my practice.


La. Match. Encouraging
Wash your hands, put on your nightgown. Take courage -- I tell you, Banquor
is buried, all but the blood that was shed at his dispatching; Fear.
and that has no likeness to be known by. Are you afraid he will come out of his
grave again? To bed, to bed, to bed. There is a knocking at the gate. Come,
come, come. What is done cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to bed.


XLIII. ENTREATING COMPLAINT of injury. REFUSING.
The Embassy from Agamemnon to Achilles, (after the latter had, in disgust,
retired from the army) to endeavor to prevail with him to return, and join the
allies against the Trojans. Ulysses at table, in Achilles's tent, speaks.
Submission.
HEALTH to Achilles! Happy are thy guests!
Not those more honored whom Atrides feasts:
Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards;
That Agamemnon's regal tent affords.
Anxiety.
But greater cares sit heavy on our souls;
Not eased by banquets, or by flowing bowls.
Sympathy.
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear,
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear.
Apprehens.
Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
And owns no help, but from thy saving hands.
Troy, and her sons, for ready vengeance call;
Their threatening tents already shade our wall.
Hear how with shouts their conquests they proclaim,
And point at every ship the vengeful flame.
For them the Father of the gods declares; Awe with Apprehen. Terror.

Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
All human force the raging chief defies;
What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
Return, Achilles! Oh return, though late, Beseeching.

To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of fate;
If in that heart or grief, or courage lies,
Rise to redeem: Ah yet to conquer rise.
The day may come, when, Warning.
all our warriors slain,
That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain.
He afterward enumerates the advantageous conditions offered by Agamemnon, to
engage him to return. To all which Achilles gives the following answer.

-- Ulysses! Stern Firmness.
"Ulysses!" is to be spoken as a whole sentence.
-- hear
A faithful speech, that knows nor art, nor fear,
What in my secret soul is understood
My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
Let Greece then know my purpose I retain,
Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore: Displeasure.

But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
Fight, or not sight, a like reward we claim; Exprobrat.

The wretch and hero, find their prize the same;
Alike, regretted in the dust he lies,
Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
A life of labors! lo, what fruit remains!
As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
From danger guards them, and from want defends;
In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
And with untasted food supplies her care;
For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
Her matrons, and her tender infants saved.
Long sleepless nights in heavy arms have stood,
And spent laborious days in dust and blood.
I sacked twelve ample cities on the main,
And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain.
Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
Sneer with Reproof.
Your mighty monarch these in peace possessed;
Some few my soldiers had; himself the rest.
Wronged in my love, all proffers I disdain;
Resolution.
Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
Refusing.
Ye have my answer -- Sneer.
What remains to do,
Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the defense this arm can make?
Has he not walls, no human force can shake?
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
And will not these, the wonders he has done,
Repel the rage of Priam's single son?
Self-Comm.
There was a time ('it was when for Greece I ^ght)
When Hector's prowess no such wonders wrought.
He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
Achilles' vengeance at the Scaean gate.
Resolution.
But now those deadly contests are no more,
Tomorrow we the favoring gods implore;
Then shall ye see our parting vessels crowned,
Insult.
And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
Then tell your king, that all the Greeks may hear.
And learn to scorn the man they basely fear.
(For, armed in impudence, mankind he braves,
And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
Though shameless as he is, to meet these eyes
Is what he dares not; if he dares, he dies. Fixed Hatred.
)
Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
Nor share his counsels, nor his battles join:
For, once deceived was his; but twice were mine.
My fates, long since, by Thetis were disclosed; Resolution.

And each alternate, life, or fame, proposed.
Here if I stay before the Trojan town,
Short is my date; but deathless my renown.
If I return, I quit immortal praise
For years on years, and long extended days.
Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make; Advising.

To quit these shores; their native seats enjoy,
Nor hope the fall of heav'n-defended Troy. Serious Reflection.

Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold;
Not all, Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
Can bribe the poor possession of a day.
Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
And steeds unrivaled on the dusty plain.
But, from our lips the vital spirit fled,
Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
He concludes with declaring his determined resolution not to return. And the
Ambassadors take their leave, to go back to the army.

XLIV. Humorous scene from Shakespeare's MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
Quince, Snug, Bottom, Flute, Snowt and Starveling. Quince. Inquiring.
Directing.
IS all our company here?


Bot. You had best call them conjunctly and severally, generally and specially,
that is, whereof to call them man by man, according to the scrip.


Quin. Informing.
Here is the scroll of every man's name, in this town, that is fit to be seen
upon the stage before the duke and duchess.


Bot. Directing.
"Good Peter Quince," etc. To be spoken with a great affectation of wisdom; but
in a clumsy and rustic manner.
Good Peter Quince, go to work in a method. Begin at the top, and go on to the
bottom; that is, whereof as a man may say, first tell us what the play treats
of, then read the names of the actors, and so your business will stand by
itself as regular, as a building set upon the very pinnacle of its foundation.


Quin. Informing.
Why then the play is the most delectable and lamentable comedy entitled and
called, The cruel tragedy of the death of Pyramus and Thisby!


Bot. Pity.
A very moving play, I warrant it. A very deep tragedy, I know by the sound of
the title of it. Pyramus and Thisby! I suppose they are to have their throats
cut from ear to ear, or their bellies ripped up from the waist-bands of their
breeches to their chins. Directing.
Well, now, good Peter, call forth your actors by the scrowl. Masters, spread
yourselves out into a clump, every man conjunctly by himself.


Quin. Answer, as I call you. Authority.
Nick Bottom, weaver.


Bot. Ready. Name my part, and proceed. Affectation: Smartness.



Quin. You, Nick Bottons, are set down for Pyramus.


Bot. I am to play Pyramus? Well, Authority.
and who is Pyramus? A gentleman or a simple man? Inquiring. Teaching.



Quin. Pyramus is a lovyer, and Thisby is his sweetheart. Pyramus kills himself
for grief, because a lion had got hold of Thisby's cloak, and tore it, which
makes Pyramus conclude, as how he had tore her too, and eaten her up, all but
the cloak; whereof he had not touched her. So that poor Pyramus loses his life
do you see, for nothing at all; whereof you know, that is enough to make a man
hang himself.


Bot. What then, Inquiring.
am I to hang myself for vexation, because I had killed myself for nothing?
Denying.



Quin. No; that is not in the play.


Bot. Here will be salt tears wept, Apprehensi.
or I am mistaken. And I be the man, that acts this same Pyramus, let the
ladies look to their eyes. I will condole and congratulate to some tune. I will
break every heart, that is not double-hooped with flint. I have a main notion
of acting your lovyer, that is crossed in love. There is but one thing, that is
more to my humor than your tribulation lovyer. That is, your tyrant; Bombast.
your thundering tyrant; I could play you, for example, I could play you such a
tyrant as Herriccoles, Hercules.
when he gets on the brimstone shirt, and is all on fire, as the unlucky boys
burn a great rat alive with spirits. And then, when he takes up little --
what is his name -- Lichas.
to squir him off of the cliff into the sea. O then it is fine, This bombastic
passage (probably intended to ridicule some play written in Shakespeare's time)
cannot be too much mouthed and ranted.
"I Will split the raging rocks; Ranting.
and shivering shocks, with thundering knocks, shall break the locks of prison
gates. And Febal's Phoebus's.
ear shall shine from far, and kindle war, with many a scar, and make and mar
the stubborn fates." There is your right tragedy stuff. Applause.
This is Herriccole's vein to a hair. This is your only true tyrant's vein.
Your lovyer's vein is more upon the condoling and congratulating. Directing.
Now Peter Quince, name the rest of the players.


Quin. Authority.
Francis Flute, Bellows -- monder.


Flute. Affectation.
were, Peter Quince.


Quin. Smartness.
Authority.
Francis, you must take Thisby on you.


Flute. Inquiring. Doubt.
What, that is to be Nick Boitom's sweetheart, and to have my cloak worried
alive by the great beast? Why, Peter, I have a beard a coming. I shall not make a
clever woman, as you may say, unless it were Mrs. What do you call her, Inquiring.
Mrs. Tibby's mother or aunt. Has not the gentlewoman of the play a mother, or
an aunt, that appears?


Quin. Encouraging
Yes; but you must do Thisby. You will do Thisby well enough, Authority.
man. You shall do it in a mask. Affectation.
Robin Starveling, tailor.


Star. Here, Peter Quince.


Quin. Smartness.
Authority.
You must play Pyramus's Father; I will play Thisby's father; Flute must play
Thisby; and ^nowt Thisby's mother. Simon Snug, joiner.


Snug. Affectation.
Here, Peter Quince.


Quin. Smartness.
Simon, Authority.
you must act the part of the lion.


Snug. Heh! the part of the lion, do you say, Inquiring.
Peter Quince? Why I never made a beast of myself in my life, but now and then,
when I have drunk a cup too much.


Quin. Psh^, Pshaw, a better man, Encouraging
than you and either, as been made a beast before now; ay, and a horned beast
too. But the lion is a royal beast, the king of beasts. So ^imon, you must play
the part of the lion.


Snug. Well, but an it be a long part, Doubt.
I cannot remember it; for I have but a poor brain. Let me see how many pages.


Quin. Why, Simon, it is not written. And, for the matter of that, you may do
it off hand. It is nothing but roaring.


Bot. I Will tell you what, Peter Quince; Advising.
you were better to let me act the part of the lion. Simon Snug is but a
hen-hearted sort of a fellow. He will not roar you so loud as a mouse in the hole
in the wall. But, Boasting.
if you will let me play the part, I will make such a noise, as shall do any
man's heart good to hear me. I will roar, that the duke shall cry, Encore,
encore, let him roar, let him roar, once more, once more.


Quin. But if you were too terrible, Cautioning.
you might frighten the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek, and
that were enough to hang us all.


Bot. Ay; Self-Vindication.
if the duchess and the ladies were frighted out of their wits, to be sure,
perhaps they might have no more wit, than to get us all hanged: but do you
think, Peter Quince, that I have no more inhumanity in my nature, than to
frighten people? I would restrain and aggravate my voice, that I would roar you
as gentle as any sucking dove; I would roar you an it were any nightingale.


Quin. Authority.
I tell you, Nick Bottom, hold your tongue, with your roaring, and set your
heart at rest. You shall play nothing but Pyramus.


Bot. Submission.
Well, if I must, I must. What cannot be endured, you know, must be cured. But
what beard were I best to play it in? Inquiring.



Quin. Directing.
You must not have on a gray beard, you know, because it will not look natural
for a man with a gray beard to be acting the part of a lovyer.


Bot. Self-Vindication.
Why, look you, Master Peter Quince, I don't think it so very unnatural to see
people, with gray beards, acting the part of lovyers; at least, I am sure, it
had not need be unnatural; for it is common enough. But, howsomdever it will
look a little unnatural, as you say, to see the young woman, Mrs. Tibby,
fondling and looking sweet upon a man with a gray beard. Wherefore, upon
minture liberation, I will play it in a beard black as jet.


Quin. Exhorting.
Here, then, Masters, take your parts, and con them over with as much retention
as you can; that you may be ready to rehearse by tomorrow night.


Bot. Inquiring.
But where must we rehearse, Peter Quince?


Quin. Apprehen.
Why, you know, if we should go to rehearse in a garret, or a molt-loft, we
should but draw a mab, and perhaps get ourselves taken up for cromancers.
Contriv.
Therefore we must go to the palace wood, and do it by moonlight. Then you
know, we shall do it with dacity and imposer of mind, when there is no body to
deplaud, or hiss.


Bot. Right, Peter Quince. We will be ready for you. [Exeunt.]


XLV. CHIDING.
The speech of Hector to Paris, on his avoiding, on the field of battle,
Menelaus, the husband of Helen, whom he had decoyed from Sparta to Troy, which
occasioned the Trojan war.

[ Pope's Hom. II. III. v. 53.] AS godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
Narration.

He thus upbraids him with a generous heat.
" Unhappy Paris! But to women -- brave! Reproof.

So fairly formed, and only to deceive!
Oh had thou died, Vexation.
when first thou saw the light,
Or died at least before the nuptial rite!
A better fate, Contempt.
than vainly thus to boast
And fly, the scandal of the Trojan host.
Gods! Vexation.
how the scornful Greeks exult to see
Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
Thy figure promised with a martial air; Contempt.

But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
In former days, in all thy gallant pride,
When thy tall ships triumphant stem'd the tide,
When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,
And crowds stood wondering at the passing show;
Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien, Inquir. with Contempt.

You meet the approaches of the Spartan queen?
Thus from her realm conveyed the beauteous prize,
"And both her warlike lords Theseus, her first, and Menelaus, her second
husband.
outshone in Helen's eyes?
This deed, thy foes' delight, thy own disgrace,
Thy father's grief, and ruin of thy race,
This deed recals thee to the proffered fight;
Challenge.
Or have thou injured whom thou dare not right?
Soon to thy cost his sword would make thee know,
Thou keep'st the consort of a braver foe.
Warning.
Thy graceful form, instilling soft desire,
Thy curting tresses, and thy silver lyre,
Beauty and youth -- in vain to these you trust,
Threatening
When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust,
Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow
Crush the dire author of his country's woe."
XLVI. REMORSE. CONFESSION. VIRTUOUS RESOLUTION. AFFECTION. JOY. RAPTURE.
Scene between Sir Charles Easy and his lady (to whom he had been false) after
his coming to understand, that his falsehood was known to her, though borne
without the least complaint, or outward appearance of dissatisfaction, on her
part, Sir Chapter Serious Conversation.
SIT still, my dear -- I want to talk with you -- and, which you well may wonder
at, what I have to say is of importance too. But it is in order to our
friendship's being upon a better foot hereafter, than it has been hitherto.


Lady Easy. Affect. with Submission.
Your behavior to me, Sir Charles, has always been friendly and loving; nor can
I charge you with a look, that ever had the appearance of unkindness.


Sir Chapter The perpetual spring of your good humor, Madam, Complim.
lets me draw no merit from what I have appeared to be. For you seem to be of a
temper to love, or at least to behave kindly to, your husband, let his
character be what it will. Yet I cannot, even now, reconcile, with your good
sense, your venturing upon marriage with a man of my indolent character.


Lady Easy. I never thought it such a hazard. Submissive Affection.
And your having never shown, even in the time of courtship, the least
affectation to be any thing, but what you was by nature; and your showing,
through that carelessness of temper, an undesigning honesty of mind, which I
suspected a want of in smoother behavior, won me by taking no pains to win me,
and pleased and courted me by taking no pain to please or court me. I
concluded, that such a temper could never be deliberately unkind. Or, at the
worst, I hoped, that any errors which might arise from want of thinking, might
be borne; and that one moment's thought would end them. Thus, Sir Charles, you
see my worst of fears. And these, weighed against the hopes I had of winning
your heart (as you know, our sex are not too diffident of the power of our own
charms) were as nothing.


S. Chapter My dear, your understanding, Wonder.
when I consider my own conduct, starties me; and makes my own look despicable.
I blush, Shame.
to think, I have worn so valuable a jewel in my bosom, and, till this hour,
have scarce had the curiosity, or rather the common sense, to think of looking
upon its luster.


Lad. Easy. You set too high a value, Self-denial.
Sir Charles, on the common qualities of harmlessness, and good nature in a
wife.


Sir Chapter Praise.
Virtues, like benefits, are doubled by being modestly concealed. And I
confess, I suspect you, Shame.
Madam, of virtues, which, as much as they exalt your character, disgrace mine.


Lad. Easy. Apprehen.
I don't understand you, Sir Charles.


Sir Chapter Trepidation.
I must speak plainer then -- Be free, and tell me, where did you leave this
handkerchief? It was by the handkerchief, that he knew his baseness was
discovered by his lady.



Lad. Easy. Starting.
Ha!


Sir Chapter Tenderness. Shame.
What do you start at -- You have nothing to be troubled about. -- Would to
Heaven I had as little. [Aside.]


Lad. Easy. Anxiety.
I cannot speak -- and I could wish you would not oblige me -- It is the only
thing I ever refused you -- And, though I cannot give you a reason, Entreating.
wl^ I would not speak, yet I hope you will excuse me, without a reason.


Sir Chapter Stinging. Remorse.
What then? Does this delicate creature scruple to accuse me of what I have so
little scrupled to be guilty of! Monster! To injure such goodness! Tenderness
with Admira.
[Aside] Well, then, Madam, your will shall be a reason. I will urge the point
no farther. And, indeed, it would ill become me. Since you are so generously
tender of reproaching me, I will declare to you, that what your delicacy avoids
charging me with, that my own reflection bears home upon me with tenfold force.
Remorse.
Your heroic behavior has waked me to a sense of your disquiet past --
disquiet so unworthily caused by me -- and -- and -- [hesitating through
fullness of heart] so nobly borne by -- her -- who least deserved to be forced
to bear it. Virtuous Resolution.
-- But, Madam -- [sighing] if I have used you ill -- I hope I have sentiment
enough still left to secure you from all fear of my offending hereafter. As an
earnest of which, Entreating.
let me beg of you to discharge your woman.


Lad. Easy. My dearest! I think not of her. Overpower.
Your tenderness overcomes me. [Weeping.]


Sir Chapter Nay, surely, Joy. Self-denial. Remorse. Tenderness.
you have no room to praise my tenderness. Such tenderness, as I have shown to
worth like yours, might -- but I see you are in pain to give me this confusion.
I will not, therefore, increase your uneasiness by reflections on what I have
been; but rather, reserving them for my private recollections, try to soothe
your anguish by the prospect of happiness to come -- happiness from my recovery
to a sense of your inimitable excellence, which hereafter, I intend shall be
the business and the joy of my life to study, and admire. Expect then, Protest.
of Affection.
thou best of womankind, from my future affection, all that can be conceived of
tender and of kind. Nothing, you can expect, shall come up to what you shall
experience; for no tenderness can equal your deservings at the hands of such a
husband as I have hitherto been. Receive me, then, entire at last, and take
what no woman ever truly had -- not even your incomparable self -- my conquered
heart. [Embracing.]


Lad. Easy. O my recovered, my almost lost, Inexpressible Transport of Love and
Joy.
my inestimable jewel! -- My husband! -- My love! -- O ecstasy of joy! -- Too
much for human nature! -- Thus to have all I love on earth, come voluntarily
and unsolicited, to lead me with kindness, and crown me with happiness! What is
the rapture of the lover sighing at our feet, to the solid joy of receiving the
relenting, returning husband! O dearest love! Be not so profusely kind* O
Heaven! Pious Great.
Teach me to show gratitude suitable to such a blessing.


XLVII. DISCONTENT. EXCITING. REPROACHING. PLOTTING.
The scene, in which Cassius excites Brutus to oppose Caesar's power. [
Shakespeare's JUL. CAES.] Cas. -- Discontent.
HONOR is the subject of my story;
I cannot tell, what you and other men
Think of this life, but for my single self,
I Would rather sleep in the dust, than live to be
Contempt. Pride.
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar. So were you.
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
Narr. with Contempt.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with his shores,
Caesar says to me. " Dare thou, Cassius, now
Quest.
" Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
Courage.
Accoutred as I was, This passage cannot be expressed with life without
something of the action of swimming.
I plunged in,
And bade him follow; so indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside,
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
Fear.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Distr. and Entreating.
Caesar cried, " Help me, Cassius, or I sink."
Courage.
Then, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulders,
The old Anchises bear, so, from the waves of Tiber,
Did I the tired Caesar; Wonder.
and this man
Is now bec^e a god, and Cassius is
A wretched creature, and must bond his body, Contempt.

If Caesar carelessly but nod to him.
He had an ague, when he was in Spain, Narr. with Contempt.

And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake: it is truth, this god did shake;
His coward lips did from their color fly,
And that same eye, Ranting.
whose bend does awe the world,
Did lose its luster; I did hear him groan: Contempt.

Ay, and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
Alas, it cried, "Give me some drink, Sickness.
Titinius" --
As a sick girl. Ye gods, it does amaze me, Wonder.

A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world,
And bear the palm alone.

Brut. Another general shout! Listening.

I do believe, Wonder.
that their applauses are
For some new honors that are heaped on Caesar. Discontent. Ranting.


Cas. Why, man, he does bestride the narrow world,
Like a Colossus, and we sorry dwarfs
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about
To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
Men sometimes have been masters of their sates: Regret.

The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
Brutus and Caesar! Exciting.
What should be in that Caesar!
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together; yours is as fair a name;
Sound them; it does become the mouth as well;
Weigh them; it is as heavy; conjure with them;
Brutus will start a ghost as soon as Caesar.
Wonder.
Now in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat does this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? Contempt.
Age thou art shamed:
Rome, thou have lost the breed of noble bloods.
When went there by an age, since the sun shone,
But it was famed with more than one man?
When could they say, 'till now, who talked of Rome,
That her wide walls encompassed but one man?
Ex^ting.
Oh! you and I have heard our fathers say,
There was a Brutus once, that would have brook'd
A whipt-gall'd ^ave to lord it over Rome
As soon as this bread Caesar.

Bru. Approbation.
The character of Brutus being cool courage, his speech is to be expressed
accordingly.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
Serious Consideration.
What you would w^rk me to, I have some aim:
How I have thought of this, and of those times,
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not (so with love I might entreat you)
Plotting.
Be any farther moved. What you have said,
I will consider; wha^ you have to say,
I will with patience hear, and find a time
Both meet to hear, and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this;
Discontent.
Brutus -- had rather be a ^ybian,
Than to repute himself a son of Rome,
Under such hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us. [Exeunt.]

XLVIII. JOY. TROUBLE. FLATTERY. DARING. FEAR. ROMANTIC IMAGINATION.
Eve's Acc^ant of her troublesome Dream.

[PAR. LOST. B. V. v. 28.] O Sole, in whom my thoughts find all repose, Joy and
Love.

My glory, my perfection! Glad I see
Thy face, and morn returned. Disagreeable Remembra.
For I this night
( Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed --
"If dreamed." The impression being so strong, that she was in doubt, whether
it was a dream or reality.
If dreamed -- not as I often am wont, of thee;
Works of day past, or morrow's next design;
But of offense and trouble which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night. Methought,
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk;
With gentle voice. I thought it thine. It said,
"Why sleep'st thou Eve? Wheed.
Now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night warbling bird, that now awake, Pleasing Description.

Tunes sweetest his love labored song; now reigns
Full orb'd the moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things. "In vain," etc. The pupil must be told,
that this means, "No matter whether any earthly creature is awake to admire
your beauty."
In vain,
If none regards. Flattery.
Heaven wakes with all his eyes
Whom to behold but thee, nature's desire?
In whose sight all things joy with ravishment,
Attracted by thy beauty -- still to gaze."
I rose, as at thy call; but found thee not, Narration.

To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways,
Apprehension.
That brought me on a sudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge. Fair it seemed,
Wonder.
Much fairly to my fancy than by day:
And as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By as often seen; his dewy locks distilled
Ambrosia. On that tree he also gazed;
Pleasure and Desire.
And, "O fair plant," said he "with fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet,
Inquiry.
Nor god, nor man? Is knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Resolution.
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good, why else set here?"
This said, he paused not, but with venurous arm
Fear.
He plucked, he tasted. Me damp horror chilled
At such bold words, vouched with a deed so bold.
Joy.
But he thus overjoyed, "O fruit divine,
Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet the cropped;
Forbidden here, it seems as only fit
For gods; yet able to make gods of men:
And why not gods of men, since good the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The author not impaired, but honored more?
Inviting.
Here, happy creature, fair angelic Eve!
Partake thou also, happy though thou art,
Flattery. Tempting.
Happier thou may be; worthier can not be;
Taste this, and be henceforth among the gods,
Thyself a goddess, not to earth confined,
But sometimes in the air, as we; sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the gods live there, and such live thou."
Tempting.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part.
Which he had plucked. Rising Desire.
The pleasant sav'ry smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, Romantic Imagination.
and underneath beheld
The earth outstretch'd immense, a prospect wide
And various. Wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down,
And fell asleep. Joy.
But O how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!
XLIX. ANGUISH followed by TRANSPORT.
The scene of Indiana's being found to be Mr. Sealand's daughter.

[Consc. Lov.] Ind. I AM told, Sir, Civility.
you come about business, which requires your speaking with me.


Seal. Yes, Madam. There came to my hands a bill drawn by Mr. Bevil, which is
payable tomorrow; and as I have cash of his, I have made bold to bring you the
money myself -- A -- a -- a -- and, to be free, Madam, Confusio.
the fame of your beauty, and the regard which Mr. Bevil is but too well known
to have for you, excite my curiosity.


Ind. Too well known to have for me! Offense.
Your sober appearance, Sir, made me expect no rudeness or absurdity from you
-- Who waits? -- Sir, if you pay the money to a servant, it will be as well --
[Going.]


Seal. Pray, Madam, be not offended. Apology.
I came hither with an innocent, nay, a virtuous design. And, if you will have
patience to hear me, it may be of service to you, as well as to my only
daughter, on whose account I come, and whom I was this day to dispose of.


Ind. Apprehensi.
[Aside.] In marriag^ with Mr. Bevil, I fear. Recollect.
What I dreaded is come. But I must compose myself, if possible. [To him.] Sir,
you may suppose I shall desire to know any thing, which may be interesting to
Mr. Bevil or to myself. Confusion.
As appearances are against me with regard to his behavior, I ought to forgive
your suspicion, Sir. Be free- then; I am composed again. Apology. Won. with
Disapp.
Go on, Sir.


Seal. I feared indeed, an unwarranted passion here. But I could not have
thought any man capable of abusing so much lovliness and worth, as your
appearance, and behavior bespeak. But the youth of our age care not what
excellence they destroy, so they can but gratify --


Ind. Vindication. Inq. with Apprehen.
[Interrupting.] Sir you are going into very great errors. But please to keep
your suspicions, and acquaint me, why the care of your daughter obliges a
person of your seeming rank, to be thus inquisitive about a wretched, helpless,
friendless -- [Weeps] I beg your pardon, Distress. Apology.
good Sir -- I am an orphan, who can call nothing in this world my own, but my
virtue -- Pray, good Sir, go on.


Seal. Pity with Disapp.
How could Mr. Bevil think of injuring such sweetness!


Ind. Vindica. Praise.
You wrong him, Sir. He never thought of injuring me. His bounty he bestows for
my support, merely for the pleasure of doing good. You are the gentleman, Inq.
with Apprehen.
I suppose, for whose happy daughter he is designed by his worthy father; and
he has consented, perhaps, to the proposal.


Seal. Caution. Rosolution.
I own, such a match was proposed; but it shall not proceed, unless I am
satisfied, that your connection with him may be consistent with it.


Ind. It is only, Sir, Distress.
from his actions and his looks, that I have had any reason to flatter myself
into the notion of his having any particular affection for me. From them, I
own, I was led into the hope of what I earnestly wished, that he had thoughts
of making me the partner of his heart. But now I find my fatal mistake. The
goodness and gentleness of his demeanor, with the richness of his benevolence,
made me misinterpret all -- 'Twas my own hope, my own passion, that deluded me
-- He never made one amorous advance to me -- His generous heart and liberal
hand meant only to help the miserable. And I -- O fool that I was! Self-Condo.
-- I fondly suffered myself to be drawn into imaginations too high, and too
ambitious for my lowly wretchedness -- O -- oh -- oh! [Weeping.]


Seal. Make yourself easy, Madam, Comfort.
upon the score of my daughter, at least. The connection between Mr. Bevil and
her is not gone so far as to render it necessary that your peace should be
destroyed by such a marriage. Depend upon it, Madam, my daughter shall never be
the cause of your disappointment.


Ind. Sir, your speaking so, Distress heightened.
makes me still more wretched. Shall I be the cause of injury to my noble
benefactor? Shall I, who have no pretensions to him, be the hindrance of his
happiness? Heaven forbid! No, Sir; Persuasion.
give your daughter to the worthiest of men. Give her to my generous Bevil --
They may be happy, though I should run distracted. And, Distress with Gratitude.
whilst I preserve my senses, I will weary Heaven with my prayers for their
felicity. As for my own fate, Distress. Lamentat.
it is likely to hold on as it begun, a series of wretchedness -- 'Twas
Heaven's high will that I should be wretched -- Taken captive in my cradle --
tossed on the seas -- there deprived of my mother -- that I should only hear of
my father; but never see him -- that I should then be adopted by a stranger --
then lose my adopter -- that I should then be delivered from the very jaws of
poverty by the most amiable of mankind -- that I should give my fond unthinking
heart to this most charming of his sex -- and that he should disappoint all my
romantic hopes, without leaving me the right or the pretense of blaming any
one, but myself. For, oh, I cannot reproach him, though his friendly hand, that
raised me to this height, now throws me down the precipice. Oh! [Weeping.]


Seal. Comfort.
Dear Lady! Compose yourself to patience, if possible. My heart bleeds for your
distress. Pity. Inquiry.
-- And there is something in your very strange story, that resembles -- Does
Mr. Bevil know your history particularly?


Ind. Lamentation
All is known to him perfectly. And it is my knowledge of what I was by birth,
and what I should be now, that embitters all my misery. Frenzy.
I Will tear away all traces of my former self; all that can put me in mind of
what I was born to, and am miserably fallen from. [In her disorder she throws
away her bracelet, which Mr. Sealand takes up, and looks earnestly on it.]


Seal. Amazement.
Ha! What means this? Where am I? It is the same! The very bracelet, which my
wife wore at our last mournful parting.


Ind. Recollecti.
What said you, Sir, Your wise! What may this mean? That bracelet was my
mother's. But your name is Sealand. Trepida.
My lost father's name was --


Seal. [Interrupting.] Danvers, was it not?


Ind. Amazement.
What new amazement! That was his name.


Seal. I am the true Mr. Danvers, Joy.
though I have changed my name to Sealand -- O my child, my child! [Catching.
Indiana in his arms.]


Ind. All gracious Heaven! Is it possible? Do I embrace my father?


Seal. O my child, my child! My sweet girl! Rapture.
My lost Indiana! Restored to me as from the dead! I now see every feature of
thy lamented mother in thy lovely countenance! O Heaven! how are our sorrows
past o'erpaid by such a meeting! To find thee thus, to have it in my power to
bestow thee on thy noble lover, with a fortune not beneath his acceptance.


Ind. O it is more like a dream, than reality! Have I then a father's sanction
to my love! His bounteous hand to give, and make my heart a present worthy of
my generous Bevil?


Seal. Let us send immediately to him, and inform him of this wondrous turn;
which shows, that Whatever the generous mind itself denies,
The secret care of Providence supplies.



L. REPROOF.
Calisthenes's honest speech in reproof of Cleon's flattery to Alexander, on
whom Cleon wanted divinity to be conferred by vote.

[ Q. Cart. VIII.] IF the king were present, Cleon, Displeasure.
there would be no need of my answering to what you have just proposed. Reproof.
He would himself reprove you for endeavoring to draw him into an imitation of
foreign absurdities, and for bringing envy upon him by such unmanly flattery.
As he is absent I take upon me to tell you in his name, that no praise is
lasting, but what is rational; and that you do what you can to lessen his glory
instead of adding to it. Heroes have never, among us, been deified, till after
their death. And, whatever may be your way of thinking, Cleon, for my part, I
wish the king may not, for many years to come, obtain that honor. You have
mentioned, Remonstr.
as precedents, of what you propose, Hercules and Bacchus. Do you imagine,
Cleon, that they were deified over a cup of wine? And are you and I qualified
to make gods? Challenge.
Is the king, our sovereign, to receive his divinity from you and me, who are
his subjects? First try your power, whether you can make a king. It is surely,
easier to make a king, than a god; to give an earthly dominion, than a throne
in heaven. Apprehension.
I only wish, that the gods may have heard, without offense, the arrogant
proposal you have made, of adding one to their number: and that they may still
be so propitious to us, as to grant the continuance of that success to our
affairs, with which they have hitherto favored us. Honest Pride.
For my part, I am not ashamed of my country; nor do I approve of our adopting
the rites of foreign nations, or learning from them how we ought to reverence
our kings. To receive laws, or rules of conduct, from them, what is it, but to
confess ourselves inferior to them?

LI. INCULCATING. COMMANDING. ENTREATING. WARNING.
The dying charge of Micipsa, king of Numidia, to Jugurtha, whom he had
adopted, and made joint-heir to his kingdom, with his two sons, Adherbal and
Hiempsal

YOU know, Jugurtha, Exciting to Gratitude.
that I received you under my protection in your early youth, when left a
helpless, and hopeless orphan. I advanced you to high honors in my kingdom; in
the full assurance that you would prove grateful for my kindness to you; and
that, if I came to have children of my own, you would study to repay to them,
what you owed to me. Hitherto I have had no reason to repent of my favors to
you. Commendation.
For to omit all former instances of your extraordinary merit, your late
behavior in the Numantian war, has reflected upon me and my kingdom, a new and
distinguished glory. You have, by your valor, rendered the Roman commonwealth,
which before was well affected to our interest, much more friendly. In Spain,
you have raised the honor of my name and crown. And you have surmounted what
is justly reckoned one of the greatest difficulties; having, by your merit,
silenced envy. My dissolution seems now to be fast approaching. Entreating.
I therefore beseech and conjure you, my dear Jugurtha, by this right hand; by
the remembrance of my past kindness to you; by the honor of my kingdom, and by
the majesty of the gods; be kind to my two sons, whom my favor to you has made
your brothers; and do not think of forming a connection with any stranger to the
prejudice of your relations. Warning.
It is not by arms, nor by treasures, that a kingdom is secured, but by well
affected subjects and allies. Teaching.
And it is by faithful and important services, that friendship (which neither
gold will purchase, nor arms extort) is secured. Remonst.
But what friendship is more perfect than that which ought to obtain between
brothers? What fidelity can be expected among strangers, Warning.
if it is wanting among relations? The kingdom I leave you, is in good
condition, if you govern it properly; if otherwise, it is weak. For by
agreement a small state increases: by division a great one goes to ruin.
Inculcat.
It will lie upon you, Jugurtha, who are come to riper years, than your
brothers, to provide, that no misconduct produce any bad effect. And if any
difference should arise between you and your brothers (which may the gods
avert! Devotion.
) the public will charge you, however innocent you may be, as the aggressor,
because your years and abilities give you the superiority. But I firmly
persuade myself, Hope.
that you will treat them with kindness, and that they will honor and esteem
you, as your distinguished virtue deserves.

LII. DRUNKENNESS. It may, perhaps, seem strange to some, that such a lesson as
this should have a place. But, besides the diversion of seeing drunkenness well
imitated, the moral is good. For this very frolic costs Cassio his place.

It is needless to mark the emphatical words in this passage. For drunkenness
destroys all emphasis and propriety.



[ Shakespeare's OTHELLO.] Cassio. I WILL be ha -- [hiccoughs] I Will be ha --
hanged, if these fellows han't given me a fill -- a fill -- a fillup on the
brain-pan -- a little one.


Montano. Why, good master lieutenant, we are not beyond pints a-piece as I Am a
so -- as I Am a so -- as I Am a soldier. And that is a shallow brain-pan, which
will not hold a poor pint of good liquor.


Iago. Some wine, ho! [Sings.]
And let me the cannakin clink, clink,
And let me the cannakin clink,
A soldier's a man, and man's life but a span,
Why then let a soldier have drink, drink,
Why then let a soldier have drink.
Some wine, boy!

Cassio. I Will be shot for a cow -- for a cow -- for a coward, if that ben't an
excellent song.


Iago. I learnt it in England, where indeed they are most potent at the pot.
Your Dane, your German, and your swag-belly'd Hollander, are nothing to your
freeborn Englishman. Did you ever hear an Englishman reckon up the privileges
he has by birthright?


Cassio. No, good Iago. What are they, pray?


Iago. Why, to say what he pleases of the government; to eat more roast beef,
and drink more port, than any three subjects of any other country: and to do
whatever he pleases, wherever he is. Therefore he raves at the best king,
while your Frenchman worships the worst; he breaks this week, the law he voted
for last week; and in all countries, he is winked at, when he does what would
send a native to a mad-house; he eats you up the whole ox in less time than
your Frenchman swills the soup he makes of the shins; and as to drinking, he
lays you France, Austria, and Russia, among the table's feet, with no more
conscience at the tavern, than in the field of battle.


Cassio. Here is our noble ge -- our noble ge -- our noble general's health for
ever.


Montano. Ay, ay, good master lieutenant, and as much longer as you please.


Iago. O sweet England!
King Stephen was an unworthy peer,
His breeches cost him a whole crown;
He held them sixpence all too dear,
With that he called his tailor lown.
He was a wight of high renown,
And thou art but of low degree:
It Is pride, that pulls the country down,
So take thy old cloak about thee.

LIII. VEXATION. SPITEFUL JOY.
The scene between Schylock and Tubal. [ Shakesp. MERCH. OF VEN.] The pupil
must, if he does not know it, be told a little of the plot, viz. That Schylock
had sent Tubal in search of his daughter, whom his ill usage, and the
importunity of her lover, had occasioned to elope from his house. And that
Antonio was a merchant, mortally hated by Schylock, who had borrowed a sum of
money of Schylock on the terms of his forfeiting a pound of his flesh, wherever
Schylock pleased to cut it, in case of his failing to discharge the debt on the
day it was due.
Schyl. Quest. with Anxiety.
HOW now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Have you heard any thing of my
backsliding daughter?


Tub. Disappointment.
I often came where I heard of her; but could not find her.


Schyl. Vexation.
Why, there, there, there! A diamond gone that cost me two thousand ducats at
Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our nation till now. I never felt it
before. Two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels! I
wish she lay dead at my foot, Execrating.
with the jewels in her ear. I would she were hears'd with the ducats in her
coffin. No news of them! Vexation.
And I know not what spent in the search. Loss upon loss. The thief gone with
so much; and so much to find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge, no ill
luck stirring, but what lights on my shoulders; no sighs, but of my breathing;
no tears, but of my shedding.


Tub. Yes, other men have ill luck too. Narration.
Antonio, as I heard in Genoa --


Schyl. What! Has he had ill luck? Spiteful Joy.



[Earnestly.] Tub. Has had a ship cast away coming from Tripoli. Narration.



Schyl. Thank God; thank God! Quest.
Is it true? Spiteful Joy.



Tub. I spoke with some of the sailors, that escaped from the wreck. Narration.



Schyl. I thank thee, good Tubal, good news, Spiteful Joy.
good news. Quest.
What in Genoa, you spoke with them?


Tub. Your daughter spent, in Genoa, Narration.
as I heard, in one night, twenty ducats.


Schyl. Thou stick'st a dagger in me. Anguish.
I shall never see my gold again. Twenty ducats at a sitting! Twenty ducats! --
O father Abraham!


Tub. There came diverse of Antonio's creditors in my company to Venice, that
say, Narration.
he cannot but break.


Schyl. I Am glad of it. I Will plague him. Spiteful Joy.
I Will torture him. I Am glad of it


Tub. One of them showed me a ring he had of your daughter for a monkey.
Narration.



Schyl. Anguish.
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my ruby. I had it of Leah. I
would not have given it for as many monkeys as could stand together upon the
Rialto.


Tub. Narration.
Antonio is certainly undone.


Schyl. Spiteful Joy.
Ay, ay, there is some comfort in that, Directing.
Go, Tubal, fee me an officer; bespeak him to be ready. Cruel. Resolution.
I will be revenged on Antonio. I will wash my hands, to the elbows, in his
heart's blood. [Exit.]


LIVE. SELF-VINDICATION. REPROOF.
The speech of C. Marius to the Romans, showing the absurdity of their
hesitating to confer on him the rank of General in the expedition against
Jugurtha, merely on account of his extraction.

[ Salust. BELL. JUGURTHIN.] Explaining.
This speech begins calm and cool. See Tranquillity, page 20. Teaching, page
26, etc.
IT is but too common, my countrymen, to observe a material difference, between
the behavior of those, who stand candidates for places of power and trust,
before, and after their obtaining them. They solicit them in one manner, and
execute them in another. Sneer.
They set out with a great appearance of activity, humility, and moderation;
Reproof. Humility.
and they quickly fall into sloth, pride, and avarice. It is, undoubtedly, no
easy matter to discharge, to the general satisfaction, the duty of a supreme
commander in troublesome times. Anxiety.
I am, I hope, duly sensible of the importance of the office I propose to take
upon me, for the service of my country. "To carry on," etc. The antithesis, in
this sentence, must be carefully marked in pronouncing it.
To carry on, with effect, an expensive war, and yet be frugal of the public
money; to oblige those to serve, whom it may be delicate to offend; to conduct,
at the same time, a complicated variety of operations; to concert measures at
home answerable to the state of things abroad; and to gain every valuable end,
in spite of opposition from the envious, the factious and the disaffected; to
do all this, my countrymen, is more difficult, than is generally thought. And,
besides the disadvantages, which are common to me with all others in eminent
stations, my case is, Contempt.
in this respect peculiarly hard; that, whereas a commander of patrician rank,
if he is guilty of a neglect, or breach of duty, has his great connexions, the
antiquity of his family, the important services of his ancestors, and the
multitudes he has by power engaged in his interest, to screen him from condign
punishment: Self-Defen.
my whole safety depends upon myself; which renders it the more indispensibly
necessary for me to take care, Anxiety.
that my conduct be clear and unexceptionable. Besides, I am well aware, my
countrymen, that the eye of the public is upon me; and that, though the
impartial, who prefer the real advantage of the commonwealth to all other
considerations, favor my pretensions, Promising.
the patricians want nothing so much, as an occasion against me. It is,
therefore, my fixed resolution, to use my best endeavors, that you be not
disappointed in me, and that their indirect designs against me may be defeated.
I have from my youth been familiar with toils, and with dangers. Self-Defen.
I was faithful to your interest, my countrymen, when I served you for no
reward, Gratitude.
but that of honor. It is not my design to betray you, now that you have
conferred upon me a place of profit. You have committed to my conduct the war
against Jugurtha. Contempt.
The patricians are offended at this. But where would be the wisdom of giving
such a command to one of their honorable body, a person of illustrious birth,
of ancient family, of innumerable statues, but -- of no experience. What
service would his long line of dead ancestors, or his multitude of motionless
statues, do his country in the day of battle? What could such a general do, but
in his trepidation and inexperience, have recourse to some inferior commander,
for direction in difficulties, to which he was not himself equal? Thus your
patrician-general would in fact, have a general over him; so that, the acting
commander would still be a plebeian. So true is this, my countrymen, that I
have myself known those, who have been chosen consuls, begin then to read the
history of their own country, of which, till that time, they were totally
ignorant; that is, they first obtained the employment, and then bethought
themselves of the qualifications necessary for the proper discharge of it.
Respect.
I submit to your judgment, Romans, on which side the advantage lies, when a
comparison is made between patrician haughtiness, Contempt.
and plebeian experience. The very actions, which they have only read, I have
partly seen, and partly myself achieved. What they know by reading, I know by
action. They are pleased to slight my mean birth: I despise their mean
characters. Want of birth and fortune is the objection against me: Want of
personal worth against them. But are not all men of the same species?
Questioning.
What can make a difference between one man and another, Contempt.
but the endowments of the mind? For my part, I shall always look upon the
bravest man as the noblest man. Suppose it were required of the fathers of such
patricians as Albinus, and Bestia, whether, if they had their choice, they
would desire sons of their character, or of mine; what would they answer; but
that they should wish the worthiest to be their sons? Argui. with Reproof.
If the patricians have reason to despise me, let them likewise despise their
ancestors, Antith.
whose nobility was the fruit of their virtue. Do they envy the honors
bestowed upon me? Let them envy likewise my labors, my abstinence, and the
dangers I have undergone for my country; by which I have acquired them.
Contempt.
But those worthless men lead such a life of inactivity, as if they despised
any honors you can bestow; whilst they aspire to honors, as if they had
deserved them by the most industrious virtue. They arrogate the rewards of
activity for their having enjoyed the pleasures of luxury. Yet none can be more
lavish, than they are, in praise of their ancestors. And they imagine they
honor themselves by celebrating their forefathers. Whereas they do the very
contrary. For, by how much their ancestors were distinguished for their
virtues, by so much are they disgraced by their vices. The glory of ancestors
casts a light, indeed, upon their posterity; but it only serves to show what
the descendants are. It alike exhibits to public view their degeneracy and
their worth. I own, I cannot boast of the deeds of my forefathers; But I hope I
may answer the cavils of the patricians by standing-up in defense of what I
have myself done. Laudible Pride. Laud. Pride. See Courage, page 24.

Observe now, my countrymen, the injustice of the patricians. Argui. with
Contempt.
They arrogate to themselves honors on account of the exploits done by their
forefathers, whilst they will not allow me the due praise for performing the
very same sort of actions in my own person. Affectation.
"He has no statues," they cry, "of his family. He can trace no venerable line
of ancestors. Courage.
" -- What then! Is it matter of more praise to disgrace one's illustrious
ancestors, Contempt.
than to become illustrious by his own good behavior? Self-Vindication.
What if I can show no statues of my family? I can show the standards, the
armor, and the trappings, which I have myself taken from the vanquished: I can
show the scars of those wounds which I received by facing the enemies of my
country. These are my statues. These are the honors I boast of; not left me by
inheritance as theirs; but earned, by toil, by abstinence, by valor; amidst
clouds of dust, and seas of blood; scenes of action, Contempt.
where those effeminate patricians, who endeavor, by indirect means, to
depreciate me in your esteem, have never dared to show their faces.

LV. PLOTTING. CRUELTY. HORROR.
Macbeth full of his bloody design against good king Duncan, fancies he sees a
dagger in the air. Starting. Courage.
IS this a dagger, which I see before me,
The handle towered my hand? Reaching out his hand, as to snatch it. The first
eight lines to be spoken with the eyes starring, and fixed on one point in the
air, where he is supposed to see the dagger. See Despair, page 22. Malice 32.
Come let me clutch thee --
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still. Wonder.

Art thou not, fatal vision! Horror.
sensible
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable, Starting.

Drawing his dagger, and looking on it, and then on that in the air as
comparing them.
As this which now I draw --
Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going, Horror.

And such an instrument I was to use. --
Mine eyes are made the fools of the other senses, Starting.

Or else worth all the rest -- I see thee still, Horror.

And on thy blade and dudgeon, drops of blood,
Which was not so before -- A long pause. He recollects and composes himself a
little, and gives over fixing his eyes upon the air-drawn dagger.
There Is no such thing. Doubt.
--
It is the bloody business, Horror. Plotting.
which informs
This to mine eyes -- Plotting is always to be expressed with a low voice.
Especially such a passage as this, to the end.
Now over one half the world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtain'd sleep; now witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate's offerings: and midnight murder, Horror.

(Alarmed by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl's his watch) thus with his stealthy pace,
Like Tarquin's ravishing strides, toward his design
Moves like a ghost -- Thou sound and firmset earth, Guilt.

Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
The very stones should prate of royal blood
Soon to be spilt. [ Shakesp. MACBETH.]
LVI. AFFECTION. JOY. FEAR of OFFENDING. GRATITUDE.
A Speech of Adam to Eve.

[ Milt. PARAD. LOST. B. IV. l. 411.] Tenderness. Awe.
SOLE partner, and sole part of all these joys,
Dearer thyself than all. Needs must the Power,
Piety.
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
Gratitude.
As liberal and free, as infinite;
That raised us from the dust, and placed as here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Ought whereof he has need; he who requires
From us no other service, than to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the trees
In paradise, that bear delicious fruit
Seriousness.
So various, not to taste that only tree
Apprehens.
Of knowledge planted by the tree of life:
So near grows death to life; whatever death is;
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know
God has pronounced it death to taste that tree,
The only sign of our obedience left,
Gratitude.
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and dominion given
Over all other creatures, that possess
Earth, air, and sea. Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited, of manifold delights.
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, Pity. Joy.
following our delightful (...)
To prune these growing plants, and rend these flowers,
Which, were it toilsome, Tenderness.
yet with thee -- were sweet.
LVII. INTERCESSION. OBSTINACY. CRUELTY. FORCED SUBMISSION.
Duke. MAKE room, Authority.
and let him stand before our face --
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too, Pleading.

That thou but lead'st this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act; and then, it is thought
Thou Wilt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty.
And, where thou now exact'st the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh See the note, page 174.

Thou will not only lose the forfeiture, Pity.

But, touched with human gentleness and love, Pleading.

Forgive a moiety of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses, Pity.

That have of late brought down such ruin on him,
Enough to make a royal merchant bankrupt.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

Shyl. I have possessed your grace of what I purpose, Obstinacy.

See Affectation, hypocritical, page 30.
And by our holy sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond. Hypocrisy. Cruelty.

If you deny it, Threaten.
let the danger light
Upon your charter, and your city's freedom --
Malice.
You Will ask me, why I rather choose to have
A weight of ca^^ion flesh, than to receive
Obstinacy. Malice. Obstinacy.
Three thousand ducats? I Will not answer that;
But, say it is my humor; Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats,
To have it ban'd? What, are you answered yet?

Bassanio. Reproof.
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
TO excuse the current of thy cruelty.

Shyl. Malice.
I am not bound to please thee with my answer.

Antonio. Deject.
I pray you, think, you question with a Jew.
You may as well go stand upon the beach,
And bid the main flood 'bate his usual height;
You may as well plead pity with the wolf,
When you behold the ewe bleat for the lamb,
As try to melt his Jewish heart to kindness.

Bass. Entreat.
For thy three thousand ducats, here are six.

Shyl. Obstinacy.
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them; I would have my bond.

Duke Grave. Rebuke.
How shall thou hope for mercy, rendering none?

Shyl. Obstinacy. Cruelty.
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
The pound of flesh, which I demand of him,
Is dearly bought: it is mine, and I will have it.

[Enters Portia disguished like a Doct. of Laws] Duke. Welcoming.
Give me your hand. You come from learned Bellario?

Portia. I do, my Lord.

Duke. You're welcome: take your place.
Question. Answer.
Are you acquainted with the cause in question?

Port. I am informed thoroughly of the case,
Question.
Which is the merchant here? and which the Jew?

Duke. Antonio and Shylock; both stand forth. Authority. Question. Obstinacy.


Port. [To Shylock.] Is your name Shylock?

Shyl. Shylock is my name.

Port. [To Antonio. Question.
] You are obnoxious to him, are you not?

Ant. Ay, so he says. Deject.


Port. Do you confess the bond? Question.


Ant. I do. Deject.


Port. Then must the Jew be merciful. Entreat. Obstinacy.


Shyl. On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

Port. The quality of mercy is not strained. Advising. Pleasure.

It droppeth as the gentle rain from Heaven
Upon ^he happy soil. It is twice blessed,
In him, who gives it, and in him, who takes.
It Is mightiest in the Mightiest. Reverence.
It becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown;
Itself enthroned in the hearts of kings.
It is the loveliest attribute of Deity;
And earthly power shows, likest to divine, Advising.

When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy. Serious Reflection.

And that same prayer does teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy.

Shyl. My deeds upon my head! Obstinacy.

I crave the legal forfeit of my bond.

Bass. For once I beg the court to bend the law
To equity. Entreat.
It Is worth a little wrong
To curb this cruel devil of his will.

Port. It must not be. Forbidding.
There is no power in Venice,
Can alter a decree established.
'Twill be recorded for a precedent,
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

Shyl. Applause.
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel.
O wise young judge! How do I honor thee!

Port. Curiosity. Applause.
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

Shyl. Here it is, most reverend doctor! Here it is.

Port. Advising.
Shylock! -- there is thrice thy money offered thee.

Shyl. Hypocrisy.
An oath! An oath! I have an oath in Heaven!
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
Declam.
No, not for Venice.

Port. Portia speaks all, to " Stop him, guards," without looking off the bond.
Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
Advis.
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant's heart. -- Be merciful.
Obstina.
Take thrice thy money. Bid me tear the bond.

Shyl. When it is paid according to the tenor,
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay upon my bond.

Anton. Dejection.
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

Port. Passing.
Why then, thus it is;
Sentence.
You must prepare your bosom for this knife.

Shyl. Thirst of Blood.
Ay, his breast;
So says the bond; does it not, noble judge?
Nearest his heart. These are the very words.

Port. Quest.
It is so. Are there scales to weigh the flesh?

Shyl. Answ. Inter^.
I have them ready.

Port. Have here a surgeon, Shylock, at your charge.
To stop his wounds, lest he should bleed to death.

Shyl. Cruelty. Interc.
Is it so nominated in the bond?

Port. It is not so expressed: but what of that?
'Twere good you do so much for charity.

Shyl. I cannot find it. It Is not in the bond, Cruelty.


Port. A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine. Sentence.

The court awards it, and the law does give it.

Shyl. Most rightful judge! Applause. Sentence.


Port. And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.
The law allows it, and the court awards it.

Shyl. Most learned judge! A sentence! Applause.

Thirsting.
Come prepare.

Port. Tarry a little. Blood. Doubt.
There is something else. --
This bond -- does give thee here -- no jot of blood.
The words expressly are a pound of flesh.
Then take thy bond. Direct.
Take thou thy pound of flesh;
But, in the cutting it, Threaten.
if thou do shed
One drop of christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are, by the laws of Venice, forfeited.

Great. O upright judge! Mark, Jew! Applause.
O learned judge!

Shyl. Is that the law? Confusion.


Port. Thyself shall see the act. Positive.

For, as thou urgest justice, Reproof.
be assured
Thou shall have justice, more than thou desir'st.

Great. O learned judge! Mark, Jew! Applause.
A learned judge!

Shyl. I take his offer then. Confusion.
Pay the sum thrice.
And let the Christian go. Yielding.


Bass. Here is the money. Giving: Forbidding.


Port. Softly. No haste. The Jew shall have strict justice.
His claim is barely for the penalty.

Great. A second Daniel! Jew. Applause. Triumph.

Now, infidel, I have full hold of thee.

Port. Question.
Why does the Jew pause? Take thou thy forfeiture.

Shyl. Confusion. Giving.
Give me my principal, and let me go.

Bassan. I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

Port. Forbidden. Reproof. Applause.
He has refused it in the open court.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

Great. A Daniel still, say I; a second Daniel! Reproof.
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

Shy. Sneaking. Refusing.
Shall I not barely have my principal?

Port. Thou shall have nothing but the forfeiture,
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

Shyl. Disappoint.
Why then the Devil give him good of it.
Spite. Forbidding. Condemn.
I Will stay no longer question.
Stop him, guards.
The law has yet another hold on you.
Teaching.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien,
That by direct, or indirect attempt,
He seeks the life of any citizen,
The party against the which he does contrive,
Shall seize on half his goods. The other half
Goes to the privy coffer of the state;
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, against all other voice,
Condemn.
In which predicament, I say, thou stand'st.
For it appears by manifest proceeding,
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou have contrived against the very life
Of the defendant; so that thou incurr'st
The danger, formerly by me rehearsed.
Advising. Grant.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

Duke. That thou may see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life, before thou ask it.

Shyl. Despair.
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that.
You take my life, taking whereon I live.

Port. What mercy can you render him, Questioning.
Antonio?

Great. A halter's price, Triumph.
and leave to hang himself.

Anton. So please my Lord the Duke, Granting.
and all the court,
To quit their right in one half of his goods,
I shall be well contented, if I have
The other half in use, until his death,
Then to restore it to the gentleman,
Who lately stole his daughter.

Duke. He shall do this, Threatening
or else I do recant
The pardon I had promised to bestow.

Port. Art thou contented, Jew? Questioning.
What do thou say?

Shyl. I pray you give me leave to go from hence. Despair.

I am not well. Send the deed after me,
And I will sign it.

Duke. Get thee gone. But do it. Threatening


[Exeunt omnes.] [Shakesp. Merch. of Venice.] LVIII. Conjugal AFFECTION with
DISTRESS.
The scene between Hector and his wife Andromache.

[Pope 's Hom. II. VI. v. 488. HECTOR, this heard, Narration.
returned without delay
Swift through the town he took his former way, Haste.

Through streets of palaces and walks of state;
And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair
His blameless wife, Action's wealthy heir.
Tender
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces pressed
Description.
His only hope hung smiling at her breast;
Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
Fair as the newborn star that gilds the morn.
Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resigned
To Soft.
tender passions all his Courage.
mighty mind.
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look;
Description of Beauty in Distress.
Hung on his hand, and then, dejected, spoke.
Her bosom labored with with a boding sigh,
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.
Compl. with Affection.
" Too daring prince! Ah whither do thou run?
Ah too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And think thou not how wretched we shall be,
Fear.
A widow I, an helpless orphan he!
For sure such courage length of life denies,
And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
Greece in her single heroes, strove in vain:
Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain,
Depr^^a.
O grant me gods I ere Hector meets his doom,
All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
And end with sorrows, as they first begun.
Lamenta.
No parent now remains, my griefs to share,
No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
The fierce Achilles wrapped our walls in fire,
Laid Thebe waste, and flew my warlike sire.
His fate compassion in the victor bred;
Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead;
His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
And laid him decent on the funeral pile.
By the same arm my sev'n brave brothers fell,
In one sad day they viewed the gate of hell.
While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled.
My Mother lived to bear the victor's hands,
The queen of Hippoplacias's sylvan lands.
Redeemed too late, she scarce beheld again
Her pleasing empire, and her native plain,
When Ah! oppressed by life-consuming woe
She fell, a victim to Diana's bow.
Yet while my Hectors still survives, Comfort.
I see
My father, mother, brethren, all in thee.
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred all, Apprehens.

Once more will perish, if my Hector fall.
Thy wife, thy infant, in the danger share;
O prove a husband's and a parent's care. Entreating.

That quarter most the skilful Greek's annoy, Apprehensi.

Where yon' wild fig trees join the wall of Troy.
Thou from this tower defend the important past,
There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
That pass Tydides, Ajax, strives to gain,
And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven,
Let others in the field their arms employ; Entreating.

But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."
The chief replied, Courage.
" That post shall be my care;
Nor that alone; but all the works of war,
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renowned
And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground,
Attaint the luster of my former name,
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame? Aversion.

My early youth was bred to warlike pains; Courage.

My soul impels me to the martial plains.
Still foremost let me stand to guard the throne,
To save my father's honors and my own.
Apprehensi.
Yet come it will! the day decreed by fates!
(How my heart trembles, while my tongue relates!)
The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend; Patriot.

Grief.
Must see thy warriors fall; thy glories end.
Grief with Affection.
And yet no dire persage so wounds my mind,
My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore,
As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread!
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led,
In Argive looms our battles to design,
And woes of which so large a part was thine.
There while you groan beneath the load of life,
Insulting.
They cry" -- "Behold the mighty Hector's wife!"
"Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
Embitters all thy woes by naming me.
Pity.
The thoughts of glory past and present shame,
A thousand griefs shall waken at the name;
May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Pressed with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapped in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear the sigh, nor see thee weep. Narration.
"
"Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy,
Tenderness.
Stretched his fond arms, to clasp the lovely boy,
The babe clung, crying, to his nurse's breast,
Scared with the dozzling helm, and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
And Hector hasted to relieve his child;
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound.
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground.
Then kissed the child, and lifting high in air,
Thus to the gods preferred a parent's prayer.
"O Thou, Intercession.
whose glory fills the aetherial throne,
And all ye deathless powers -- Protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
Against his country's foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age!
So, when triumphant from successful toils,
Of heroes slain, he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
And say -- "This chief transcends his father's fame."
While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
His mother's conscious heart overflows with joy."
He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms, Tenderness.

Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hushed to repose, and with a smile surveyed.
The troubled pleasure soon chastis'd with fear, Apprehens.

She mingled with the smile a falling tear.
LIX. REMORSE. Attempt toward REPENTANCE. OBDURACY. DESPAIR.
The wicked king's soliloquy, expressing his remorse for the murder of his
brother Hamlet, king of Denmark.

[ Shakes. HAMLET.] King. OH my offense is rank! Compu^^^.
It smells to heaven
It has the eldest curse of heaven upon it. --
A brother's murder! -- Pray, alas! I cannot:
Hardness of Heart.
Though sore my need of what the guilty pray for;
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause, where I shall first begin,
And both neglect. -- Glimpse of Hope.
What, if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy,
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what is in prayer, but this two-fold-force,
To be forestal'd, ere yet we come to fall,
Or pardoned, being down? -- Then I Will loop up.
My fault is past. -- Guilt.
But oh! what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? -- Doom.
" Forgive me my foul murder!"
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects, for which I did the murder;
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain the offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice;
Nay, often it is seen, the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. Terror.
But it is not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature; we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence -- Anxiety. Hope. Obduracy. Despair
What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. -- What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Oh wretched state! Oh bosom, black as death!
Oh limed soul! that struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Anguish.
Help, Angels! Make essay,
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!
All may be well. Hope.

[The king kneels, and, by his looks and gestures, expresses great agony and
horror; but no penitential melting of heart; after continuing a short time in
that posture, he rises in despair, and speaks the following.] My words fly up
-- My thoughts remain below --
Words without thoughts never to Heaven go. Despair.


LX. REPROACHING. EXCITING to Self-defence.
The speech of T. Q. Capitolinus to the Roman people, when the Aequi and
Volsci, taking the advantage of the animosities then prevailing between the
patricians and plebelans, joined their forces, and, after plundering the Roman
territories, advanced, in a hostile manner, to the very walls of the city.

[T. LIVE. Hist. Rom.] THOUGH I am not conscious to myself, Vexation.
Romans, of any offense I have committed against my country; it is with
confusion that I address you thus publicly on such an occasion. For what can be
imagined more shameful, than that it should be known to the world -- that it
should be known to ourselves! -- and must be handed down to posterity -- that
in the fourth consulship of Titus Quintius Capitolinus, the Aequi and Volsci,
so lately found scarce a match for the Hernici, advanced in arms --
uninterrupted, and unpunished -- to the very walls of Rome! Had I imagined,
that such a disgrace as this would have come upon my country in the year of my
fourth consulship (though our affairs have of late gone in such a way, that
every thing was to be feared) I would have avoided the consular honor -- Agony.
the shame rather by banishment, or even by death. How much more desirable to
have died in my third consulship, than to live to see the dishonors, which the
times are like to bring upon us. But whom does the insolence of so contemptible
an enemy disgrace? Remons. with Vexation.
Is it us, the consuls? Or is it you, Romans? If the fault be in us; take from
us that authority, we are so unworthy to enjoy. And if that be not enough,
inflict on us the punishment we have deserved. Kindness.
If it is owing to you, my countrymen, that the enemy have thus dared to insult
us, Interces.
all I beg of the gods is, that they will forgive you; Kindness.
and I wish no other punishment to come upon you, than repentance for your
misconduct. Courage.
Our enemies have not presumed upon any want of bravery in you, Romans; nor
upon any imagined superiority in themselves. They know both you and themselves
too well. Contempt.
They have not forgot how often they have been routed in battle, how often put
to shameful flight, deprived of their lands, Vexation.
and even made to pass under the yoke, by the Romans. It is the fatal
dissension between the patricians and plebeians, that give courage to the
enemies of the Roman name. Our quarrels amongst ourselves are the poison of our
state. While you are dissatisfied with the powers enjoyed by the patricians,
and we are jealous of the plebeians, the enemy, seeing their time, have
surprised us.

Remons.
But what (in the name of all the gods!) will satisfy you? You demanded plebeian
tribunes. For the sake of peace, we, patricians, consented. You then called for
decemviri. We agreed, that the decemviral power should be established. You were
quickly tired of this form of government. We obliged the decemviri to abdicate.
Your resentment pursuing them even to their retirement; Grief.
we gave our consent to the exile and death of some of the first men of Rome
for birth and merit. Then you insisted, that the tribunitial authority should
be re-established. Remons.
You did accordingly re-establish it. We bore with the innovation of conferring
the consular power upon men of plebeian rank, though we saw how injurious it was
to our own. We bore patiently, and do still bear with the tribunitial power;
with the right of appeal to the people; with the obligation upon the patricians
to submit to the popular decrees; and with the alienation of our peculiar
rights and privileges, under pretense of equaling the different ranks, and
reducing things to order in the commonwealth. But, my countrymen, when will you
put an end to these wranglings? When shall this unhappy state be united? When
shall we look upon Rome as our common country? We, of the patrician rank,
though losers, are more disposed to peace, than you, who have gained all your
ends. Is it not enough that you have made yourselves formidable to your
superiors? Now you assemble, in a seditious manner, on the Mount Aventine; then
on the Mons sacer: and against us your vengeance is always directed. Rousing.
Shame.
You were in no haste to prevent the enemy from seizing on the Esquiliae, or
from mounting our works. It is only against the patricians, Reproaching
that you dare to show your valor. Go on, then, if you are so determined; and
when you have surrounded the senate house, made the forum dangerous for any of
patrician rank to be seen in, and got the prisons filled with persons of the
first eminence; keep up the same heroic spirit, you show against your own
countrymen; Sneer.
sally out at the Esquilinegate, and repulse the enemy. Or if your valor is
not sufficient to enable you to do this, at least show that you have the
heroism to view from the walls, your lands wasted by fire and sword, and
plundered by the irresistible army of the Aequi and Volsci.

Remons.
Will any one pretend to answer to this, that it is only the public that suffers
by the inroads of the enemy, and that the main of the loss will be only that of
a little national honor? Rousing. Honor.
Were that the case, what Roman could think of it with patience? But, besides
the loss of our honor, what effect, do you think, these ravages will have upon
private property? Alarm.
Do you expect any else, than that every individual of you should quickly have
accounts of what he himself has lost? Remons.
And how are those losses to be made up? Will your darling tribunes make good
the damages? Reproach.
They will be active enough in inflaming you with their speeches; they will
commence suits against the principal men in the state; they will gather
seditious assemblies, and multiply laws on laws, and decrees on decrees. Remons.
But which of you, my countrymen, has gained any thing by such proceedings? Has
any Roman carried home to his family, from those tumultuous meetings, any
thing, but hatred, quarrels, and mischiefs, public and private? Regret.
The case was, in former happier times, very different, when you submitted to
the rightful authority of the consuls, and were not, as now, the dupes of your
tribunes; when you exerted yourselves in the field of battle, not in the forum;
when your shouts of courage struck terror into your enemies; not your seditious
clamours into your countrymen. Then you used to return home, enriched with
spoils, and adorned with trophies: instead of which you now ingloriously suffer
the enemy -- and that enemy a contemptible one -- to go off unmolested, and
loaded with your substance. Reproach.
But go on with your seditious assemblies, Remons.
as long as you can. The time is approaching, Alarm.
when you will find yourselves obliged to quit them, though so agreeable to
you, Reproach.
and to betake yourselves to what you have the greatest reluctance to, I mean
your arms. You thought it a mighty hardship to be obliged to march against the
Aequi and Volsci. Alarm.
They have spared you that trouble. They are now at your gates. And if you
don't drive them from thence, they will soon be in the city, in the capitol,
and in your houses. Regret.
Two years ago an order was given by authority of the senate, that levies
should be made, and that the army should march. Reproof.
Instead of executing this salutary order, we have been loitering at home,
unemployed, except in wrangling; forgetful, while our peace was undisturbed
from abroad, that this long indolence would probably be the very cause of
troubles coming upon us from various quarters at once.

I know full well, my countrymen, Profess.
that here are many subjects more agreeable to you than those I have now spoken
to you upon. Sincer. Alarm.
But the necessity of the times obliges me (if I were less inclinable of
myself) to lay truth before you, rather than tickle your ears. Profess.
I wish I could humor your inclinations: Sincer.
but I had rather secure your safety, than gain your good will. Alarm.
It is commonly observed, Apology.
that those who address the public from selfish views are more acceptable, than
those whose sole disinterested aim is the general advantage. Remons. Reproof.
And I think you can hardly imagine, that those flatterers of the plebeians,
who neither suffer you to rest in peace, nor in war, mean your good by
continually exciting you to tumult and sedition When they work you up to
discontent and rage, they are sure to gain their avaricious or their ambitious
ends. And, as in times of peace they find themselves to be of no consequence,
rather than be undistinguished, they set themselves to promote mischief.

Exciting Self-Defen.
If you are at last (as I am sure you have reason to be) sick of such absurd and
ruinous proceedings, and have a mind to resume your own characters, and to act
agreeably to that of your ancestors; Courage.
I am myself ready now to head you, and am willing to undergo any penalty, if I
do not, in a few days, force these plunderers of our lands to abandon their
camp, and if I do not carry the terror of war, which now alarms you, from our
gates, to those of the enemy.

LXI. DOUBTING. VEXATION. SERIOUS REFLECTION.
Hamlet's soliloquy upon his finding that the king his father was murdered by
his uncle; in which he considers of the consequence of putting an end to a
burdensome life.

[ Shakes. HAMLET.] Ham. Anxiety.
TO be -- or not to be "To b^ -- or not to be." -- The thought, at length, would
run thus, "Is death the total destruction of consciousness? Or do the dead
still con^^^ to think and act, though in a different manner from that of the
present state?" The ^he (...) in the second line is different, viz. "Whether is
ru^^ mercy to put an end to life, when it becom^ irks^n?"
-- that is the question --
Whether 'th^ nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune;
Or to take arms against a host of troubles, Courage.

And by opposing, end them -- Deep Thoughtfulness.
But to die --
To sleep -- No more -- -- But to die -- To sleep -- No more." The pauses must
be equal. The sense, at length being, "Is dying only falling asleep, and
nothing else?"
And by a sleep to end
The heart-ach, Vexation.
and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to -- It Is a consummation
" Devoutly to be wished." To be spoken with the eyes raised earnestly to
heaven* See Veneration, page 20.
Devoutly to be wished -- To Thought.
die -- To sleep --
To sleep -- Apprehen.
Perchance to dream -- A startling thought --
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal evil,
Must give us pause. There Is the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Vexation.

The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of love despised, the law's delay, Anguish.

The insolence of office, and the spurns,
That patient Meekness.
merit of the unworthy Aversion.
takes;
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would Courage.
bend to earth, Complain. Fear.

And groan and sweat under a weary life?
But that the dread of something after death
(That undiscovered country, from whose bourne -- "Whose bourne." That is,
border, or coast.

No traveller returns) puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others, which we know not yet?
Thus conscience makes cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied over with a pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great strength and moment,
With this regard their currents turn away,
And lose the name of action.

LXII. EAGERNESS. CHIDING. ENTREATING.
Ghosts of various characters press to be admitted into Charon's boat. Are
repulsed by him and Mercury, on account of their coming loaded with their
vices, follies, and wrong attachments.

[ Lucian. DIAL. MOST. CHAR. MERC. etc.] Charon. Chiding.
LOOK you, gentlemen and ladies, this will never do. My boat is but smull; and
old, and leaky into the bargain; so that, if it be either in the least
overloaded, or not exactly trimmed, yon will be among the Stygian frogs
presently, every single ghost of you. You come pushing and crowding in such
shoals, Threatening
and I know not how much luggage along with you, that you are like to repent of
your being in such a hurry, at least those of you who cannot swim.


1st Ghost. Entreating.
But you don't consider, Mr. Ferryman, how much we are tired of dodging about
here, where we have neither house nor home, Complaini.
where there is nothing but mud, in which we sink over shoes, over boots, nor
so much as a tree to hang a dog upon. Entreating.
Pray, good Charon, push us over as fast as you can.


Char. Chiding.
What a plague ails the brainless ghost? Would you have me do impossibilities?
Do Mercury, Exciting. Refusing.
bear a hand a little. Push them back. Don't let above one come into the boat
at a time; that you may examine them ghost by ghost, and make them strip, and
leave their luggage, before they set a foot in the boat.


Merc. Ay, ay, I Will take care of that, Promising.
Charon. -- Hold. Who are you? Refusing.



2d Ghost. My name is Menippus, Submission.
by trade a cynic philosopher. And to show you how willing I am to be
conformable, look you there, away go my wallet and my staff into the Styx. And
as for my cloak, I did not bring it with me.


Merc, That Is my honest cynic. Approbation.
Come into the boat, Menippus. Here is a ghost of sense for you. Go, go forward
by the helm, where you may have good sitting, and may see all the passengers.
-- Your servant, Madam. Who may you be, if a man, I mean, if a god may be so
bold?


3d Ghost. Sir, I am the celebrated beauty, Affected Beauty.
who rated my favors so high, as to receive a talent for a kiss. It is true a
certain philosopher did grudge my price, Refusing.
saying he had no notion of paying an exorbitant sum for so unpleasant a
bargain as repentance. Contempt.
But my comfort is, that it was a poor old-fellow, and a philosopher, that made
this clownish speech, so different from what I was used to.


Merc. Look you, Madam, Refusing.
this country is not famous for gallantry. And, as you will make nothing of
your beauty, where you are going, I must desire you to leave it all behind, or
you don't set a foot in the Stygian ferry-boat.


3d Ghost. Pray, Sir, excuse me. Entreat.
Why must one be ugly, because one is dead?


Merc. Come, come, Madam, Insist. with Blame and Sheer.
off with your whole apparatus of temptation, if you mean to cross the Stygian
pool. You must not only lay aside the paint on your cheeks, but the cheeks
themselves. You must throw off not only the gorgeous attire of your head, but
the hair, and the very skin, to the bare skull. So far from granting you a
passage with all your finery about you, we shall expect you to strip off both
skin and flesh to the very bones. So, Mrs. Beauty, if you please to step aside,
and dispose of your tackle, and present yourself by and by, in the plain dress
of a skeleton, we shall perhaps carry you over the water.


3d Ghost. Vexation. Insisting.
It is deadly hard; and --


Merc. This is our way, Madam -- Refusing.
Stop -- Who are you? You seem to brush forward, as who should say, "I am no
small fool."


4th Ghost. Pride.
Why, Sir, I am no less person, than Lampichus the tyrant.


Merc. Sneer. Refusing.
Pray, good Mr. Lampichus the tyrant, where do you intend to stow all that
luggage?


4th Ghost. Entreat.
Consider, Mercury, it is not proper that a king should travel without his
conveniences about him.


Merc. Refusing.
Whatever may be proper for you in quality of a king, you must allow me to
determine of the necessaries of life requisite for you in quality of a ghost.
Insisting. Blame.
I shall therefore desire, that your tyrantship will be pleased to leave your
bags of gold, your pride, and your cruelty, Apprehens.
behind. For, if you were to go into our poor crazy wherry, with them, you
would sink it, if there were no passenger but yourself.


4th Ghost. Entreating.
Pray, good Mercury, let me carry my diadem. Diadems are thought to have been
only a sort of ring to go round the head, like a wreath.
It is much heavier than an old-fashioned wedding-ring. How will the ghosts
know, that I am a king, without some thing of a royal ensign about me?


Merc. Refusing.
There is no difference, where you are going, between a king and a cobbler,
unless the cobbler has been the better man, which happens commonly enough.
Questioning.
-- But who are you, with your rosy gills, and your round paunch?


5th Ghost. I am only a harmless good-natured fellow, known by the name of
Damasias, Entreating.
the parasite. You see I am naked, I hope, therefore, you will let me into the
boat.


Merc. I like such naked passengers as you. Refusing.
Pray, Apprehens.
do you think you can cross the Styx with such a load of flesh about you? One
of your legs would sink the boat.


5th Ghost. What, Vexation.
must I put off my very flesh?


Merc. Yes, surely. Insisting.



5th Ghost. If I must, I must. Entreat.
Now then, let me come.


Merc. Hold. Refusing.
What have you got under your arm?


5th Ghost. It is only a little book of compliments and poems, in praise of
great folks, Entreating.
which I have written out, and keep ready by me, to put any name at the head of
them, as occasion offers, you know.


Merc. You silly fellow! Contempt.
Do you think you will have occasion for panegyrics on the other side of the
Styx? Questioning.



5th Ghost. What, Disappoint.
are there no great folks there?


Merc. Why, you simpleton, Contempt.
don't you know, that those, who were greatest in the other world, are meanest in
that you are going to? Besides, there are neither places nor pensions to give
there. -- Who are you pray? Questioning.



6th Ghost. A conqueror. Chiding.
Boasting.
I am the famous --


Merc. You shall not conquer me, Resolution. Refusing.
I can tell you, Mr. Famous; and, therefore, if you don't throw your sword and
your spear, and all these trophies, into the Styx, you shall not set a foot in the
boat.


6th Ghost. What must not my immortal Vexation.
honors accompany me? If I had not thought of enjoying them in the other
world, I had not taken the pains I did about them.


Merc. Threatening
You will see presently what honors judge Minos will confer on you for ravaging
mankind, and deluging the world with blood -- Stop. Questioning.
Who are you?


7th Ghost. Affec. Learn.
Sir, I am an universal genius.


Merc. Contempt.
That is to say, in plain English, a Jack of all trades, and good at none.


7th Ghost. Boasting.
Why, Sir, I have written upon all manner of subjects. I have published ten
volumes in folio, sixteen quartos, thirty-five octavos, nineteen volumes in
twelves, and twenty-two pamphlets. I am a standard-author in astronomy, in
natural history, in physic, in criticism, in history, in epic, tragic, and
comic poetry, in metaphysics, in grammar, in --


Merc. Contempt. Questioning.
Plague on thy everlasting tongue; is it never to lie still any more? What
mountain of a folio is that, thou have under thy arm?


7th Ghost. Entreating.
Sir, it is only my commonplace book.


Merc. Contempt.
Well, if you will go and dispose of it, and of your learned pride, and your
scurrility to all your contemporary authors, and of your arrogance in
pretending to be master of so many different subjects, and of your ostentation
in giving yourself so many silly airs of learning needlessly; and come back in
the dress and disposition of a modest well-behaved skelet^^, Questioning.
Boasting.
we shall think of giving you your passage. -- Now, who are you?


8th Ghost. Sir, I am worth a plum, as I can show you by my ledger. Look you
here.

" BALANCE Dr. Per. Con. Cr."
Merc. Chiding.
What, in the name of Plutus, The god of riches.
has silly ghost got in his pericranium? Do think, Contempt.
friend, that there is cheating, and usury, and stock-jobbing, in the lower
regions? Refusing. Questioning.
Stand out of the way. -- Who are you?


9th Ghost. Sir I am a gentleman, rat me. Foppery.



Merc. Ay, Contempt.
there is little doubt of your rotting, now you are dead. You was half rotten
before you died.


9th Ghost. Sir, Foppery.
I have been the happiest of all mortals in the favor of the ladies, split me.
The tender creatures could refuse me nothing. Boasting.
I conquered whatever I tried, stab my vitals.


Merc. I cannot but admire your impudence to tell me a lie. Don't you know,
firrah, Chiding.
that Mercury is a god? No lady, whose favors were worth having, ever cared a
farthing for you, or any pig-tail'd puppy of your sort. Therefore let me have
none of your nonsense; Command with Cont.
but go and throw your snuff box, your monkey airs, your rat me's, and your
split me's, your pretensions to favors you never received, your foolish
brains, and your chattering tongue: throw them all into the Styx, and then we
shall perhaps talk to you.


10th Ghost. I am an emperor, Boasting with Intr.
and could bring three hundred thousand men into the field, and --


11th Ghost. I am a female conqueror, Affec. with Intr.
and have had princes at my feet. My beauty has been always thought
irresistible, Affect. of Piety.
nor has --


12th Ghost. I am a venerable priest of the temple of Apollo, and you know,
Mercury, whether the report of the Delphic oracles's being only a contrivance
among us, Self-Vindication.
be not a malicious fiction; and whether the priests, in all ages, and in all
places, have not been, and will not always be eminent for their artless,
undesigning simplicity, their contempt of riches, their honest opposition to
the vices of the great, and their zeal in promoting truth and liberty of
conscience, and --


13th Ghost. Fawning.
I have the honor to tell you Sir, I am the darling of the greatest prince on
earth. I have kept in favor five and twenty years in spite of the hatred of a
whole nation, and the arts of hundreds of rivals. There is not, I will take
upon me to say, Sir, a fetch in politics, nor a contrivance for worming in, and
screwing out, that I am not master of. I had I assure you, Whisp.
Sir, (a word in your ear) I had my king as much at my command as a shepherd
has his dog. Sir, I should be proud to serve you, Sir, if you --


14th Ghost. Stiff Affec.
I presume illustrious, Sir, you wont hinder me, of my passage, when I inform
you, Learn.
I only want to carry with me a few nostrums, a little physical Latin, and a
small collection of learned phrases for expressing common things more
magnificently, which if they were put into a vernacular tongue, would be too
easily understood. Besides, I have, I believe --


15th Ghost. Affect. with Wheedling. Boast.
Great god of eloquence, you will not, I am persuaded, stop a famous lawyer and
orator. I am master of every trope and figure that ever was heard of. I can
make any cause good. By the time I have talked half an hour, there is not a
judge on the bench, that knows which side the right is on, or whether there be
any right on either side. And then, for brow-beating, and finding useful and
seasonable demurs, quirks, and the like, I dare challenge --


16th Ghost. Hypoc. and Fawn.
Mercury. I do entreat you to let me come into the boat. I am sure, judge Minos,
will pass a very favorable sentence on me. For it is well known, that no body
ever was a more exact observer of the religious ceremonies appointed by
authority, and established by custom, than myself. And what was alleged
against me, of my being given to censoriousness, pride, and private sins, is
all false -- almost -- and --


17th Ghost. I am sure, Mercury, Confidence.
I shall be very well received by judge Minos, judge Rhadamanthus, and judge
Aeacus. For I never did harm to any body; but was always ready to do any
kindness in my power. Self-Vindication.
And there is nothing can be alleged against me, worth naming. For it is not
true, that I believed neither god nor future state. I was no Atheist, as has
been alleged, but only a free-thinker.


18th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, Entreating. Pity.
let a brave soldier come into the boat. See what a stab in my back I died of.


19th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, don't keep out an industrious citizen, who died of
living too frugally.


20th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, let an honest farmer pass, who was knocked on the
head for not selling corn to the poor for a song.


Merc. Hoity, toity! What have we got! Impatience.
Why don't you all bawl together? Now, in the name of the three Furies, Alecto,
Tysiphone, and Megara, of the Vegoves, the Numina laeva, and all the Robigus's
and Averruncus's that stand on Aulus Gellius's list of mischievous deities,
what must we do, Charon?


Char. Push them away. Anger.
Push them into the Styx. There is not one of them fit to be carried over.
Chiding.
One comes loaded with pride of beauty and lust, another with arrogance and
cruelty, another with falsehood and flattery, another with love of fame, and
desire of boundless dominion, another with false learning, another with learned
pride, another with spiritual pride and hopocrisy, another with avarice and
curlishness, another with foppery and false pretensions to ladies favors,
another with political craft, bribery, and corruption, another with law quirks,
another with quackish nostrums, and another with priostcraft; and they expect,
that my poor little old half rotten wherry should carry them and all their
nasty luggage over at one lift. Why, Mercury, it would require such a vessel,
as those they will build at the island of Albion two thousand years hence,
which will be called first rate men of war, Determine.
to carry such a cargo. Therefore we must even put off, with this half dozen of
passengers, and, perhaps, by the time we come back, some of them will be
stripped to the buff, I mean to the bones, and disencumbered of their
respective appurtenances, so as to be fit for the voyage.


Merc. Agreeing.
We have nothing else for it, Charon. Therefore, gentlemen and ladies, if you
don't clear the way, Threatening Commandi.
I must be rude to you. Fall back, fall back. I have not room to push the boat
off -- [Standing a tiptoe, and looking as at a distant object] O -- Methinks,
Doubting.
I see a couple of modest-looking ghosts whom I should know, Inviting.
Approbation
standing at a distance. Ay, Ay, it is the same. Hark ye, you good people, come
this way. You seem to have shaken off all your useless lumber. I remember you
You lived in a little cottage on the side of a hill in the Chersonesu,
Cimbrica. You were always good, honest, contented creatures.


Char. Kindness.
Take them in, Mercury. They are worth an hundred of your cumbrous emperors,
conquerors, beauties, and literati^ Come, let us push off.


LXIII. ACCUSATION. From Cicero's ORATION against Verres, entitled DIVINATIO^.
HAVING formerly had the honor of being quaestor in Sicily, Apology.
and leaving that people with such grateful impressions of me on account of my
behavior, while I was among them, as, I hope, will not soon be effaced, it
appeared, that as they had great dependence upon their former patrons for the
security of their properties, they likewise reposed some degree of confidence
in me. Those unhappy people being plundered and oppressed, Pity.
have made frequent and public applications to me, entreating, that I would
undertake the defense of them, and their fortunes; which, they told me, they
were encouraged to request of me, by promises I had given them (of the
sincerity of which they had had several substantial proofs) that if ever they
should have occasion for my friendship, Promising.
I would not be wanting in any respect in which I could be useful to them.
Entreating.
The time was now come, they told me, when they had but too much occasion to
claim my promise; for that they were now in want of protection, not for their
property only, Pity.
but even for their lives, and for securing the very being of the province.
That for three years they had suffered, Accusation.
by the injustice of Caius Verres, every hardship, with which during impiety,
rapacious insolence, and wanton cruelty could distress a miserable and helpless
people. It gave me no small concern, Vexation.
to find myself obliged either to falsify my promise to those, who had reposed
a confidence in me, or to undertake the ungrateful part of an accuser, instead
of that which I have always chosen, I mean of a defender. I referred them to
the patronage of Quintus Caecilins, Declin.
who succeeded me in the quaestorship of the province. I was in hopes, I should
thus get free of the disagreeable office, Vexation.
they had solicited me to engage in. Accusation.
But to my great disappointment, they told me, so far from their having any
hopes from Caecilius, their distresses had been heightened by him; and that he
had, by his conduct, during his quaestorship, made their application to me more
necessary, than otherwise it would have been. Apology.
You see, therefore, Fathers, that I am drawn to engage this cause by duty,
fidelity, and commiseration, for the discussed; and that though I may seem to
take the accusing side, it is, in fact, the defense of the oppressed, that I
undertake, the defense of many thousands, of many great cities, of a whole
province. And indeed, though the cause were of less consequence than it is;
though the Sicilians had not requested my assistance; and though I had not been
by my promise, and my connexions with that unfortunate people, obliged to
undertake their defense, though I had professedly commenced this prosecution
with a view to the service of my country merely; that a man infamous for his
avarice* Accusation.
impudence, and villainy, whose rapaciousness, and other crimes of various
kinds, are notorious, not in Sicily only, but in Achaia, Asia, Minor, Cilicia,
Panphilia, and even here at home; that such a man might, at my instance, be
brought upon his trial, and receive the punishment he deserves; though I had
had no other view in this prosecution, Self-Vindication.
than that justice should be done upon a cruel oppressor and the distressed be
delivered; what F^eman could have blamed my proceeding? How could I do a more
valuable service to the Commonwealth? What ought to be more acceptable to the
Roman people, to our allies, or to foreign nations? What more desirable toward
securing the properties, privileges and lives of mankind, than examplary
justice, inflicted on notorious abusers of power? Deplorable is the situation
of the tributary states and provinces of the commonwealth. Oppressed,
plundered, Pity
ruined, by those who are set over them, they do not now presume to hope for
deliverance. All they desire, is a little alleviation of their distresses. They
are willing to submit their cause to the justice of a Roman senate. But they,
who ought to undertake their vindication, are their enemies. Accus.
They who ought to commence the prosecution against their oppressors, deserve
themselves, to be brought upon their trial for their own mal-administration.

It is sufficiently known to you, Fathers, Teaching Explaining.
that the law for recovery of tributes unjustly seized, was intended expressly
for the advantage of the allied and tributary states. For in cases of injustice
done by one citizen to another, redress is to be had by action at common law.
The present cause is, therefore, to be tried by the law of recovery. And, under
the umbrage of that law, and in hopes of redress by it, the province of Sicily,
with one voice, accuses Verres of plundering her of her gold and silver, of the
riches of her towns, her cities, and temples, Accus.
and of all she enjoyed under the protection of the Roman commonwealth, to the
v^e of many millions, etc.

From his other orations against Verres. The time is come, Fathers, Teaching or
Explaining.
when that which has long been wished for, toward allaying the envy, your
order has been subject to, and removing the imputations against trials, is (not
by human contrivance, Awe. Informing.
but superior direction) effectually put in our power. An opinion has long
prevailed, not only here at home, but likewise in foreign countries, both
dangerous to you, and pernicious to the state, viz. That, in prosecutions, men
of wealth are always safe, however clearly convicted. There is now to be
brought upon his trial before you, Accus.
to the confusion, I hope, of the propagators of this slanderous imputation,
one, whose life and actions condemn him in the opinion of all impartial
persons; but who, according to his own reckoning, and declared dependence upon
his riches, is already acquitted; I mean C^ias Verres. I have undertaken this
prosecution, Apology.
Fathers, at the general desire, and with the great expectation of the Roman
people, not that I might draw envy upon that illustrious order, of which the
accused happens to be; but with the direct design of clearing your justice and
impartiality before the world. Exciting.
For I have brought upon his trial, one, whose conduct has been such, that in
passing a just sentence upon him, you will have an opportunity of
re-establishing the credit of such trials; of recovering whatever may be lost
of the favor of the Roman people; and of satisfying foreign states and
kingdoms in alliance with us, Insisting. Accus.
or tributary to us. I demand justice of you, Fathers, upon the robber of the
public treasury, the oppressor of Asia Minor, and Pamphylia, the invader of the
rights and privileges of Romans, the scourge and curse of Sicily. Exciting.
If that sentence is passed upon him which his crimes deserve, your authority
Fathers, will be venerable and sacred in the eyes of the public. But if his
great riches should bias you in his favor, I shall still gain one point, viz.
To make it apparent to all the world, that what was wanting in this case was
not a criminal, nor a prosecutor; but justice, and adequate punishment. And,
Apprehens.
to confess the very truth, fathers, though various snares have been laid for
me, by sea and land, by Verres, which I have partly avoided by my own
vigilance, partly baffled with the help of my friends; I have never been so
apprehensive of danger from him as now. Nor does my anxiety about my own
insufficiency for conducting such a trial, nor the awe, with which so great a
concourse of people strikes me, alarm my apprehensions so much, as the wicked
arts and designs, which I know he has framed, against Marcus Glabrio, the
praaetor, against the allied and tributary states, against the whole senatorial
rank, and against myself. Accus.
For he makes no scruple publicly to declare, "That in his opinion, they alone
have reason to fear being called to account, who have only amassed what is
sufficient for themselves. That, for his part, he has prudently taken care to
secure what will be sufficient for himself and many others besides. That he
knows there is nothing so sacred, but it may be made free with, nothing so well
secured, but it may be come at by a proper application of money." It is true,
Contempt.
we are so far obliged to him, that he joins with his daring wickedness, such
barefaced folly, that it must be our own egregious and inexcusable fault, if
we are deceived by him. For, as those acts of violence, Accus.
by which he has gotten his exorbitant riches, were done openly, so have his
attempts to pervert judgment, and escape due punishment, been public, and in
open defiance of decency. He has accordingly said, that the only time he ever
was afraid, was, when he found the prosecution commenced against him by me;
lest he should not have time enough to dispose of a sufficient number of
presents in proper hands. Nor has he attempted to secure himself by the legal
way of defense upon his trial. And, indeed, where is the learning, the
eloquence, or the art, which would be sufficient to qualify any one for the
defense of him whose whole life has been a continual series of the most
atrocious crimes? To pass over the shameful irregularities of his youth, what
his quaetorship, the first public employment he held, what does it exhibit, but
one continued scene of villainies; Cneius Carbo plundered of the public money by
his own treasure; a consul stripped and betrayed; an army deserted and reduced
to want; a province robbed; the civil and religious rights of a people's
violated. The employment he held in Asia Minor and Pamphylia, what did it
produce, but the ruin of those countries; in which houses, cities, and temples
were robbed by him. There he acted over again the scene of his quaestorship,
bringing, by his bad practices, Cneius Dolobella, whose substitue he was, into
disgrace with the people, and then deserting him; not only deserting, but even
accusing and betraying him. What was his conduct in his praetorship here at
home? Let the plundered temples, and public works neglected, that he might
embezzle the money intended for carrying them on, bear witness. How did he
discharge the office of a judge? Let those who suffered by his injustice,
answer. But his praetorship in Sicily, crowns all his works of wickedness; and
finishes a lasting monument to his infamy. The mischiefs done by him in that
unhappy country, during the three years of his iniquitous administration, are
such, that many years under the wisest and best of praetors, will not be
sufficient to restore things to the condition, in which he found them. For it
is notorious, that, during the time of his tyranny, Pity.
the Sicilians neither enjoyed the protection of their own original laws, of
the regulations made for their benefit, by the Roman senate, upon their coming
under the protection of the commonwealth, nor of the natural and unalienable
rights of men. Accus.
No inhabitant of that ruined country has been able to keep possession of any
thing, but what has either escaped the rapaciousness, or been neglected by the
satiety of that universal plunderer. His nod has decided all causes in Sicily,
for these three years. And his decisions have broken all law, all precedent,
all right. The sums he has, by arbitrary taxes, and unheard of impositions,
extorted from the industrious poor, are not to be computed. The most faithful
allies of the commonwealth have been treated as enemies. Roman citizens have,
like slaves been put to death with tortures. The most atrocious criminals, for
money, have been exempted from the deserved punishments; and men of the most
unexceptionable characters condemned, and banished unheard. The harbors,
though sufficiently fortified, and the gates of strong towns, opened to pirates
and ravagers. The soldiery and sailors, belonging to a province under the
protection of the commonwealth, starved to death. Whole fleets, to the great
detriment of the province, suffered to perish. The ancient monuments of either
Sicilian or Roman greatness, the statues of heroes and princes, carried off;
and the temples stripped of the images. The infamy of his lewdness has been
such, as decency forbids to describe. Nor will I, by mentioning particulars,
put those unfortunate persons to fresh pain, who have not been able to save
their wives and daughters from his impurity. And these his atrocious crimes,
have been committed in so public a manner, that there is no one, who has heard
of his name, but could reckon up his actions.

Having, by his iniquitous sentences, filled the prisons with the most
industrious and deserving of the people, he then proceeded to order numbers of
Roman citizens to be strangled in the goals; Depreca.
so that the exclamation, "I am a citizen of Rome, Accus.
" which has often, in the most distant regions, and among the most barbarous
people, been a protection, was of no service to them; but, on the contrary,
brought a speedier, and more severe punishment upon them.

Challeng.
I ask, now, Verres, what you have to advance against this charge? Will you
pretend to deny it? Will you pretend that any thing false, that even any thing,
aggravated, is alleged against you? Had any prince, or any state, committed the
same outrage against the privilege of Roman citizens, Remons
should we not think we had sufficient ground for declaring immediate war
against them? Accus.
What punishment ought, then, to be inflicted upon a tyrannical and wicked
praetor, who, dared, at no greater distance than Sicily, within sight of the
Italian coast, to put to the infamous death of crucifixion, that unfortunate
and innocent citizen, Publius Gavius Cosanus, Pity.
only for his having asserted his privilege of citizenship, and declared his
intention of appealing to the justice of his country against a cruel oppressor,
Accus.
who had unjustly confined him in prison at Syracuse, from whence he had just
made his escape. Pity.
The unhappy man arrested, as he was going to embark for his native country, is
brought before the wicked praetor. Accus.
With eyes darting fury, and a countenance distorted with cruelty, he orders
the helpless victim of his rage, to be stripped, and rods to be brought;
accusing him, but without the least shadow of evidence, or even of suspicion,
Pity. Depreca.
of having come to Sicily as a spy. It was in vain, that the unhappy man cried
out, "I am a Roman citizen, I have served under Lucius Pretius, who is now at
Panormus, and will attest my innocence." The blood-thirsty praeter, Accus.
deaf to all he could urge in his own defense, ordered the infamous punishment
to be inflicted. Thus, Fathers, Pity.
was an innocent Roman citizen publicly mangled with scourging; whilst the only
words he uttered amidst his cruel sufferings, were, Depreca.
"I am a Roman citizen." With these he hoped to defend himself from violence and
infamy. Accus.
But of so little service was this privilege to him, that while he was thus
asserting his citizenship, Horror.
the order was given for his execution -- for his execution upon the cross.

O liberty! Lamenta.
-- O found once delightful to every Roman ear! -- O sacred privilege of Roman
citizenship! -- once sacred! -- now trampled upon! Exciting to Vindica.
But what then! Is it come to this? Shall an inferior magistrate, a governor,
who holds his whole power of the Roman people, in a Roman province, within
sight of Italy, bind, scourge, torture, with fire and red hot plates of iron,
and at the last put to the infamous death of the cross, a Roman citizen? Shall
neither the cries of innocence expiring in agony, nor the tears of pitying
spectators, nor the majesty of the Roman commonwealth, nor the fear of the
justice of his country, restrain the licentious and wanton cruelty of a
monster, who, in confidence of his riches, strikes at the root of liberty, and
sets mankind at defiance?

I conclude with expressing my hopes, that your wisdom, and justice, Fathers,
will not, by suffering the atrocious and unexampled insolence of Caiu^ Verres
to escape the due punishment, leave room to apprehend the danger of a total
subversion of authority, and introduction of general anarchy and confusion.

LXIV. TERROR. DISCOVERY of secret Wickedness.
The ghost of Hamlet king of Denmark, murdered by his brother, in concert with
his queen, appears to Hamlet his son.

[ Shakes. HAMLET.] Horatio. Alarm. Starting.
LOOK! my lord, it comes!

Hamlet. Angels and Ministers of grace defend us! -- Hamlet, standing in
conversation with Horatio and Marcellus, is supposed to be turned from the
place where the ghost appears, and is seen by Horatio. When Horatio gives the
word, that the ghost appears, Hamlet turn hastily round toward it in great
consternation, and expresses his fear in the first line, " Angels and
Minister," etc. Then, after a long pause, looking earnestly at the spectre, he
goes on. "Be thou a spirit," etc. See Fear, p. 23.

Trembling.
Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damned;
Bring with thee airs from Heaven or blasis from hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou come in such a questionable Questionable, means inviting question^. The
ghost appeared in a shape so interesting to the young prince, viz. That of his
father, that he could not help venturing to speak to it, though with great
reluctance from fear.
shape,
That I will speak to thee. I Will call thee Hamlet,
Earnest.
King, Father, Royal Dane! O answer me,
Why thy bones hears'd in canonized earth,
Have burst their cerements? Cerements are the medicated swathings put about a
dead body, to preserve it longer from putrefaction; from cera wax.
Why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
Has opened his ponderous and marble jaws,
To cast thee forth again? What may this mean,
That thy dead corpse again in warlike steel
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous?
Say, why is this? Questioning.
What would thou have done for thee?

Ghost. The speech of the ghost to be spoken without action, very slow and
solemn, with little variation of voice, and in a hollow dreary tone.
I am thy father's spirit, Horror.
to earth returned
Foul murder to disclose -- List then, O Hamlet! --
It Is given out, that sleeping in my garden,
A serpent stung me. So the ear of Denmark
Is, by a forged process of my death,
Grossly abused. But know, thou princely youth,
The serpent, that did sting thy father dead,
Now wears his crown. Complaint of Injury.
Sleeping within an alcove,
On my security thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed he be non distilled,
And in the porches of mine ears did pour
The leprous poison, whose contageous nature
Holds such an enmity with the life of man,
That with a sudden vigor it does curdle
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And instantly a tetter barked about,
Most lazar like, with vile and loathsome crust,
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand,
Of life, of crown, of queen, at once bereft.
Cut off even in the blossom of my sins;
No reckoning made, but sent to my account,
With all my imperfections on my head.
Exciting.
If thou have nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
Aversion.
A couch for filthiness, and beastly incest.
But howsoever thou purfu'st redress,
Cautioning.
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
Anguish.
And to those thorns, that in her bosom lodge,
To goard and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the morning to be near,
His ineffectual fire begins to pale.
Farewell. Remember me.

LXV. EXHORTATION. REPROACHING.
The Athenians, being unsuccessful in the war against Philip of Macedon,
assembled, in great dejection, in order to consult what measures were to be
taken to retrieve their seemingly desperate affairs. Demosthenes endeavors to
encourage them, by showing them, that there was nothing to fear from Philip, if
they prosecuted the war in a proper manner.

[ Demost. PHILIP. ORAT.] ATHENIANS!

Apology.
HAD this assembly been called together on an unusual occasion, I should have
waited to hear the opinions of others, before I had offered my own; and if what
they proposed had seemed to me judicious, I should have been silent; Submission.
if otherwise, I should have given my reasons for differing from those, who had
spoken before me. Apology.
But as the subject of our present deliberations has been often treated by
others, I hope I shall be excused, though I rise up first to offer my ^pinion.
Had the schemes, formerly proposed, been successful, there had been no occasion
for the present consultation.

First, then, my countrymen, Encouragi.
let me entreat you not to look upon the state of our affairs as desperate,
though it be unpromising. For, as on one hand, to compare the present with
times past, matters has indeed a very gloomy aspect; Concern.
so, on the other, if we extend our views to future times, I have good hopes,
Hope.
that the distresses, we are now under, will prove of greater advantage to us,
Doubting.
than if we had never fallen into them. If it be asked, what probability there
is of this, I answer, I hope, it will appear, that it is our egregious
misbehaviour alone, that has brought us into these disadvantageous
circumstances. Reproach.
From whence follows the necessity of altering our conduct, Directing.
Hope.
and the prospect of bettering our circumstances by doing so. If we had nothing
to accuse ourselves of; Apprehens.
and yet found our affairs in their present disorderly condition; we should not
have room left even for the hope of recovering ourselves. But, Exciting.
my countrymen, it is known to you, partly by your own remembrance, and partly
by information from others, how gloriously the Lacedaemonian war was sustained,
Courage.
in which we engaged in defense of our own rights, against an enemy powerful
and formidable; in the whole conduct of which war nothing happened unworthy the
dignity of the Athenian state; Approbation
and this within these few years past. My intention in recalling to your memory
this part of our history is, To show you, Exciting.
that you have no reason to fear any enemy, if your operations be wisely
planned, and vigorously executed; as, Apprehens.
on the contrary, that if you do not exert your natural strength in a proper
manner, you have nothing to look for but disappointment and distress; Exciting.
and to suggest to you, that you ought to profit by this example of what has
actually been done by good conduct against the great power of the
Lacedaemonians, Courage.
so as in the present war to assert your superiority over the insolence of
Philip; Reproach.
which it is evident from experience may be effected, Encouragi.
if you resolve to attend diligently to those important objects, which you have
of late shamefully neglected. Regr.
The enemy has indeed gained considerable advantages by treaty, as well as by
conquest. For it is to be expected, that princes and states will court the
alliance of those, who, by their counsels and arms, seem likely to procure for
themselves and their confederates distinguished honors and advantages.
Encouraging
But, my countrymen, though you have, of late, been too supinely negligent of
what concerned you so nearly; Earnestness.
if you will even now, resolve to exert yourselves unanimously, each according
to his respective abilities and circumstances, the rich, by contributing
liberally toward the expense of the war, and the rest by presenting themselves
to be enrolled, to make up the deficiencies of the army, and navy; if, in
short, you will at last resume your own character, Encouraging
and act like yourselves, it is not yet too late, Rever.
with the help of Heaven, to recover Reproach.
what you have lost, and Courage.
to inflict the just vengeance on your insolent enemy. Philip is but a mortal.
He cannot, like a god, secure to himself, beyond the possibility of
disappointment, the acquisitions he has made. Exciting.
There are those, who hate him; there are, who fear, and there are who envy
him; and of these some, who seem most inseparably connected with him. Reproach.
These, your inactivity obliges, at present, to stifle their real sentiments,
which are in your favor. Exciting.
But when will you, my countrymen, when will you rouse from your indolence, and
bethink yourselves of what is to be done? Apprehens.
When you are forced to it by some fatal disaster? When irresistible necessity
drives you? Rousing Shame.
What think ye of the disgraces which are already come upon you? Is not the
past sufficient to stimulate your activity? Or do ye wait for somewhat,
Reproving with Contempt.
yet to come, more forcible and urgent? How long will you amuse yourselves with
enquiring of one another after news, as you ramble idly about the streets?
Rousing Shame. Contempt.
What news so strange ever came to Athens, as, that a Macedonian should subdue
this state, and lord it over Greece? Again, you ask one another, " What, is
Philip dead?" "No," it is answered, "but he is very ill! Chiding.
How foolish this curiosity! What is it to you, whether Philip is sick or well?
Suppose he were dead. Your inactivity would soon raise up against yourselves
another Philip in his stead. For it is not his strength, that has made him what
he is; but your indolence, which has, of late, been such, that you seem neither
in a condition to take any advantage of the enemy, nor to keep it, if it were
gained by others for you.

But what I have hitherto observed to your reproach, Recollecting.
will be of no service toward retrieving the past miscarriages, unless I
proceed to offer a plan for raising the necessary supplies of money, shipping,
and men.

The orator then goes on to treat of ways and means. But that part of his
speech being less entertaining, and his demands of men, money, and shipping,
being pitiful, compared with the immense funds, and stupendous armaments, we
are accustomed to, I leave it out. Afterward he shows Philip's insolence by
producing his letters to the Euboeans; and then makes remarks on them.

Regret.
The present disgraceful state of your affairs, my countrymen, as it appears
from the insolent strain of the letters I have just read, may not, perhaps, be
a very pleasing subject, for your reflections. Reluctance.
And if, by avoiding the mention of disagreeable circumstances, their existence
could be prevented or annihilated, there would be nothing to do, but to frame
our speeches so as to give the most pleasure to the hearers. Apprehens.
But, if the unseasonable smoothness of a speech tends to lull a people into a
fatal security, how shameful is such self-deceit! Reproach.
How contemptible the weakness of putting off the evil day, and through fear of
being shocked at the sight of what is disordered in our affairs, Apprehens.
to suffer the disorder to increase to such a degree, as will soon be
irretrievable! Courage.
Wisdom, on the contrary, directs, that the conductors of a war always
anticipate the operations of the enemy; Contempt.
instead of waiting to see what steps he shall take. Superiority of genius
shows itself by taking the start of others; Courage.
as in marching to battle, it is the general, who leads, and the common
soldiers that follow -- Whereas you, Repr. with Indignation.
Athenians, though you be ^ master of all that is necessary for war, as
shipping, cavalry, infantry, and funds, have not the spirit to make the proper
use of your advantages; Rous. Shame.
but suffer the enemy to dictate to you every motion you are to make. If you
hear that Philip is in the Chersonesus, you order troops to be sent thither. If
at Pylae, forces are to be detached to secure that post. Wherever he makes an
attack, there you stand upon your defense. You attend him in all his motions,
Chiding.
as soldiers do their general. Chiding.
But you never think of striking out of yourselves any bold and effectual
scheme for bringing him to reason, by being beforehand with him. Contempt.
A pitiful manner of carrying on war at any time: but, Apprehens
in the critical circumstances you are now in, utterly ruinous. However you
might trifle, so long as things were in a tolerable state of safety, you will
not, I hope, think of going on in the same way, now that the very being of the
state is come to be precarious. Hope.
I would willingly flatter myself with the hope, that things being come to a
crisis, the hasty strides made by Philip toward the conquest of this
commonwealth, will prove the means of defeating his design. Had he proceeded
deliberately and prudently, Sarcasm.
you seem so disposed to peace, that I do not imagine, you would have troubled
yourselves about his taking a few towns and provinces, but would have given him
leave, without molestation, to affront your standards and flags at his
pleasure. But now, that you see him making rapid advances toward your capital,
perhaps you may at last be alarmed, if you be not lost to all sense of
prudence, honor, or safety.

O shame to the Athenian name! Rousing Shame.
We undertook this war against Philip, in order to obtain redress of
grievances, Sarcasm.
and to force him to indemnify us for the injuries he had done us. And we have
conducted it so successfully, that we shall, by and by, think ourselves happy,
if we escaped being defeated and ruined. For, Apprehens.
who can think, that a prince, of his restless and ambitious temper, will not
improve the opportunities and advantages which our indolence and timidity
present him? Will he give over his designs against us, without being obliged to
it? Remonstrant Alarm.
And who will oblige him? Who will restrain his fury? Soliciting.
Shall we wait for assistance from some unknown country? Entreating.
In the name of all that is sacred, and all that is dear to us, let us make an
attempt with what forces we can raise, if we should not be able to raise as
many as we would wish. Indignation.
Let us do somewhat to curb this insolent tyrant of his pursuits. Charge, with
Reproof.
Let us not trifle away the time in hearing the ineffectual wranglings of
orators, Apprehens.
while the enemy is strengthening himself, and we are declining, and our allies
growing more and more cold to our interest, and more apprehensive of the
consequences of continuing on our side.

LXVI. Villainous SURMISING. JEALOUSY.
Iago artfully endeavors to excite Othello to jealousy against his innocent
wife Desdemona, to be revenged on Othello for a supposed injury.

[ Shakesp. OTHEL.] Iago. Question.
DID Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady,
Craft.
Know of your love?

Othello. Indiffe.
He did from first to last. Why do thou ask?

Iago. Insinuating.
But for a satisfaction of my thought;
No farther harm.

Oath. Doubting.
Why of ^h^ thought, Iago?

Iago. Insinuating.
I did not think he had been acquainted with it.

Oath. Declar.
O yes; and went between us very often.

Iago. Surmising.
Indeed!

Oath. Anxiety.
Ay indeed. Discern'st thou aught from that?
Is he not honest?

Iago. Honest, my Lord? Surmising.


Oath. Honest, ay, honest! Anxiety.


Iago. My Lord -- for aught -- for aught -- I know.

Oath. What do thou think of? Anxiety.


Iago. Think of, my Lord!

Oath. Think of, my Lord! Anxiety.
Why do thou echo me,
As if there were some monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Suspicion.
Thou do mean something.
I heard thee say but now, thou lik'd'st not that;
When Cassio left my wife: Questioning. Suspicion.
What did not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my counsel,
In my whole course of wooing, thou cry'dst "Indeed!"
And did contract and purse thy brows together,
As if thou then had shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. If thou do love me, Earnest.

Show me thy thought.

Iago. My Lord, you know I love you. Fawning.


Oath. I think thou do
And as I know you are full of honesty, Suspicion.

And weigh^st thy words, before thou giv'st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more: Apprehens.

For such things in a false disloyal knave,
Are tricks of custom; but in a man, that is just,
They Are distillations working from the heart,
Which passion cannot rule. Earnest.
Therefore I tell thee,
Thou do conspire against thy friend, Iago, Charg.

If thou but think him wronged, and make his ear
Pret.
A stranger to thy thought.

Iago. Reluct.
I do beseech you,
From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
Your wisdom would not build yourself a trouble
Out of my scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

Oath. Questioning.
What do thou mean?

Iago. Pretended Reluct.
Good name in man, or woman, dear my Lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Contempt.
Who steals my purse, steals trash; it is something -- nothing --
'Twas mine -- it is his -- it has been slaves to thousands:
Concern.
But he who filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that, which makes not him the richer,
And makes me poor indeed.

Oath. Charging.
I Will know thy thoughts.

Iago. Refusing.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand; Iago. You cannot, etc.] That is, "I
hardly know^ myself, what to think; and yet I cannot help suspecting Cassio"

Caution.
Beware, my Lord, beware of jealousy,
Horror.
That ghastly green-ey'd monster, which does make
The meat it feeds on. -- does make the meat it feeds on] That is, "Jealousy
creates to itself, out of nothing, grounds of suspicion."
The injured husband's happy,
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his traitress:
Anguish.
But, oh, what cruel minutes tell he over,
Who dotes, yet doubts; suspects, yet strongly loves.

Oath. O misery! [Aside.]

Iag. Poor, and content, is rich, and rich enough:
But wealth unbounded is as poor as winter
To him, who ever fears, he shall be poor. Pretend.
--
I doubt, this has a little dashed your spirits. Symp.


Oath. Not a jot. Not a jot. Farewell. Pretend.

If thou do more perceive, let me know more. Indiff.

[Exit Iago.] Why did I marry? This honest fellow, doubtless, Jealousy.

Sees, and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
He knows all qualities, with a learned spirit
Of human dealings He knows all qualities, etc.] That is, "He knows the
characters of men and women, and is learned in human nature."
-- Should I prove her faithless, Anguish.

Though that her charms were bodied with my heart, Threatening.

I Would read it into twain, to throw her from me.

LXVII. COMPLAINT. ENTREATING.
The speech of Adherbal, son of Micipsa, king of Numidia, complaining to the
Roman senate, and imploring assistance against the violence of Jugurtha,
adopted, and left coheir of the kingdom, by Micipsa, with himself and
Hiempsal, which last Jugurtha had procured to be murdered.

[ Sal. BELL. JUGURTHIN.] FATHERS,
IT is known to you, that king Micipsa, Explaining.
my father, on his deathbed, left in charge to Jugurtha, his adopted son,
conjunctly with my unfortunate brother Hiempsal, and myself, the children of
his own body, the administration of the kingdom of Numidia; Submis.
directing us to consider the senate and people of Rome, as proprietors of it.
He charged us to use our best endeavors to be serviceable to the Roman
commonwealth, in peace and war; assuring us, that your protection would prove
to us a defense against all enemies, and would be instead of armies,
fortifications, and treasures.

Grief.
While my brother and I were thinking of nothing, but how to regulate ourselves
according to the directions of our deceased father; -- Jugurtha -- the most
infamous of mankind! -- breaking through all ties of gratitude, and of common
humanity, Compl.
and trampling on the authority of the Roman commonwealth, procured the murder
of my unfortunate brother, and has driven me from my throne, and native
country, though he knows I inherit, from my grandfather Masinissa, and my
father Micipsa, the friendship and alliance of the Romans.

Grief.
For a prince to be reduced, by villainy, to distressful circumstances, is
calamity enough; but my misfortunes are heightened by the consideration, that I
find myself obliged to solicit your assistance, Fathers, for the services done
you by my ancestors; not for any I have been able to render you in my own
person. Compl.
Jugurtha has put it out of my power to deserve any thing at your hands, and
has forced me to be burdensome, before I could be useful, to you. And yet, if
I had no plea, but my undeserved misery, who, from a powerful prince, the
descendant of a race of illustrious monarchs, find myself without any fault of
my own, destitute of every support, and reduced to the necessity of begging
foreign assistance against an enemy, Submis.
who has seized my throne and kingdom, Intr.
if my unequalled distresses were all I had to plead, it would become the
greatness of the Roman commonwealth, the arbitrese of the world, to protect the
injured, Excit. to Vindic.
and to check the triumph of daring wickedness over helpless innocence. But, to
provoke your vengeance to the utmost, Jugurtha has driven me from the very
dominions, which the senate and people of Rome gave to my ancestors, and from
whence my grandfather, and my father, under your umbrage, expelled Syphax, and
the Carthaginians. Thus, Fathers, your kindness to our family is defeated, and
Jugurtha in injuring me, throws contempt on you.

O wretched prince! O cruel reverse of fortune! O father Micipsa! Lamen.
Is this the consequence of your generosity; that he, whom your goodness raised
to an equality with your own children, should be the murderer of your children!
Horror. Lamen.
Must then, the royal house of Numidia always be a scene of havoc and blood?
While Carthage remained, we suffered, as was to be expected, all sorts of
hardships from their hostile attacks; our enemy near; our only powerful ally,
the Roman commonwealth, at a distance; while we were so circumstanced, we were
always in arms, and in action. When that scourge of Africa was no more, Glim.
Hope. Horror.
we congratulated ourselves on the prospect of establishing peace. But instead
of peace, behold the kingdom of Numidia, drenched with royal blood, and the
only surviving son of its late king flying from an adopted murderer, and
seeking that safety in foreign parts, which he cannot command in his own
kingdom.

Whither! -- O whither shall I fly? Angu. Distr. Dread.
If I return to the royal palace of my ancestors, my father's throne is seized
by the murderer of my brother. What can I there expect, but that Jugurtha
should hasten to imbrue in my blood, Horror. Did.
those hands which are now reeking with my brother's? If I were to fly for
refuge, or for assistance, to any other court, from what prince can I hope for
protection, if the Roman commonwealth gives me up? From my own family or
friends, Grief.
I have no expectations. My royal father is no more. He is beyond the reach of
violence, and out of hearing of the complaints of his unhappy son. Were my
brother alive, our mutual sympathy would be some alleviation. But he is hurried
out of life in his early youth, by the very hand, which should have been the
last to injure any of the royal family of Numidia. Horror.
The bloody Jugurtha has butchered all, whom he suspected to be in my interest.
Some have been destroyed by the lingering torment of the cross; others have
been given a prey to wild beasts, and their anguish made the sport of men more
cruel than wild beasts. If there be any yet alive, they are shut up in
dungeons, there to drag out a life more intolerable than death.

Subm. Intr.
Look down, illustrious senators of Rome, from that height of power, to which
you are raised, on the unexampled distresses of a prince, who is, by the
cruelty of a wicked intruder, become an outcast from all mankind. Subm. Caut.
Horror.
Let not the crafty insinuations of him, who returns murder for adoption,
prejudice your judgment. Do not listen to the wretch who has butchered the son
and relations of a king, Accus.
who gave him power to sit on the same throne with his own sons. I have been
informed that he labors by his emissaries, to prevent your determining any
thing against him in his absence, pretending that I magnify my distress, and
might, for him, have staid in peace, in my own kingdom. ^omp.
But, if ever the time comes, when the due vengeance, from above, shall
overtake him, he will then assemble in the very same manner as I do. Then he,
who now, hardened in wickedness, triumphs over those whom his violence has laid
low, will, in his turn, feel distress, and suffer for his impious ingratitude
to my father, and his blood thirsty cruelty to my brother.

O murdered, butchered brother! Lamen.
O dearest to my heart -- now gone for ever from my sight. -- But why should I
lament his death? He is indeed deprived of the blessed light of heaven, of life
and kingdom, at once, by the very person, who ought to have been the first to
hazard his own life in defense of any one of Micipsa's family: But as things
are, my brother is not so much deprived of these comforts, as delivered from
terror, from flight, from exile, and the endless train of miseries, which
render life to me a burden. He lies full low, Horror.
gored with wounds, and festering in his own blood. But he lies in peace. Angu.
He feels none of the miseries which rend my soul with agony and destraction;
whilst I am set up a spectacle to all mankind, of the uncertainty of human
affairs. So far from having it in my power to revenge his death, I am not
master of the means of securing my own life. So far from being in a condition
to defend my kingdom from the violence of the usurper, I am obliged to apply
for foreign protection for my own person.

Fathers! Senators of Rome! Vehem. Solicit.
the arbiters of the world! To you I fly for refuge from the murderous fury of
Jugurtha. By your affection for your children, by your love for your country,
by your own virtues, by the majesty of the Roman commonwealth, by all that is
sacred, and all that is dear to you; deliver a wretched prince from undeserved,
unprovoked injury; and save the kingdom of Numidia, which is your own property,
from being the prey of violence, usurpation, and cruelty.

LXVIII. ACCUSATION. PITY.
Pleading of Lysias the orator in favor of certain orphans, defrauded by an
uncle, executor to the will of their father.

[Dion. Halicarn.] VENERABLE JUDGES!
IF the cause, which now comes under your cognizance, Subm. Apol. Avers.
were not of extraordinary importance, I should never have given my consent,
that it should be litigated before you. For it seems to me shameful, that near
relations should commence prosecutions against one another; and I know, that,
in such trials, not only the aggressors, but even those, who resent injuries
too impatiently, Subm. Pity.
must appear to you in a disadvantageous light. But the plaintiffs, who have
been defrauded of a very large sum of money, and cruelly injured by one who
ought to have been the last to hurt them; Accus. Pity.
have applied to me as a relation, Apol.
to plead their cause, and procure them redress. Pity.
And I thought I could not decently excuse myself from undertaking the
patronage of persons in such distressful circumstances, with whom I had such
close connections. For the sister of the plantiffs, the niece of Diogiton the
defendant, Apol.
is my wife. When the plaintiffs entreated me, as they did often, to undertake
the management of the suit, I advised them to refer the difference between them
and their uncle the defendant, Avers.
to private arbitration; thinking it the interest of both parties to conceal,
as much as possible, from the knowledge of the public, that there was any
dispute between them. But as Diogiton knew, Accus.
that it was easy to prove him guilty of detaining the property of the
plaintiffs his nephews, he foresaw, that it would, by no means answer his
purpose, to submit his cause to the decision of arbitrators. He has, therefore,
determined to proceed to the utmost extremity of injustice, at the hazard of
the consequences of a prosecution.

I most humbly implore you, Subm. Intr.
venerable judges, to grant the plaintiffs redress, if I show you, as I hope I
shall in the most satisfactory manner, that the defendant, Pity. Blame.
though so nearly related, to the unhappy orphans, the plaintiffs, has treated
them in such a manner, as would be shameful among absolute strangers.

I beg leave to lay before you, Subm.
venerable judges, the subject of the present prosecution, as follows:

Diodotus and Diogiton were brothers, Narration.
the children of the same father and the same mother. Upon their father's
decease, they divided between them his movables; but his real estate they
enjoyed conjunctly. Diodotus growing rich, Diegiton offered him his only
daughter in marriage. Among the ancients, marriage was allowed between persons
very nearly related.
By her Diodotus had two sons and a daughter. Diodotus happening afterward to
be enrolled, in his turn, to go to the war under Thrasyllus, he called together
his wife, his brother's daughter, and his wife's brother, and his own brother,
who was likewise his father-in-law, and both uncle and grandfather to his
children. He thought, he could not trust the care of his children in properer
hands, than those of his brother. He leaves in his custody, his will, with five
talents See for the value of talents, minae, drachmae, and stateres. Gronov. DE
PECU^. VIT.
of silver. He gives him an account of seven talents, and forty minae besides,
which were out at interest, and a thousand minae, which were due to him by a
person in the Chersonesus. He had ordered in his will, that in case of his
death, one talent, and the household furniture, should be his wife's. He
bequeathed, farther, to his daughter, one talent, and twenty minae, and thirty
Cyzicenian stateres, and the rest of his estate equally between his sons. Conc.
Accus.
Settling his affairs thus, and leaving a copy of his will, he sets out along
with the army. He dies at Ephesus. -- Diogiton conceals from his daughter the
death of her husband. He gets into his hands the will of his deceased brother,
by pretending, that it was necessary for him to show it as a voucher, in order
to his transacting some affairs for his brother, during his absence. At length,
when he thought the decease of his brother could not much longer be concealed,
he formally declares it. Pity.
The family goes into mourning. They stay one year at Piraeum, where their
movables were. Narration.
In this time the produce of all that could be sold of the effects, being
spent, he sends the children to town, and gives his daughter, the widow of his
brother Diodotus, to a second husband, and with her five thousand drachme, of
which the husband returns him one thousand as a present. When the eldest son
came to man's estate, about eight years after the departure of Diodotus,
Diogiton calls the children together; Accus.
tells them, that their father had left them twenty minae of silver and thirty
stateres. Pretend. Conc.
"I have laid out (says he) of my own money, for your maintenance and
education, a considerable sum. Nor did I grudge it, while I was in flourishing
circumstances, and could afford it. But, by unforeseen and irremediable
misfortunes, I am reduced to an incapacity of continuing my kindness to you.
Therefore, Advis.
as you (speaking to the eldest son) are now of an age to shift for yourself, I
would advise you to resolve upon some employment, by which you may gain a
subsistence."

The poor fatherless children were thunderstruck, upon hearing this barbarous
speech. Shock. Distr.
They fled in tears to their mother, and, with her, came to request my
protection. Finding themselves stripped of the estate left them by their
father, and reduced by their hard hearted uncle and grandfather, to absolute
beggary, they entreated, Intr.
that I would not desert them too; but for the sake of their sister, my wife,
would undertake their defense. The mother begged, that I would bring about a
meeting of the relations, to reason the matter with her father; and said, that
though she had never before spoke in any large company, especially of men, she
would endeavor to lay before them the distresses and injuries of her family.

Diogiton, being with difficulty, brought to the meeting, Accus.
the mother of the plaintiffs asked him, how he could have the heart to use her
sons in such a manner. "Are ^ou not, Sir, Remons.
(says she) the uncle and the grandfather of the two fatherless youths! Are
they not the children of your own brother, and of your own daughter? How could
they be more nearly related to you, unless they were your own sons? And, though
you despised all human authority, you ought to reverence the gods, who are
witnesses of the trust reposed in you by the deceased father of the unhappy
youths."

Narr.
She then enumerated the several sums, the property of the deceased, which had
been received by Diogiton, Accus.
and charged him with them, producing authentic evidence for every particular.
Remons.
"You have driven, (says she) out of their own house, the children of your own
daughter, in rags, unfurnished with the common decencies of life. You have
deprived them of the effects, and of the money left them by their father. But
you want to enrich the children you have had by my step mother; which, without
doubt, Sev. Charge.
you might lawfully and properly do, if it were not at the expense, and to the
utter ruin of those, whose fortunes were deposited in your hands, and whom,
from affluence, you want to reduce to beggary, impiously despising the
authority of the gods, injuring your own daughter, and violating the sacred
will of the dead."

Narr. Pity.
The distressed mother having vented her grief in such bitter complaints as
these, we were all, by sympathy, so touched with her afflictions, and the
cruelty of her injurious father, Blame. Pity.
that, when we considered, in our own minds, the hard usage, which the young
innocents had met with, when we remembered the deceased Diodotus, and thought
how unworthy a guardian he had chosen for his children, there was not one of us
who could refrain from tears. And I persuade myself, venerable Judges, that you
will not be unaffected with so calamitous a case, when you come to consider,
attentively, the various aggravations of the defendant's proceedings. Accus.
Such unfaithfulness, in so solemn a trust, were it to pass unpunished, and
consequently, to become common, would destroy all confidence among mankind, so
that nobody would know how, or to whom, he could commit the management of his
affairs, in his absence, or after his death. The defendant, at first, would
have denied his having had any effects of his brother's left in his hands. And
when he found, he could not get off that way, he then produced an account of
sums, laid out, as he pretended, by him for the children, to such a value, as
is beyond all belief; no less, than seven talents of silver and seven thousand
drachmae. All this, he said, Wonder.
had been expended in eight years, in the clothing and maintenance of two boys,
and a girl. And when he was pressed to show how their expenses could amount to
such a sum, he had the impudence to charge five obolio a day for their table;
and for shoes, and dying their clothes, In those simple ages, the cloth, or
stuff, of which the clothes of persons, even of high rank, were made, was
commonly manufactured, from the wool to the dying, at home.
and for the barber, he gave in no particular account, neither by the month,
nor by the year; but charged in one gross sum a talent of silver. For their
father's monument, he pretends to have been at the expense of five thousand
drachmae, of which he charges one half to the account of the children. But it
is manifest, that it could not cost twenty minae. His injustice to the children
appears sufficiently in the following article alone, if there were no other
proof of it. He had occasion to buy a lamb for the feast of Bacchus, which
cost, as he pretends, ten drachmae; and of these he charges eight to the
account of his wards.

Had the defendant been a man of any principle, Accus.
he would have bethought himself of laying out to advantage the fortune left in
his hands by the deceased, for the benefit of the fatherless children. Had he
bought with it lands or houses, the children might have been maintained out of
the yearly rents, and the principal have been kept entire. But he does not seem
to have once thought of improving their fortune; but on the contrary, to have
contrived only how to strip them.

Narration.
But the most atrocious (for a single action) of all his proceedings, is what
follows. When he was made commander of the galleys, along with Alexis, the son
of Aristodicus, and according to his own account, had been, on accasion of
fitting out the fleet, and himself, at the expense of forty-eight minae, out of
his own private purse -- he charges his infant-wards with half this sum. Accus.
Wonder.
Whereas the state not only exempts minors from public offices, but even grants
them immunity, for one year, at least, after they come of age. And when he had
fitted out for a voyage to the Adriatic, a ship of burden to the value of two
talents, he told his daughter, the mother of his wards, that the adventure was
at the risque, and for the benefit of his words. But, when the returns were
made, and he had doubled the sum by the profits of the voyage -- the gains
were, he said, all his own. The fortune of his wards was to answer for the
damages -- but was not to be at all the be^^e for the advantages! Accus.
If, in this manner, one is to trade at the peril and loss of others, and
engross to himself the whole profit; it is not difficult to conceive how his
partners may come to be undone, while he enriches himself.

Aversion.
To lay before you all the particulars, which have come to our knowledge, of
this compli^d scene of wickedness, would but disgust and shock you. Affir.
We have witnesses here to prove what we have alleged against this cruel
invader of the property of helpless innocents, Pity with Blame.
his own near relations, entrusted to his charge by his deceased brother.

[The witnesses examined.] You have heard, venerable Judges, Submis. Affirm.
the evidence given against the defendant. He himself owns the actual receipt
of seven talents, and forty minae of the estate of the plaintiffs. To say
nothing of what he may have, Accus.
or rather certainly has, Grant.
gained by the use of this money; I will allow, what every reasonable person
will judge more than sufficient for the maintenance of three children, with a
governor and a maid, a thousand drachmae, a year, Affir.
which is something less than three drachmae a day. In eight years this amounts
to eight thousand drachmae. So that, upon balancing the account, there remain
due to the plaintiffs, of the seven talents and forty minae, six talents and
twenty minae. For the defendant cannot pretend, that the estate of the
plaintiffs has suffered by fire, by water, or by any other injury, than what
himself has done it....

[The rest is wanting.]

LXIX. CONSULTATION.
The speech of Satan, in his infernal palace of Pandaemonium, in which he
proposes to the consideration of his angels, in what manner it would be proper
to proceed, in consequence of their defeat, and fall.

[Milt. Parad. Lost. B. II. Maj. with Distress.
POWERS, and Dominions! Deities of Heaven!
For (since no deep within her gulf can hold
Courage.
Celestial vigor, though oppressed and fallen)
I give not Heaven for lost. From this descent
Celestial virtues rising will appear
More glorious, and more dread, than from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate.
Author:
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven,
Did first create your leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in council, or in fight,
Has been achieved of merit; yet this loss
Thus far at least, recovered, has much more
Established in a safe un-envied throne,
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity might draw
Apprehens.
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderer's aim,
Compl. Courage.
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain. With this advantage then
To union, and firm faith, and firm accord,
More than can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us, and by what best way,
Whether of open war, or covert guile,
We now debate. Who can advise, may speak. Consid.

LXX. FIERCENESS. DESPERATION.
The speeeh of the fallen angel Moloch, exciting the infernal crew to renew the
wa^ against the Messiah. The author represents Satan's hostility as directed
against the Supreme Being. But this seems (with all deference) to be
incredible. For no created being can, without losing all use of reason, imagine
itself a match for Omnipotence.


[Ibid.] MY sentence is for open war. Cour.
Cont.
Of wiles
More inexpert, I boast not. Then let those
Contrive, who need; unworthy of our might. Cour.

For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions, now under arms, who longing wait
The signal to ascend, Cont. Rage.
sit lingering here
Heaven's fugitives, and for their dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious den of shame,
The prison of his tyranny who reigns
By our delay! -- " No, let, us," etc. to, "But perhaps," can hardly be
over-acted, if the dignity of the speaker be kept up in pronouncing the
passage. At the words, "But perhaps," etc. the angel composes himself again.
No -- let us rather choose, Fierce. Cour.

Armed with hell flames and fury, all at once
Over Heavens high towr's to force resistless way,
Turning our tortures into horrid arms
Against our torturer. When to meet the noise
Of his terrific engine, he shall hear
Infernal thunder, and for lightning see
Black fire, and horror, shot with equal rage
Amongst his angels; and his throne itself
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire,
Recol.
His own invented torments. -- But perhaps
The way seems difficult, and steep to scale
With adverse wing, against a higher foe. --
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not still,
That, in our proper motion, we ascend
Up to our native seat. Descend and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late
When our fierce foe hung on our broken rear,
Insulting, and pursued us through the deep;
Slow.
With what compulsion, and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? -- Arg.
The ascent is easy then. --
The event is feared. -- Should we again provoke.
Our enemy, some worse way he may find
To our destruction; if there be in hell
Fear to be worse destroyed. -- What can be worse
Than to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
Comp.
In this abhorred deep to utter woe,
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end,
The vassals of his anger, when the scourge
Inexorable, and the torturing hour
Call us to penance? -- More destroyed than thus
Fierce.
We must be quite abolished, and expire.
What fear we then? -- What doubt we to incense
His utmost ire; which, to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
Complain. Cour.
To nothing this essential; happier far
Than miserable to have eternal being.
Or if our substance be indeed divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are, at worst,
On this side nothing. And by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal throne; Malice.

Which, if not victory, is yet revenge. Fury.
The voice, instead of falling toward the end of this line, as usual, is to
rise; and in speaking the word revenge, the fierceness of the whole speech
ought, as it were, to be expressed in one word.

LXXI. CONSIDERATION. DISSUASION. DIFFIDENCE.
The speech of the fallen angel Belial, in answer to the foregoing.

[Ibid.] I Should be much for open war, O peers!
As not behind in hate; if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate war,
Did not dissuade me most, Delib.
and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success;
When he, who most excels in feats of arms,
In what he counsels, Apprehens.
and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair,
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
But what revenge? -- The towers of Heaven are filled
With armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable. Often on the bord'ring deep
Encamp their legions; or with flight obscure, Arg. Apprehens.

Scout far and wide into the realms of night,
Scorning surprise. -- Or could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all hell should rise
With blackest insurrection to confound
Heaven's purest light; yet our great enemy,
All incorruptible, would on his throne
Sit unpolluted, and the ethereal mould,
Incapable of stain, Awe.
would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Horror.
Is flat despair. We must exasperate
Our conqueror to let loose his boundless rage,
And that must end us; that must be our cure,
To be no more. -- Sad cure! -- For who would lose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
These thoughts that wander through eternity --
To perish utterly; for ever lost*
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Arg.
Devoid of sense and motion? -- But will he,
So wise, let loose at once his utmost ire,
Belike through impotence, or unawares,
To give his enemies their wish, and end
Courage. Anguish.
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? -- "Wherefore cease we then,"
Say they, who counsel war; "we are decreed,
Reserved and destined to eternal woe.
Despair.
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more?
What can we suffer worse?" Arg.
Is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in arms?
Terror.
What, when we fled amain, pursued and struck
By Heaven's afflicting thunder, and besought
The deep to shelter us; this place then seemed
A refuge from those wounds: Or when we lay
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse. Apprehens.

What if the breath, that kindled these grim fires,
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage,
And plunge us in the flames? Or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
Horror.
His red right hand to plague us? What, if all
Her stores were opened; and this firmament
Of hell should spout her cataracts of fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads, while we, perhaps,
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery tempest shall be hurled,
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Of wrecking, whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapped in chains,
There to converse with everlasting groans, Argu.

Unrespited, unpitied, unreliev'd,
Ages of hopeless end! -- This would be worse. Appr.
--
War, therefore, open, or concealed, Dissua.
alike
My voice dissuades. --.
"Shall we then live thus vile! Remons. with Cont.
The race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled, to suffer here
Chains and these torments!" Better these than worse, Dissua. Arg.

By my advice. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal; nor the law unjust,
That so ordains. This was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh when those, who at the spear are bold, Cont.

And venurous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must fellow; to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their conqu'ror. This is now
Our doom; which if with courage we can bear, Encou.

Our foe supreme, in time, may much remit
His anger, and, perhaps, thus far removed
Not mind us, not offending, satisfied,
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his br^^th stir not their flames.
Our pure essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapor, or inured, not feel,
Or changed, at length, and to the place conformed
In temper, and in nature, will receive,
Familiar, the fierce heat, and void of pain,
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light*
Besides what hope the never-ending flow
Of future days may bring; what chance, what change,
Worth waiting. Since our present lot appears,
For happy, dismal; yet, for ill, not worst,
If we procure not to ourselves more woe.
LXXII. SUBMISSION. COMPLAINT. ENTREATING.
The speech of Seneca the philosopher to Nero, complaining of the envy of his
enemies, and requesting the emperor to reduce him back to his former narrow
circumstances, that he might no longer be an object of their malignity,

[The substance is taken from Corn. Tacit. ANNAL. xiv.] Submis.
MAY it please the imperial Majesty of Caesar favorably to accept the humble
submissions and grateful acknowledgements of the weak, though faithful guide of
his youth. Seneca was one of Nero's preceptors; and the emperor seemed, during
the first part of his reign, to have profited much by his instructions. The
egregious ^ollies, and enormous, unprovoked cruelties he afterward committed,
of which his ordering Seneca to put himself to death, is among the most
flagrant, seem hardly otherwise accountable, than by supposing that he lost the
use of his reason.


Great.
It is now a great many years since I first had the honor of attending your
imperial Majesty as preceptor. And your bounty has rewarded my labors with
such affluence, as has drawn upon me, Compl.
what I had reason to expect, the envy of many of those persons, who are always
ready to prescribe to their prince, where to bestow, Apol.
and where to withhold his favors. It is well known, that your illustrious
ancestor, Augustus, bestowed on his deserving favorites, Agrippa, and M^cenas,
honors, and emoluments suitable to the dignity of the benefactor, and to the
services of the receivers: Nor has his conduct been blamed. My employment about
your imperial Majesty has, indeed, been purely domestic: I have neither headed
your armies, nor assisted at your councils. But you know, Sir, (though there
are some, who do not seem to attend to it) that a prince may be served in
different ways, some more, others less conspicuous, and that the latter may be,
to him, as valuable as the former.

"But what" says my enemies, Pride. Remon.
"shall a private person, of equestrian rank, and a provincial by birth, be
advanced to an equality with the patricians? Shall an upstart, of no name, nor
family, rank with those, who can by the statues, which make the ornament of
their palaces, reckon backward a line of ancestors, long enough to tire out the
fasti? The Fasti, or Calendars, or, if you please, Almanacs, of the ancients,
had, as our Almanacs, tables of kings, consuls, etc.
Shall a philosopher who has written, for others precepts of moderation, and
contempt of all that is external, himself live in affluence and luxury? Shall
he purchase estates, and lay out money at interest? Shall he build palaces,
plant gardens, and adorn a country, at his own expense, and for his own
pleasure?"

Caesar has given royally, Great. Apol.
as became imperial magnificence. Seneca has received what his prince bestowed;
nor did he ever use: he is only guilty of -- not refusing. Caesar's rank places
him above the reach of invidious malignity. Seneca is not, Compl.
nor can be high enough to despise the envious. As the overloaded soldier, or
traveller, Fatigue.
would be glad to be relieved of his burden, so I, in this last stage of the
journey of life, now that I find myself unequal to the lightest cares,
Entreating.
beg that Caesar would kindly ease me of the trouble of my unwieldy wealth. I
beseech him to restore to the imperial treasury, from whence it came, what is
to me superfluous and cumbrous. The time and the attention, which I am now
obliged to bestow upon my villa, and my gardens, I shall be glad to apply to
the regulation of my mind. -- Caesar is in the flower of life. Great. Intr.
Apology.
Long may he be equal to the toils o^ government! His goodness will grant to
his worn out servant, leave to retire. It will not be derogatory from Caesar's
greatness, to have it said, that he bestowed favors on some, who, so far from
being intoxicated with them, showed, that they could be happy when (at their
own request) divested of them.

LXIII. JEALOUSY.
Iago goes on to inflame Othello's jealousy (see page 228) against his innocent
wife. Othello is by him worked up to rage.

[ Shakes. OTHEL.] Iago. Plotting.
[Alone] I Will in Cassio's lodging drop this handkerchief,
That he may find it; then persuade the Moor,
His wife did give it -- Trifles light as air,
Are to the jealous confirmation strong
Malicious Joy.
As proofs from holy writ. This will work mischief.
Dangerous conceits are in their nature poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste;
But with a little action on the blood,
Burn, like the mines of sulphur.
[Othello appears.] It Is as I said.
Look where he comes! Not all the drowsy potions,
That ever calmed raging anguish to repose,
Shall medicine thee to that blessed sleep,
Which thou ow'd'st the past night.

Enters Othello. Does not see Iago. Oath. Ha! false to me! Perturbat.


Iago. How now, noble general? Soothing.
No more of that.

Oath. Avaunt! Be gone! Rage.
Thou'st set me on the rack.
Better, unknowing, to be much abused,
Than but to doubt the least. Pret. Surpr.


Iago. How my Lord?

Oath. What sense had I of her unfaithfulness? Regret for lost repose.

I thought not of it; felt no injury;
I slept untroubled; I waked free and cheerful.
O now, Augu. of Grief.
farewell for ever blessed peace
Of mind: Farewell the tranquil breast.
The plumea troops, the thunders of the war,
The fire of valor, and the pride of triumph.
Othello is a wicked woman's mock'ry. Pret. Surpr.


Iago. Is It possible, my Lord, you should be thus...

Oath. Villain! Rage.
Be sure thou prove my love a traitress, [Catching him by the throat. Threat.
]
Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul,
'Twere better for thee to have been born a dog,
Than answer my waked wrath. Pret. Surpr. with Vexat.


Iago. Is it come to this! Good Heaven defend me!
Pret. Repr. of Ingrat.
Are you a man? Have you a soul, or sense?
I Have done. Take my office -- Pret.
Wretched fool,
Self-Accus.
That liv'st to make thine honesty a vice!
Aston.
O monstrous world! What times are we fallen upon? Repr. of Ingrat.

To be direct and honest, is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and henceforth
I Will love no friend; since love breeds such offense.

[Going.] Oath. Recol.
Nay stay -- thou should be honest.

Iag. Pret. sense of Injury.
I should be wise; for honesty's a fool,
That loses what it works for.

Oath. In my anguish
Apol.
I think my wife is honest, and think she is not.
I think that thou art just, and that thou art not.
I Will have some proof. Regr.
Her name, "Her name" that is, her character, or reputation.
that was as fresh,
Fury.
As Dian's "Dian's visage." Diana is represented in the heathen mythology, as a
goddess of extraordinary purity.
visage, is now begrim'd and black,
As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,
Poison, or fire, or suffocating steams,
I Will not endure it. Would I were but satisfied.

Iago. Pret. Conc.
I see, Sir, you are eaten up with passion.
I do repent me that I ever started it.

Oath. Anxiety.
Give me a living reason she is disloyal.

Iag. Pret. Reluc.
I do not like the office:
But since I Am entered in this cause so far,
Apol.
Urged on by foolish honesty of friendship,
I must go on, or bear the name of slander.
I lay in the same room with Cassio lately,
Narr. Expian.
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep. There is a kind of men,
So loose of soul, that in their sleep, will multer
Love. Caution.
All their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio.
In sleep I heard him say, " Sweet Desdemona!
Vexat. Rage.
Let us be wary; let us hide our loves.
O cursed fate, that gave thee to the Moor."

Oath. O monstrous! I will tear her limb from limb.

Iag. Nay; but be calm. Soothing.
This may be nothing yet
She may be honest still. But tell me this, Question.

Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries, in your wife's hand;

Oath. I gave her such a one. Alarm.
'Twas my first gift.

Iag. That I knew not. Accus.
But such a handkerchief
(I Am sure, it was the same) did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

Oath. O that the slave had twenty thousand lives! Desperation.

One is too poor -- too weak for my revenge.

Iag. Yet be patient, Sir.

Oath. O blood, blood, blood! Bound. Fury.

Hot, reeking blood shall wash the poisonous stain,
Which fouls mine honor. From this hour, my thoughts
Shall never look back, nor ebb to humble love,
'Till a capacious, and wide revenge, Horror.

Equal to their gross guilt swallows them up,
Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw,
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair sorc'ress, and her smooth adulterer, Plotting.
Great. Pert. Acknowl.

From hence you are my lieutenant.

Iag. As you will, Sir.

LXXIV. CRAFT. FOOLISH FEAR. VEXATION.
Mascarille, a crafty servant in the interest of Leander, his master's son,
contrives to send his old master into the country, and, in the mean time,
persuades his friend Anselm, that he is dead, suddenly; and, on that pretext,
borrows of him a sum of money for Leander.

[ See Moliere, L'ETOURDI.] Ans. Surprise.
WHAT, my good friend Pandolph dead!


Masc. Concern. Surprise.
I don't wonder the news surprises you.


Ans. To die so very suddenly!


Masc. Concern.
It is a very hurrying way of doing things, to be sure. But who can make people
live, you know, if they will die?


Ans. Question.
But how does your young master take it?


Masc. Whim. Grief.
Take it! why worse than he would a kicking. He welters on the ground like a
wounded adder, and says he will absolutely go into the same grave with his dear
papa. If it were not that they who take on so violently, do not, for the most
part, hold it long, I should expect him to go quite compompous about it. -- But
-- a -- you must know, Apology.
Sir, that we are all in a pucker at our house. The old gentleman must be
buried, you know, and that requires some of the ready. And my young master, if
he were in his best wits, knows no more than a broomstick, where to find a
penny of money. For you know, the old one, rest his soul, kept all that same as
snug as if he had thought the daylight would melt it. Now, Sir, Asking Favor.
you would do us a great kindness if you will be so good as to help us with a
score or two of pieces, till we can turn ourselves round a little.


Ans. Hum -- [Aside.] He will have a good estate. Anxiety. Avarice. Resolution.
And will not grudge to pay handsome interest. [To Masc.] I will come to him
immediately, and bring the money with me; and try to comfort him a little. [He
goes. Anxiety. Alarm.
Gives the money. Is deceived by an artificial corpse laid out on the bed.
Returns full of anxiety.] Lawkaday! what a sad thing this is. He was but
sixty-eight, or sixty-nine; about the same age with myself. It frightens me to
think of it. Suppose I should die suddenly too. I believe I had better think of
repenting, and making my peace. It is true, he was a little asthmatic, and,
Courage.
thank God, no body has better lungs -- hem -- hem -- hem -- than myself, --
Well, but I must go, Haste.
and send neighbor Cloak'um, the undertaker, as I promised. [Going, he meets
the supposed dead man, who had been stopped on his way to his country house, by
persons, who informed him of the falsehood of the reports which had occasioned
his setting out.] Ah! Sudden Fear.
mercy on my soul! What is that! My old friend's ghost! They say, none but
wicked folks walk. I wish I were at the bottom of a coal-pit! Law! How pale,
and how long his face is grown since his death. He never was handsome. And
death has improved him very much the wrong way. -- Pray, Entreating.
do not come near me. I wished you very well when you was alive. But I could
never abide a dead man cheek by jowl with me. Rest your soul! Trembling.
Rest your soul, I pray! Vanish, vanish, in the name of --


Pandolph. What the plague is the matter, Wonder.
old friend! Are you gone out of your wits. I came to ask your advice; but


Ans. Intr.
Tell me, then, pray, without coming a step nearer, Trem.
what you would have me do for the repose of your soul. Ah, ah, eh, eh, mercy
on us! no nearer pray! If it be only to take your leave of me, that you are
come back, I could have excused you the ceremony with all my heart. [Pandolph
comes nearer, to convince Anselm, that he is not dead. He draws back, Protest.
as the other advances.] Or if you -- mercy on us -- no nearer, pray -- or if
you have wronged any body, as you always loved money a little, I give the word
of a frightened christian, I will pray, as long as you please, for the
deliverance and repose of your departed soul. Intr.
My good, worthy, noble friend, do, pray, disappear, as ever you would wish
your old friend Anselm, to come to his senses again.


Pand. Mirth.
[laughing.] If I were not most confoundedly out of humor, I could be diverted
to a pitch. Remon.
But prithee now, old friend, what is in the wind; that you will have me to be
dead? This is some contrivance of that rogue Mascarille; Susp.
I guess by what I have just found out of his tricks.


Ans. Fear.
Ah, you are dead, too, su^ Did not I see your corpse laid out upon your own bed,
and...


Pand. Remon.
What the duce! I am dead, and know nothing of it! But, don't you see that I am
not dead?


Ans. Fear.
You are clothed with a body of air, which resembles your own person, when you
was alive -- only -- you will excuse me -- a good deal plainer. Intr.
But, pray, now, don't assume a figure more frightful. I am within a hair's
breadth of losing my senses already; and if you should turn yourself into a
giant, with saucereyes, or black horse without a head, or any of the ugly
shapes -- I ask pardon -- you apparitions sometimes put on, I am sure I should
go clean of one side at the least glimpse of you. Pray, Earn. Intr.
then, in the name of the blessed virgin, and all the saints, male and female,
be so good as to vanish quietly, and leave your poor frightened old friend wit
enough to keep him out of a mad-house. Vexat.



Pand. This is undoubtedly that rogue Mascarille's manufacture. He has, for
some gracious purpose, contrived to send me to the country on a fool's errand,
and I suppose, Encour.
in my absence, he has, to answer some other pious end, persuaded you that I am
dead. Come, give me thy hand and thou will be convinced I am not dead more than
thyself. Reluct.



Ans. [drawing back.] What was it I saw laid out upon the bed then? Encour.



Pand. How should I know? It was not I, Reluct.
however.


Ans. If I were sure you are not dead, I should not be afraid to touch you:
Shudd. Encou.
but the hand of a dead man must be so co -- o -- o -- old!


Pand. Prithee now give over. I tell you, it is nothing but Mascarille's
invention. [He seizes Anselm's hand, who sereams out. Terr. Returns Cour.
]


Ans. Ah! St Anthony preserve me! -- Ah -- ah -- eh -- eh -- Why -- why --
after all, your hand is not so co -- o -- o -- old, neither. Of the two, it is
rather warmer than my own. Can it be, though, that you are not dead? Encour.



Pand. Not I.


Ans. I begin to question it a little myself. Recol.
But still my mind misgives me plagui^y about the corpse I saw laid out upon
your bed. If I could but find out what that was --


Pand. Encour.
Pshaw, prithee, what signifies it what it was? As long as you see plainly I am
not dead.


Ans. Retol.
Why yes, as you say, that is the point. But yet the corpse upon the bed haunts
me. But -- [pauses] I Will be hanged if it be not as you say. Vexation.
Mascarille is a rogue. But, if you be not dead, I am in two sweet scrapes. One
is, the danger of being dubbed Mascarille's fool. The other of losing fifty
pieces, I furnished him for your interment


Pand. Discovery.
O, you have lent him money, have you? Then the secret is out.


Ans. Apology.
Yes; but you know, it was upon the credit of your estate, and for your own
personal benefit. For, if you had been dead, you must have been buried, you
know. And Mascarille told me, your son could come at no ready cash, you know.
Insinuating.
So that I hope you will see me paid, you know.


Pand. Refusing.
I Will be hanged if I do. I have enough to pay on that score otherwise.


Ans. Vexation.
I Will pluck off every single gray hair that is upon my old foolish head. --
What! to have no more wit at this time of life! -- I expect nothing else than
that they should make a farce in praise of my wisdom, and act me, till the town
be sick of me.

[Exeunt different ways.]
LXXV. EXHORTATION.
The speech of Galgacus the general of the Caledonii, The Caledonii were,
according to Ptolemy, the inhabitants of the interior parts of what before the
unto a was called Scotland, now North-Britain.
in which he exhorts the army he had assembled, in order to expel the Romans,
to fight valiantly against their foes under Jul. Agricola.

Corn. Tacit. VIT. AGRIC. COUNTRYMEN, and FELLOW SOLDIERS!
WHEN I consider the cause, Cour.
for which we have drawn our swords, and the necessity of striking an effectual
blow, before we sheath them again, I reel joyful hopes arising in my mind, that
this day an opening shall be made for the restoration of British liberty, and
for shaking off the infamous yoke of Roman slavery. Caledonia is yet free.
Vexat.
The all-grasping power of Rome has not yet been able to seize our liberty.
Cour.
But it is only to be preserved by valor. By flight it cannot: Warn.
for the sea confines us; and that the more effectually, as being possessed by
the fleets of the enemy. As it is by arms, that the brave acquire immortal
fame, so it is by arms that the sordid must defend their lives and properties,
or lose them. You are the very men, my friends, Encour.
who have hitherto set bounds to the unmeasurable ambition of the Romans. In
consequence of your inhabiting the more inaccessible parts of the island, to
which the shores of those countries on the continent, which are enslaved by the
Romans, are invisible, you have hitherto hitherto been free from the common
disgrace, and the common sufferings. You lie almost out of the reach of fame
itself. Warn.
But you must not expect to enjoy this untroubled security a^y longer, unless
you bestir yourselves so effectually, as to put it out of the power of the
enemy to search out your retreats, and disturb your repose. If you do not,
curiosity alone will set them a prying, and they will conclude that there is
somewhat worth the labor of conquering, in the interior parts of the island,
merely because they have never seen them. What is little known, is often
coveted, because so little known. And you are not to expect, that you should
escape the ravage of the general plunderers of mankind, by any sentiment of
moderation in them. When the countries, which are more accessible, come to be
subdued, they will then force their way into those, Accus.
which are harder to come at. And if they should conquer the dry land, over the
whole world, they will then think of carrying their arms beyond the ocean, to
see, whether there be not certain unknown regions, which they may attack, and
reduce under subjection to the Roman^ empire. For we see, that if a country is
thought to be powerful in arms, the Romans attack it, because the conquest will
be glorious; if inconsiderable in the military art, because the victory will be
easy; if rich, they are drawn thither by the hope of plunder; if poor, by the
desire of fame. The east and the west, the south and the north, the face of the
whole earth, is the scene of their military achievements; the world is too
little for their ambition, and their avarice. They are the only nation ever
known to be equally desirous of conquering a poor kingdom as a rich one. Horr.
Their supreme joy seems to be ravaging, fighting, and shedding of blood; and
when they have unpeopled a region, so that there are none left alive able to
bear arms, they say, they have given peace to that country.

Nature itself has peculiarly endeared to all men, their wives, and their
children. Tender.
But it is known to you my countrymen, that the conquered youth are daily
draughted off to supply the deficiencies in the Roman army. Horror.
The wives, the sisters, and the daughters of the conquered are either exposed
to the violence, or at least corrupted by the arts of these cruel spoilers. The
fruits of our industry, Accus.
are plundered to make up the tributes imposed on us by oppressive avarice.
Britons sow their fields; and the greedy Romans reap them. Compl.
Our very bodies are worn out in carrying on their military works, and our
toils are rewarded by them with abuse and stripes. Those, who are born to
slavery, are bought and maintained by their master. Indig.
But this unhappy country pays for being enslaved, and feeds those who enslave
it. And our portion of disgrace is the bitterest, as the inhabitants of this
island are the last, who have fallen under the galling yoke. Our native bent
against tyranny, is the offense, Accus.
which most sensibly irritates those lordly usurpers. Our distance from the
seat of government, and our natural defense by the surrounding ocean, render us
obnoxious to their suspicions: for they know, that Britons are born with an
instinctive love of liberty; and they conclude, that we must be naturally led
to think of taking the advantage of our detached situation, to disengage
ourselves one time or other, from their oppression.

Thus, my countrymen, and fellow soldiers, Warn.
suspected and hated, as we ever must be by the Romans, there is no prospect of
our enjoying even a tolerable state of bondage under them. Let us, Cour.
then, in the name of all that is sacred, and in defense of all that is dear to
us, resolve to exert ourselves, if not for glory, at least for safety; if not
in vindication of British honor, at least in defense of our lives. Commed.
How near were the Brigantines The Brigantines, according to Ptolemy, inhabited
what is now called Yorkshire, the bishopric of Durham, etc.
to shaking off the yoke -- led on too by a woman? -- They burnt a Roman
settlement: they attacked the dreaded Roman legions in their camp. Regr.
Had not their partial success drawn them into a fatal security, the business
was done. Cour.
And shall not we of the Caledonian region, whose territories are yet free, and
whose strength entire, shall we not, my fellow soldiers, attempt somewhat,
which may show these foreign ravagers, that they have more to do than they
think of, before they be masters of the whole island.

Remons.
But, after all, who are these mighty Romans! Are they gods, or mortal men, like
ourselves? Do we not see, that they fall into the same errors, and weaknesses,
as others? Does not peace effeminate them? Does not abundance debauch them?
Does not wantonness enervate them? Cour.
Do they not even go to excess in the most unmanly vices? And can you imagine,
that they, Cour. Regr.
who are remarkable for their vices, are likewise remarkable for their valor?
What, then, do we dread? -- Shall I tell you the very truth, my
fellow soldiers? it is by means of our intestine divisions, that Romans have
gained so great advantages over us. They turn the mismanagements of their
enemies to their own praise. They boast of what they have done, and say nothing
of what we might have done, had we been so wise as to unite against them.

What is this formidable Roman army? Cont.
Is it not composed of a mixture of people from different countries, some more,
some less, disposed to military achievements; some more, some less, capable of
bearing fatigue and hardship. They keep together, while they are successful.
Cour.
Attack them with vigor: distress them: you will see them more disunited among
themselves, than we are now. Can any one imagine, that Gauls, Germans, and --
with shame I must add, Regr.
Britons, who basely lend, for a time, their limbs, and their lives, to build
up a foreign tyranny; Cour.
can one imagine, that these will not be longer enemies than slaves? Or that
such an army is held together by sentiments of fidelity, or affection? No: the
only body of union among them is fear. And, whenever terror ceases to work upon
the minds of that mixed multitude, they, Cont.
who now fear, will then hate their tyrannical masters. On our side, there is
every possible incitement to valor. The Roman courage is not, as ours, Cour.
inflamed by the thought of wives and children in danger of falling into the
hands of the eneemy. The Romans have no parents, as we have, to reproach them,
if they should desert their infirm old age. Cont.
They have no country here to fight for. They are a motly collection of
foreigners, in a land wholly unknown to them, cut off from their native
country, hemmed in by the surrounding ocean, and given, I hope, a prey into our
hands, without all possibility of escape. Let not the sound of the Roman name
affright your ears. Nor let the glare of gold or silver, upon their armor,
dazzle your eyes. It is not by gold, or silver, that men are either wounded or
defended; though they are rendered a richer prey to the conquerors. Cour.
Let us boldly attack this disunited rabble. We shall find among themselves a
reinforcement to our army. The degenerated Britons, who are incorporated into
their forces, will, through shame of their country's cause deserted by them,
quickly leave the Romans, and come over to us. The Gauls, remembering their
former liberty, and that it was the Romans who deprived them of it, will
forsake their tyrants, and join the assertors of freedom. The Germans, who
remain in their army, will follow the example of their countrymen, the Usipii,
who so lately deserted. And what will there be then to fear? A few
half-garrisoned forts; Cont.
a few municipal towns inhabited; by worn-out old men, discord universally
prevailing, occasioned by tyranny in those who command, Cour.
and obstinacy in those who should obey. On our side, an army united in the
cause of their country, their wives, their children, their aged parents, their
liberties, their lives. At the head of this army -- I hope I do not offend
against modesty in saying, Apol.
there is a General ready to exert all his abilities, such as they are, and to
hazard his life in leading you to victory, and to freedom.

Encour.
I conclude, my countrymen, and fellow soldiers, with putting you in mind, that
on your behavior this day depends your future enjoyment of peace and liberty,
or your subjection to a tyrannical enemy, with all its grievous consequences.
When, therefore, you come to engage -- think of your ancestors -- and think of
your posterity.

LXXVI. DOUBTING. VEXATION. AFFECTATION of LEARNING. COMPULSION. etc. [See
Moliere's MARRIAGE FORCE.]
Longhead solus, with an open letter in his hand. I WAS wrong to proceed so far
in this matter so hastity. To fix the very day, Vexation. Apprehens.
and then fail. Her father will prosecute me, to be sure, and will recover
heavy damages too, Apology. Blame.
as he threatens me. But then, what could I do? Could I marry with the prospect
I had before me? To tell me, she married to get free from restraint, and that
she expected, I should make no inquiry into her conduct, more than she would
into mine! Apprens. Courage.
If she speaks so freely before marriage, how will she act after? No, no, I Will
stand his prosecution. Recollecti. Desire.
Better be a beggar than a cuckold. -- But hold. -- Perhaps I am more afraid
than hurt. She might mean only innocent freedom -- She is a charming girl.
Doubt. Desire. Apprehens. Anxiety.
But I am thirty years older than she in -- I would wish to marry her; but I
should not like what I am afraid will be the consequence. What resolution shall
I take? I Will be hanged, if I know what to do. On one hand, beauty inviting;
Desire. Apprehens. Vexation.
on the other, cuckoldom as ugly as the d -- l. On one hand, marriage; on the
other a lawsuit. I am in a fine dilemma. -- Lancelot Longhead; Lancelet
Longhead; [striking himself on the forehead.] I Will tell you what, old friend, I
doubt you are but a simpleton all this while, that have been thinking yourself
a little Solomon. I Will even go and consult with some friends, what I must do.
Doubt.
For I cannot determine, within myself, whether I had better try to make it up
with the family, and go on with my intended marriage, or set them at defiance,
and resolve to have nothing to do with matrimony. -- If any body advises me to
marry, Confid. Resolution.
I Will venture it, I think. Let me see, what wise, sagacious people are there of
my acquaintance? -- Oh -- my two neighbors, Dr. Neverout, and Dr. Doubty; men
of universal learning! Ill go to them directly. And here is Dr. Neverout coming
out of this house very fortunately.

Neverout, Anger.
[talking to one in the house.] I tell you, friend, you are a silly fellow,
ignorant of all good discipline, and fit to be banished from the republic of
letters. Affectat. of Learning.
I will undertake to demonstrate to you by convincing arguments, drawn from the
writings of Aristotle himself, the philosopher of philosophers, that ignarus
es, you are an ignorant fellow: that ignarus eras, you was an ignorant fellow;
that ignarus fuisti, you have been an ignorant fellow; that, ignarus fueras,
you had been an ignorant fellow; and that, ignarus eris, you will be an
ignorant fellow, through all the genders, cases, numbers, voices, moods,
tenses, and persons, of all the articles, the nouns, the pronouns, the verbs,
the participles, the adverbs, prepositions, interjections, and conjunctions.


Longh. Wonder.
Somebody must have used him very ill, to make him call so many hard names. Dr.
Neverout, Civil.
your servant. A word with you, if you please, Sir.


Nev. Contempt.
You pretend to reason! You don't so much as know the first elements of the art
of reasoning. Learned Pride.
You don't know the difference between a category and a predicament, nor
between a major and a minor,


Longh. His passion blinds him so, he does not see me. Doctor, I kiss your
hands. Civil.
May one...


Nev. Do you know what a blunder you have committed? Do you know, Contempt.
Pride.
what it is to be guilty of a syllogism in Balordo? Your major is foolish, your
minor impertinent, and your conclusion ridiculous.


Longh. Pray, Doctor, what is it, Enquiring.
that so disturbs your philosophy?


Nev. The most atrocious provocation in the world. Anger. Pride.
An ignorant fellow would defend a proposition the most erroneous, the most
abominable, the most execrable that ever was uttered or written.


Longh. May I ask, what it is? Inquiring. Apprehens.



Nev. Mr. Longhead, all is ruined. The world is fallen into a general
depravity. A degree of licentiousness, that is alarming, Reproach.
reigns universally; and the governors of states have reason to be ashamed of
themselves, who have power in their hands for maintaining good order among
mankind, and suffer such enormities to pass unpunished.


Longh. What is it, pray, Sir? Inquiring. Accus.



Nev. Only think, Mr. Longhead, only think, that in a christian country, a
person should be allowed to use an expression publicly, that one would think
would frighten a nation; an expression, that one would expect to raise the
devil! Only think of -- "The form of a hat!" -- There, Mr. Longhead, Amazement.
there is an expression for you! Did you think you should have lived to hear
such an expression as -- "The form of a hat?"


Longh. How, Sir? Enquiring.
I don't understand wherein the harm of such an expression consists.


Nev. I affirm and insist upon it, Positive.
with hands and feet, pugnis et calcibus, unguibus, et rostro, that to say,
"The form of a hat," is as absurd, as to say, that, datur vacuum in rerum
natura, there is a vacuum in nature. [Turning again to the person with whom he
had been disputing in the house. Displeasure. Contempt.
] Yes, ignorant creature a hat is an inanimate substance, and therefore form
cannot be predicated of it. Learned Pride.
Ga, illiterate wretch, and read Aristotle's chapter of qualities. Go, study
Aquinas, Burgersdicius, and Scheiblerus, of the ten predicaments. Go; and then
say "The form of a hat," if you dare. Satisfac.



Longh. O, I thought, Doctor, something worse than all this had happened.


Nev. Apprehen. Ostentation of Learning.
What would you have worse, unless a comet were to come from beyond the orbit of
Saturn, and either burn the world by its near approach; drown it by attracting
the sea, and raising a tide three miles high; or force it from its orbit by
impinging against it, and make it either fly out into infinite space, or rush
to the sun the enter of our system. Apprehen.
Except this, what can be worse than confounding language, destroying
qualities, demolishing predicaments, and, in short, overturning all science
from the foundation. For Logic is the foundation of science.


Longh. Consulting. Entreating.
Why, it may be a bad thing for what I know. But, pray, Doctor, let a body speak
with you.


Nev. Anger.
[To the person in the house.] An impertinent fellow!


Longh. Entreating.
He is so; but I want your advice, Doctor, in...


Nev. Anger. Entreating.
A blockhead!


Longh. Well, I own he is so; but no more of that, Pride..
pray, good Doctor.


Nev. To pretend to dispute with me!


Longh. He is very much in the wrong, Consulting. Entreating, Asking Advice.
to be sure. But now let me ask you a question, Doctor. You must know, Sir,
that I have been thinking of marrying. Only I am a little afraid of that, you
know of; the misfortune for which no body is pitied. Now I should be glad you
would, as a philosopher, give me your opinion on this point.


Nev. Rather than admit such an expression, Angu.
I would deny substantial forms, and abstract entities.


Longh. Plague on the man! Vexation. Entreating.
He knows nothing of what I have been saying. Why Dr. Neverout, I have been
talking to you this hour, and you give me no answer.


Nev. I ask your pardon. Apol.
I was engaged in supporting truth against ignorance: but now I have done. If
what I have said will not convince, let the ignorant be ignorant still. What
would you consult me upon? Entreating.



Longh. I want to talk with you about an affair of consequence.


Nev. Good. Enquiring.
And what tongue do you intend to use in the conversation with me?


Longh. What tongue? Why, Wonder.
the tongue I have in my mouth.


Nev. I mean, what language; what speech? Enquiring.
Do you intend to talk with me in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew?


Longh. Not I. Wonder.
I don't know one of them from another.


Nev. Then you will use a modern language, I suppose, as the Italian, perhaps,
Enquir.
which is sweet and musical. Vexation. Enquiring.



Long. No.


Nev. The Spanish, which is majestic and sonorous.


Longh. No. Vexation.



Nev. Enquiring.
The English, which is copious and expressive.


Longh. Vexation. Enquiring.
No.


Nev. The High Dutch is but an indifferent language. You will not I suppose, make
use of it in this conversation.


Longh. Vexation. Enquiring.
No.


Nev. And the Low Dutch is worse still. Will you talk to me in Turkish? It is a
lofty language.


Longh. Vexation. Enquiring.
No.


Nev. What think you of the Syriac, the Arabic, the Chaldaic, the Persian, the
Palmyrene? Do you choose any of them?


Longh. Vexation. Enquiring.
No.


Nev. What language then?


Longh. Vexation.
Why the language we are talking now.


Nev. Satisfac.
Oh! you will speak in the vernacular tongue? If so, please to come on the left
side. The right ear is for the foreign, Learned Pride.
and the learned languages.


Longh. Here is a deal of ceremony with such sort of people. Vexation.
Entreating.
I want to consult you, Doctor, about an affair of consequence.


Nev. O! I understand you. You want my opinion upon some of the difficulties in
philosophy, Affected Learning.
as, for example; Whether substance and accident, are terms synonymous or
equivocal, with regard to the being?


Longh. No that is not it.


Nev. Vexation. Affect.
Whether Logic is an art, or a science?


Longh. Vexation.
No, no. I don't care a halfpenny which.


Nev. Affect.
If it has for its object the three operations of the mind, or the third only.
Vexation.



Longh. That is not the affair.


Nev. Whether, properly speaking, Affect.
there are six categories, or only one?


Longh. I don't care, Vexat.
if there were six bushels of catechisms. That is not what I want. I am...


Nev. Perhaps you want to know whether the conclusion is of the essence of the
syllogism? Affect.
Vexat.



Longh. No, no no. It is not about any such point; but (...)...


Nev. Whether the essence of good is appetibility, or suitableness. Affect.



Longh. I am going to tell you my business, Vexat.
if...


Nev. You would know, perhaps, Affect.
if the good and the end are reciprocal?


Longh. Not a bit. Vexat.



Nev. Whether the end influences, Affect.
us by its real essence, or by its intentional?


Longh. No, no, it is quite another affair, Vexat.
I tell you.


Nev. You must explain yourself, then; Affect.
for I have mentioned the most difficult points, and those, that are commonly
agitated in the schools in our times.


Longh. I should have told you my business an hour ago, if you would have heard
me. Vexat.



Nev. Pronounce then. Affect. Intr.



Longh. and Nev. together The affair I want to consult Speech was given to man
on you about, Dr. Neverout, is this; Affect.
I have had purpose, that by it he might express his thoughts: thoughts of
marrying a young lady, who is and as the thoughts are the images of things,
very handsome, and much to my liking. I have so words are the images of our
thoughts. Make asked her father's consent, and he has granted use therefore of
words to explain to me your it. Only I am afraid... thoughts...


Longh. Impat.
Plague on this everlasting talker. Who is like to be the wiser for him; if he
will not so much as hear what one has to say to him? I Will go to Dr. Doubty.
Perhaps he will be more reasonable. Joy. Civil.
-- And, very fortunately, here he comes. I will consult him at once. -- Dr.
Doubty, I beg your wise advice about a matter of great concern to me.


Doubt. Affect. Learn.
Be pleased, good Mr. Longhead, to alter your phraseology. Our philosophy
directs to give out no decisive propositions; but to speak of all things with
uncertainty; and always to suspend our judgment. Therefore you ought not to say
-- "I beg your advice," but -- "I seem to beg it."


Longh. Su^pr.
I seem! What signifies talking of seems; when I am here on the spot with you?


Doubt. Affect.
That is nothing to the purpose. You may imagine a thousand things, in which
there is no reality.


Longh. Wond.
What! is there no realty in my being here talking with Dr. Doubty?


Doubt. Affect.
It is uncertain; and we ought to doubt of every thing. You appear to my
external senses to be here, as I, perhaps, to yours. But nothing is certain.
All things are doubtful.


Longh. Wond.
Sure, Dr. Doubty, you are disposed to be merry. Here am I: there are you: here
is no seem; no uncertainty; nothing doubtful; but all as plain as the nose on
your face. Chid. In^.
Let us, for shame, drop these whims, and talk of my business. You must know,
Dr. Doubty, that I have had thoughts of marrying, and should be glad of your
opinion and advice.


Doubt. Affect.
I don't know, that you have had thoughts of marrying.


Longh. Vexat. Affect.
But I tell it you.


Doubt. That may be, or it may not be.


Longh. The young lady I had made choice of, is very young, and very handsome.
Anxiety.



Doubt. That may be or it may not be. Affecta. Anxiety.



Longh. Do you think, I shall do wisely in marrying her?


Doubt. You may do wisely, Affect.
for aught I know, or you may do unwisely, for aught I know.


Longh. I am very much in love with the young lady. Anxiety.



Doubt. That is not impossible. Affect. Anxiety.



Longh. But, as she is much younger than me, I am afraid of, you know what.


Doubt. You may be afraid, Affect.
for aught I know.


Longh. Do you think, Anxiety.
I should run the hazard of being a cuckold, if I should marry her? Affect.



Doubt. There is no natural impossibility in it. But, if you should, you may,
perhaps, Affect.
not be the first, nor the last. But all things are uncertain.


Longh. But what would you do, Anxiety.
if you were in my place, Dr. Doubty?


Doubt. It is uncertain, as all things are. Affect.



Longh. But what do you advise me to do? Anxiety. Indiff.



Doubt. What you please.


Longh. I shall go ^^d. Vexation. Indiff.



Doubt. I wash my hands of it.


Longh. A plague on the old dreamer! Anger. Indiff.



Doubt. Happen what will, I am clear.


Longh. I Will make you change your cuckow-note, you old philosophical hu^dru^,
Passion.
you -- [beats him] -- I will -- [beats him] I Will make you say somewhat else,
than " All things are doubtful; all things are uncertain" -- [beats him] I
will, you old fusty pedant.


Doubt. Ah! -- oh! -- eh! Compl.
-- What beat a philosopher! -- Ah! -- oh! -- eh!


Longh. Stiff^.
Be pleased, Dr. Doubty [mimicking the Doctor] to alter your phraseology. Your
philosophy directs you to give out no decisive propositions; but to speak of
all things with uncertainty, and always to suspend your judgment. -- Therefore,
you ought not to say -- "I have been beaten;" but -- "I seem to have been
beaten."


Doub. Anger. Threat. Indiff. Anger.
I will have you prosecuted with the utmost rigor of the law.


Longh. I wash my hands of it.


Doub. I will show the marks of the blows I have received from you.


Longh. Indiff.
You may imagine a thousand things in which there is no reality.


Doub. Anger.
I will go directly to a magistrate, and have a warrant for you. [Exit Doubty.]


Longh. There is no natural impossibility in it. Indiff.



Enter Captain Pinkum, with two swords in one hand, and a cane in the other.
Pink. Respect.
Mr. Longhead, I am your most obedient, most humble servant.


Longh. Indiff.
Sir, your servant.


Pink. Respect.
Sir, I have the honor of waiting on you, to let you know, that, as you was
pleased to disappoint us yesterday, which was the day fixed by yourself for
your marriage with my sister, you and I must settle that affair in an
honorable way.


Longh. Vexation.
Why, Sir, it is with regret that I failed you; but...


Pink. Respect.
Oh! Sir, there is no harm as we shall order matters.


Longh. I am sorry it so happens. Vexat.
But some little scruples chanced to come into my mind about the difference
between our ages, which, you know, is pretty considerable. And I put off the
marriage for a little time, only that I might consider of it, and advise with
my friends. And now, that the day is past, I think it may be better for us
both, that it be let alone altogether.


Pink. Sir, as you please. Respect.
You know it is not an object of any consequence. But, Sir, what, I have done
myself the honor of waiting on you for, is only to beg the favor of you, Sir,
to choose which you please of these two swords. They are both good, I assure
you, Sir, Affirm.
and as fairly matched as I could. If my judgment deserves any regard, you need
not hesitate long. Either of them is very fit for a gentleman to be run through
with.


Longh. Sir, I don't understand you. Surprise.



Pink. O, Sir, I wonder at that. Respect.
The thing is not hard to be understood. It is no more than this, Sir, that if
a gentleman promises a lady marriage, and, especially, if he fixes the day and
fails of performing his contract, the relations, of the lady (whose character
and fortune in ^^^e are injured by it, you know, Sir) generally think it proper
to commence a prosecution against the gentleman; and the law gives, in those
cases, heavy damages. My father had thoughts of prosecuting you, Sir, as he
wrote you. But as law is tedious, we chose rather, Sir, upon second thoughts,
to vindicate the honor of our family in a more expeditious way. Therefore, if
you please, Sir, I will endeavor to whip you through the lungs in the neatest
manner now practiced in the army. And I offer you your choice of one of these
two swords, to defend yourself with. This, you must own, Sir, is treating you
genteelly. For, you know, I could run you through the body now, without giving
you the opportunity of defending yourself. -- Please, Sir, to make your choice.


Longh. Refus.
Sir, your humble servant. I shall make no such choice, I assure you.


Pink. Respect.
Sir -- you must, if you please, fight me. You shall have fair play, upon my
honor.


Longh. Refus.
Sir, I have nothing to say to you, [Going.] Sir, your humble servant.


Pink. Respect.
O dear Sir, [stopping him] you must excuse me for stopping you. But you and I
are not to part, till one or the other drops, I assure you, Sir.


Longh. Mercy on us! Was ever such a bloody-minded fellow!


Pink. Sir, I really have a little business upon my hands; so that I must beg
you will give me leave to run you through as soon as possible.


Longh. Refus.
But I don't intend that you shall run me through at all. For I will have
nothing to say to you.


Pink. Respect.
If you mean, Sir, that you will not fight me, I must do myself the honor of
telling you, that you are in a little mistake, Sir. For the order of such
things is this, Explan.
Sir. First, a gentleman happens to affront another gentleman or a family, as
you have done ours, Sir. Next, the gentleman affronted, or some one of the
family, in order to vindicate their honor, challenges to single combat, the
gentleman who did the injury, as I have done you, Sir. Then the gentleman who
did the injury, perhaps, refuses to fight. The other proceeds to take the
regular course of beating [counting on his fingers [ bruising, kicking,
cuffing, pulling by the nose, and ears, rolling in the dirt, and stamping on
him, till the breath be fairly out of his body, and there is an end of him, and
of the quarrel, you know. Or if the gentleman, who happened to do the injury,
will fight, which, to be sure, is doing the thing genteelly, you know; why
then, one, or the other is decently run through the body, and there is an end of
the matter another way, you know. Now, Sir, Respect.
you see plainly, that my proceedings are regular, and gentleman-like --
gentleman-like -- absolutely. So Sir, once more, and but once more, will you be
pleased to accept of one, or the other, of these two swords?


Longh. Not I, truly. Refus. Respect.



Pink. Why then, Sir, the first step I am to take, you know, is to cane you,
which I humbly beg leave to proceed to accordingly. --


[Canes him.] Longh. Ah! -- eh! -- oh! Compl. Respect.



Pink. Then, Sir, the next operation is cuffing -- no, I am wrong; kicking is
next.

[Kicks him.]
Longh. Hold, hold. Is the d -- l in you? Compl.
Oh! I am bruised all over!


Pink. Sir, I ask your pardon, Respect.
if I have offended you; I did not mean it, I assure you, Sir. All I want, is
to vindicate the honor of our family. If you had fulfilled your contract, you
had spared me all this trouble. Besides, Haste.
I am really pressed for time; therefore must take the liberty of proceeding,
as expeditiously as possible, to the remaining operations of cuffing you,
pulling you by the nose and ears, rolling you in the dirt, and stamping the
breath out of your body. Come, Sir, if you please.


Longh. Hold a little, pray, -- Oh! Respect. Entreat.
-- my bones are bruised to jelly. Compl. Entreat.
-- Is there no way of compounding this affair but by blood and murder?


Pink. Respect.
O yes, Sir. You have only to fulfill your contract, and all will be well.


Longh. Distress.
[Aside.] What the duce must I do? -- I had better be cuckolded, I believe,
than trod to death. Reluctance.
-- [To him.] I am willing -- I am willing -- to perform the contract. -- Oh!
my poor bones! -- Oh!


Pink. Respect. Joy. Complais.
Sir, you are a gentleman, every inch of you. I am very glad to find you are
come to a right way of thinking. I assure you, Sir, there is no man in the
world, for whom I have a greater regard, nor whom I should rather wish to have
for a brother-in-law. Inviting.
Come, Sir, the ceremony shall be performed immediately.


[Exeunt.] LXXVII. WARNING. BLAMING. COMMENDATION. INSTRUCTION.
The substance of Isocrates's Areopagitic oration, which is celebrated by Dion
Halicarn.

Tom. II. p. 40. Apology.
I DOUBT not, Athenians, but many of you will wonder what should excite me to
address you upon public affairs, as if the state were in immediate danger,
whilst, to you, we seem to be in perfect safety, a general peace prevailing,
and the commonwealth secured by formidable fleets and armies, and strengthened
by powerful allies, Triumph.
and tributary states, to support the public expenses, and cooperate with us
in every emergency. All which circumstances seeming to be in our favor, I
suppose most of those who now hear me, imagine, we have nothing to do, but
congratulate ourselves on our happiness, and enjoy ourselves in peace; and that
it is only our enemies, who have any thing to fear. I therefore, take for
granted, Contempt.
Athenians, you do, in your own minds, despise my attempt to alarm you; and
that, in your imaginations, Pride. Alarm.
you already grasp the empire of all Greece. But what would you think, my
countrymen, if I should tell you, it is on account of the seemingly favorable
circumstances, I have mentioned, that I am apprehensive. My observation has
presented me so many instances of states, which at the very time they seemed to
be at the height of prosperity, were in fact upon the brink of ruin; that I
cannot help being alarmed at the security, in which I see my country, at
present sunk. When a nation is puffed up with an opinion of her own strength
and safety; it is then that her counsels are likely to be rash and imprudent,
and their consequences fatal. The condition of kingdoms, as of individuals, is
variable. Caution.
Permanent tranquillity is seldom seen in this world. And with circumstances
the conduct both of individuals and of nations, is commonly seen to change.
Instruct.
Prosperity generally produces arrogance, rashness, folly. Want and distress,
naturally suggest prudent and moderate resolutions. Therefore, it is not so
easy, as at first view it may seem, to determine, which condition i^, for the
purpose of real happiness, the most to be desired for individuals; or, with a
view to national prosperity, which state one should wish public affairs to be
in, during his own life, and that of his children; whether of perfect
superiority to danger and fear, or of circumstances requiring caution,
frugality, and attention. For that condition, which is most desired by mankind,
I mean of perfect prosperity, generally brings with it the causes, and the
forerunners of misfortune; whilst narrower circumstances commonly lead on to
care, prudence and safety. Of the truth of this observation, better proofs
cannot be desired, than those which the histories of our own commonwealth, and
of Lacedaemon, furnish. Was not the taking of our city, Arguing.
(...) the barbarians, the very cause of our applying, with such diligence, to
the a^ of w^ and government, Apprehens.
as set us at the head of Gre^^^? But when our s^^ess against our enemies
misled us into the imagination, that our power was ^^conq^^nable, we soon found
ourselves on the v^^ga of destruction. Arguing.
The Lacedaemonians, likewise, from inhabiting a f^^^ ^bse^^e towns, came,
through a diligent attention to the military art, Contempt.
to conquer P^^^p^^nes^. And, upon this, increasing their power by sea and
land, they were soon puffed up to such a height of pride and folly, as brought
them into the same dangers, which we had run into.

Arguing.
Whoever attends to these particulars, and yet thinks our commonwealth in a safe
condition, Apprehens.
^oust be entremely thoughtless, especially as our affairs are now i^^ ^or^^
state, than at the pe^^^d I ^^^r to; for we have both the (...) of the other
states of Greece, and the hostility of the king of P^rs^^ to fear.

Blame.
When I ^des these things, I am in doubt, whether, I should conclude that you
have (...) all ca^^ for the public safety; or that you (...) not indifferent,
but wholly ignorant of the present dangerous state of our affairs. May it not
be said, Contempt. Alarm.
that we have l^st the cities of Thrace; that we have squandered above a
thousand talents in military pay, by which we have gained nothing; that we have
drawn upon ourselves the suspicion of the other states of Greece, and the
enmity of the barbarous king; Of Persia.
and that we are necessitated to take the side of the Thehans, and have lost
our own natural allies? Blame.
And for these signal advantages we have twice appointed public thanksgivings
to the gods: and show, in our deliberations, the tranquillity, which could only
be proper, if all went in perfect safety. Nor is it to be wondered, that we
fall into wrong measures, and consequent misfortunes. Intr.
Nothing is to be expected to go right in a state, unless its governors know
how by prudence and sagacity, to consult the general advantage. Fortune may,
occasionally, bring partial success, and temporary prosperity; Blame.
but upon this there can be no dependence. When the command of all Greece fell
into our hands in consequence of the naval victory gained by Conon and
Timotheus, we could not keep what we were in actual possession of. The very
constitution of our commonwealth is gone wrong, and we have not the least
thought of entering upon ways and means to se^ it right; Instruct.
whilst we all know that it is not the surrounding of a only with high and
strong walls, not assembling together a multitude of people that makes a great
and flourishing state, but wholesome laws, a wise police, and a faithful
administration. Desire.


How much, therefore, is it to be wished, that the commonwealth could be
brought back to the condition in which the wise legislat^^^ of Solon placed it
(than whom no one ever had the good of the people more at heart) and to which
Clisthenes restored it, when enslaved by the thirty tyrants, whom he expelled;
re-establishing the commonwealth in the hands of the people according to the
original constitution. Instruct.
It is notorious, that in the happier times, when the republic was administered
according to the original constitution, Blame.
there was not, as since, a nominal liberty, with a real tyranny; but that the
people were accustomed to other principles, than those, which now lead them to
consider democracy as the same with anarchy, liberty with licentiousness; and
that their happiness consists in the unpunished violation of the laws. In those
times, Commend.
the equal distribution of justice, which prevailed, brought adequate
punishment upon those who deserved it, and conferred the due honors upon such
as had earned them by their virtue. Preferment, Blame.
to stations of power and trust, was not, Commend.
in those days, open to all promiscuously. They, who appeared to the public to
have the best claim by merit and character, obtained them. For they wisely
considered, that to promote to high stations men of superior eminence for
virtue, was the likeliest means to excite a general emulation among persons of
all ranks, even to the lowest; Instruct.
as the people are constantly observed to form their manners upon the model of
their superiors. Blame.
Instead of the public treasures plundered to fill the coffers of private
persons; it was common to see large sum^ of private wealth voluntarily
contributed for defraying the public expense. Commend.
In those times, the difficulty was, to prevail with the persons qualified for
filling important stations, Blame.
to assume them: whereas in our days, all, are aspiring to preferment, worthy
and unworthy, qualified and unqualified. In those times, Commend.
they, who refused, were the most solicited to assume high stations; as it was
considered that merit is commonly diffident of itself. Blame.
In our days, they, who elbow others, and thrust themselves forward, obtain the
most readily, what they, by this very conduct, show themselves the most
unworthy of. Cont.
Our ancestors did not look upon a place of authority as an emolument; but as a
charge: Commend.
Cont.
the successor did not enquire what his predecessor had gained, while he held
his employment, Commend.
but what he had left undone, that the deficiency might be supplied, as soon as
possible. They held it proper, that the administration should be trusted to
those, who had the most to lose, in case of a subversion of the state; but so,
that no riches, or power, should screen any person from an enquiry into his
conduct, nor from suffering adequate punishment, in case of delinquency. The
rich thought extreme poverty in the lower people a reflection upon them, as
having failed in their patronage of them; and the poor, far from envying the
wealth of their superiors, rejoiced in it; considering the power of the rich as
their protection. Sensible of the supreme importance of right education toward
the happiness of a state, they bestowed the strictest attention upon forming
the manners of the youth to modesty, truth, valor, and love of their country.
Nor did they think it sufficient to lay a foundation of good principles in the
minds of young people, and leave them, after they were grown up, to act as they
pleased: on the contrary, the manners of adult persons were more strictly
inspected, than those of the youth; and the general censorship was vested in
this very court of Areopagus, of which none could be members, but persons
eminent for their birth, and their virtues; so that it is not to be wondered,
that this court bore, at that time, a character superior to that of all the
other councils of Greece.

It is from ignorance, that they speak, Cont.
who would persuade us, that there is nothing more necessary toward making a
state great and happy, than a body of good laws. The laws, by which our
commonwealth was governed in her most flourishing times, were known to all the
other states of Greece, and they might adopt as many of them, Remon.
as they pleased. But were all the other states of Greece -- was any of them,
upon as advantageous a foot as the Athenian Republic? Instr.
What chiefly tends to the establishment of a state, is, a police found in
habitual modesty, temperance, integrity, valor, and patriotism. The general
prevalence of these dispositions in a people, is not brought about by laws or
sanctions; but by education, example, and a judicious exertion of the
discretionary power, which is, and ought to be, in the hands of magistrates,
whereby they discountenance vice, without directly punishing it, and draw the
subjects into that voluntary rectitude of behavior, which force will never
produce. Cont.
Laws heaped upon laws, and sanctions added to sanctions, show an unruly and
perverse disposition in the people, who would not otherwise require such
various terrors to restrain them. Commend.
The sagacity of governors appears in their showing, that they have the
address to plant their laws in the hearts of a tractable and obedient people.
Instr.
The most tremendous sanctions will be incurred by men of ungovernable
dispositions: but those, whose minds have received from education and good
police, a proper bent, will behave well, though left to themselves. The
business, therefore, is not so much, to find ways of punishing offenders, as to
form the minds of the people so, that they shall have no disposition to offend.

Self-Def.
I hope no Athenian, who hears me this day, will show such malice, as to accuse
me of attempting to promote innovations. Apology.
To advise, that we should return to the institutions of our ancestors, is,
surely, a very different matter from proposing innovations. And to propose the
reestablishment of those arts of government, which we know to have been
judicious, from their producing the most desirable effects, is far enough from
showing a love of novelty. Experience may teach us, Alarm.
if we be disposed to learn, what we have to expect, if we go on in the track
we are now in; Encour.
and what the consequences will be, if we restore the commonwealth to the
condition in which our wise ancestors established and maintained it. Instruct.
Let us attend to the effects which our conduct will have upon those, we are
most concerned with, viz. The other states of Greece, our rivals, and the
Persians our enemies. Repr.
The truth is too notorious to be dissembled: we have, by our misconduct, and
neglect of the public concerns, brought matters to such a pass, that part of
the rival states despise, and part hate us. And, as for the Persian monarch, we
have his sentiments of us in his letters.

I have in perfect sincerity declared to you, Apology.
Athenians, as far as my judgment reaches, the precarious state of the
commonwealth at present; with its causes and cure. Advis.
You will show your wisdom and your patriotism, by taking into your serious
consideration these important objects; and setting yourselves with speed and
diligence to find out, and carry into execution, the most proper and effectual
means of redressing those evils, which, otherwise, Alarm.
will draw after them the most ruinous consequences.

LXXVIII. BLUNT REPROOF. WARNING. OFFERING FRIENDSHIP.
The speech of the Scythian ambassadors to Alexander, who was preparing war
against them.

[Q. Curt. xii.] IF your person were as gigantic as your desires, the world
would not contain you. Respect.
Your right hand would touch the east, and your left the west, at the same
time. You grasp at more than you are equal to. From Europe you reach Asia: from
Asia you lay hold on Europe. And if you should conquer all mankind, you seem
disposed to wage war with woods and snows, with rivers and wild beasts, and to
attempt to subdue nature. Warn.
But have you considered the usual course of things? Have you reflected, that
great trees are many years a growing to their height, Cont.
and are cut down in an hour. It is foolish to think of the fruit only, without
considering the height you have to climb, to come at it. Warning.
Take care lest, while you strive to reach the top, you fall to the ground with
the branches you have laid hold on. The lion, when dead, is devoured by ravens;
and rust consumes the hardness of iron. There is nothing so strong, but it is
in danger from what is weak. It will, therefore, be your wisdom to take care
how you venture beyond your reach. Remon.
Besides, what have you to do with the Scythians, or the Scythians with you? We
have never invaded Macedon: Why should you attack Scythia? We inhabit vast
deserts, and pathless woods, where we do not want to hear of the name of
Alexander. Cour.
We are not disposed to submit to slavery; and we have no ambition to tyrannise
over any nation. That you may understand the genius of the Scythians, we
present you with a yoke of oxen, an arrow, and a goblet. We use these
respectively in our commerce with friends, and with foes. We give to our
friends the corn, which we raise by the labor of our oxen. With the goblet we
join with them in pouring drink offerings to the gods; and with arrows we
attack our enemies. We have conquered those, who have attempted to tyrannise
over us in our own country, and likewise the kings of the Medes and Persians,
when they made unjust war upon us; and we have opened to ourselves a way into
Egypt. Accus.
You pretend to be the punisher of robbers; and are yourself the general robber
of mankind. You have taken Lydia: you have seized Syria: you are master of
Persia: you have subdued the Bactrians; and attacked India. All this will not
satisfy you, unless you lay your greedy and unsatiable hands upon our flocks
and our herds. Remon.
How imprudent is your conduct? You grasp at riches, the possession of which
only increases your avarice. You increase your hunger by what should produce
satiety; so that the more you have, the more you desire. But have you forgotten
how long the conquest of the Bactrians detained you? While you were subduing
them, the Sogdians revolted. Your victories serve no other purpose, than to
find you employment by producing new wars. Instr. Warn.
For the business of every conquest is twofold; to win and to preserve. And
though you may be the greatest of warriors, you must expect that the nations
you conquer, Cour.
will endeavor to shake off the yoke as fast as possible. For what people
chooses to be under foreign dominion? If you will cross the Tanais, you may
travel over Scythia, and observe how extensive a territory we inhabit. But to
conquer us is quite another business. Your army is loaded with the cumbrous
spoils of many nations. Warn.
You will find the poverty of the Scythians, at one time, too nimble for your
pursuit; Threat.
and, at another time, when you think we are fled far enough from you, you will
have us surprise you in your camp. For the Scythians attack with no less vigor
than they fly. Remon.
Why should we put you in mind of the vastness of the country you will have to
conquer? The deserts of Scythia are commonly talked of in Greece; and all the
world knows that our delight is to dwell at large, and not in towns or
plantations. Advice.
It will therefore be your wisdom to keep, with strict attention, what you have
gained. Warn.
Catching at more, you may lose what you have. We have a proverbial saying in
Scythia, "That Fortune has no feet; and is furnished only with hands, to
distribute her capricious favors, and with fins to elude the grasp of those to
whom she has been bountiful.." You give yourself out to be a god, Repr. Cont.
the son of Jupiter Hammon. It suits the character of a god to bestow favors
on mortals, not to deprive them of what they have. But, if you are no god,
Advice. Repr.
reflect on the precarious condition of humanity. You will thus show more
wisdom than by dwelling on those subjects which have puffed up your pride, and
made you forget yourself. You see how little you are likely to gain by
attempting the conquest of Scythia. Offer.
On the other hand, you may, if you please, have in us a valuable alliance.
Friend. Instr.
We command the borders of both Europe and Asia. There is nothing between us
and Bactria but the river Tanais; and our territory extends to Thrace, which,
as we have heard, borders on Macedon. Offer.
If you decline attacking us in a hostile manner, you may have our friendship.
Nations, which have never been at war, are on an equal footing. Warn.
But it is in vain that confidence is reposed in a conquered people. There can
be no sincere friendship between the oppressors and the oppressed. Even in
peace, the latter think themselves entitled to the rights of war against the
former. Offer.
We will, if you think good, enter into a treaty with you, according to our
manner, which is, not by signing, sealing, and taking the gods to witness, as
is the Grecian custom; but by doing actual services. Bluntn.
The Scythians are not used to promise, but to perform without promising. And
they think an appeal to the gods superfluous; for that those who have no regard
for the esteem of men, will not hesitate to offend the gods by perjury. Advice.
You may therefore consider with yourself, whether you had better have a people
of such a character, (and so situated, as to have it in their power either to
serve you, or to annoy you, according as you treat them) for allies, or for
enemies.

LXXIX. OUTCRY. EXAMINATION. SELF-DEFENCE. CHIDING. LAMENTATION. THREATENING.
REFUSAL. RELUCTANT COMPLIANCE.
[See Moliere's L'AVARE.] Scrapely. THIEVES! Robbers! Thieves! Outcry.
Robbers! Thieves! Robbers! Traitors! Murderers! Justice! Help! Lament.
I am robbed! I am ruined! I am dead! I am buried! O my money, my money! My
guineas! My golden guineas! My thousand guineas! My precious treasure! My
comfort! My support! My life! My all is ga^e, plundered, robbed, carried off,
Extra. Distress.
strong-box and all! O that I had never been born! O that the earth would open,
and swallow me up alive! [Throws himself down on the floor. Lies some time, as
stupefied with the fall, then gathers himself up.] Oh! oh! oh! Who has done
this? Who has robbed me? Who has got my money? Where is the thief? the
murderer, the traitor? Where shall I go to find him? Where shall I search?
Where shall I not search? Outcry.
Is he gone this way? [Running to the right.] Is he gone that way? [Running the
contrary way.] Stop thief, stop thief, stop thief! Here is nobody. Are they all
gone out of the house? They have robbed me, and are all gone off. My son, my
daughter, my servants are all concerned; they have conspired together to ruin
me. Listening. Seizing. Lament.
-- Heh! [Listening] What do you say? Is he caught, villain! [Catching
himself.] I have you. -- Alas, I have caught myself, I am going out of my
senses; and that is not to be wondered at. Distress.
-- I will go to a magistrate. I will have every body examined, that ever was
in my house. I will have half the town imprisoned, tried and hanged; and if I
cannot, with all this, recover my money, I will hang myself.


Returns with Justice Nosewell. Just. Nosewell. Affect. Wisdom.
Let me alone. I know what I have to do, I Will warrant you. This is not the first
piece of roguery I have found out. If I had but a purse of ten guineas for
every fellow I have been the hanging of, there are not many of his Majesty's
Justices of the peace, would carry their heads higher. Questioning.
There were, you say, in your strong-box?


Scr. A thousand guineas well told. Lament. Wonder. Weeping.



Nose. A thousand guineas! A large sum!


Scr. A thousand guineas of gold. Hoo, hoo, hoo! [Weeps.]


Nose. Have you any suspicion of any particular person? Questioning.



Scr. Yes, I suspect every body. Lament. Affect. Wisdom.



Nose. Your best way, Sir, will be, to keep very quiet, and not to seem to
suspect any one, till you can lay hold of some proof or presumption, at least.
Then you may proceed to the rigor of the law. [While they are talking without
the door of Scrapely's house, James, the cook, comes out, and speaks with his
face from them, leaving directions with the scullion boy.]


James. You understand me, Jack. Directing.
I shall be back presently. Kill him directly Put him in boiling water. Scrape
him, and hang him up.


Scr. What, the rogue who has robbed me? Anger.
Do hang him, drown him, burn him, slay him alive.


James. I mean a pig, Sir, Submis.
that is come from Mr. Rackum, your honor's worship's steward in the country.


Scr. Pig, me no pigs, Sir. Anger.
I have other things to think of than pigs. -- You may be the rogue for what I
know of. A cook may carry off a strong-box as soon as another man. Entreat.
Examine him, pray, good Mr. Justice Nosewell.


Nose. Don't frighten yourself, friend. Affect. Wisdom.
I am not a man who loves to blaze things abroad.


James. Sir, you honor, I ask your honor's pardon; I am a little hard of
hearing, your honor. Often h^t, and often cold, your honor. Your honor's
worship, sups, this evening with my master's honor's worship, I suppose, and
your honor's worship would, mayhap, like to have a little plate of something
tossed up to your honor's worship's liking, mayhap. Flattery.
If your honor's worship pleases to let me know what your honor's worship
fancies, I will do my best to please your honor's worship.


Nosew. Affect.
No, no, my business with you is quite another matter. F^d, it will be your
wisdom not to conceal any thing from your master. It will be the better for you.


James. Flattery.
Sir, your honor, I assure your honor's worship, I will do my very best to
please your honor's worship, upon my honor. If there be a better way than
another, Desire.
I will use it, as far as I have minterials and ingratitudes. I wish my
master's honor's worship would go to the expense of a few morrels and
truffles, and a little right East India catchup. Flattery. Accus.
There Is your high flavor, your honor. And our niggardly steward, Flattery.
hang him, downright spoils my master's honor's worship. I could engage to
send up as pretty a little collation, Accus.
as your honor's worship could wish to sit down to, if that narrow hearted
soul, Rackum our steward, did not clip my wings with the sciffars of his
niggardliness


Sch. Arguing.
Hold your tongue, you scoundrel. We don't want to hear your nonsense about
eating. Hold your tongue, and answer to the questions, which Justice Nosewell is
going to put to you about the money I have lost, and which I suppose you have
taken.


James. Surprise.
I take your honor's worship's money, Self-Dei.
Sir! Mercy defend me from thinking of such a thing! I did not so much as know
that your honor's worship had lost any money.


Scr. Threaten.
Yes, you rogue, I have lost money, and I Will have you and twenty others hanged
if I don't recover it.


James. Mercy defend me, your honor! Anxiety. Self-Defen.
Why should your honor's worship suspect me of such a thing? Did your honor's
worship ever know me rob your honor's worship of a farthing, or a farthing's
worth?


Nosew. Hold, Mr. Scrapely. Affect. Wisdom. Directing.
There is no need of scolding. My Clerk shall administer to him the oath. Here,
Mr. Longscroll, administer the oath to this man. Not the common oath. No body
minds kissing the book nowadays. Give him the great oath. [Clerk comes
forward.]


Clerk. Fall down on your knees before his worship, and say after me. Affect.
Auth. Auth.
[James kneels before the Justice, in great trepidation.] May the d -- l.


James. May the d -- l. Fear.



Clerk. The great d -- l. Auth.



James. The gre -- e -- e -- at d -- l. Tremb.



Clerk. The great d -- l of d -- ls. Auth.



James. The gre -- e -- e -- at d -- l of d -- ls. Terror. Auth.



Clerk. With his great iron claws.


James. With his gre -- e -- e -- at iron -- Ah! Fright.
Mercy defend me, Entreating.
your noble honor's worship, I am frightened out of my wits! I cannot say any
more of this dreadful oath. I expect the d -- l to came up through the ground
before my very nose in a minute. I Will tell your honor's worship all the whole
truth without the oath, if your honor's worship will but give me a little time
to fetch breath.


Nosew. Rise then, James. Affect. Wisdom.
Don't frighten yourself; but frankly confess the foul fact like an honest
christian. [To Scrapely.] I knew he would not trifle with the great oath. We
shall have a full confession presently.


James. Why then -- why then -- I confess the foul fact frankly, and like an
honest christian, Self-Defen.
that I do not know who has taken my master's worship's money, no more than the
child that was unborn forty years ago, as I am a sinner to be saved for ever
and ever, and amen.


Nosew. Affect.
O that will not do, James. You must kneel down again, Wisdom. Threatening
and take all the whole great oath. And, if you will not give up the truth, my
clerk shall write your mittimus to prison, James.


James. Fright.
O mercy defend me! O your noble honor's worship, have mercy on a poor
harmless criminal, Self-Defen.
that is as innocent of the fact he is convicted of, as your honor's worship,
or your honor's worship's clerk, there where he stands. If I ever do such a
thing again, your worship shall hang me twenty times over. For I am sure I
never touched my master's honor's worship's money, nor any man's money, in all
my born days, in an unfair or unconscionable way, saving your honor's
worship's presence, and my master's honor's worship's presence, and...


Enter Smoothly leading in Mariana, Scrapely's daughter. Smooth. Submission.
Behold, Sir, you son and daughter, present themselves to beg your pardon,
favor, and blessing.


Scr. Anger.
My son (if you be my son) and my daughter may hang themselves. That is all the
blessing I have to bestow on them, or myself. O my dear strong-box! Lament.
Weeping.
O my lost guineas! O poor ruined, beggared old man! Hoo! hoo! hoo! -- [Weeps.]


Smooth. Submission.
Sir, if you please to look upon our union with a favorable eye, no uneasiness
about your strong-box need trouble your repose. It shall be forthcoming
immediately.


Scr. What do you say? My strong-box? Surprise and Joy.
With all that was in it? The thousand guineas? The whole thousand? Shall it be
forthcoming? If you make your words good, you shall eat my daughter, if you
please, and my son too.


James. I told your honor's worship, Self-Defen.
I knew nothing of your honor's worship money.


Scr. Where is my precious, Desire. Joy. Blame with Submission.
precious treasure, my life, my joy, my all?


Mar. Sir, your unreasonable anxiety about money, which appears on the present,
as on many former occasions, in your lamentations about what, to a man of your
fortune, are trifles, has been the cause of constant anxiety to yourself,
Apology.
and all your family, and has forced me upon what I am ashamed of. Great. Esteem.
This worthy gentleman has long had a regard for me, much above my deserving.
He has always declared, that he desired no fortune with me. Blame with
Submission.
Your excessive penuries denied me the decencies of dress suitable to your
daughter. I thought myself entitled to some part of what you can very well
spare. Apology.
I took the liberty of having your strong-box seized, that I might have
wherewith to furnish myself suitably to the daughter of a man of fortune, and
the bride of a man of fortune. Esteem.
His generous heart could not bear the thought of my taking any thing from you,
which you did not choose to give me. He therefore insists upon my delivering
you up the strong-box, Entreating.
if you require it. But I am in hopes, Sir, you will not only grant me the
trifling sum contained in it, but allow me a fortune suitable to your estate,
and to the gentleman's, who is so kind as to marry me without the prospect of
any.


Scr. Where must I have it? Peevishness.
Can I make money? Where is my strong-box? If this gentleman has married you
without a fortune, let him keep you without a fortune. Where is my strong-box?
He cannot say, I ever promised him a fortune with you. Where is my strong-box?


Enter Mr. Sagely. Sage. Demand.
Mr. Scrapely, this gentleman, my nephew, has, in consequence of a long mutual
affection between him and your daughter, married her this day. He has a fortune
sufficient to maintain his lady and family, without any addition by marriage;
and he desires nothing with your daughter. But as it is well known, you can
afford to give her a fortune, I insist upon it, though he is indifferent about
the matter, that you sign this bond, which is ready filled up, for twenty
thousand pound, which is much less than you ought to give with your daughter to
such a son-in-law.


Scr. Affected Surprise. Mist. Threat.
Mr. Sagely! Are you out of your wits? I twenty thousand pound! Where should I
have the tenth part of twenty thousand pound?


Sage. Harkye, Mr. Scrapely, [takes him aside] I know enough of your tricks,
your smuggling, your extortion, and the like (you know I know enough of them)
to hang you. If, therefore, you don't directly sign this bond, I will go and
lay the informations against you before the proper persons: so that before you
be a day older, you may depend on being safe in custody.


Scr. Vexat. Fear. Mist.
[Aside.] O d -- l on him. He has me. I feel the noose under my left ear
already. [To him.] Why, Mr. Sagely, twenty thousand pound is a great sum. How
should I raise twenty thousand pound? I believe I might, with the help of some
friends, raise two thousand; but --


Sage. Threat.
Will you sign and seal directly; or shall I go, and inform directly? I ask you
only this once. [Going.]


Scr. Hold; you are so hasty. Fear. Madness. Vexation. Self-Def.
Let me see the bond. [Aside.] I wish I had you in a private place, and a knife
at your throat; I Would soon spoil your informing. [To him.] I will sign and seal.
But I know not where the money is to come from.


James. Now, Sir, I hope you are satisfied. Complaint.
I am entirely conscious of meddling with your honor's worship money; that I
am a conscionable man, and not such a rogue, a your honor's worship [makes a
long pause] was pleased to take me for you.


LXXX. DISSUASION.
The wise advice of Charidemus, an Athenian exile at the court of Darius, when
he was asked his opinion of the event of the warlike preparations making by
Darius against Alexander.

[ Q. Curt. L. III.] PERHAPS your majesty may not bear the truth from the mouth
of a Grecian and an exile; and if I do not declare it now, Apology.
I never will; perhaps I may never have another opportunity. Your majesty's
numerous army, Warning.
drawn from various nations, and which unpeoples the east, may seem formidable
to the neighboring countries. The gold, the purple, Contempt.
and the splendor of arms, which strike the eyes of beholders, make a show
which surpasses the imagination of all who have not seen it. The Macedonian
army, Alarm.
with which your majesty's forces are going to contend, is, on the contrary,
grim and horrid of aspect, and clad in iron. The irresistible phalanx, is a
body of men, Comm.
who in the field of battle, fear no onset, being practiced to hold together,
man to man, shield to shield, and spear to spear; so that a brazen wall might
as soon be broke through. In advancing, in wheeling to right or left, in
attacking in every exercise of arms, they act as one man. They answer the
slightest sign from the commander, as if his soul animated the whole army.
Every soldier has a knowledge of war sufficient for a general. And this
discipline, by which the Macedonian army is become so formidable, was first
established, ^t.
and has been all along kept up, by a stand contempt of what your majesty's
troops are so vain, I mean of gold and silver. The bare earth serves them for
beds. ^n.
Whatever will satisfy nature, is their luxury. Their repose is always shorter
than the night. Your majesty may, therefore, judge, whether the Thes^^^n,
Acarnanian, and Aetolian cavalry, and the Macedonian Phalanx -- an army, ^tempt
that (...) spite of all opposition, overrun half the world -- are to be
repelled by a multitude (however numerous) armed with slings, and stakes,
hardened at the points by fire. ^e.
To be upon equal terms with Alexander, your majesty ought to have an army
composed of the same sort of troops. And they are no where to be had, but in
the same countries, which produced those conquerors of the world. It is
therefore my opinion, that if your majesty were to apply the gold and silver,
which now so superstuously adorns your men, to the purpose of having and army
from Greece, to to contend with Greeks, you might have some chance for success;
^m.
otherwise I see no reason to expect any thing else, than that you army should
be defeated, as all the others have been, who have encountered the irresistible
Macedonians.

LXXXI. A SERMON. I did not know where to find a single sermon containing a
sufficient variety of species of matter, for exercising, generally, the talents
of a preacher. The reader will perceive, that the discourse in composed with a
direct ^^ew to expression or delivery. And whoever has considered the strain of
the popular addresses of the prophets and apostles, and of the Fathers, and
best French preachers, to say nothing of the orations of Demost^, Cicero, and
the rest, will not, I hope, be offended at a v^oucity of remonstrance, and
description, unusual in our English sermons; which are, otherwise, the best.

THE end of preaching is twofold: Teach.
To instruct mankind in the several truths contained in scripture; and, To
persuade them to live agreeably to the laws of the Christian religion. It is,
therefore, my present purpose, my brethren, to endeavor, with the Divine
assistance, to promote your spiritual and temporal happiness, by desiring your
attention to what shall be spoken to you from the following passage of the
Epistle of the Apostle Paul to Titus, the second chapter, and eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth verses.

"The grace of God, which brings salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world, looking for the blessed
hope, and glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior, Jesus Christ."
We may represent to ourselves the great Apostle of the Gentiles, speaking as
follows: for it is, I think, probable, he meant what follows:

"The favor of God, to which we owe all that we enjoy, or hope for,
particularly our deliverance from Heathen ignorance and immorality, and the
prospect of future rescue from the tyranny of Satan, Acts xxvi. 18.
and from death; Heb. ii. 14, 15.
this divine goodness is, in the Christian revelation, gloriously displayed
before mankind; the new religion being established upon the unquestionable
evidence of miracles, prediction, and its own internal character, and that of
its divine Author, and of its propagators, who are ready to lay down their
lives in attestation of the truth of his resurrection from the dead; Acts i. 3.
of the reality of which they are sure beyond the possibility of mistake, and
cannot be suspected of a design to deceive others, having no worldly temptation
to propagate, but much to conceal, or deny the fact.

"And this heavenly religion gives full satisfaction to the anxious and
inquisitive mind, upon the most interesting subjects; where the light of
nature, and the sagacity of philosophers had left men in great uncertainty, as,
Wherein the chief good of man consists: Who is the only object of worship,
and how he is to be acceptably worshipped: Of the other orders of beings,
inferior to the one indivisible and unoriginated Supreme, but superior to us;
and how we are concerned with them: How evil, and, particularly, death, came
into God's world: Of the future redress of the disorderly state, in which this
world is at present: The will of God, or duty of man, fixed by laws
authoritatively promulgated: -- What will be the effect of repentance and
reformation: How, and when the good, and the wicked are to receive their
respective retributions of reward and punishment: The possibility of rising
from the dead demonstrated by actual resurrections, especially that of Christ
himself: That the whole human species is to be raised from the dead, in bodies,
and that the heathen nations of Elysian fields, and of Tartarus, as well as of
transmigration of some souls into other bodies, without end, and of the
reunion of others to the Deity, are fables and fictions; and that all mankind
are to be judged at one time, and that it is to be done by Christ: That the
retribution for the virtuous is glory, honor, and immortality; and of obdurate
wickedness, final destruction from the presence of God, and the glory of his
power; both sentences irreversible.

"And the new religion inculcates, in the most powerful manner, the necessity
of forsaking the impious superstitions, Aversion.
and vicious abominations, allowed, or not reformed, by the heathen religions,
as the worship of deisied men, and of innumerable imaginary gods and goddesses,
celestial, terrestrial, and infernal, with rites, absurd, obscene and cruel;
the promiscuous, excessive and unnatural indulgence of fleshly lust; the
arbitrary violation of the matrimonial union by causeless separation; the
horrid practices of exposing children; of self-murder; or inflicting arbitrary
revenge, and the like. Romans i.
And this blessed religion does also prohibit, in general, the indulgence of
every wicked disposition (for its authority reaches to the heart) and every
wicked practice; Teaching.
all malice, hatred, envy, injustice, selfishness, pride, covetousness,
intemperance, lasciviousness, anger, revenge, backbiting, lying, craft,
uncharitable zeal, impiety, profane swearing, blasphemy, obscenity, idleress,
sedition, rebellion, and neglect of public and private religion. The Christian
law forbids all unwarrantable pursuit of the three great objects of the
desires of wicked and worldly men, viz. riches, power, and pleasure; and it
requires the faithful and unreserved performance of our whole threefold duty.

"First, That which respects ourselves, the due regulation of every passion,
appetite, and inclination of our nature; and a proper attention to, and careful
cultivation of, all our powers, bodily and mental, so that the wise ends of the
beneficent Giver of them may best be answered, and the least disappointed;
therefore no one can justly pretend to be a sincere proselyte to the new
religion, who does not study to be humble, meek, forgiving, pure in heart,
sincere, diligent in improving his knowledge and virtue, courageous in the
cause of truth, temperate, frugal, industrious, decent, cautious, fearful of
offending, penitent for his weaknesses, heavenly-minded, and richly furnished
with every grace and virtue, flourishing, and growing, and rising to higher and
higher degrees of perfection continually.

"The second head of duty required by the new religion, is, That which
respects our fellow creatures, viz. The conscientious observance of justice,
negative and positive, as to the interests of the body, the soul, the
reputation, and the worldly estate of our neighbor; and over and above mere
justice, a generous disposition to show kindness on every proper occasion, and
in every prudent manner, to all within our reach; and the discharge of every
relative duty according to our respective situations of governors, subjects,
countrymen, parents, children, husbands, wives, masters, servants, and the rest.

"The third head of duty, required by the new religion, is, That which
respects our Creator, viz. Thinking and speaking, Veneration.
and acting in the constant fear, and sense of the universal presence of
Almighty God; with love and gratitude to him for all his goodness to us,
especially for his last and best gift, the Christian religion; worshipping Him
in spirit and truth, both publicly and privately; obedience to all his laws;
acceptance, upon due examination, of the blessed religion of his Son, and
adherence to it in spite of the terrors of persecution, with an unreserved
submission to its heavenly precepts, The gospels, and particularly that by St.
Matthew, in the 5th, 6th, and seventh chapters of which we have the peculiar
laws of christianity summed up, probably, were not at this time, written.
sincerely repenting of, and thoroughly reforming all our faults; with
gratitude to our illustrious Deliverer from Satan, sin, and death, and
observance of his institution for commemorating his sufferings and death.

"And this heavenly religion teaches us to expect the future glorious
appearance of its divine Author, to restore this ruined world, to put an end to
the tyranny of Satan. Rev. xxi.
to abolish death, and to judge the whole human race, both those who shall then
be alive, and also all who have lived in all parts of the earth, from the
creation of man, who shall universally be restored to life, by the same power
which first gave them life; and to reward them according to their respective
characters, to fix the penitent and virtuous, Joy.
in a state of safety and everlasting happiness, and condemn the obdurate to
utter destruction." Horror. Alarm.


This is, in part, the vast and weighty sense of the passage of Scripture, from
which I have chosen to speak to you at this time. And what is there, my
Christian brethren, of consequence to us, with regard either to our peace, of
mind here, or our happiness hereafter, that is not virtually comprehended in
this short passage of three verses? What various matter for consideration is
here suggested? ^ear.
To think of the state we are at present in, and of the task prescribed us, of
which you have heard only the principal heads, which task if we do not labor
to perform, with the fidelity which becomes those, who know, that the
all-piercing eye is upon them, it were better we had never been born -- to
think of this, is it not enough to make us tremble at ourselves? Joy.
-- To consider the prospect we have, and the hope set before us, if we
endeavor, with sincere diligence, to act worthily our part -- is it not enough
to overwhelm us with rapture? Excit.
If we are not stocks and stones, if we have in us either hope or fear, desire
of our own hap^ness, or horror at the thought of misery and ruin; Alarm.
here is what ought to alarm us to the highest pitch. There is not one here
present, whose condition may not hereafter be blissful or calamitous, beyond
imagination. And which of the two it shall be, depends upon every individual
himself. Then surely no man, who thinks for a moment, can imagine, that the
period of our present existence, however transient, is to be trifled with. No
one, who has ever heard of a future appearance of a general Judge, as in the
text, can think it a matter of indifference what life he leads. Hear the voice
of inspiration on this important point: "Be not deceived. God is not to be
mocked. Whatsoever a man sows, that he shall also reap. Gal. vi. 7.
God shall render to every man according to his works; to them, who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honor, immortality, and everlasting
life; but to them who are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul that works wickedness, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; for
there is no respect of persons with God." Romans ii. ^^
-- What can be more awful than this warning! It is not for vain parade, like
the triumphant entry of a conqueror, that the son of man is to come with the
sound of the trumpet, attended with hosts of angels, and armed in flaming fire.
Every one of us is interested in the solemn business of that dreadful pay. It
is, therefore, my Christian brethren, in the sincerity of my heart, Protesta.
and the agony of my soul, Romans ix. 1, 2, 3.
that I stand forth to warn you, in the name of the great and terrible One,
Alarm.
who sits upon the throne of heaven, whose creatures we are, and to whom we
must answ^r, and to declare to you without flattery, without reserve, that
there is no safety, no chance of escape for you, but by a constant and faithful
attention to the performance of every one of the duties I have mentioned to
you, and a fixed aversion against every one of the vices I have pointed out,
and all others. You have the word of God for it. And his word shall stand; he
will do all his pleasure; Isa. xlvi. 10.
and the Judge of the earth will do what is right. Remonst.
Genesis xviii. 29.
Would you have the pre^^ her say smooth things? Would you have him betray the
truth of God? Shall he, like a faithless hireling, John x. 13.
leave his flock unwarned a prey to the Enemy of mankind? Would you have him
heap on his own soul, the damnation of a whole people. Protestation.
Ezekiel. iii. 18, 19.
No, not for the riches on this wide world. By the help of God, I will be
faithful to my trust. Warning.
I will set before you life, and death, the blessing, and the curse. Deuteronomy. xi
26.
It shall appear, in that day, when you and I shall stand before the general
judgment seat, that I have done the duty of my office, and, if you listen not,
those above, who now look on, though to us invisible, shall witness against
you, that you have murdered your own souls.

Alarm.
I would not have you imagine, that it is so easy a matter to secure your own
salvation, as to render care on your part, and apprehension on mine, unnessary.
He, who best knew, has declared, that the way to happiness is strait, and the
gate narrow; that the way to destruction is broad and the gate wide; and that
the number of those who shall reach happiness, will be small, compared with
that of those, who shall go to destruction. Fear.
Matt. vii. 13.
Can I then address you with indifference, when I know that you are in danger?
-- But why should I say you? -- I am myself in danger. Every individual, who
shall come to salvation, will be one escaped from extensive ruin and wreck.

Comfort.
Yet I would not have you think, my Christian brethren, that the charge of your
souls is a burden too grievous to be borne; or your duty, a task impossible to
be performed. Though it is true, that the reward offered, and the punishment
threatened, by the Christian religion, are motives sufficient if we think
aright, to excite in us desires and fears to carry us through any abstinence
from pleasure or any suffering of punishment; though this is true, yet so
little does our kind and merciful Lord deserve the character of a hard
task-master, that all he requires of us -- of us, who enjoy these happy times,
untroubled with the terrors of persecution -- all he requires of us, is -- To
be happy here, and hereafter. Even in the life that now is. 1 Timothy vi. 6.
I appeal to the feelings of every man of common decency in this assembly (for
I hold not the abandoned profligate a judge of what virtue is, or what its
effect,) I appeal to every heart that is not hardened beyond feeling, whether
virtue is not, even in this world, its own reward? And I ask thy conscience, O
sinner, whether vice be not its own tormentor? Can thou say, the imaginary
pleasure, the profit and the honor, which vice bestows, are sufficient to arm
thee against the pang of guilt? Does not its envenomed sting often pierce thee
through that weak, though threefold armor of defense, to the very soul? What,
then, Anguish.
do thou gain by thy fatal attachment, if thou art not by it secured from
suffering? Remonst.
Thou have but one objection, and that, God knows, a wretched one, against a
life of strict virtue; that it may chance to deprive thee of some fancied
pleasures, and subject thee to certain imaginary austerities. Now, if thy
favorite vices were capable of affording thee, at present, a pleasure
untainted, unpoisoned, and of securing thee against all pain; and thou knew,
that virtue is, in the present state, pure misery, thou might pretend thy
scheme of life had the whole advantage against a course of virtue, as far as
this world goes; and for the next, thou might, if thou were desperate
enough, set it at defiance. But thou dare not pretend, Challenging
that vice will yield thee, even in this life, the copious harvest of
substantial happiness which virtue gives. Which of thy lawless pleasures,
affords, on reflection, an untroubled enjoyment? Does the smile of the great,
bought with perjury, light up in thy soul the sunshine of und^sturbed
tranquillity? Does the glittering trash, by unjust means wrested from the
reluctant hand of industry, satisfy the ever-craving thirst of gold? Does
lawless lust indulged, does virgin innocence betrayed, do broken marriage-vows,
yield, on reflection, a continual feast to thy mind? Horror.
In what condition is thy breast from the moment of conceiving wickedness, to
that of its execution? Does the dark conspirator enjoy himself in quiet? Can
happiness dwell with anxiety, tumult, and horror? Will sweet peace take up her
habitation with discordant desires, with warring passions, with fear of
discovery, with apprehension of public shame, and exemplary punishment? Is the
reflection on revenge, gratified by the shedding of blood, Trepidation
a subject of calm enjoyment? Why then, is the murderer afraid to be alone?
What is it, that breaks his slumbers, whilst all nature is at rest? Why does he
start at every noise? What does he see? With what does his sacred imagination
fill the void? Does not the horror of his conscience even raise the murdered
out of the earth again? Whence came the frightful imaginations of charnel
houses opening, and graves casting forth their dead? What is it, but guilt,
that presents the bloody apparition of the mangled innocent, dumb and ghastly
before the eyes of the assassin? We know, that the dead, (excepting a few
raised by miracle) are to sleep till the resurrection. Yet the murderer does
not find himself safe, even when the hapless victim of his cruelty is dust.
Despair.
The pang of remorse proves so intolerable that a violent death is relief. He
flies from his internal tormentor to the more friendly halter or dagger. To
deliver himself from his present ceaseless gnawings, he is content to lose this
blessed light: he throws himself headlong into eternity, and, committing the
crime, which cuts itself off from repentance, seals his own damnation. Such are
the fruits of atrocious wickedness. Do not, therefore, O presumptuous sinner!
Charging.
I charge thee on thy soul, do not pretend, that the ways of vice are ways of
pleasantness, or that her paths are peace. Prove. iii. ^^.
The history of mankind -- thy own feelings -- will give thee the lie.

Did thou but consider, Contempt.
what figure thou make in the eye of the discerning among thy own species,
thou would think of altering thy conduct. Thy wisdom is easily understood to
be at best but low cunning. Sarcasm.
Thy honors are but the applause of fools, dazzled by thy riches, or of
knaves, who flatter thee for what they hope to gull thee of. Thy arts
overreach only the weak, or the unguarded. The eye of experience pierces the
cob-web veil of hypocrisy; Awe.
not to mention a more penetrating eye, which thou art sure thou can not
deceive. But go on, if thou will. Sarcasm.
Take the advantage, while thou can, of thy honest neighbor, who suspects
not thy worthlessness. It will not be long that thou will have it in thy power
to overreach any one. Craft is but for a day. O fool! whom art thou deceiving?
Even thy wretched self. And of what art thou cheating thyself? Of thy
reputation, thy prosperity, and thy peace; to say nothing of thy miserable
soul; which thou art consigning to the enemy of man, for what thou ha^ better a
thousand times be without, if the future consequences were nothing. Remember I
have told thee what thou acquirest by lawless means, whether thou have been
used to dignify it by the name of proj^^, pleasure, or honor; and the
wickedness thou drinkest in with greediness, will either poison thy life, or
else must be disgorged, with the horrible pangs of remorse. Teach.
Where then will be thy gains? I say therefore, were there no state ordained
for us beyond the present, the wisdom of a man would direct his choice to
virtue. To be conscious of that cloudless serenity within, which proceeds from
passions subdued under the superior authority of reason; Joy.
to feast upon that uninterrupted joy, which this vain world can neither give,
nor take away; to bless, and be blessed, to love, and be loved, to be eyes to
the blind, and feet to the lame, Job xxix. 15.
to be a guardian angel to his fellow creatures; to serve Him, whose service is
the glory of those who sit enthroned in heaven, Rev. iv.
to have neither th^^^, nor wish, would not do him honor, if published before
the universe, what sense of dignity, what self-enjoyment must not this
consciousness yield? I tell thee, thoughtless libertine! there is more joy, in
repenting of, and flying from vice, nay, in suffering for virtue, than ever
thou will taste in the cloying draught of swinish impurity, 2 Pet. ii. 22.
What, then, must be the undisturbed fruition of that which makes the happiness
of every superior nature?

Alarm. Rever.
But this life is not all. There is -- there is full surely, another state
abiding us. The soul of man feels itself formed for something greater, than all
that is here below; and it cannot think what is noblest in its nature to be
given in vain. The power of lifting its thought to its Creator; the
unconquerable dread of an account hereafter to be given; the thirst for
immortality (to say nothing of that surest proof given by the Messenger of
Heaven, who showed us, in himself, man actually raised from the grave to
immortality) 1 Cor. xv. 20.
all these confirm that there is a life to come. And if there is -- what is thy
prospect, O remorseless abdurate?

The present state would teach thee if thou would be taught, Remons.
what will be prevalent in the future. Teaching.
The world is now under the moral government of the One Supreme. The life to
come will be under the same direction. Appr.
The present state of things, for the most part, brings on vice the present
punishments of fear, remorse, with worldly shame, and often bitter poverty, and
death, from a constitution shattered, by vice, or from the iron hand of
justice. Joy.
The natural course of this world rewards the virtuous with peace of mind, with
approbation from every worthy character, and generally, with length of days,
prosperity, and affluence. Prove. iii. 16.
What does this conclude? Is it not from hence evident, Arguing.
that when the temporary irregularity of the present state which hinders equal
retribution from being universal, when the influence of the Enemy Mat. xiii. 39.
is at an end, under which this world now groans, Romans viii. ^0 -- 24.
and, when at the appointed time, order shall spring out of confusion; then,
what now appears in part will prevail universally; then virtue will rise
superior; and evil be, for ever, sunk to its proper place.

Rousing Shame.
To a generous mind there is little need of terror. Such are better won to
goodness by the view of its own apparent excellence, which wants only to be
held forth to be perceived; is no sooner perceived, Grief. Rousing Shame.
than admired. But, alas, I sadly fear the generous-minded are but few. For, if
otherwise, how could the number of the wicked be what it is. Every hardened
sinner is one lost to all that is truly great or worthy in the rational nature.
And are there any in this assembly, is there one, fallen to so low an ebb of
sentiment, so stupefied beyond all feeling, as to go on to offend, without
remorse, against the goodness of his heavenly Father? Think, wretched mortal,
that thou art insulting the very power, Softness.
which supports thee in thy insolence against itself. The gentle mercy of the
Almighty, like the fructifying moisture of the spring droppeth on thee from on
high; Rage.
and, instead of producing the fruit of repentance in thee, i^, by thy impiety,
dashed back in the face of Heaven. Remons.
What could thy best friend on earth, what could pitying angels, what could the
Author of all good, do for thee that has not been done? Thy Creator has given
thee reason to distinguish between good and evil; to know what is thy life, and
what will seal thy ruin. He has placed conscience in thy breast, to warn thee
in the momen^ ^y guilt. He has sent down to thee, Ha^, whom he had dearest in
all heaven, to give thee yet ampler instruction in the way to bliss. Mov. Pity.
And the Son condescended to come with the same willingness as the Father sent
him, though with the certain knowledge, that, like a patriot rising in defense
of his country, Reproach.
his coming must cost him his life. The richest blood, that ever flowed, has
been shed for thy worthlessness, and for such as thou art Shame and torture
have been despised for the sake of bringing thee to good. And will thou grudge
to forego a little sordid pleasure, Pity.
to show thyself greateful for all this goodness? Go with me then, to Golgotha,
and insuit thy suffering Savior in his agonies. Behold there a sight, which
the sun would not look upon. Matt. xxvii. 45.
View with dry eyes, what made angels weep. Harden thy heart at an object,
which rent the rocks, Ibid. 53.
and brought the dead out of their graves. Ibid. 53.
His arms stretched on the cursed Gal. iii. 13.
tree, invite thee to bliss. Awe.
Though now feeble and languid, they will quickly raise a world from the grave,
and lay the angel of death full low. I am not describing a fancied scene. The
witnesses of the death and resurrection of Jesus have sealed the truth of what
they saw with their blood. Affir.
Remons.
But can thou find a heart to crucify him afresh, Heb. vi. 6.
by persisting in the crimes, which brought on him this cruel death? If thou
have been so wicked, bethink thee of thy obstinacy. It thou do, even now,
Warning. Encourag.
repent, he has prayed for thee, " Father, forgive them; for they know not what
they do." Luke xxiii. 34.
Behold how deadly pale his sacred countenance! Pity. Weak.
Cruel are the agonies, which rend his tender frame. His strength fails; his
heart breaks; the strong pangs of death are on him. Now he utters his last
solemn words -- "It is finished. John xix. 30.
What is finished? The suffering part, Path. Question. Pity. Joy.
to which his dear love for mankind, exposed him. The rest is victory and
triumph; and the salvation of a world will reward his glorious toil. But what
salvation? Path. Quest. Informing.
Not of the obdurate, with all their vices about them; but of the
heart-bleading penitent, whose streaming sorrows have washed away his impurity,
Pity. Aversion. Comfort.
and who has bid a last farewell to vice, and to every temptation, which leads
to it. To such the blessed gospel which I preach, speaks nothing but peace. For
them it has no terrors. Be of good cheer, then, my disconsolate, brokenhearted
mourner. Though thy sins have been as scarlet, they shall be white as the wool,
which never received the tincture. Isa. i. 18.
They shall be blotted out, as if they were covered with a cloud. Isa. xliv. 22.
They shall no more come into remembrance. Ibid lxv. 17.
For our God is long suffering, and of great mercy, and will abundantly pardon.
Ibid lv. 7.


Beseech.
O suffer then, my unthinking fellow creatures, suffer the word of exhortation.
Heb. xiii. 22.
Every encouragement, every invitation, is on the side of virtue. It has the
promises of this life, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy iv. 8.
Let me beseech you by the superior love of your Maker; by the streaming blood
of the Savior, and by the worth of your immortal souls; to cast off your
ruinous vices, and to return to Him, who is ready to receive the returning
sinner, and never casts him out, who comes to Him. John vi. 37.
Listen! Oh listen to him, who speaks from heaven. It is not the voice of an
enemy. It is your heavenly Father, Awe.
who calls you. Behold! the very Majesty of the universe bends forward from his
throne to invite you. He veils uncreated brightness to allure you to return to
your own happiness. He proclaims himself the "Lord merciful and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness." Exodus xxxiv. 6.
He condescends to assure you with an oath, that he has no pleasure in the
death of him that dies. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
He encourages, Beseeching.
he threatens, he promises, he remonstrates, he laments, he wooes his wretched
creatures, as if his own unchanging happiness depended on theirs. He leaves the
door of mercy open: he gives them space to repent, he does not take them by
surprise. Return -- O yet return to the Father of spirits, my poor deluded
wanderers! Whom have ye forsaken? Pity.
What have you been in pursuit of? Whose conduct have you put yourselves under?
You have forsaken the fountain of your happiness. You have pursued your own
ruin. You have given yourselves up to the guidance of the enemy of souls. But
it is not, even now, too late to retrieve all; Encourag.
all may yet be well, if you will yet be wise. Grief.


Can you shut your ears, and steel your hearts against all that is tender? Are
you determined on your own ruin? Must I then lose my crown of rejoicing? 1 Thessalonians. ii. 19.
Must I be deprived of the joy of our mutual endless congratulations, for our
escape from the hideous wreck of souls? Complain.
Must I reap no fruit of my labor of love? 1 Thessalonians. i. 3.
Shall the blessed message The literal signification of the Greek word: (...)
which our English word Gospel (i. e. Good-book) expresses but weakly.
from heaven prove your death, which was intended to be your life? Alarm.
2 Cor. ii. 16.
If you will not listen to the still small voice, 1 Kings xix. 12.
which now speaks to you from the mercy-seat, the time will quickly come, when
your ears, if they were of rock, will be pierced by the thunder of that voice
which will terrify this great world from the throne of judgment. Think, O
hardened offender, think, the time will quickly come, when, as sure as thou now
hear this awful warning, thou shall hear ( -- it would be thy wisdom to
think thou now hear --) the sound of that trumpet, 1 Cor. xv. 52.
which will startle the silent dust, and break the slumbers, which were begun
before the general flood. Think, that thou beholdest the whole species around
thee, covering the face of the earth beyond the reach of sight. Terror.
Rev. xx. 12.
Think of universal trepidation and amazement, Rev. vi. 14, 15, 16.
to which all the routed armies, the cities sacked, the fleets dashed in
pieces, the countries whelmed by inundation, and the nations swallowed by
earthquakes, which make the terrors of history, are but the diversions of a
stage play. Behold the heavens involved in flame: the brightness of the sun
extinguished by the superior luster of the throne; and the heavens and the
earth ready to fly away from the terrible face of Him, who sits upon it.
Rev. xx. 11.
Imagine thyself called forth; thy life and character displayed before men and
angels. Guilt.
Thy conscience awakened, Ibid. 12.
and all thy offenses full in the eye of thy remembrance. What will then be thy
defense, when thy various uncancelled guilt is charged upon thy soul? No
frivolous shuffle will blind the avenging Judge. Alarm.
The very counsel now rejected by thee against thyself, Luke vii. 30.
if thou had never had another invitation to repentance, will condemn thee;
the very warning given thee this day will be thy undoing.

Horror.
To attempt a description of the terrors hidden under those dreadful words,
"Depart from me ye cursed! into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his angels;" Matt. xxv. 41.
to reach, as it were, over the brink of the bottomless pit, to look down where
ten thousand volcanoes are roaring, and millions of miserable beings tossed
aloft in the fiery whirlwind of the eruption; what employment would this be for
human imagination! But what human imagination can conceive how fearful a thing
it is to fall into the hands of the living God? Fear with Wonder.
Heb. x. 31.
When we see a raging hurricane tear up the rooted oaks, and shake the ancient
hills on which they grow; when we hear of the mountainous ocean dashing with
ease, the strong-jointed ships in pieces, overflowing a continent, and sweeping
whole towns before it; when we see the black thunder-cloud pour down its
cataract of fire; whose burst shivers the massy tower or solid rock; or when we
read of the subterraneous explosions heaving up the ground, shattering
kingdoms, and swallowing nations alive to one destruction; do not such scenes
exhibit to us a tremendous view of power? And whose power is it that works
these terrifying effects? The laws of nature are the living energy of the Lord
of nature. And what are thou, Remons.
wretched warm of earth, to resist such power? Fear.
But what we see at present, is but part of his ways. Joh xxvi. 14.
What the direct exertions of omnipotence against his hardened enemies will
produce; what the condition of those will be, who stand in the full aim of its
fury -- Where is the imagination to be found equal to the conception, or tongue
to the description of such terrors? Appre. Horror. Earn. Depreca.
Yet this may be the situation of some, now known to us. -- O frightful
thought! O horrible image! -- Forbid it, O Father of mercy! If it be possible,
let no creature of thine ever be the object of that wrath, against which the
strength of thy whole creation united would stand but as the moth against the
thunderbolt! Alas, Grief.
it is not the appointment of Him, who would have all saved, that brings
destruction on any one. On the contrary, it is his very grace that brings
salvation. Tit ii. 11. the text.
He has no pleasure in the death of him, who will die. It is the rebellion of
the enemy, and the unconquerable obduracy of those who take part with him, that
has given a being, to the everlasting fire, which otherwise had never had been
kindled. Mat. xxv. 41.


Relief.
But let us withdraw our imagination from this scene, whose horror overcomes
humanity. Let us turn our view to joys, Joy.
of which the supreme joy is, That every one of us, if our own egregious fault
and folly hinder not, may be partaker of them.. Every one of us may, if he
will, gain his portion in that state, which the word of truth holds forth to
the present weakness of human understanding under all the emblems of
magnificence and delight. Delight.
To walk in white robes; Rev. iii. 4. vi. 11. vii. 9, 13, 14.
to eat of the fruit of the tree of life Rev. ii. 7. xxii. 2, 14.
to sit on thrones; Rev. iii. 21.
and to wear crowns; Rev. ii. 10. iii 11. 1 Pet vi. 4. James i. 12. 2 Timothy iv.
8. 1 Cor. ix. 25.
to be clothed with the glory of the firmament of heaven, and of the stars;
Dan. xii. 3.
what do these images present to our understandings, but the promised favor of
the One supreme; the approbation of the general judge; the total purification
of our nature; and an assured establishment in immortal honor and felicity?
This, Rapt.
and much more than eye has seen, or ear heard, or heart conceived, 2 Cor. ii.
9.
is laid up for those who properly receive that saving grace of God, which has
appeared to all men, who study to live soberly, righteously and godly, in this
present world, as those who look for the blessed hope, and future glorious
appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ. Titus ii. 11, 12, 13.


Thus have I (my dear fellow creatures, Ser. Remons.
and fellow christians; my flock, for whose inestimable souls I am to answer to
the great Shepherd) thus have I, in much weakness, but in perfect integrity of
heart, endeavored to excite you, Concern.
and myself, to a more strict attention, than I fear is commonly given, to the
care of all cares, the business of all businesses. I have, Charg.
for this purpose, given you, in an explanatory paraphrase, on the text, an
abridged view of your threefold duty. Warn.
I have fairly warned you of your danger, if you neglect or violate,
habitually, any part of it. I have put you in mind, that it is but too common
to neglect the great salvation, Heb. ii. 3.
whilst with a reasonable diligence, Remons.
and at no greater expense of hardship or suffering, generally with less, than
vice exposes men to, it might be made sure. Arguing.
I have appealed to your own feelings, whether virtue be not the best wisdom,
if there were no future state. I have laid before you some of the arguments for
the reality of a world to come, with a view of the probabilities, from what we
see in the present state, of what will be the immensely different consequences
of virtue and of vice, in the future. I have tried to rouse your sense of
gratitude and of shame. I have set your suffering Savior before your view.
Rous. Sense of Gratitude and Shame. Beseeching.
I have invited you in the name of your heavenly Father to return to him and to
your own happiness. I have entreated you by your regard -- (I hope you are not
altogether without regard) for your weak, but faithful pastor, the servant of
your souls. I have put you in mind of the future appearance of our Savior,
Mod. Alar^
and Judge; and of the sentences of approbation, and condemnation, under one,
or other of which, every human individual will be comprehended, from which
there is no appeal. Grief.
If these considerations be not sufficient to stir up, in your minds, a sense
of danger, and of duty, I know not what more, Pity with Veneration.
I can, at present, do for you, but to retire, from this place of public
instruction, to my closet, and there to pour out my soul for you before the
Father of spirits, that He, who has access to all hearts, may touch your hearts
with such prevailing influence, that the great end of preaching may be gained
with you, in spite of that fatal indifference, and obstinacy, which so often
baffles all human power and art.

Tenderness. Veneration.
I commit the salvation of your precious souls to the great Overseer of souls. 1
Pet. ii. 25.
To Him, as to the Restorer of this ruined world, the Conqueror of Satan, Mat.
xii. 29.
the Abolisher of death, 2 Timothy i. 10.
Light of mankind, John viii. 12. xii. 46.
and the future Judge of the quick and the dead, be ascribed, by every being in
Heaven, and on earth, Rev. v. 13.
blessing and honor, and power, to the glory of God, Phil. ii. 11.
the Father Almighty, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
supreme and unequalled dominion is over all, from everlasting to everlasting.
Amen.

CONCLUSION.
I HOPE the judicious reader will think the labor, I have bestowed in
collecting, and altering, where proper, the foregoing LESSONS, not wholly lost.
Though a greater number of passages might have been put together (which
likewise must have enhanced the bulk and price of the book) I hope it will be
owned, that this collection affords such a competent variety, that whoever can
express, or deliver, properly, all the matter contained in these LESSONS, need
be at no great loss in speaking any kind of matter, that can come in his way.

There are in the LESSONS, several humors, or passions, for expressing which
there are no directions nominally given in the ESSAY: But in the ESSAY there
are directions for expressing the principal humors, or passions, which
commonly occur, and the others are generally referable to them. For example,
there is not in the ESSAY such an article as HYPOCRISY which occurs in the
LESSONS, page 183: but there is AFFECTATION of piety, in the ESSAY, page 30,
which is the same thing under a different name, and so of others, which every
reader's understanding will enable him to trace out with the help of the INDEX.

Masters of places of education, and private tutors, may easily enlarge the
practice of their pupils, on the plan here given, to what extent they please;
this part of education being, like all others, endless. The youth may be
directed to translate from the ancients, especially the orators and then, the
master correcting their translations, and marking the emphatical words with
lines under them, and the various humors, or passions, on the margin, they may
be instructed to commit the substance of them to memory, so as to be able
without having too often recourse to their papers to speak them with ease and
gracefulness, and with propriety as to tone of voice; looks and gesture.

TABLE of the LESSONS.
I. NARRATION. Found. of the Romans commonwealth. Sal. Page 61 II. Narr. Story of
Damon and Pythias. Val. Max. Page 63 III. Narr. Story of Damocles. Cic Tusc.
Quest. Page 64 IV. Narr. Romans Charity. Val. Max. Plin. Page 65 V. Description.
Character of Catiline. Sal. Bell. Catil. Page 67 VI. Arguing. Of moral
certainty. Grace ^f. Page 68 VII. Arguing. Absurdity of Atheism. Cic. Page 70
VIII. Sneer. Receipt to make an epic poem. Swift. Page 72 IX. Remonstrance, and
contempt of pride. Mont. Page 74 X. Horrors of war. Pope's Hom. II. Page 75 XI.
Petitioning with Dejection. Pens. Ing. Page 76 XII. Praise under the appearance
of blame. Ibid. Page 78 XIII. A lovesick shepherd's Complaint. Philips. Page
79 XIV. Remonstrance. Pons. Ing. Page 80 XV. Authority and forbidding. Pope's
Hom. Page 81 XVI. Sublime Description. Spect. Page 83 XVII. Description,
sublime and terrible, Pope's Hom. Page 84 XVIII. Complaint. Pens. Ing. Page 85
XIX. Terrible Description. Philips. Page 86 XX. Ridicule. Tale of a Tub. Page
88 XXI. Exhortation. Pope. Page 91 XXII. Affectation of learning. Swift. Page
93 XXIII. Adoration. Milton. Page 97 XXIV. Peevishness. O^way. Page 99 XXV.
Contempt. Pope. Page 101 XXVI. Clownish Bashfulness. Steel. Page 104 XXVII.
Mournful Description. Dryd. Virg. Page 107 XXVIII. Rusticity. Affectation.
Steel. Page 110 XXIX. Asking. Reproof. Approbation. Pope. Page 113 XXX. Polite
Conversation. Steel. Page 115 XXXI. Serious Meditation. Young. Page 118 XXXII.
Seeming Civility. Spenser. Page 119 XXXIII. Trepidation. Vexation. Shakes. Page
121 XXXIV. Various Characters. Pope. Page 126 XXXV. Reconciliation. Steel.
Page 129 XXXVI. Characters. Pope. Page 134 XXXVII. Anxiety. Resolution.
Addison. Page 136 XXXVIII. Anger. Threatening Milton. Page 138 XXXIX.
Deprecation. Recollection. Ib. Page 139 XL. Vexation. Pertness. Cringing. Pope.
Page 140 XLI. Desperation. Milton. Page 142 XLII. Walking in sleep. Shakesp.
Page 144 XLIII. Entreating. Complaint. Refusal. Pope's Hom. Page 146 XLIV. Low
Humor. Shakes. Page 150 XLV. Chiding. Pope's Hom. Page 155 XLVI. Remorse.
Affection, etc. Steel. Page 156 XLVII. Discontent. Protting, etc. Shakes. Page
16^ XLVIII. Joy. Trouble. Flattery. Fear, etc. Milton. Page 163 XLIX. Ang^.
Transport. Steel. Page 165 L. Reproof. (...) Curt. Page 169 LI. Commanding.
Entreating. Warning. Sal. Page 171 LII. Drun^ess. Shakes. Page 172 LIII.
Vexation. Spiteful Joy. Ib. Page 174 LIVE. Self-Vindication. Reproof. Sal. Page
176 LV. Plotting. Cruelty. Horror. Shakes. Page 180 LVI. Affection, Joy, etc.
Milton. Page 18^ LVII. Intercession. Obstinacy. Cruelty, etc. Shakes. Page 183
LVIII. Conjugal Affection, etc. Pope's Hom. Page 189 LIX. Remorse. Obduracy.
Shakes. Page 193 LX. Reproaching. Exciting to Self-defence. Live. Page 195 LXI.
Doubting. Vexation, etc. Shakes. Page 200 LXII. Eagerness. Chiding. Entreating,
Lucian. Page 202 LXIII. Accusation. Cic. Page 211 LXIV. Terror. Discovery of
Wickedness, Shakes. Page 220 LXV. Exhortation. Reproaching. Demosth. Page 222
LXVI. Surmising. Jealousy. Shakes. Page 228 LXVII. Complaint. Entreating. Sal.
Page 231 LXVIII. Accusation. Pity. Dion Halicarn. Page 236 LXIX. Consultation.
Milton. Page 244 LXX. Fierceness. Desperation. Ib. Page 245 LXXI.
Consideration. Dissuasion. Diffidence. Ib. Page 247 LXXII. Submission.
Complaint. Entreating. Tacit. Page 250 LXXIII. Jealousy. Shakes. Page 252
LXXIV. Craft. Fear. Vexation. Moliere. Page 256 LXXV. Exhortation. Tacit. Page
261 LXXVI. Doubting. Vexation. Pedantry, etc. Moliere, Page 267 LXXVII.
Warning. Blaming. Commendation, etc. Isoer. Page 280 LXXVIII. Blunt Reproof.
Warning. etc. Q. Curt. Page 288 LXXIX. Outcry. Examination. Self-Defence, etc.
Moliere. Page 291 LXXX. Dissuasion. Q. Curt. Page 299 LXXXI. Sermon. Page 301
INDEX OF PASSIONS, or HUMORS, in the ESSAY and LESSONS.
ACCUSATION 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 217, 218, 219, 234, 236, 237, 238, 239,
240, 241, 242, 243, 254, 255, 262, 263, 289, 294. See Blaming. Acquitting 25.
See Approbation. Admiration 29, 83, 84, 97, 98, 102, 103, 127, 133, 142, 158.
See Commendation. Adoration 97. See Praise. Advice 80, 120, 123, 140, 149, 153,
185, 188, 287, 290, 291. See Cautioning, Warning, Alarm. Affectation 30, 111,
112, 135, 151, 152, 180, 203, 206, 207, 208, 268, 273, 274, 275, 292, 293, 294,
295, 296. See Hypocrisy, Formality. Affection 156, 157, 182, 190, 192. See
Love. Tenderness. Affirmation 25, 90, 242, 277, 315. See Positiveness. Agony
196. See Complaint, Distress, Anguish, Trouble. Agreeing 25, 2^0. See Yielding.
Alarm 118, 120, 122, 139, 198, 199, 220, 227, 255, 257, 281, 282, 287, 299,
300, 306, 307, 308, 312, 317, 318, 322. See Fear, Terror, Fright. Amazement
163, 269. See Surprise. Anger 31, 93, 95, 129, 131, 132, 138, 141, 209, 269,
270, 275, 276, 293, 296. See Rage, Peevishness, Fury, Indignation. Anguish 74,
79, 95, 133, 144, 145, 165, 176, 194, 201. 222, 231, 235, 249, 253, 309. See
Distress, Complaint, Agony, Trouble. Answering 184, 186. See Informing,
Teaching, Explaining. Anxiety 95, 96, 116, 122, 135, 136, 137, 146, 158, 174,
176, 177, 194, 200, 228, 254, 257, 267, 275, 295. See Distress, Vexation,
Trouble, Perplexity. Apology 114, 123, 165, 166, 199, 211, 212, 214, 222, 2^6,
250, 251, 252, 254, 256, 260, 266, 267, 271, 280, 286, 287, 297, 299. See
Self-Defence. Applause 152, 186, 187, 188. See Commendation, Praise,
Approbation. Apprehension 85, 115, 117, 136, 137, 147, 151, 154, 158, 164, 166,
170, 182, 191, 192, 194, 201, 204, 20^, 215, 223, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 244,
247, 248, 267, 269, 270, 282, 313, 319. See Fear, Terror, Fright. Approbation
101, 102, 113, 162, 210, 223. See Commendation, Praise, Applause Arguing 26,
68, 70, 71, 103, 179, 180, 246, 247, 248, 249, 282, 313. See Teaching,
Explaining. Asking 111, 112, 257, 269. See Questioning. Astonishment 254, See
Wonder, Surprise, Amazement. Attention 21, 104, 107, 145. See Respect, Esteem.
Authority 25, 81, 95, 132, 151, 152, 183, 185, 244, 295. See Commanding,
Directing, Ordering, Dictating. Aversion 33, 67, 102, 103, 104, 112, 128, 139,
191, 201, 222, 236, 237, 242, 303, 316. See Hatred. Awe 75, 81, 86, 87, 92,
110, 136, 147, 182, 214, 247, 311, 315. See Reverence, Adoration, Respect,
Esteem. Aukwardness 104. See Clownishness, Bashfulness, Bluntness.
BASHFULNESS 104. See Clownishness, Aukwardness, Bluntness. Benevolence 133.
See Love, Kindness. Beseeching 76, 77, 147, 321. See Entreating. Blaming 103,
203, 204, 237, 240, 243, 267, 282, 283, 284, 297. See Chiding, Peevishness.
Blaspheming 143. Bluntness 288, 291. See Bashfulness, Aukwardness,
Clownishness. Boasting 24, 74, 127 153, 205, 206, 207, 208. See Pride,
Affectation. Bombast 151. Buffoonery 20. See Humor, Mirth.
CAUTIONING 94, 105, 153, 222, 230, 234, 254, 281. See Advising, Alarm,
Warning. Challenging 82, 156, 170, 218, 310. See Pride, Boasting, Chiding.
Characters 126. Charging 228, 240, 315, 321. See Accusing, Blaming, Chiding.
Cheerfulness 20. See Mirth, Humor. Chiding, 100, 202, 205, 206 207, 209, 225,
226, 227, 274. See Blaming, Accusing, Reproaching. Clownishness. 112. See
Bashfulness, Aukwardness. Comfort 86, 95, 136, 137, 167, 168, 191, 308, 316.
Commanding 25, 132, 107, 210, See Authority, Ordering, Directing, Dictating.
Commendation 33, 171, 264, 284, 285, 286, 300. See Approbation, Praise,
Admiration. Complaint 32, 79, 80, 85, 105, 190, 201, 202, 221, 131, 232, 234,
244, 250, 251, 263, 275, 279, 317. See Anguish, Agony, Grief. Complaisance 129,
279, 280. See Kindness, Civility. Complimenting 157. See Complaisance.
Compunction 193. See Remorse, Trouble, Guilt, Self-Condemnation. Concern 78,
104, 114, 223, 230, 238, 254, 321. See Anxiety, Grief, Anguish, Distress
Condemning 26, 188. See Chiding, Accusing. Confession 156. See Compunction.
Confidence 64, 209, 245. See Courage, Self-Defence. Confusion 123, 124, 133,
136, 165, 166, 187, 188. See Distress, Complaint, Compunction. Congratulation
78. See Joy. Consideration 162, 247, 268. Consultation 244. See Questioning,
Asking, Contemplation 136. See Consideration. Contempt 70, 74, 82, 86, 87, 91,
92, 93, 101, 102, 103, 104, 127, 138, 155, 160, 161, 162, 177, 178, 179, 180,
196, 203, 205, 206, 207, 215, 225, 226, 227, 230, 245, 249, 265, 266, 268, 269,
270, 285, 286, 288, 290, 299, 300, 311. Contriving 154. See Consultation,
Consideration. Courage 24, 64, 91, 199, 107, 109, 130, 137, 160, 180, 190, 191,
196, 200, 201, 223, 224, 244, 245, 248, 257, 259, 261, 264, 265, 266, 268, 288,
289, 302. See Confidence, Daring. Craft 135, 228, 256. See Fawning, Cringing,
Surmising. Cringing 113, 141. See Craft. Cruelty 32, 176, 183, 184, 186, 187.
Curiosity 29, 105, 136, 186.
DARING 163. See Courage. Death 35, See Fainting. Declamation 66. See
Authority, Ordering. Declaration 186, 228 See Explaining. Declining 212. See
Refusing, Denying. Dejection 76, 77, 92, 115, 186. See Grief, Anxiety, Trouble.
Deliberation 247. See Consideration. Delight 21, 71, 114, 320. See
Satisfaction, Pleasure. Demanding 279. See Insisting. Denying 25, 151. See
Refusing. Deprecation 80, 86, 115, 128, 139, 190, 193, 218, 219, 319, See Awe,
Reverence, Piety, Apprehension, Fear. Description 67, 83, 84, 86, 107, 114,
119, 163, 190. Desire 28, 136, 164, 267, 283, 297. See Love, Delight, Pleasure.
Despair 22, 80, 87, 142, 143, 144, 188, 189, 194, 195, 245, 248, 311. See Fear,
Apprehension, Horier. Desperation or Fury 255. See Anger, Peevishness.
Determining 210. See Insisting, Resolution. Devotion 77, 172. See Reverence,
Awe, Piety. Dictating 88, 96. See Authority, Ordering, Insisting. Differing 25.
Diffidence 247. See Anxiety, Fear, Trouble. Dignity 129. See Esteem, Respect,
Reverence, Awe. Directing 102, 122, 150, 152, 176, 187, 223, 293, 295. See
Authority. Disappointment 174, 188, 205. See Vexation. Disapprobation 78, 81,
166. See Displeasure, Peevishness, Anger. Discontent 160, 161, 162. See
Trouble, Anxiety, Peevishness. Discovering 220, 222. See Horror, Surprise.
Dismissing 26, 141. See Approbation, Displeasure. Displeasure 130, 147, 169.
See Anger, Peevishness. Disputing 270. Distraction 35. See Rage, Fury, Frenzy.
Distress 100, 160, 166, 167, 189, 233, 239, 244, 280, 292. See Anguish, Grief,
Vexation. Dissuasion 249, 299. Dotage 34. See Weakness. Doubting 64, 152, 153,
181, 187, 200, 210, 223, 228, 267. See Anxiety, Vexation. Dread 233. See Fear,
Terror, Fright, Trembling. Drunkenness 172.
EAGERNESS 127, 202. See Desire. Earnestness 92, 94, 106, 112, 134, 135, 220,
224, 229, 259, 319. See Desire. Encouraging 145, 152, 153, 223, 224, 249, 259,
260, 261, 287, 315, 317. See Approbation. Enquiry 21, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154,
155, 164, 166, 168, 269, 271, 272. See Question. Envy 32. See Aversion, Malice,
Hatred. Esteem 92, 297. See Respect. Examination 291. See Question, Enquiry.
Exciting 91, 92, 105, 114, 123, 160, 161, 166, 171, 195, 200, 202, 214, 219,
222, 223, 233, 306, 321. See Courage, Honor. Exclamation 139. See Outcry.
Excusing 141. Execration 90, 100, 175. See Hatred, Aversion Anger, Rage.
Exhorting 25, 91, 154, 222, 261. See Advice. Expiring 128. See Weakness,
Fainting, Death. Explaining 176, 231, 254, 278. See Teaching, Instruct.
Exprobation 147. See Reproaching. FAINTING 35. See Weakness, Expiring, Death.
Fatigue 32, 251. See Weakness. Fawning 208, 229. See Flattery. Fear 23, 65, 74,
76, 96, 111, 120, 122, 236, 146, 160, 163, 164, 182, 190, 201, 256, 257, 2^8,
295, 298, 308, 319. See Dread. Fierceness 245, 246. Firmness 130, 131, 137.
Flattery 163, 164, 294. See Fawning. Folly 34. Foppery 127, 207. See
Affectation, Pertness. Forbidding 25, 81, 185, 187, 188. See Displeasure.
Forgiving 133. Formality 127. See Affectation. Frenzy 168. Fright 295, 296. See
Fear, Terror, Dread. Fury 247, 254. See Anger, Rage.
GIVING 29, 90, 188. See Granting. Granting 27, 189, 243. See Giving. Gratitude
133, 140, 159, 167, 178, 182, 250, 251, 255, 297. See Esteem, Respect. Gravity
21. See Seriousness. Grief 22, 92, 94, 107, 108, 110, 128, 192, 232, 234, 255,
314, 317, 319, 321. See Anxiety, Anguish, Vexation. Guilt 145, 181, 194, 318.
See Remorse, Horror, Compunction. Trouble, Self-Condemnation, Obduracy.
HASTE 123, 124, 189, 257, 279. See Trepidation, Hurry. Hatred 142, 149. See
Aversion. Honor 198. See Exciting. Hope 28, 132, 172, 194, 195, 223, 227, 233.
See Pleasure, Joy, Satisfaction. Horror 67, 75, 87, 107, 108, 110, 133, 142,
145, 180, 230, 233, 234, 235, 248, 255, 262, 263, 306, 310, 318, 319. See
Agony, Fright, Anguish. Humility 116, 176. See Modesty, Submission. Humor, 93,
150. See Mirth. Hurry 65, 123. See Haste, Trepidation. Hypocrisy 183, 186, 208.
See Affectation, Formality.
JEALOUSY 33, 131, 228, 231, 252, See Agony, Love, Hatred, Horror, Complaint,
Rage. Imagination 165, 166. See Wonder. Impatience 209, 274. See Vexation,
Peevishness, Anger. Inculcating 171, 172. See Teaching, Insisting. Indifference
110, 111, 112, 113, 115, 128, 231, 275. See Tranquillity. Indignation 226, 228,
263. See Anger. Informing 101, 105, 110, 114, 125, 150, 214, 315. See Teaching,
Explaining, Instruction. Insinuation 228, 260. See Fawning, Flattery. Insisting
203, 204, 214. See Positiveness, Authority, Ordering, Commanding. Instruction
280, 281, 283, 284, 286, 287, 289. See Teaching, Authority, Explaining. Insult
149, 192. See Anger, Pride. Intercession 183, 186, 193, 196. See Kindness,
Love, Pity. Intoxication 31. See Drunkenness. Entreating 8^, 94, 133, 146, 158,
159, 171, 185, 191, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 211, 228, 233, 234, 237,
239, 250, 252, 257, 258, 259, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 293, 295, 297. See
Distress, Love, Kindness. Inviting 89, 121, 164, 210, 280. See Kindness. Joy
21, 105, 116, 132, 156, 159, 163, 164, 165, 168, 176, 183, 252, 274, 280, 297,
306, 312, 313, 315, 320. See Pleasure. Irritating 130, 131. See Anger,
Reproaching, Accusing. Judging 25.
KINDNESS 196, 210. See Inviting, Affection.
LAMENTATION 79, 167, 168, 190, 219, 233, 235, 291, 292, 293, 296. See Grief,
Auguish, Distress, Agony. Listening 144, 161, 182. See Seriousness, Esteem,
Gravity, Anxiety. Love 28, 159, 163, 254. See Tenderness, Affection.
MAJESTY 244. See Esteem. Respect. Malice 32, 144, 184, 247, 252. See Hatred,
Aversion, Spiteful, joy. Meditation 118. See Seriousness, Attention, Anxiety.
Meekness 201. See Submission, Modesty. Melancholy 22. See Grief, Anxiety,
Concern, Vexation, Distress. Mirth 20, 238. See Humor. Mock-praise 126. See
Contempt. Modesty 21. See Submission, Humility.
NARRATION 61, 63, 64, 65, 67, 81, 86, 134, 135, 139, 155, 160, 161, 163, 175,
176, 189, 192, 237, 238, 240, 242, 254. See Explaining, Teaching, Instruction.
Neglect 102. See Contempt.
OBDURACY 143, 144, 193, 194. See Guilt. Obsequiousness 96. See Submission,
Humility, Modesty. Obstinacy 25, 183, 184. See Obduracy. Offense 111, 130, 140,
141, 165. See Anger. Offering 290, 291. See Giving, Granting. Ordering 124 See
Authority, Commanding, Insisting. Ostentation 270. See Pride, Affectation.
Outcry 291, 292. See Exclamation.
PARDONING 26 See Granting. Passing Sentence 186, 187. Peevishness 32, 89, 94,
96, 99, 127, 297. See Anger, Vexation Perplexity 21, 75. See Anxiety, Concern.
Persuasion 30, 167. See Advice. Pertness 140. See Foppery. Perturbation 253,
254. See Trouble, Anxiety, Fear, Trepidation. Petitioning 76. See Entreating.
Piety 130, 135, 183. See Adoration, Reverence. Pity 22, 66, 107, 108, 111, 150,
166, 168, 183, 192, 209, 211, 213, 217, 218, 219, 236, 237, 238, 240, 243, 314,
315, 316, 317, 321. See Sympathy. Pleading 183. See Entreating. Pleasure 164,
185. See Joy. Plotting 106, 160, 162, 180, 252, 255. See Anxiety. Politeness
115. See Civility. Pomp 86. See Majesty. Positiveness 270. See Insisting.
Praise 78, 97, 98, 158, 166. See Piety, Approbation, Commendation. Praying 129.
See Entreating, Intercession. Pressing 278. See Entreating, Insisting. Pride
24, 93, 95, 127, 134, 135, 137, 138, 142, 143, 160, 170, 179, 204, 251, 268,
269, 270, 272, 281. See Contempt. Promising 30, 177, 203, 211. See Kindness.
Protesting 159, 258, 307. See Affirming.
QUESTION 64, 74, 83, 89, 93, 94, 101, 104, 105, 106, 109, 110, 111, 117, 122,
125, 138, 139, 160, 174, 175, 179, 184, 185, 186, 188, 189, 204, 205, 206, 221,
228, 229, 230, 255, 256, 292, 315. See Enquiry.
RAGE 131, 143, 245, 253, 254. See Anger. Raillery 20. See Humor, Sarcasm.
Rant 152, 161. See Bombast. Rapture 160, 166, 169, 320. See Piety, Joy, Love
Transport. Recollection 89, 128, 132, 139, 166, 168, 225. 246, 254, 259, 267.
See Seriousness, Consideration, Reflection. Reconciliation 90, 129. See
Kindness. Reflection 142, 200. See Consideration, Remembrance. Refusing 26,
146, 148, 188, 202, 203, 204, 205, 230, 260, 278, 279, 291. See Anger,
Peevishness. Regret 142, 161, 198, 199, 224, 226, 232, 264, 265. See Grief,
Concern. Relief 320. See Joy. Reluctance 226, 230, 254, 259, 280, 291. See
Aversion, Hatred, Anger, Refusing. Remonstrance 74, 76, 77, 79, 80, 99, 100,
101, 132, 170, 172, 196, 197, 198, 199, 218, 227, 239, 249, 251, 258, 264, 286,
288, 289, 290, 307, 309, 313, 314, 315, 319, 321. See Arguing. Remorse 24, 77,
133, 156, 158, 193. See Guilt. Remembrance 163. See Reflection. Reproaching
100, 123, 130, 160, 195, 197, 222, 314. See Chiding. Reproving 25, 90, 113,
114, 122, 130, 139, 155, 169 176, 179, 184, 187, 199, 223, 224, 225, 226, 228,
253, 269, 287, 288, 290. See Chiding, Blaming, Peevishness, Displeasure,
Resolution 77, 136, 138, 148, 149, 156, 158, 164, 205. See Firmness. Respect
103, 107, 110, 115, 116, 117, 178, 276, 277, 278, 279, See Esteem, Reverence.
Revenge 32. See Anger, Rage, Fury. Reverence 185, 224, 312. See Respect,
Esteem. Ridicule 88. See Contempt, Humor, Mirth. Rusticity 110. See
Bashfulness, Clownishness, Aukwardness.
SARCASM 131, 227, 311. See Reproaching. Satisfaction 136, 137, 270, 272. See
Tranquillity, Joy, Pleasure, Approbation. Seizing 274. See Anger.
Self-Condemnation 124, 133, 142, 143, 167, 254. See Remorse, Guilt.
Self-Defence 100, 130, 148, 153, 154, 176, 177, 180, 207, 209, 212, 286, 295,
296, 297, 299. See Apology. Self-Denial 157, 159. See Modesty. Sense of Injury
254. See Offense, Complaint, Vexation. Seriousness 118, 130, 156, 182, 185. See
Attention, Concern. Shame 23, 133, 157, 158, 197, 225, 227, 314, 321. Shock
239. Shuddering 259. Sickness 32, 128, 161. Sincerity 199. Sloth 31. Smartness
151, 152. Smoothness 127. Sneaking 127, 188. Sneer 72, 95, 101, 126, 148, 176,
197, 203. Softness 314. Solicitation 77, 228. Soothing 253, 255. Spiteful Joy
175, 176. Starting 158, 180, 220. Sternness 147. Stiffness 276. Strutting 127.
See Pride, Affectation, Formality. Submission 77, 86, 89, 90, 199, 132, 146,
154, 156, 157, 183, 203, 222, 232, 233, 234, 236, 237, 243, 250, 293, 296, 297.
See Humility, Modesty. Suffering 103. See Complaint. Sullenness 132. See
Peevishness. Surmising 228, 229. See Craft. Surprise 89, 90, 111, 123, 125,
132, 139, 140, 253, 254, 256, 274, 277, 294. See Wonder, Astonishment,
Amazement. Suspicion 145, 229, 258. See Doubting, Anxiety. Sympathy 146, 231.
See Pity.
TEACHING 26, 72, 88, 91, 92, 94, 101, 104, 127, 151, 172, 188, 213, 301, 303.
See Explaining, Instruction, Inculcating. Tempting 30, 164. See Fawning,
Wheedling. Tenderness 159, 183, 184, 192, 263, 322. See Love. Terror 84, 147,
194, 220, 248, 294, 318. See Fear, Dread, Fright, Trembling. Thirst of Blood
186, 187. See Cruelty. Thoughtfulness 201. See Anxiety, Concern. Threatening
82, 90, 120, 138, 141, 156, 183, 187, 189, 202, 206, 210, 231, 253, 276, 290,
294, 296, 298. See Anger, Rage, Offense. Tranquillity 20. Transport 159, 165.
See Rapture. Trembling 220, 257, 258, 295. See Fear. Trepidation 65, 75, 84,
87, 91, 109, 121, 123, 128, 132, 158, 310. See Haste, Anxiety, Concern,
Trouble, Triumph 137, 187, 189, 280. See Joy, Pride. Trouble 163. See Distress.
Trouble of Conscience 144. See Remorse.
VENERATION 27, 83, 92, 97, 137, 305, 322. See Praise, Adoration, Pity.
Vexation 22, 85, 95, 105, 106, 121, 124, 125, 134, 139, 140, 141, 155, 174,
195, 196, 200, 201, 204, 205, 211, 253, 254, 256, 259, 260, 261, 267, 271, 272,
273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 298. See Concern, Anxiety, Trouble. Vindication 166.
See Self-Defence, Kindness. -- of an Enemy 142.
WALKING in sleep 31, 144. Warning 93, 108, 122, 147, 156, 171, 172, 261, 262,
263, 280, 288, 289, 290, 291, 299, 308, 315, 321. See Alarm. Weakness 128, 315.
See Fainting. Weeping 128, 293, 296. See Grief. Welcoming 184. See Kindness.
Wheedling 1^1, 163, 208. See Flattery. Whispering 208. See Anxiety. Wonder 25,
66, 70, 71, 78, 89, 91, 93, 94, 104, 105, 110, 111, 113, 114, 125, 145, 157,
161, 162, 164, 166, 181, 241, 242, 257, 268, 271, 274, 293, 319. See Surprise,
Admiration, Astonishment.
YIELDING 187. See Agreeing.
THE END

