Mr. BROWN'S SERMON, ON PRIVATE EDUCATION.

The IMPORTANCE of the early and proper EDUCATION of CHILDREN, both as it
respects themselves and mankind in general, -- CONSIDERED IN A SERMON, PREACHED
AT WAREHAM, (MASSACHUSETTS) MARCH 31st, 1795.

BY CLARK BROWN, A LICENSED CANDIDATE PREACHER.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE.

"And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up."

DEUTERONOMY, Chap. 6. verse 7. PRINTED AT NEW BEDFORD, MASSACHUSETTS, BY JOHN
SPOONER, -- M.DCC.XCV. --

Advertisement.
THE following SERMON, was delivered in the Meeting House, previous to the
exhibiting of a number of SINGLE SPEECHES, DIALOGUES and SCENES, on various
Subjects, by a number of YOUNG GENTLEMEN and LADIES of the Town of WAREHAM;
who, for several months, had attended on the AUTHOR'S INSTRUCTIONS; and, at
their particular request, is made public. As a TOKEN of RESPECT for their
POLITENESS, and PROFICIENCY in their STUDIES, it is now DEDICATED, to THEM, by

Their SINCERE FRIEND, and WELL-WISHER, THE AUTHOR.
WAREHAM, April 30, 1795.
A SERMON, etc.
PROVERBS, xxii. 6. TRAIN UP A CHILD IN THE WAY HE SHOULD GO: AND WHEN HE IS
OLD HE WILL NOT DEPART FROM IT.


MANY wise and excellent proverbs have been established, by men of the most
eminent worth and value, as useful and important. Among which, not any have a
more just claim to preeminence, than those of the wise and learned King of
Israel. Perhaps not one, among the great variety to be found in his writings,
is more useful and excellent, than that which we have chosen for the theme of
our discourse.

THIS, above all others, is verified in most instances. It cannot be reasonably
expected, that it should be strictly confirmed in every particular instance; as
there are but very few, if any, rules, proverbs or maxims, but what admit of
some few exceptions. In most of the instances where this proverb, contained in
the text, is thought not to prove strictly true, yet if they should be
carefully examined, there would be found some defect in not having strictly
attended to the proverb, rather than in the proverb itself, We may, therefore,
safely receive this proverb, as one of the most general, useful and important
proverbs or maxims, any where known, either verbally among mankind, or upon
record.

"TRAIN up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not
depart from it."

As this proverb is so generally verified, so useful and important, a strict
attention to the exhortation contained in it, which is, "Train up a child in
the way he should go," is of the highest moment: for in so doing, the happy
consequence, will, according to the proverb, naturally follow, which is, "And
when he is old he will not depart from it."

FROM the Exordium, the question which will afford matter for the sequel of the
discourse, naturally arises, How or in what manner are CHILDREN to be trained
up? Both reason and revelation, are ready to give an answer.

REASON answers, Train up CHILDREN in that way, in which they will make
valuable members of a community; and in that way also, which will secure to
them, joy, peace and happiness of mind as long as they continue to exist.
REVELATION is ready to aid and confirm the voice of REASON, by saying, " And ye
fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the LORD."

IF CHILDREN, according to the passage now cited, are trained up in the nurture
and admonition of the LORD, they will become useful ORNAMENTS of society, happy
in their own minds, and will, beyond the short span of human life, be
completely happy in the enjoyment of their CREATOR.

THIS, in various places in the sacred oracles, is evidently confirmed. Those
that are trained up in the way of true christian virtue, will be adopted as the
true children of God, such being chosen through Christ, as heirs of a joyful
immortality. Unto such, the Gospel assures us, all things, which God in his
consummate wisdom and goodness, sees will best tend to advance their
everlasting peace, joy and happiness, shall be abundantly added.

THIS is the language of the GOSPEL, " Seek ye first the kingdom of GOD, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall he added unto you."

THAT this most happy consequence, resulting from training up children in the
way they should go, might take place, they must, while buding to bloom in
youth, be properly educated.

THE education of children, is an interesting concern, to all those that are
possessed of sentiments of love and compassion for them; as also to all such as
have any regard for the well being of mankind, especially of the inhabitants of
the community, to which they belong.

THE peace and happiness of children in the future periods of their existence,
and likewise of their place of residence, as also of mankind in general,
eminently depend upon their being rightly educated.

IF their education should be neglected, they will step forth upon the stage of
action, ignorant, rude and barbarous, unfit rightly to serve and worship their
CREATOR; and likewise unqualified for the company of the polished and well
informed part of mankind.

SHOULD, therefore, the education of children become generally neglected,
superstition, misery and destruction, would inevitably be the awful
consequences. Intellectual pleasures, or those of a mind refined by celestial
virtue, and illuminated by the emanating rays of divine love, could then never
be experienced in all their purifying and pleasurable effects. But few other
joys and pleasures, would be known, but those which are sensual, proceeding
from hearts defiled, like contaminated streams, issuing from impure fountains.
Victory and triumph, would consist, as they now do among the savages of the
wilderness; while the honor of obtaining a victory over there own passions would
be unknown, and the joys of a happy triumph over the powers of darkness never
possess their hearts. Their virtue and morality, would be none other, than that
which was conformable, however ridiculous, to the place in which they had been
trained up. Such are the deplorable consequences of ignorance, every one will
readily acknowledge, who has but superficially examined the history of mankind;
and but with indifference, surveyed the great variety of practices and customs
of some of the many states, kingdoms and nations of the earth. By such, it will
be acknowledged, that those actions or practices, which, in some places among
the ignorant and unpolished, are esteemed as virtuous and honorable, are indeed
ridiculous and impious; and which, among the truly virtuous and well informed,
would be thus esteemed. According, therefore, as children are educated, will be
their notions, ideas and practices, when they shall have come forth upon the
theater of time. Truly is the proverb contained in the text, verified, --
"Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not
depart from it."

BY contrasting ignorance with knowledge, it will still be thought to have a
more glaring and odious appearance. Innumerable are the happy consequences
resulting from a general diffusion of useful knowledge.

THOSE that have early had their minds refined by a good education, can rise,
upon the wings of science, far above the sordid pleasures of the ignorant and
unpolished. With their aspiring minds, they can soar on high, even from earth
to heaven, and from pole to pole, contemplating with exquisite delight, the
majestic works of creation and the beauties of nature, which, with pleasing
astonishment, every where strike the enlightened mind.

LEARNING not only capacitates the mind for scanning with pleasure the works
and beauties of creation: but renders it a fit recipient and a proper
repository of consistent ideas of God, the great Creator and Upholder of all
things.

THOSE minds, which remain deformed by ignorance, have very inconsistent ideas
of God, his perfections natural and moral, and of his dealings with his
intelligent creatures. To the truth of this assertion, both history and our own
observations, will bear testimony.

KNOWLEDGE obtained from useful learning, imprints on the mind many important
ideas; prepares, if rightly improved, those, whose minds are thus expanded, to
act their parts right and well in the world; and to them, points out the way,
that leads to the happy abodes of the blessed, where fountains of knowledge,
springs of peace, rivers of pleasure and streams of joy, in one incessant
prospect for ever rise, making glad the hearts of the myriads of its elysian
inhabitants. It is knowledge, which teaches us to assert the sovereignty of our
nature; and to assume that dignity in the scale of being, for which we were
created.

THOUSANDS of utilities, elegancies, joys and pleasures, owe their birth and
being to it, without which, existence itself would be but an insipid enjoyment.

SUCH are the happy consequences, privileges and advantages; which wholly
depend upon the right education of children.

THE real worth or superiority of mankind, above the beasts of the forest,
appear only, by rightly cultivating, replenishing and polishing their minds,
with knowledge received from learning's source.

LEARNING or education, does for the mind, the same that the polishing hand of
the artist that works on rich and precious GEMS, does to ONE taken from the
earth, as it there laid in its hidden recesses.

THE mind originally, as in children upon their entrance into the world, is
destitute of all ideas, excepting such as they immediately receive from
sensation.

THE mind or understanding, seems not to have any original ideas imprinted on
it, but appears rather to be destitute of the least glimmering of all innate
knowledge.

"A CAREFUL examination of the minds of young children, says a learned and
ingenious Writer, will sufficiently convince us, that they bring not many
original ideas into the world with them."

IF there were any original ideas in the mind, which in its first being it
receives, those ideas most certainly would be universally known, and
acknowledged by all mankind as incontestible truths; which we sufficiently know
has never been the case, even with respect to the most self evident
propositions and necessary existences.

THIS, therefore, is sufficient to convince us, that the mind originally is
similar to white paper, being void of all innate characters.

AS God has neither made nor done any thing in vain, it would be impertinent to
suppose that the mind had any ideas or characters engraven on it in its first
existence: for as we are endowed with such noble powers and faculties by which
we are capacitated, to obtain all the ideas necessary for us to have, to
suppose this, would be to suppose a superfluous operation of the divine agency.

IT is therefore, only by improvement, and that by degrees, that the mind comes
to be stored with any fund of useful knowledge. At first, the senses let into
the mind, particular ideas, called the ideas of sensation. After which, the
mind, begins to exercise its own powers, by abstracting and compounding the
ideas it received from sensation; and by a certain progression, learns for each
of its ideas both simple and complex, particular and general names with their
use and design. The ideas received from the perception of the operations of the
mind, are the ideas of reflection; which operations are the source, from which
proceeds all our useful knowledge, respecting virtue and morality, in which is
included our duty both toward God and man, as well as our joy, peace and
happiness. This is the way or manner, in which the mind is furnished with ideas
and the use of language; and by which it is enabled to exercise its discursive
faculties. It, therefore, eminently depends upon the right education of
children, respecting their future prosperity, knowledge and usefulness in the
world. It is education, which raises one above another in real worth and merit.

THE divine portion of genius is diffused among the rich and the poor, the high
and the low; and requires only the polishing hand of education, to make it
shine in each with distinguished luster.

THE great disparity among mankind, arises not so much from the want of gifts,
as from the want of a proper education. Among crowds of the untutored, real
evidences of a bright genius, may often plainly be discovered. Many of those,
who traverse America's deserts, to whom no other joys and pleasures are known,
"but the chase and the pipe" -- have as great if not greater natural abilities,
than those, who among the civilized, fill distinguished stations of usefulness
and honor.

"MAN, by nature, says ONE, is like a piece of marble just taken from the
quarry; and it is education which gives the use, the form and the polish."

MANY of those, who have been raised to dignified stations of honor and
usefulness, have been taken from the most humble situations in the world, and
advanced to them, by means of their education with great dignity and
reputation. A striking instance of this, we have in the life of MOSES. Reflect
a moment, -- "How great the contrast between Moses in the marshy weeds," and
MOSES the Commander of the people and armies of the GOD of hosts! Behold him at
one time in an Ark of bulrushes, floating upon the river Nile; and at another
as a most noble Commander under the supreme KING of kings, standing upon the
banks of the Red Sea, safely conducting the chosen of the Lord, through the
paths of the watery element! Whence, therefore, may the question be justly
asked, was this strange surprising reverse of fortune? Was it wholly owing to
his being taken from the Ark of bulrushes, upon the banks of a dangerous river?
No! For notwithstanding he was thus saved from the very jaws of death; yet his
eminence and worth, are to be attributed to some greater CAUSE. It was his
education, under the superintending providence of God, which prepared him to be
such a pattern of meekness; such a blessing to the chosen of the Lord; and to
commence the performer of such a scene of wonders, as "must astonish the world
to the latest ages." Had it not been for his education, his genius and latent
seeds of meekness and virtue, together with his great usefulness to generations
gone, to the present and to those that are yet to come, would, like a lump of
unwrought gold, never have appeared according to their true value; but would
have been concealed by the impenetrable shades of ignorance.

PHARAOH'S daughter is worthy of a high eulogium, for her kind assistance to
Moses, a poor forsaken child; for snatching him from a watery grave; and for
what is yet greater, providing him with the means of education. "As soon as his
age and capacity would admit, says a celebrated DIVINE, he was sent to school,
where under the most improved instructors, he made uncommon proficiency in his
studies." " He was learned, says an inspired WRITER, in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds."

BY educating this child, O Called so by Josephus.
Thermutis! thou did perform great service to mankind; and did heap upon
thyself exalted encomlums. This benevolent act, gave thee more joy, than all
the gay pleasures of a splendid life; added more charms to thy person than
sparkling eyes, blushing cheeks, and curling trusses.

THE supreme glory, shall be ascribed to God, while blooming flowers shall be
scattered in the paths, in which, O Thermutis! thou walk with thy maidens
down to the River, from which thou did draw Moses, the son of a slave.

SINCE such wondrous acts are performed, and such great good accrues to
mankind, by the means of education, it is of the utmost importance to cultivate
by learning, those latent sparks of genius in the minds of children, that they
may be rightly employed for their own advantage, and for the benefit of society.

THE more that true knowledge is diffused, the more will true peace and
happiness be enjoyed; the more safe will be the rights and liberties of each
individual; and the more likely will be the holy religion of the blessed
Redeemer to prevail and flourish.

A GENERAL diffusion of useful knowledge, will have a happy tendency to make
the inhabitants of the world, as are the citizens of America enlightened and
free; to prevent the ambitious and designing from usurping either political or
ecclesiastical tyranny; and to qualify a people to be happy subjects and
virtuous rulers.

"TYRANNY, bigotry and superstition, says ONE, are supported only by gloomy
ignorance." "These, whenever the divine ray of knowledge shall illume the
benighted parts of the earth, will flee, like Satan," "with the shades of the
night."

IN this Country, where liberty is the basis of its government, where birth and
riches give no preeminence; "and where merit alone has the surest claim" to
distinction, there are but very few, who may not be so trained up or educated,
as to be qualified to fill with reputation the highest places of honor and
trust; or at the least, to make honest, useful and peaceable citizens. If
therefore, CHILDREN are trained up in the way they should go, when they shall
have arisen to years of maturity, they will not depart from it; but in it with
pleasure will delight to walk.

IMPROVEMENT.
FROM what has been said upon this subject, we may infer, that it is the
indispensible duty of parents, to rightly train up or educate their children in
that way, in which they should go when they are old.

AS children come into the world destitute of ideas, as we have shown, they
ought early to be furnished with the means of education, that their young and
tender minds, which can easily be molded into any form, might be replenished
with suitable and necessary knowledge. It is, therefore, dangerous to defer the
education of children till they shall have imbibed certain sentiments, notions
and ideas, which, however ridiculous and absurd, they will never renounce.

MANY parents really injure their children by not giving them a proper
education for the calling, in which it is probable they will follow, at as
early a period of life, as would have been consistent with their capacities for
learning and improvement.

NOTWITHSTANDING a very considerable knowledge of the arts and sciences, may,
at an advanced age of life be obtained; yet it has been remarked and that very
justly, that most of such persons will be contracted in their views and
sentiments, practicably infallible and self conceited, and illiberal and
uncharitable in most of their proceedings. They are commonly destitute of all
delicate impressions, their hearts being as hard as the adamantine rock. If
such persons sustain a religious character or act in a sacred profession, they
will impute all their inconsistencies to the sacred spirit of God, or perhaps
for a conscientious zeal for his glory. By their blind, absurd and infatuated
zeal, together with their pretended orthodoxy, they essentially injure the
cause of true religion, which they have been endeavoring to support. The
opinions or sentiments of such, can by reason no more be altered, than thunder
clouds can be turned, or the everlasting hills be moved by the voice or
strength of man. Nothing but fear, shame and punishment, withhold them from
imitating the deluded followers of the Eastern Impostor, in unsheathing the
SWORD of JEHOVAH, and pointing it at the breasts of those, who fall not in with
their fanatical notions and persecuting principles. Such, my friends, are the
natural and dreadful consequences, of neglecting the early and proper education
of children.

SUFFER me, therefore, ye PARENTS present, to direct a few words of address to
you, upon this important and interesting concern.

PERMIT one, my friends, who experimentally knows not the joys, fears and
anxieties of a parent, to entreat you for your own honor, and for what is yet
far greater, for the future prosperity of your children, to give to them as
good an education as you can consistently with your several abilities. The
future characters and conduct of your children, yea, their everlasting
happiness in an eminent sense, depend upon the education they shall receive
from you. You can perform no greater kindness, and manifest no greater parental
affection for them, than by giving them an opportunity to obtain a useful and
valuable education. In this way, you will probably prevent their own misery and
ruin; and at the same time perform an essential service to mankind. To thus
assist them, is far more commendable, than it is to bestow on them riches and
hereditary honors. By so doing, you will prepare them for usefulness in the
world, for honor and happiness, and for a proper management of themselves, when
they shall appear upon the stage of action, to take a part in life's great
DRAMA.

MANY a bright genius, have spent their days in the low and humble walks of
life, for the want of having their minds improved by education; and finally
have gone down to the grave, without ever appearing to advantage in the world.
Hearken to the language of a celebrated POET, after contemplating, in a burying
yard, the monuments erected to the memory of the dead: -- "Perhaps in this
neglected spot is laid
"Some heart once pregnant with eclestial fire;
"Hands that the rod of EMPIRE might have swayed,
"Or waked to exstacy the living lyre.
"But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
"Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
"Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
"And froze the genial current of the soul.
"Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
"The dark unfathomed caves of OCEAN bear;
"Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
"And waste its sweetness in the desert air."


SUFFICIENT has been said to persuade you, my friends, not to neglect the early
and proper education of your children. In educating them, you will aim to have
them instructed in heavenly knowledge.

A FEW words, in addition to what has been said, respecting their spiritual
instruction, will not be considered as unnecessary.

AS long as they are under your particular care and direction, you will, like
the pious and most amiable PARENT, the AUTHOR of the text, be frequently
calling upon them to obtain heavenly knowledge; and with all their getting to
get a wise and understanding heart. Guard as much as possible, against their
embracing such religious sentiments, as are dishonorary to God, or inconsistent
with that benevolent character, in which he is clothed both in the BOOK of
reason and revelation. In a particular manner, guard against their being
enthusiastical in religion; against their minds being absorbed in a system,
which literally shuts the gate of mercy upon most of the human race.

NEVER become guilty of instructing, yea nor even countenancing them in
embracing such religious sentiments, as involve in them such palpable
absurdities, as neither Angels, Man nor Devils, can ever make to appear
plausible to a rational and unprejudiced mind. Always endeavor to represent God
to them, in the most amiable, endearing and benevolent character; that they may
love, not servilely fear and dread HIM, as some awful, horrible and most
powerful TYRANT, delighting in damnation and misery. With the pious ELDER of
old, may you say, "I have no greater joy, than to hear that my children walk in
the truth."

MAY you have the happiness to see your children, increase in learning;
preparing to shine as distinguished LIGHTS in the world, and to behold THEM
walking in that path, which leads to the heavenly mansions in glory, where
there is knowledge to be obtained beyond finite conception, and peace, joys and
pleasures beyond expression.

THE youth of this congregation, particularly those that have attended my
instructions, shall next claim particular attention in the sequel of the
subject.

MY YOUNG FRIENDS,

YOU have heard in this discourse, that your future honor, usefulness and
happiness, depend eminently on your education. You will, therefore, while in
the morning of your days, prepare yourselves by your education, for honor among
mankind, usefulness to the world, and profit to yourselves, when the voices of
your parents can no more be heard, nor their hands be stretched out no longer
for your assistance. If it is the duty of your parents to instruct you, and to
provide for you the means of education, it is then your indispensible duty, to
hearken to all their faithful and benevolent admonitions, precepts and
instructions; and gratefully to improve every opportunity, which they may
afford you for obtaining useful knowledge.

NOW is the best and only time for the proper improvement and cultivation of
your minds. Be entreated then, to attend diligently to all the means of
instruction, with which your PARENTS in love may favor you.

BUT above all, you must seek to obtain the knowledge of God; and of his Son
Jesus Christ, and the way of Salvation through HIM, as it is revealed in the
Gospel. To this END, you will faithfully attend to the instructions of pious
PARENTS and TEACHERS. Heavenly knowledge, is highly recommended to your choice
in repeated instances by the wise, virtuous and learned Preacher of Israel.
This is his language: --

"MY Son, hear the instruction of thy FATHER, and forsake not the law of thy
MOTHER: For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about
thy neck." " Hear ye children the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding. For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law. For I was
my FATHER'S son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my MOTHER." My Father
taught me, and my Mother frequently instructed me -- "And said unto me, let
thine heart retain my words; keep my commandments and live." "Take fast hold of
instruction; let her not go; keep her; for she is thy life." "Receive my
instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold. For wisdom
is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be
compared to" her. Many more passages might be easily cited, were it necessary,
in which wisdom and instruction are highly recommended to the choice of Youth.

AMONG the great variety you shall only once more be refered to the story of
the wise Preacher's choice, when God in the days of his youth, thus addressed
him, "Ask what I shall give thee." His choice, my young friends, teaches you
that wisdom or a wise and understanding heart, is to be chosen and prefered as
far more valuable than all earthly honors, riches and pleasures. While health,
riches and victory, were spreading their alluring charms before the young
Monarch, recommending themselves to his choice, when wisdom appeared, it was
with her alone, with which he was captivated. While it is an accepted time, be
persuaded to imitate Solomon in his choice; and like him, may you be wise to
know the God of your fathers, and to serve HIM with a perfect heart and willing
mind. Your youthful days are fleeting fast; and will soon be gone. Expiring
time will soon scatter hoary hairs among the most beautiful locks; "draw
furrows on the smoothest brow; and blast the roses on the finest cheek." Those,
therefore, who, AFTER their youthful and vigorous days are past, would appear
amiable and beautiful, must have their minds adorned with heavenly wisdom, and
their hearts replenished with the graces of the divine SPIRIT. May you be
continually abounding in true knowledge and wisdom; in true piety and virtue;
and in every good word and work. When done with time, may you be admitted to
the full fruition of the joys and pleasures of heaven; where you will ever be
increasing in knowledge; flourishing in immortal youth; and glowing with crowns
and diadems of dazzling beauty, through the rolling and ceasless ages of
Eternity.

IN a word, to comprehend, "THE ONE THING NEEDFUL," which involves in it,
knowledge the most important, as well as all riches, honors and pleasures, is
to have a spiritual knowledge of HIM, whom to know aright is Life eternal.

TO conclude therefore; May we all both young and old, be trained up for
everlasting life; and when through death's dark vault we shall have passed, may
we through faith in the merits of the REDEEMER, be admitted to the delightful
participation of the perfectly blessed in glory.

AMEN.

