A DISCOURSE DELIVERED BEFORE His Excellency THOMAS CHITTENDEN, ESQUIRE,
GOVERNOR, The Honorable COUNCIL, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE STATE OF
VERMONT; AT WINDSOR, OCTOBER 8th, 1795.

BEING THE DAY OF General Election.

BY ASA BURTON, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN THETFORD,

RUTLAND: PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE LEGISLATURE.

M,DCC,XCV.

STATE OF VERMONT.
IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 9th October, 1795.
ON MOTION, RESOLVED,

THAT JONATHAN ROBINSON, Esquire. Dr. ELDERKIN, and Col. SHELDON, be a Committee to
wait on the Rev. AS A BURTON, return him the thanks of this House, for the
Sermon by him delivered on Election Day, and request a Copy for the Press.

Extract from the Journals. (Attest,) R. WHITNEY, Clerk.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
PSALMS, VIII. 5. For thou have made him a little lower than the angels.
PHILOSOPHERS, for the purpose of reasoning and communicating their ideas to
better advantage, have divided all existences into classes. These divisions are
denominated by such general terms, as a genus, species, order, and rank of
beings. Matter is a general term, including all the ideas, which belong, in
common, to all material existences. They then subdivide material existence into
several species. Inanimate existence constitutes one, vegetable another, and
animals a third species, rising, by way of gradation, from the lowest to the
highest in kind. Spirit is also a general common name of all spiritual beings,
which, however, are divided into different classes, as divine, angelic, and
human. The soul is a spiritual existence; men, therefore, form one, and the
angels another and higher rank. Whatever the specific difference between angels
and men may be, the text places us as but little below them, and at the head of
all other creatures in this world. Man is made, (for he is the person meant in
the text,) a little lower than the angels. Indeed, the analogy observable in
all the works of God, together with the text, afford us reasons to believe,
that the angels rise in different ranks one above another, till at last the
Almighty appears infinitely above the whole, as the superior head of all
principality and power, or of all ranks in the universe.

ALL beings rank according to their real dignity and worth. Different orders of
creatures ought, therefore, to rise, by easy gradations, men above animals, and
angels above men, in proportion to their different degrees of real dignity and
value. By the same rule, all the states and kingdoms of the earth ought to rank
themselves. And all beings ought to employ all their powers agreeably to, and
uniformly in, the stations assigned them, by the Author of their existence.

ASCERTAINING clearly the real value of things in general, and of those
properties in particular which are the most valuable, will teach men their real
worth, and the rank they sustain, and prepare the way to show how the
improvement of the mind will contribute to the good of society.

LET it then be shown,

I. WHAT constitutes the real worth of beings in general.

THE value of all things is either intrinsic or relative. The reason why any
thing is esteemed, is, on account of the immediate pleasure which it affords,
and the happiness it may hereafter produce. As all happiness presupposes a
pleasing object, those which suit the relish of the mind may be termed the
sources of happiness. Those things then, which, of themselves, afford immediate
pleasure, have intrinsic value; but those things which please only when viewed
as necessary means to happiness hereafter, have a relative value. Hence, some
kinds of fruit are valued on account of the immediate pleasure which they
afford, and also, for the sake of some future good to which they are a
necessary mean, by restoring health, nourishing the body, and procuring other
things of higher gratification. There are some things, which, in themselves,
afford no satisfaction; these are valued only as means to happiness hereafter.
It is in this relative view that money is so highly esteemed; because it serves
as a mean to procure most of the sources of happiness in the present life.
Hence, some things have only a relative, and others have both a relative and an
intrinsic value.

FURTHERMORE, although some things give immediate gratification, yet, if they
will hereafter destroy our happin^^^ (...) on the whole valuable. Hence, those
things only will be esteemed by any person on the whole as valuable, which give
him more pleasure than pain. And those things only which on the whole produce
more good than evil, ought to be esteemed by us as being really valuable to
society. And by the same rule, in estimating the worth of things, we ought not
to consider any thing as valuable on the whole, only that which will finally
and forever issue in the highest happiness of the universe. As all persons
ought to seek the good of society, so all societies ought to seek the good of
the universe: And as the good of each of these is inseparably connected, every
person by seeking the highest good of the one, promotes the highest good of the
other. Hence, the highest good or happiness of the moral system, is the
standard by which we are to estimate the worth of every thing. According to
this standard, the following are the only reasons why any existences, with
their properties, are valuable. (1.) Because some of them are capable of
enjoying the highest good. A capacity to enjoy good is valuable on this very
account. Vessels in daily use, are esteemed on account of what they receive and
contain. In this view, the worth of any being is great, in proportion to the
sum of happiness he i^ capable of enjoying during his existence. (2.) Because
they are a means of the increase and diffusion of happiness. An existence is
valuable, if it is a means of promoting, although it is not capable of enjoying
happiness. In this view, the intrinsic and relative value of all things is
greater or less, in (...) they promote the highest good of the moral system.
Hence, those things which serve as means to happiness, without any capacity to
enjoy it, have not that degree of worth those beings have who are capable both
of enjoying and increasing it.

THIS leads me to inquire,

II. WHAT those faculties or properties in any being are in particular, which
are the most valuable?

THE soul of man is a ray from the Eternal Source of intelligence; and, like
its author, is composed of three general faculties, understanding, taste, and
will.

THE understanding is the receptacle of ideas; that faculty which perceives
truth and falsehood, right and wrong, and is the seat of every rational process
and operation. It is the light of the soul, the candle of the Lord shining in
every man, to direct him in the way to true happiness and glory. It is
necessary to the existence of happiness, and capable of endless growth and
improvement in know^edge.

THE faculty of taste is the seat of all our pleasures and pains. If man were
destitute of this, or of feeling, he would no more be the subject of happiness,
or of misery, than the inanimate creation. -- This is one property of our
nature, by which we are distinguished from, and exalted above, the lower orders
of existence. This faculty is, also, capable of improvement in refinement, in
delicacy, and sensibility; and hereby of deriving more satisfaction from all
the sources of happiness around us. Of these sources, some are short in their
duration, and others are eternal. If the relish of the mind is such as to be
pleased with the former only, we are not prepared for endless happiness;
because, in this case, our present happiness will terminate when these
temporal, and fading sources have an end. And those sources which will
continue, and afford delight to a good taste, will be sources of misery to a
bad one. Hence, according to the nature of our taste, we are prepared to
experience (...) happiness* or misery, forever. This shows how important it is,
that the taste should (...) rectified and improved; and shows, that its eternal
grow^^ lays a foundation for endless increasing happiness.

THE will is the next faculty, which exalts men above the interior ranks.
Volition and its connection with effects constitute all that power, or regency,
of which intelligent beings are possessed. -- We know, that to obtain the
objects, and answer the end, which suit the taste, many mediate effects, as
means, are often necessary. These are produced by voluntary exertions. Hence,
without the faculty of will, men would be destitute of power, and be unable to
obtain any end, or accomplish any scheme whatsoever. Without this, he would not
be a moral agent, or accountable for any of his actions. This faculty,
therefore, is necessary in union with the others, to form a complete man; and
has been the cause of all the great works and actions, which have been
performed by men on the theater of life.

THESE faculties united constitute a soul, which is a complete, natural image
of the great Creator. These are the faculties, or properties, in particular,
which are of the greatest value; and render man a being of higher rank, than
any other being in this world; and capable of endless growth in knowledge, in
goodness, and happiness. Because these render him capable of more sublime
enjoyments, and of promoting the highest good, to a greater degree than any
other rank of existence, below the angelic.

LET us now take a view of the beings which surround us, and ascertain their
rank in the gradations of existence.

MERE matter, being devoid of all those properties, which are necessary to
enjoyment, has no value, only as a mean to promote it. In this relation, it is
of great service, and contributes much to the felicity of intelligent beings.
But as it is not capable of any enjoyment, it takes the lowest place in the
grade of existence.

ANIMAL beings are sensitive, capable subjects of pleasure and pain, are also a
mean of more good to society, and, therefore, possess properties of higher
value than mere matter. In these respects, being of greater dignity and worth,
they occupy the next rank in the scale of existence.

NEXT in the ascent is man, who is capable, not only of the enjoyment, and
increase of more happiness in this life, than any other order of beings; but he
is designed to be the subject, and the mean of increasing happiness and glory
through an endless duration. He, therefore, sustains the highest rank in this
world, and is stationed but a little below the angelic orders; and, on account
of his superior dignity, is made lord of this lower creation. Indeed, the
sacred pages, and the analogy of the divine works, afford as reasons to
believe, that the distance between man and the lowest order of angels, is
nearly the same as the distance between man and the animal tribes. And the same
reasons may convince us, that the angels rise in ranks above each other,
toward the throne of the Almighty. Hence, we read of the cherubims, the
seraphims, of principalities, dominions, and powers, which terms denote the
different ranks in the angelic world.

HAVING ascended, in taking a view of the rising ranks of existence, to God the
supreme head, and king of the universe, let us stop, for a moment, and
contemplate his infinite dignity and glory. He, not only enjoys an
inexhaustible fountain of happiness in himself, but is possessed of all the
attributes necessary to communicate and diffuse it to the utmost possible
extent. God is the original fountain of all that is good, and of all that is
valuable throughout the creation. It is on account of his infinite dignity and
worth, that he does, and ought alone, to sustain the highest rank in the
universe. All other ranks are derived from, and dependent on him. His will gave
them existence; according to it they are governed, and will be disposed of for
ever. In what exact order God has arranged his creatures, from the lowest to
the highest. The lower ranks are subordinated to the higher; they are mutually
dependent on, and subservient to the good of each other, and the greatest
happiness of the moral system. All his works, through every rank, speak his
existence, his universal presence, and agency, and, like a mirror, reflect to
the view of rational creatures, his infinite glory. We are ranked so very far
beneath Jehovah, that when he looks down, through the angelic orders, on men,
it is no matter of wonder to hear him say, the nations are as the drop of the
bucket, and accounted as the small dust of the balance -- all nations are,
before him, as nothing, and less than nothing and vanity. Lord what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? And are not we under every obligation to look up
to God, and unite with the shining ranks around his throne, in their adoring
prostration at his footstool; and, with the highest joy, join in their
constant anthem of praise, that the Lord God Omnipotent reigns?

ALL creatures rise by nice gradations from the lowest to the highest, and
hereby display the wisdom of God. Hence, among the individuals of the same
rank, some have less, and others greater value; so that the difference here is
as great, as the difference between the greatest in one, and the least
individual in another, through all the several ranks of created existence.
Hence no schasms appear, for every space is occupied by some creature of less
or greater dignity and worth; and the individuals of every kind, and the
several ranks, being linked together, form one stupenduous whole, which will
issue, finally, in the highest possible increase and diffusion of happiness.

ALL that now remains, is, to apply the subject,

BY showing how the improvement of the mind will contribute to the good of
society.

WE have taken into view the natural capacities of that spiritual existence,
called the soul of man. These faculties improve with our growth in knowledge,
goodness, and happiness; and they have no value, except as they stand related
to such improvement. In this view, their value is equal to the importance of
knowledge of virtue, of the dignity and happiness of society. The inanimate
creation has no capacity for improvement in knowledge, in virtue, or in
happiness; and the highest improvement of which animals are capable, is very
limited. But man is made to grow and increase for ever: And his happiness will
increase, especially hereafter, in proportion to his growth in knowledge and
virtue. Without improving in these respects, the rank and dig^^^y of man will
be stationary. But by such improvements he may exalt his rank, rise in dignity
and glory, until he exceeds in lustr^ the brightness of the sun.

To make it appear then, distinctly, what means are necessary to the
improvement of the mind, and how such improvement will contribute to the good
of society, let it be observed,

That every civil community, whether state, kingdom, or empire, may be
considered a political person. The legislative or supreme authority is the head
or soul of this person; and the several individuals, composing the community,
are the members. These members, with their head, constitute one entire
political person. The legislative authority is the collective voice and will of
the society. And as the greatest wisdom in the community ought to (...) in the
head, for this reason it ought to (...) to each person his duty, and direct and
govern, as far as is necessary, to the highest good of the whole body. In this
view it is evident, that as every civil community is composed of a united
collection of individuals, its real dignity and worth are in proportion to the
dignity and worth of the persons composing it. But as persons increase in real
value and dignity only by improving their minds, by such improvement only can
the true dignity and glory of any society be increased. Therefore, whatever is
necessary to their improvement, is necessary to the highest good and
improvement of society.

FOR further illustration, let it be enquired. Is not a society prosperous and
happy, in proportion as the members enjoy their rights, liberties, and
privileges in peace, and safety? When they are neither disturbed by internal
broils, nor foreign wars, nor stand in fear of them? When the members, from a
spirit of love, mutually discharge all the offices of kindness and friendship,
and enjoy every necessary source of happiness? But, how shall society be
advanced to a state so desirable; and what means are requisite to accomplish an
end so important? What, but knowledge, can devise the necessary means? And
what, but a virtuous disposition, will prompt a person to seek, invariably, the
good of society? And what, but power, or voluntary exertions, can accomplish
the patriotic wishes of virtue? Surely, such attributes are necessary to the
highest good of society. Otherwise, why do all men judge, that the rulers of a
nation ought to be men eminent for knowledge, and virtue? And that power, in
every community, is necessary to its happy existence? These are considered as
necessary to qualify a person to govern well. By being possessed of knowledge,
power, and goodness in perfection, Deity is qualified to govern the universe
with unerring rectitude. And, in proportion as the members of any civil body
excel in these improvements, they approach toward perfection, and are
qualified to advance the happiness and glory of society. And, it is evident,
that a deg^^^ of that, which is necessary to make a good ruler, is necessary to
constitute a good subject. How happy, were every one fit to govern. Then,
whether he sustains a private or public character, he would, invariably, seek
by the best adapted means, the highest good of society. And, were all the
members, thus qualified, it would be impossible, that society, with the common
blessings of providence, should not, also, enjoy the highest dignity and
prosperity,

FROM these remarks, it is obvious, that the improvement of the mind is not
only requisite, but highly so, to the advancement of society to any higher
perfection than that already attained. Hence, as it is the professed design of
politicians to promote the happiness of civil community, the improvement of the
mind is one mean, without which, they can never fully reach their end. So far
as ignorance and vice prevail among any people, so far those errors and evils
which violate their happiness, and disturb their repose, will prevail.
Constitutions may be framed, laws enacted and executed, still, these evils,
while their sources continue, will, in a greater or less degree, abound. Laws
and constitutions are necessary, and may do much in restraining vice, and
promoting the good of society, yet, without the improvement of the mind, (...)
will not increase in dignity, or in (...). No object, therefore, which can
claim the attention of politicians and legislators, (...) so important as the
growth of the mind in knowledge and virtue.

HOWEVER, to impress this idea more deeply on the mind, let us take a view of
past ages, and see, how, by the cultivation of the mind, persons, states, and
kingdoms, have exceeded the ignorant and vicious in luster and greatness.

KNOWLEDGE began at first to beam forth in Egypt. There the arts and sciences
were at first cultivated. From thence, like the ascending luminary, she shone
on the plains of Shinar, and diffused her beams through the states of Greece
and the republic of Rome. It was owing, in a great measure, to their superior
knowledge, that the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, so far surpassed in dignity
and splendour, all the barbarous nations around them. And how did Europe emerge
from darkness, and shine with superior luster, by the revival of letters, in
the sixteenth century? And the States of America owe their superiority, in
point of dignity, above the savage tribes, to the cultivation of their minds in
the arts and sciences. Indeed, the fame of every nation is to be attributed
more to a few men of eminent knowledge, than to all their kings and mighty
conquerors. -- Knowledge has made astonishing distinctions between man and man,
and between nations and nations. The Newto^^, the Locks, and the Addisons,
appear like a superior order of beings; and, by improvements in knowledge, do
not some men in our land, as far exceed others, as the sun exceeds the stars in
brightness? Had it not been for men of learning, the fame of America would
never have sounded through the earth. Science and liberty mutually befriend
each other. Those constitutions, which secure the rights and liberties of men;
those laws which govern society, owe their origin to men of knowledge. Men, by
the improvement of the mind, have made discoveries in the heavens and in the
earth, and in all the works of God, which have illuminated the world, and
taught us how we may convert the furniture of nature, to the use and benefit of
society. The necessity and utility of knowledge, to the happiness of the world,
are inconceivably great. And virtue, by which I mean true religion, is not less
important. This has its seat in the taste, or heart of men. She is a constant
friend to man -- to his rights, to his liberties, and to his everlasting
felicity. She is the brightest ornament, the most precious jewel, and most
valuable crown of glory to man. Knowledge, when united with a vicious, instead
of a virtuous disposition, has been a means of more hurt than good, in every
age of the world. It is owing to Satan's superior knowledge, as one cause, that
he has been able to found a kingdom in this world, and maintain his dominion
over the sons of men. His knowledge concerted the measures (...) his vile heart
carried into execution, (...) our first parents, and establishing the reign of
sin through the earth. If Alexander had been ignorant of the military art, and
of the means necessary to raise and equip an army, he could not have
accomplished his ambitious views in conquering the world. Ignorance restrains
and limits the operations of vice. But, knowledge opens to view a field for the
depraved heart, like a violent storm, to spread destruction far and near. Of
this we have many instances.

THE Caesar's, by their arts and intrigues, deprived Rome of her liberties, and
reduced her to slavery. What may not be expected from an increase of light
without virtue? Revolutions in favor of the rights of man may succeed, and the
tree of liberty may be planted in various soils; yet the same light which
discovers the way to demolish the thrones of despotism, and humble the proud
tyrants of the earth, may enable the ambitious to destroy the temple of
liberty, and erect in its stead the throne of tyranny. Where are the liberties
of Sparta, of Athens, of Greece, and of Rome? If virtue had held an equal
dominion with the light which illuminated Greece and Rome, the tree of liberty
might have flourished in those countries to the present day. And, if the light
of the present day should enable the ambitious to destroy the liberties of
America, such an event would be no more extraordinary, than those of a similar
nature which have been effected in the world. The influences of the sun,
however salutary in common, if rain be withheld, only serve to harden the
earth, and destroy the sources of life and happiness. Light, without virtue,
produces similar effects in the moral world. Hence, without religion, the human
race cannot reach a more exalted rank; but, by a retrograde motion, will sink
lower into disgrace and misery. Angels, stripped of the robe of virtue, became
devils, and fell from the highest seats above, into the lowest pit of darkness
and shame. Where shall we find any rank of beings more worthless than they?
they are viler than worms. Sin is, in like manner, and ^^sgrace to any people;
but religion is their glory. This raised David from the humble employment of a
she^^erd, to the throne of Israel. This pro^^^ed for Solomon that wisdom, which
extended his fame to the ends of the earth. This made Daniel greater than the
wise men of Babylon. By this, man, simple as he is at present, may rise to the
highest glory in heaven. This is the ornament which adorns and dignifies human
nature. It is the genius, the spirit, and the life of liberty. Unless we
improve in virtue, our improvements in knowledge serve only to sink us more
swiftly and deeply into endless shame and darkness. As ignorance and vice will
degrade persons and nations, to a level with the most uncivilized and savage
tribes in Africa; so when they are enlightened with the beams of science and
virtue, they rise into respectability. As there is nothing to prevent their
growing in greatness, since the field of knowledge is infinitely extended, they
may proceed in a constant progression for ever. By improvement, lower ranks may
ascend, till they reach an inconceivable height. By pursuing this path, we have
reason to believe, from the pen of prophecy, that future nations will shine
more bright than the luminary of heaven. For we read of a time, when all shall
know the Lord from the least to the greatest; and when the light of one day,
shall be as the light of seven. These remarks are sufficient to convince every
person, how highly important the improvement of the mind is to the dignity and
happiness of society.

BUT how shall the mind be thus improved? To this end, education, on one hand,
and the attention and application of the mind, on the other, are requisite. The
mind, like seed sown in a garden, needs cultivation to favor its growth. By
the assistance of education, to bring into view those things which ought to be
known; and to give it a right direction in the pursuit of knowledge; and by a
proper application of the mind to acquire it, it will daily enlarge its views
-- discover the nature and properties of the things by which it is surrounded
-- their (...) and dependencies -- their various uses and designs, and their
ultimate relation to the greatest happiness of the universe. The understanding,
by such cultivation and use, acquires greater penetration and readiness, to
discover the agreement and disagreement of things, with their connections,
relations, and designs. It acquires an habit of investigating with ease,
independence, and vigor; and every progressive ste^ facilitates future
advances in the field of knowledge, and renders the walks of science the more
agreeable. By thus opening and expanding, the mind comes to feel its own
strength and dignity; rises above useless amusements, and scandalous vices, and
soars aloft lost in search of new discoveries, which may promote the happiness
of society.

BUT, with what branches of knowledge ought the mind to be more especially
acquainted? Man, in one age, cannot learn every thing. For this reason, we
ought to acquaint ourselves, more especially, with those branches of science,
which have ^he greatest tendency to rectify the taste -- to promote the good of
society, and our own eternal felicity. But, of all the sciences, politics and
divinity will have the greatest influence in answering these important
purposes. The great design of politics, (by which I mean the whole system of
civil jurisprudence) is to concert and pursue those measures, which will
advance the highest good of society. The whole system of divinity has the same
object in view, and, further, aims at the future blessedness of mankind. -- It
is true, some suppose, that these sciences have no relation, or connection with
each other. Such a supposition is attended with many ruinous effects. The fact,
is, they are branches of moral philosophy; founded on the same general
principles; aim at the same object, and differ, only, in certain circumstances.
This will be evident from the following illustrations.

ALL intelligent beings form one great community, or kingdom, of which God is
the supreme head. The greatest happiness of his kingdom, is the ultimate object
which all his subjects ought to be pleased with, and invariably seek. Here is
the origin of all moral obligation; for it is the highest good which binds and
obligates moral agents. All the states, kingdoms, and empires of this world,
may be viewed as so many colonies, into which this universal kingdom of Jehovah
is divided. Let us view these colonies as so many distinct political persons;
then we can as easily see the general principles which ought to govern them, as
we can see the general principles by which individual persons ought to be
governed; for they stand in the same relation individual persons do to each
other, and the universe. Now, it is self evident, that individual persons ought
to seek each others happiness, to the extent of their abilities, and the
highest good of those bodies, of whatever denomination, to which they belong.
To do this is right, and to do otherwise is wrong. Here, then, are two general
principles, or laws, which necessarily involve each other; one of which binds
us to seek the highest good of all individuals, and the other the good of all
collective bodies. Also, when any person acts the part of an enemy to another,
or to any collective body, and it becomes necessary to the good of the whole,
that his good should be relinquished, and he be made the subject of punishment:
-- the principle just stated, which requires us to seek the high^^^ good
obligates us to relinquish his good* and (...) punishment upon him.

THESE and the like are general principles, or the laws of nature, which all
beings are severally bound to observe; upon which the law of God, civil laws,
and the laws of nations are founded. The great design of these laws, with the
rewards annexed to them, is, to enforce obedience to the law of nature: For it
is by observing the laws of nature, that the good of individuals, and the
general good, are secured and promoted. Every act, which is injurious on the
whole to happiness in general, is a breach of the law of nature; and every act
which aims at happiness in general, is an act of obedience to it. Hence, these
general principles are very extensive: For they prohibit or require all those
acts of every kind, which ought to be prohibited or required by any of the laws
either of God or of men. On these principles, the whole systems of politics and
of divinity are founded. Their object is, likewise, the same: For they,
unitedly, aim at general happiness. Hence, those greatly err, who view politics
and divinity as wholly disconnected. Hence, these sciences not only contain the
principles, but also all the duties which are necessary to our personal good,
to the good of civil society, and to the highest good of the moral system.
Therefore, of all branches of knowledge, none are of equal importance to be
taught and well understood by the human race. These present to view an
unbounded field for mental improvement. Here is room for the mind to expand,
and enlarge her acquaintance with the principles and duties which are the m^^^
conducive to the happiness of the world. Here is room for the everlasting
improvement and gratification of a good relish of heart. Here is presented to
our view, the strongest motives to persuade us to make every possible exertion
necessary to the good of society, the glory of God, and increasing good of his
kingdom. Hence, it appears, that God has displayed his wisdom and benevolence,
in appointing an order of men, to teach us publicly, and weekly, those
principles and duties which are adapted to improve the mind, better the heart,
regulate the conduct, and diffuse light and happiness through every order of
men. And, as politics and divinity are built on the same original principles,
include the same duties, and (...) at the same object, in teaching one, the
other is taught, in a greater or less degree. This mode of weekly education,
instituted by God, is the best adapted to improve the minds and hearts of men,
of any now in practice; and has more influence in regulating their lives and
promoting the good of society, than any other measures which have been adopted
by the wisest politicians of the earth. And the design of this benevolent
institution is more perfectly answered, in proportion as the ministry is filled
with men of abilities, piety, and learning. Those, therefore, who neglect this
institution, would do well to enquire, whether they act a friendly part toward
the improvement of the mind, the good of society, or themselves, or show any
suitable reverence to the Almighty? And those, who deny the divinity of the
scriptures, would do well to inquire soberly, whether they are not sapping the
foundation of politics and society, and acting inconsistent with their
political creed?

ON the whole, is the improvement of the mind, an object of such importance to
increase the glory and dignity of man, and the dignity and happiness of
society? Ought this to claim the attention of rulers, as the surest way to
answer the important designs of government?

THEN we learn the importance of having every public station filled with men
the most eminent for virtue and wisdom. Good abilities, extensive knowledge and
virtue, constitute true worth and merit. Those who have more merit in these
respects than others, are exalted in rank above them. They have risen by merit.
And, as public stations are places of eminence, men of the greatest worth ought
to fill them. They will fill them with dignity, utility, and honor. They will
feel, more than others, the importance of having the mind improved in every
useful qualification: they will attend to it, as the most necessary measure to
promote the general good. When they are called by the suffrages of the freemen
from their private walks, to fill such seats (...) eminence, their regard for
the public weal is the great motive which will induce them to obey, and engage
in the arduous work assigned them. Such men never seek any public station by
intrigue. Every method of exalting themselves, except by merit, to places of
eminence, is beneath their notice. They despise all the low arts of intrigue,
as mean and despicable. Such arts discover, by whomsoever practiced, a little,
mercenary mind, which aims not at the public good, or any thing higher than its
own personal honor and emolument. Freemen may therefore know, that men who are
intriguing for places of honor, are by no means qualified to fill them, and
ought to be entirely neglected.

OUR subject contains the strongest motives to induce your Excellency to act
with the highest dignity and firmness. Reflect on your rank by creation, at the
head of all existence in this world, and but a little below the angels. --
Reflect on the exalted station you are called to fill, by the suffrages of the
freemen; and how highly you are honored by God and by men. -- Look down, then,
with a noble disdain, on every thing which is beneath your station and dignity,
or which can stain your glory. Let all your conduct exhibit greatness of mind,
a virtuous, patriotic spirit, increasing dignity in your public station and
journey through life, that, when you ascend to act on a more exalted theater
above, succeeding generations may rise up and call you blessed.

WITH his Excellency, the Council, and the House of Representatives, belong to
the same created rank, and by the freemen are called to act in the stations
which you now fill. Let your actions and professions be as dignified as your
rank and stations. What is worse, or more degrading, th^n vice, and the
profession of sentiments, which are ruinous to society? Can you descend so low
as to walk in the degrading paths of vice, and to be a servant to Satan, the
prince of darkness. How would you despise a king, dressed in his royal robes, to
see him wallowing in the filth and mire of the streets? Or to see him,
neglecting the great concerns of his kingdom, for the sake of spending his time
with children in their amusements, and playing with the glittering pebbles,
which engage their attention? It is equally out of character, for any in a
dignified rank or station, to spend any part of his time in useless amusements,
or to stai^ his glory with the spots of wickedness. You are resolved this shall
not be; but that your conduct shall be as dignified as your station. Reflect on
the great and glorious work with which you are entrusted. The general good
calls on you to concert measures -- to restrain vice -- to defend the rights of
men -- to have justice executed -- to protect the virtuous and innocent -- to
nourish the arts and sciences, and, by establishing a proper mode of education,
to diffuse the beams of knowledge and virtue through every rank of citizens,
and advance society to the highest dignity and renown. What an amazing work!
But, for your encouragement, take a review of those men, who, by their great
and virtuous deeds, have adorned human nature, obtained immortal honor, and
are now shining in exalted seats in the paradise above. -- Take a review of the
great and virtuous deeds of Joseph in Egypt -- of Moses, the leader of the host
of Israel from the house of bondage, to a land of liberty and plenty -- of
Joshua, in his conquest of Canaan, and at the close of his life -- of David,
who, by his religious establishments, and by extending the kingdom of the
Hebrews to the limits assigned by God, and other virtuous deeds, was styled the
servant of the Lord -- of Solomon, who raised the kingdom of Israel to the
highest summit of earthly glory, and whose same for wisdom founded through the
world -- of Paul, who diffused the light of the gospel, and extended the
conquests of the Redeemer from kingdom (...) kingdom, and persuaded thousands
to assume their native dignity, and act like men. And why should I detain you
to review the deeds and characters of Abraham, of Samuel, of Daniel, and of
others, especially, the imitable and glorious deeds of Christ, the savior of
the world. Here are examples worthy of imitation. By performing deeds, as great
and virtuous in your stations, as they did in theirs, you will leave your names
to be immortalized, like theirs; and soon unite with them in services more
sublime* -- By an example as worthy of imitation, you may do good, after you
are dead: for example has amazing influence. For there is a great proneness in
human nature to imitate, especially, those in stations of eminence. Hence, one
reason why, in general, the things which are fashionablest among the great, as
dress for instance, are imitated by the lower classes of people.

IF improving the mind, practicing virtue, and attending on religious
institutions were in fashion with the leaders and fathers of the people, there
is reason to believe, these things would more generally gain the attention of
the lower classes; and, if no more, greatly restrain the practice of vice. For
vice and error will never prevail to any great degree, when out of fashion with
the great, and wholly discountenanced by them. -- May your exertions,
therefore, to exalt this rising state to the highest eminence in knowledge and
virtue, be smiled upon and prosper. To this end, read more -- read books, read
the great volume of the divine works, grow in virtue, and outshine the sun in
all its glory.

FINALLY, our subject presents to the view of this audience, a universe
composed of a vast gradation of beings: The several ranks connected, like the
links of a chain, form one stupendous whole. At the head of this system is the
great Jehovah, who, by right of merit, sways the scepter of universal
government; ultimately seeking the highest good of this great community, and
subordinating all things to this end of highest value and importance. God has
placed man but a little below the angels, at the head of every ^ank in this
lower world, and given him dominion over the whole. Hence, all creatures in
this lower world are his subjects, and, by submitting to his dominion,
administer happiness to every individual. As men compose one entire rank, they
are by creation equal; one no greater than another, and each entitled to all
the ^ights and prerogatives of men. They ought, therefore, to feel toward each
other as brethren, and view each other as fellow-sovereigns of the world -- as
the subjects of the Almighty -- and as made to advance the greatest happiness
of the universe. Among all the orders of being in this world, as far as our
knowledge extends, man alone is made capable of endless growth and improvement.
-- And his improvemement depends on his conduct -- on the use of his abilities
-- and the means and advantages with which he is highly privileged and
distinguished by his all-bountiful Creator. According to our conduct, we shall
grow in dignity and worth, and shine with increasing luster; or sink into
greater and greater shame, darkness, and misery for ever. -- Sin stains the
glory* darkens the luster and degrades the rank of every intelligent creature.
While virtue or religion, connected with knowledge, is the brightest crown of
glory, which dignifies us more and more, till we shall, through divine grace,
be fixed as stars in the firmament above, to shine with increasing everlasting
brightness. Science, and the religion which is (...) us in the volumes of
creation, of providence, and revelation, are the eternal friends and supporters
of liberty; friends and servants to the growing greatness, and endless
happiness of man. While ignorance and vice degrade our rank, enslave the mind,
and constitute the foundation of every system of tyranny. How many examples
might be produced in support of the present sentiment. Witness the fall of
angels. Look through the world, at Asia, at Africa, at a great part of Europe
and America, where vice, and in many kingdoms profound ignorance, have reigned
triumphant; and what do we behold, but a world of slaves, and the uncontrouled
sway of tyranny and oppression.

ON the other hand, look at these United States enjoying their rights and
liberties, founded at first by men too eminently religious to remain any longer
in a land of slavery and oppression. Liberty, exiled from Europe, crossed the
Atlantic with them, and fixed her standard in this western world. This shows,
that religion is the genius, the life, and spirit of liberty, and the
foundation of all true happiness and greatness. By her aid, from small
beginnings, we have risen into a growing empire. If we continue to cultivate
science and virtue, our land may become a paradise, and our nation, in some
way, be instrumental in erecting the temple of liberty on the ruins of every
throne of tyranny through the world. But if vice should universally prevail,
and religion be exiled, however the light of science may increase, liberty will
follow religion; and if they find no place to erect their standard in this
world, they will leave it to groan under the slavery and oppressions of vice,
and revisit their native skies.

Now then, the broad road which leads to slavery -- to shame, and misery, is
before us; and the narrow way, which leads to greater freedom, to brighter
scenes, to increasing greatness, and future glories, is clearly presented to
our view. Let us rise, then, and by cultivating science, dispel the clouds of
ignorance and darkness, and, by virtuous lives, banish all vice from among us
-- Let us rise superior to the empty grandeurs and fading glories of this
world, and pursue our journey after higher ranks before us, by swift advances
in the improvement of the mind in knowledge, in virtue, and happiness, for
ever. Amen.

THE END.

