STRICTURES ON FEMALE EDUCATION ^^^TLY AS IT RELATES TO THE CULTURE OF THE
HEART. IN FOUR ESSAYS.

BY THE REV. JOHN BENNETT.

(...) PARTNER, AND SOLE PART OF ALL THE^^ JOYS,
"DEARER THYSELF THAN ALL." --
MIL. E^T QUOD^^^ PRODIRE TENUS, SI NON DATUR ULTRA. --

HOR. PRINTED AT WORCESTER. BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE SIGN
OF Johnson's Head. 1795.

Preface.
THESE Essays are to be considered as only an introductory specimen of a much
larger work, consisting of Letters to a young Lady, on the much neglected
subject of Female Education. -- These letters were intended to be comprised in
three small pocket volumes; the first recommending religious duties and writers
for the culture of the heart; the second proper studies and authors for the
improvement of the understanding; and the last pointing out the necessary,
domestic duties, as well as the proper manners, graces and accomplishments of
the sex.

The whole work was intended to have made its appearance at the same time; but
the intervention of other s^dies, professional engagements, as well as many
private reasons of del^^^y, which the Author does not feel himself at liberty
to disclose, have induced him to suspend, at least for the present, the
publication of these Letters. Nor perhaps, may they now ever see the light,
though nearly prepared for it, unless particularly called for (which he
scarcely expects) by the encouragement given to these preparatory sketches. He
has little to say concerning the performance now before the public; but only
that he conceives the subject to be important, whatever may be its execution.
He is sensible how invidious a task it is to attack established systems,
prejudices, habits, errors, that have been ridiculously consecrated, as it
were, by the lapse of time, and what disgraceful epithets are lavished on the
man, who sets up, from whatever motives, either for a censor or a reformer of
his age. He is conscious that neither his talents nor his station will justify
him in assuming so arduous a character, and has therefore cautiously concealed
a name, which might only raise a prejudice against his bold undertaking, and
hidden himself behind the shade of secrecy, until criticism shall have fully
emptied its quiver, and the indignation of public censure is overpast. Since
the Publication of the first Edition of these S^r^^^^e, the author has thought
^t e^^gible to prefix his name to the work.


Still as he conceives that the cause of truth and virtue should fear no
discouragements, and that neither mediocrity of talents nor obscurity of
station should discourage a man from great undertakings, the time may come,
when he shall openly avow these productions of his pen, contented with the
pittance, which an impartial public shall be pleased to give him, of censure
or of fame.

CONTENTS
ESSAY I. Containing a slight survey of the treatment of women in different
ages and nations of the world, and an investigation of the causes, which have
contributed to the obvious and shameful negligence in their education. ESSAY
II. Observations on the manner. in which the treatment of this sex will be
influenced by, and will reciprocally influence the taste, the sentiments, the
habits and pursuits, the manners, the morals, the public and the private
happiness of a people. ESSAY III. A disquisition concerning the nature, quality
and extent of female talents, and the comparative difference of understanding
in the sexes. ESSAY IV. Reflections on the dangers and insufficiency of
Boarding Schools, considered as a mode of Female Education.
STRICTURES ON FEMALE EDUCATION.
It i^, me thinks, a low and degrading idea of that sex, which was created to
refine the joy, and to soften the ca^es of ^^manit^ by the most agreeable
participation, to consider them merely as objects of sight. This is abridging
them of their natural exte^t of power, and putting them upon a level with their
pictures at Kne^er's. --

SPECT. VOL. 1. No. 33. "DOCTRINA SED VIM PROMOVER INSITAM REC^^QUE CULTUS
PECTORA ROBORANT." --
WHEN we consider the natural equality of women with the other sex, their
influence upon society, and their original destination to be companions and
comforters of man; when we recollect the pleasures derived from their Thendoret
believed Adam to have been naturally of a savage disposition, but civ^^zed the
a^^^able deporement and soothing o^ ^^dimments of (...) he^^ meet. Evam
libet^st (...) fe^^tate, virum suum Adam.


agreeable vivacity and sprightliness, the soothing tenderness of their
friendship, and the ardency of their affaction; when we call to mind all their
charms and attractions; above all, when we reflect, that the youth of both
sexes are under their management for many of those ^orly years, when all the
durable impressions must be made, it may justly appear a matter of amazement,
that their education has been so much and so generally neglected; that no
nation, ancient or modern, has esteemed it an object of public importance that
no Philosopher or Legislator has interwoven it with his system, nor any witter
deemed it a subject worthy of a full or a serious discussion.

Many systems of instruction have been adopted for the other sex, various as
the countries, the religion, the climate, or even as the caprices of the
writers, who, at different periods, have undertaken to compose them. But, by a
strange fatality, women have been considerably omitted in the account, as if
they were not gifted with reason and understanding, but were only to be valued
for the beauty of their persons, for the elegance of their manners, or the
symmetry of their forms.

At the same time, we make no concessions, or abatement in our expectations
from them, for this contemptuous neglect. Forming a high and flattering
estimate of what their character should be, we extend no allowance for this
insuperable disadvantage. We expect a rich, spontaneous harvest to spring from
an untilled soil; and whilst we make their failings inevitable by our
remissness, we fail not to load them with the heaviest censure, ridicule and
contempt.

Complaints against the foibles and imprudence of women are almost coeval with
the foundation of the world. -- Whatever, in other instances, may have been the
scarcity of genius and talents, yet their imperfections have never wanted
recorders. To do them ample justice, and place them in every varying point of
view for the amusement of a busy and illnatured curiosity, for the
gratification of a dark and malignant spleen, or the purpose of a public and
humiliating correction, the shafts of satire, the flights of poetry, the
lucubrations of the moralist, and even the more dignified labors of the Divine
have, in turns, been employed. Many Aristotle, Euripides, Thucydides, Boccace,
an Italian Author, in his Laberyn to de Parnor, Pope, Swift, Congreve, etc. See
a most degrading opinion of this sex, maintained by Almaricus, a Doctor a^
Paris, in the 12th. century, and refuted by St. Austin, Lib. 17th De Civ. Dei.
famous author of Greece and Rome, of modern Europe, and of our own country,
have formed an ignominious phalanx, to wage, in inky armor, an unequal battle
against this tender and defenseless sex. Even the sacred books of Revelation
have been called in to sanction these malevolent effusions; and, because
Solomon declaimed, at an early period, only against the worst and most
abandoned of the sex, he has been followed by a number of servile imitators, of
all ages and nations, who indiscriminately, have applied the dark portrait to
all. I will not add a Chesterfield to a group, (whose letters to his son, from
beginning to end, are one continued libel upon women) because I wish the memory
of his immortal graces, and his refined dissimulation, to sleep forever with
him in his grave.

Nor is this sex more indebted, in general, to those, who assume the appearance
of friendship and esteem. Like princes, they seldom hear the language of truth.
Many, like a Judas, betray them with a kiss. Their charms excite a fugitive
passion. Passion vents it^^^f in profuse adulation. And that flattery has
frequently little more in view, than a momentary pleasure, which must borrow
its existence from their misery and ruin.

To enumerate the various charges, which have been adduced, at different times,
against this amiable part of the Creation, would be a very difficult and
laborious undertaking. They are as the complexions or pre^^^ the persons from
whom (...) proceeded, as the circu^^^^ which have checquered the (...) lives,
or the feelings wh^^^ circumstances have excite^^ breast.

Some men of a saturr^^ gloomy complexion, ha^^ demned them for that (...)
which constitutes the f^^^ sweetest of their charme^^ might as well be angry
(...) sky is not all over sable, w^^^ streak of white or blue to (...) the
horizon; whilst other retaliated on the sex at la^^^ injuries and offenses they
(...) ceived from a few.

The Philosophe^ comp^^^ their levity and g^ddin^^ man of sentiment inveigh^^
the frivolousness of their t^^ the frothiness of their conversation. He who
courts their society from motives of fashion, and makes it a system to say
every thing but truth, pronounces them greedy of flattery in the extreme, and
capable of swallowing that undeserved praise, which is the severest satire in
disguise. The scholar is disgusted with their ignorance and insipidity; the
lover with their coquetry, caprices and inconstancy in the tender connections.
And he, who seeks them with the most honorable views, for the companions of
his life, is terrified with the prospect of that fondness for gaiety, which
would sacrifice every emotion of the heart to splendor and parade, and,
instead of making his retirement a Paradise, threatens to convert it into a
dreary wilderness of vexation and remorse. From all quarters they have been
attacked; and whilst their form is confessed to be enchanting, they are
treated, by the bulk of men, as fit for little else but some domestic
drudgeries, or some indelicate enjoyments.

How far these heavy charges are founded on truth, it would appear invidious,
and it is not, by any means, necessary to determine. Suffice it to remark in
favor of this injured and persecuted sex, that the judge would be esteemed a
monster of cruelty, who first induced a person to be a culprit, and afterward
condemned.

It is an established and universally received maxim, that the future
sentiments, actions and characters of men are considerably influenced by their
earliest education; and if we consider the superior susceptibility of women,
and that exquisite sensibility, which so wonderfully dispose them to receive
all impressions, and, in fact, have made so many of that sex, in different
periods, and in various circumstances, martyrs to love, to friendship and
devotion, it is reasonable to conclude, that, if they are defective in any
rational seize, it is for want of a judicious and timely cultivation. If
a soul, so lodged, was not neglected, it would not be without its necessary
excellences. If a mine so rich, was worked with skill and industry, it would
reward its owner with as great a quantity of solid gold and treasure, as, now,
it only mocks him with a light and superficial tinsel, that glitters on the
eye^ To censure them before we have made this experiment, is ungenerous
anticipation. It is expecting to reap, where we have not sowed, and gather
where we have not strewed.

Whether we look into foreign countries or our own, and whether into the
ancient or modern histories of both, it will plainly appear that the
instruction of women has engrossed but a little share of the public attention;
and, to a speculative mind, it may afford a moment's curious entertainment, if
I endeavor to investigate the cause of this phenomenon, why mankind have so
uniformly neglected the heart and understanding of a creature, whose person has
called forth their warmest panegyricks, and whose shrine they have approached
with the richest incense of idolatry and adulation.

The happy age of our first parents in Eden is no subject of this contem ^^^on.
A state or intimate communion ^^^th God supposes every possible degree of
intellectual information. The knowlledge of both sexes issued immediately from
the fountain of light, and, if it was not communicated in equal rays to both,
our first father would be impelled by the combined workings of duty and
affection, to make up, in the most insinuating manner, the difference to a
woman, whom heaven had so lately given "as its last, best gift;" whom he had
led "so sweetly blushing to the nuptial bower;" whom solitary haunts and
familiar conversations must have riveted so very closely to his heart; whose
unstudied innocence, and unartisicial charms must have poured a delicious
rapture through his soul, who combined in her own person all the tenderest
relationships, and monopolized all the ^^^eliest names and attachments, and
without whose society, all the fragrant shrubs, and fruits, and blossoms of his
Paradise would have been but insipid and unanimated blessings.

So soon as we lose fight of Paradise (and alas! the golden prospect soon fades
upon the eye) we trace the dawnings of shameful negligence to women. We
discover the baneful operation of a system, which, insensible to their charms,
and unmindful of the blessings which they pour upon society, has bound them in
the fetters of an illiberal oppression. The earliest ages of the world are
disfigured with a degrading treatment of this sex, which, notwithstanding all
the allowance to be made for difference of manners, and primitive simplicity,
necessarily involves but little moral culture, and less rational instruction.
The sacred writings exhibit women, engaged in the most laborious and servile
employments, tending flocks, carrying water and performing many other domestic
drudgeries, which, whilst they strike us as unsuited to the dignity of their
character, or the delicacy of their frame, evidently bespeak the very low
estimation in which they were held.

The truth is, (and it is a first principle, to which we must often have
recourse in the progress of thi^ quiry) a considerable civili^ation must have
taken place in any age or country, before the manners of women will be
sufficiently captivating to raise our admit^^ion, or before we ourselves shall
ha^^ any susceptibility of their many little, ^^meless and delicate
attractions. In the beginnings of society, such a politeness must be utterly
unknown. It springs from a constant collision with A degree of se^ocity must
always a^fend those, who have not such an inter burse. S^^^ (...), speaking of
the Spanish n^^^ons, Lib. 13. Th^^^ ^^^e^^, said of the people, who inhabit the
maritime pasty of India. Quint. C^^^. Lib. 9. C. 1^. Montain. Esprit des L. ^x.
Live. 2. C. 2.

Athought the Greek also Romans, the words, which denote breeding, were taken
from these: of having in ci^^^, ^ad having (...) ^^able ^rcountly with (...).


mankind, from that unrestrained intercourse with other people and country^s,
which only an extended commerce is observed to open in any part of the world;
and from the liberal cultivation of those arts and sciences, which, if they are
not always nursed in the bosom of luxury, at least suppose a period of
accumulated wealth. On this morning of the world such an era had not dawned.
The pastoral life and agriculture, as they supplied the wants, occupied the
hours and bounded likewise the wishes of these primitive and undesigning men.
Satisfied with a plain and frugal repast, they sighed not for riches, and never
so much as dreamed of a commerce, which in maturer progressions of society,
should spend its days, and nights and soul to accumulate, if possible, upon a
single point, the treasures of the world. Ambition was, as yet, asleep, nor had
Imagination opened to their dazzled view, its boundless regions of artificial
pleasures, or artificial pains. Science was uncultivated, and taste was unborn;
the manners of the men were proportionably coarse, and the women were
unrefined. It was happy, indeed, for the latter, that they were so. If they had
been otherwise, their sensibility must have shuddered at the lowness of their
servitude, and the rigours of subjection.

Amongst the Egyptians, who were celebrated for their learning, astronomy and
Magi, women met with some partial and some distinguishing marks of attention.
They were admitted to the public lectures in philosophy; the laurel of science
wa^ not supposed improper for their brow; and, by a taste, unparalleled and
unheard of in any other country, they wer-entrusted H^r^d Pu^. Li^. 2. D^^^
(...) Si^. Li^. 2. 2. (...) V^ew o^ ^ee. ia Europe, p. 1^^. A^be M^^^^ E^^n.
(...).
with the management of negociations, of commercial interests and other public
undertakings. But this was erring in another ridiculous extreme. It 'was
attempting to make them move in a sphere for which Nature never gave them
talents, nor Providence designed them. This people had not discovered, from a
rightly cultivated taste, the true and striking point of female perfection. The
sort of knowledge, which these sages communicated, unmade the women Quem
p^^^^re ^ot^st mulier galeat^ p^dorum, Q^^^ (...). have any (...) of sham^.
(...) of (...) vol. 1. p. 110.
It raised her understanding on the ^ain of her graces. An Egyptian Lady does
not captivate us in recollection, however, in such darker ages, she might
shine. Such Heroines may dazzle in the page of history, but they are not the
females, who in the stiller walks of life, attract us by their softness, and
enchant us by their ease.

In the history of the Babylonians and Assyrians, we meet with little but
conjectural hints, to direct our enquiry concerning the treatment or education
of women. The ingenuity of the former appears in the working A^^^ (...) Hist.
(...) at Rome, for a (...) of Babylonian. hangings, for a dining room, six
thousand four hundred and fifty eight pound^, six shi^^^ngs and (...). Ha^.
^i^. (...) 48. S^^ An^i. Univ. H^st. o^ the Babylonians.


of those carpets, hangings, embroidery etc. which might agreeably amuse the
solitary, whilst it relieves the melancholy hour. Such a trait in the portrait,
likewise, may convince us that riches and luxury had made considerable advances
in this kingdom, and that minds, at rest from procuring the necessaries, could
exhaust their most ingenious efforts on the elegances of life. It proves
nothing of any moral culture directed to their hearts, or any efforts made to
extend their understanding. One probable conclusion, however, it involves,
that, in the bosom of luxury, we must not expect unvitiated women, any more
than to discover firmness of nerves, or delicacy of features in the torrid
zone. If this presumptive reasoning is not satisfactory, their K^ime's Sketch,
vol. 1. p. 185. H^^od. O^^o. Lib. 1. p. 90. A^^^ (...) P^^^o^re. A^ex. (...)
Alex. (...) E^se^. P^^p. Evan^. (...) 4. D^^ (...) Li^. (...) 10. Her^^. (...).
shocking and indelicate custom of collecting all their young, marriageable
women, and disposing of their charms and person^ by auction, whilst it brings a
blush on every modest cheek, may abundantly convince us, that this people had
but slender ideas of female importance, of any moral qualities in the sex, or
any mental perfections.

The Medes and Persians afford us no specimens of any great partiality
exercised to the fair. Still they groan under the rigor of the times. Still
they are unmentioned, and still they are unknown; or if any of them, casually,
pass in review before the eye of the inquisitive reader, it is only to shock
him with the mention of a body, prostituted, at the call of a capricious
tyrant, to a bestial degradation, or a mind abandoned to the grossest
ignorance, neglect and disorder.

The luxury of the Assyrians was communicated to In some provinces of the
ancient Median empire, it was customary for women to entertain a number of
husbands. Stra^. Lib. 1^.
the Medes; that of the Medes was transmitted to the Persians. The
dissoluteness of the Persian court was, proverbially, flagrant. For a
refinement of sensual gratification, kingdoms were ransacked, ingenuity was
tortured, and a considerable reward Quint. ^^^t. Abbe Mill. Elem. sur l'
History. Xen. Cyr^p. L. 1. Str^b. Lib. 11.
offered to the person, who should extend the narrow boundaries of appetite,
and possess the singular ability and address of inventing a new pleasure. Even
the hardy, martial spirit of Alexander caught the luscious infection: and his
sol diers, by dissolving, for a very little while, in the Q^^^t. Curt Mill.
Elem. and Anc. Univ. Hist.
Luxuries of the metropolis, had nearly lost that bravery and vigor, to which
they owed all the glories of the field.

It would be hoping, therefore, against all hope, and doing violence to all the
common principles of probability, to conclude that the females of such a
country, or of such an era, had any regular instruction. A mad, furious
Savage, boldly intent on conquering the whole world, imposing his arbitrary
edicts upon all, and binding, in equally inglorious fetters, their bodies and
their minds; for the sake of a harlot, burning a magnificent city, and in a fit
of drunkenness, murdering his nearest friend, affords but slender hopes of such
a moral policy, or virtuous legislation, as would consult the less spacious,
though more important interests and happiness of women. Universal savageness,
in short, and a species of brutality disgrace these darker ages of the world;
and very little mention is made of a sex, who could contribute nothing to the
trophies of a Conqueror, to the extension of empire, of the splendours of a
despotick throne. Women, in such a mode of calculation, were comparatively,
ciphers; and, when they had produced a race of savage and of healthy warriors
for the state, were supposed to have fulfilled the purposes of their existence,
if they did not even possess one sentiment of the heart, or one illuminating
ray of understanding.

After poring so long ever these dark ages, I congratulate, at once, myself and
the reader on arriving at a period which History has irradiated with a clearer
information. I mean the famous ages of Greece and Rome. Here we may expect the
condition of women to assume a very different, and more chearing aspect. Here
we may suppose their captivity will cease, and their trampled honor and
dignity revive. But this, like many other illusive hopes, is only formed to be
disappointed. It is one of those bright mornings which is quickly overcast with
darkness and clouds.

It is certain the Greeks were the very patterns of every thing that could be
charming and exquisite in taste. It breathed in their statues; it glowed in
their paintings; it fascinated in their orators; it warms us with all the
ardour of enthusiasm in their poets; and their writings are still the model of
excellence to every refined and cultivated mind. To them the fine arts, in
general, owe an exquisite perfection, which all succeeding ages emulate in
vain. Still they wanted that true politeness and urbanity of manners, which
extend to women all the delicate civilities, and all the flattering attentions.
If the Greeks had not been remarkably deficient (...) de^^cacy and (...) is,
how could they have re^^she^ (...) l^w ^^b^ld^y or (...) Aristophan^, at a time
when the^ w^^ ^^^ertain^^ with the subl^me of a Dem^^^ at ^e^e. (...) pa^^
(...) comp^^^t (...) of a ^^^hocie, and in (...)


With their exquisite sensibility to every other sort of beauty, with a passion
for seeing all her lifeless perfections, glowing on the canvas, they suffered,
by an amazing kind of indifference, the charms of living women to wither in
neglect. "and waste their sweetness on the desert air."

The truth is, eloquence and valor were the sole, exclusive ambition of the
times. As yet, women had not emerged from a low and inglorious condition of
servility. It was a still, unexploded system to shut them up from H^^n Odys.
Lib. 4.121, 122. E^^^i^. Hec^b. Sopho^. E^ectra. Wood Essay on the writings and
Genius of Homer. Ci^. in Ver. Lib. 1. C. 26.
society, and the consequences of this confinement were strongly discernible in
the features of both the sexes. The men were rough and insolent; and the women,
for want of a collision with their natural associates, had not every possible
elegance to charm. Thus imbosomed in solitude, the manners of the Grecian
Ladies might be pure, but they were not very captivating; their taste might be
innocent, but it was not improved. Retirement gave them awkwardness; and
awkwardness in its turn, denied them admiration.

As taste, however, gradually advanced, and knowledge made the feeling^
exquisitely alive, the Greeks began ardently to pant for an intercourse with
the sex: And, to the eternal disgrace of their morality, they found it in their
courtezans. They gave to vice the distinctions of virtue, and offered, at the
ignominious shrine of prostitutes, what should have been the unvarying rewards
of merit, of delicacy and discretion.

In reality, it was not so much a matter of wickedness, as of taste. Whilst
women of modesty were deprived of all advantages for improving themselves,
these courtezans, by mixing in public circles, had acquired all the
interesting allurements and Socrates and Pericles found each other at Aspasia's
S. x ^r seven writers devoted their pens to celebrate their courtezans. Three
famous painters employed their pencils to repres^nt them to advantage on the
canvas; and, when they d^e^, sumptuous monuments were erected to their memory.
(...). Webb on Painting, p. 41 Essais sur^es (...). ^^^sem. Men. Tho^.


attractions. Hence the unbound (...) ^^^ions they received (...) most learned
(...) a^ their houses. Hence poets of the highest fame paid homage to their
charms; and hence the most celebrated painters endeavored to immortalize, with
a licentious pencil, their merit and their graces! So true it is, that taste is
not always, a concomitant of virtue; and that over a people, in certain periods
of society, languishing with sensibility, and enfeebled in their morals, the
brilliant accomplishments will have a greater influence, than all the virtues
and good qualities united. Amongst such a people what was female Education?
Whilst modesty was thus openly violated and shocked, where was moral
discipline, culture and improvement?

The behavior of the Romans to their women assumes a different aspect,
according to the varying state of their taste, from the revolutions of their
empire, the extension of their conquests, from their intercourse with other
nations, and the progressive culture of knowledge, politeness and refinement.

At first, a hardy, warlike and heterogeneous race of men collected from the
banditti of all places and countries, fired only with the passion of military
glory, frugal in their taste and rigid in morals, they expected, and they
experienced a Di^l. de causis quae Romans corrumpebant eloquen^^^m. V^l. Max.
Lib. 2. S. 1. Blackwell's Memoirs of the court of Augustus, Vol. 1. Live. Lib.
26 C. 49. Alex. ab Alex. Vol. 1. p. ^71. C. 11. A^l^^ G^ll. N^^. Atti. Lib. 10.
C. 23. Aelian. V^^. I^^ft. Lib. 2. Plot. Vit. Anton. Kennett's Ar. I stay on
the Roman Education.


strong similarity of rigid qualities in their women, a faithful attention to
domestic duties, an inviolable constancy and a submissive, unremitting
attention. But their conduct to the sex was that of Despots to their slaves,
unmixed with esteem, and unsoftened with affection. They never thought of
treating wives, as their Equals, with the luxury of confidence, or the
reciprocity of tender and Amongst the Romans, a wife was considered, as, in
every respect, the slave of her husband. She might be ^o^d by him at pleasure,
or put to death by an arbitrary exertion of his authority. It seems probable
from the ceremony (...) "co^^ptio," that she was purchased with a real price
^^om her relations. She was ^^^koned incapab^e of having any estate of her own;
and whatever she possessed, at the time of marriage, became the property of her
husband. He^n^^. An^^^. Romans


endearing conversation. If their women had but plain and homely virtue, it was
all they desired. They left it to others, whose minds grasped at less than the
conquest of the globe, to engage in so very effeminate an office, as that of
nursing the embryo graces of their heart, or calling forth, by adequate
encouragements, the native and unsuspected vigor of their understanding.
Valor and a thirst for military glory, considerably swallowed up all the
tender emotions; and, whilst to die for their country was the height of their
ambition, they left it to the Quixotism of other times to expire for a woman.
The heroism of those early ages How savage were the manners of warriors to each
other in the time of Homer. 11. Lib. 8. V. 161. Lib. 12.247. Lib. 23.473. Lib.
9.590. Lib. 22.60. Lib. 6.55. Lib. 17.125. Lib. 22.375. Men and. apud Stoba^um.
Trates, of a similar nature, are discoverable in many of the Roman heroes. They
frequently took great steps toward the extermination of the people they had
conquered. Witness their behavior to Carthage, Numantia, Corinth, etc. though
some writers have celebrated their lenity to the vanquished. Dion. Halic. Lib.
1. Cicce Off. Lib. 1. Poly. L. 10.

An ancient writer mentions it as a custom of the Scythian^ to suck the blood
of their enemies killed in battle. Pomp. Mel. Lib. 2. C. 1. Such was the manner
of the Saracens, and of the American Indians. Carver's trav^^^.

The ancient Scythians destroyed the nations they had conquered. He^^^. Melpo^.
When the S^^^^metae inv^ded Scythia, they (...) wa^^^ the whole country, and
pu^ to ^^^ath the vanqu^shed. Diod. Sic. Lib. 2. For the ^^^el^y of the
Va^^^a^, ^n this particular, see Note V. to Ro^^^tion's Hist. of Charles the
5th.


had not that agreeable accommodation in its manners, that gentleness in its
nature, or humanity in its exercise, which later times have produced. Warriors
had not tempered intrepidity with softness, nor courage with sensibility. They
had not softened the forbidding portrait of the soldier with the milder graces
of the citizen, the philosopher or the friend. A successful hero did not, then,
invite a general he had vanquished, to partake of the social, elegant repast,
prepared by politeness, and sweetened with a noble and a generous
commiseration. Such a combination of, seemingly, opposite qualities, such a
softening of the natural horrors of war, we certainly owe to the superior
progress of modern civilization. It was an honor reserved for the conquerors
of the present age, and will last, when the greenest of their laurels has
decayed.

Occasional mention, indeed is made of some illustrious Roman Sic. C^^nel^am,
G^a^chorum, sic Aureliam, Julii Caesa^^s, sic Autiam, Augusti m^trem, (...)
Elegant D^alogue on the (...).
Ladies, who, by stooping from their dignity, to the painful and arduous office
of forming youthful minds, did honor to humanity and to their sex. But this
attention was, chiefly, lavished on the boys. It had only in contemplation the
training up of orators or heroes for the state. Girls are not so much as
mentioned in the account. They were silently abandoned to that untutored
ignorance, (...) which Nature had produced them. Amongst this celebrated
people, women were always thrown into the back ground of the piece. The
picture, at large, was grouped with the laurels, and emblazoned with the
trophies and achievements of the men.

C^^. T^s^. Quaest. Lib. 5.25.
As we approach farther into Roman civilization, a new page opens on us in the
history of women. A revolution, similar to that of all other countries, in
certain stages of society, took place in the treatment and manners of the sex.
Dragged from a long and inglorious confinement, their patronage was courted,
and their charms were admired. In a state of roused passion, and of inflamed
imagination, as objects of pleasure, they had a temporary consequence. Asiatic
luxury, imparted to (...) capital, viewed them as a part^^ sensual refinement;
and, havi^^ exhausted all the other varied: ^^gions of sensuality for its
gra^^fication, wished at last to revel (...) their arms. But the sex are n^^
indebted to any age or count^^ for this kind of valuation. It insults their
delicacy; it degra^^ their understanding, and has ^ most unhappy influence on
th^^ fortunes and their taste.

Alex, ab Alexand. Sueton, pas^im. V^rn pati muliebria, mulieres pudicitiam in
pro^^^ hab^^^. Sall. Live. Lib. 39.
The manners of the Roman (...) quickly took the infection of t^^^ times. In
the hot bed of luxury, (...) their virtues and graces relaxe^ Their modesty
declined, their chas^^ty became less tremblingly alive the unhallowed touch;
and, by degrees, their delicacy lost its nati^^ fairness, till, at length, it
was tinged with the darkest shades of indecency and vice. Never was the female
character Ju^. Sat. 6. The female reader will be highly gratified by perusing
Owen's masterly translation of this (...), and by the general apologies in
favor of women, (...) prefaced.
more prostituted than at Rome. A reader, who enters on their history with
admiration, is obliged to close it with amazement and regret.

Knowledge, which is, generally, seen in those epochs of society, when luxury
has made considerable advances, dispensed, indeed, some of its favors on the
sex. The Romans enumerate several illustrious women, whom science crowning with
its greenest laurels, has preserved from that oblivion, which is, too
generally, the portion of the sair. But they are mentioned, only to be
disapproved by every person of sentiment and taste. Their seize were of
an enormous and improper kind; a dropsy in the understanding. Besides the reign
of their talents was but short. It preceded but a little while, the extirpation
of the Empire. The taper just shot forth an extraordinary blaze, before it was
about to be extinguished forever.

Where, in short, shall we turn, or whither change the scene, to see women with
no marks of degradation upon them, treated with respect, and educated, as
rational and intelligent creatures? The greatest lawgivers and the brightest
geniuses, that ever figured in antiquity, L' Esprit des Loix. Aristot. de Rep.
Lib. 7. C. 16. lending a wife to a friend, was recommended to the Spartan, by
the celebrated institutions of Lycurgus. Lu^. Pharsal. Mitf. Hist. of Greece,
Vol. 1. p. 192. Plut. in Vit. Lycurg. Solon made some trifling regulations in
favor of the sex; but they had more an eye to political utility, than to their
own personal honor or advantage. Po^t. Greek antiq.
Confucius, Zoroaster, Solon and Lycurgus, famed through the world for their
extensive talents and wise legislation, have scarcely made one single decree in
favor of this sex, excepting with some view, remote or immediate, to political
advantage. In the prosecution of their favorite schemes of policy and of
national greatness, they have considered them but as mere, passive instruments
of an extensive population. Some of these Sages have done violence to their
delicacy by the most immoral and arbitrary regulations. Their chastity has been
violated; their modesty shocked, and the sacred tie of marriage modified and
changed, as the ever fluctuating interests of society have seemed to require;
and, with bodies to answer all political purposes, very little thought has been
lavished on their minds.

Stuart's View of Soc. in Europe. Abbe Millots, Hist. Literaire des
Troubadours. H^^d's Letters on Chivalry and Romance, Letter 3.
Though in the ages of Chivalry, women received a kind of adoration, and
numbered in their service, such a pompous crowd of heroes, warriors and
knights, yet this appears not to have proceeded from that heart felt esteem,
which is conferred on intrinsic merit, or an elevated understanding. In fact,
they were distinguished merely for their sex. Because it was the fashion, they
were courted as objects of a romantic protection, and as instruments of a
ridiculous, and visionary honor. And, though, when this rage expired, their
abilities were carried to an extraordinary height, under the powerful workings
of an unnatural enthusiasm, they were but disgusting monuments of talents
misapplied, and of taste misdirected. A Never, perhaps, were there seen at any
one time so many princesses of improved understanding, as were then, in that
part of Europe. The courts of Naples, of Milan, or Man^^^, of Parma, of
Florence, etc. formed so many schools of ^aste, in which there was an emulation
of tallents and of glory. Ess. on the Char. of women, translated by Mrs.
Kindersley from the French.
woman, issuing out laws, disputing in philosophy, ^^ranguing the Pope in
Latin, writing Greek, studying Hebrew, commencing Theologian, and preaching in
public, may be a literary heroine, that challenges our wonder, but has nothing
of that softness, timidity and reserve, which, in that sex, so powerfully
captivate our hearts, and inchant our imaginations.

Roberts. Hist. of Charles the 5th. Vol. 1. p. 69. M^mo^^ ^ur ^ancienne
Cheval^ie, par M. de la Cu^^^. M^^^. Dist^. of Ranks in Soc. p. 5^.
To this spirit of chivalry, however, the women owe an eternal obligation. It
was this which called them forth from confinement and obscurity into public
attention. It was this, which has given birth to that species of gallantry,
which, molded as it has been by increasing knowledge, still, in a greater or a
less degree, pervades every part of the continent of Europe. It is this, which,
by giving them a collision with society, has wonderfully heightened all their
graces and their charms; which has appropriated to them no inconsiderable rank
in civilized society, and made the strength and consequence of the other sex,
fashionably, subservient to their ease and their protection. Highly as we think
of our gallantry and politeness, they have issued from this northern source.
From Barbarians we have learned complaisance to the sex, if not to instruct
them.

Whilst the institution of Chivalry rendered women of such unusual consequence,
and celebrated all their charms with eulogies in Europe, a Lawgiver and a
Religion had sprung up in Asia, which rigidly doomed them to an inglorious
confinement, as mere objects of a sensual and fugitive delight. This slavery
and this confinement, time has not altered. The customs of the For the
immutability of Eastern customs, see Fale. on the Inf. of Clim. L'Esprit des
Loix. Shaw's Travels. p. 227. Mrs. Kindersley's Letters from the East indies.
L. 72.
Orientals are, in general, as unchangeable as the rocks, which surround them.
The increasing humanity and learning of the times have not yet been able to
penetrate into the East, or give this injured sex the shadow of relief. Instead
of consulting the improvement of their minds, their tyrants and adorers expect
nothing from them, but to give their persons every perfume, and every luscious
advantage, that may communicate a higher zest to an indelicate moment, and
heighten the luxury of mere, animal indulgence. As if they had no souls, they
are treated but as brutes of a superior order. Even their very virtue is
rendered involuntary; their distresses are unpitied, and their signs are
unheard.

In Africa, or the wilds of America, it is vain to expect a better fate, or a
more respectful attention to females. Savages of all countries, indolent and
cruel, take advantage of superior Robert. Hist. of Amer. Vol. 1. p. 319. Mill.
Dis. of Ranks in Society, p. 18. Aritot. Pol. Lib. 1. C. 2.
strength to oppress the weaker sex, and blind them in the fetters of slavery
and subordination. In some of these countries, the hardships of women are
grievous beyond all possible description. In one place In the Brazils.
treated as beasts of burden, carrying to the war their children, hammocks and
provisions on their backs; in another, though nominally united to Sovereigns,
yet performing This is the case with the Sovereign of Giaga. Kaim's Sket^hes.
the drudgeries of common slaves; in a third, permitted Amongst some of the
Negroes in the coast of Guinea. Histoir Generale des Voyag. Tom. 5. Live. 10.
Chap. 3.
to appear, only, in a kneeling posture, in the presence of their Lords; in a
fourth, In the Kingdom of Potany.
hired out for the wages of prostitution; here, sold like cattle, to the
Amongst the Cir^^ssians.
highest bidders in a public market; and there, doomed, when nature has
pronounced them incapable of bearing children, to This was the cruelty of the
ancient Chinese to their women.
be put to death, what heart of tenderness relents not at their lot? What mind
of delicacy does not shudder at the prospect? But, destitute of knowledge, and
devoid of sensibility, the cruel K^^^r^^. Hist of Amer. Vol. 1. Ka^^^'s S^^ten.
(...).
savage beholds such sufferings with a stupid unconcern, and would load a
single murmur of an oppressed sex, with a redoubled oppression.

Hitherto I have placed the cause of female neglect in the want of a proper
civilization and refinement, and considered it as resulting from a particular
stage of society and manners. I have been reviewing periods and nations, in
which a savage barbarism or an ardent thirst of extending dominion was
considered as the essence of wisdom and of glory. I have been speculating, at
leisure, on the conduct of men, uninfluenced by religious sentiments and
unenlightened by the gospel. If, therefore, we have blamed their treatment of
this sex, their criminality is considerably alleviated by their ignorance, and
those very physical causes, which produced, palliate the moral guilt, which
would, otherwise, attend it. We pity women; and, from views more enlarged than
their despots had, we even pity or forgive their oppressors. If the first were
degraded, insulted or enslaved, candor pleads in favor of the latter, that no
proper sense of duty operated on their conscience; that revelation had not
dissipated their intellectual darkness, or pointed out the awful consequences
of actions; and that they did not know the richness or the value of the jewel
they despised.

But when we come to countries and aeras, when all the secondary causes of
advanced knowledge, taste and civilization combine with that, which should
always be the first (I mean religious principle) to give women every possible
advantage of moral discipline and cultivation; when, as men valuing themselves
on their refinement, we should deny no attentions to this weaker sex, and, as
Christians, ^e taught that they, like all oth^^ ^^man creatures, are of
infinite consequence in the sight of heaven; that they are gifted with the
treasure of an immortal soul; that they are training for eternal happiness or
misery; that the awful alternative will very much depend on their present
education; and that the care of it, therefore, is the highest duty, that can
possibly engage the parental solicitude -- with these phy^^^l advantages --
these suggestions of conscience -- and these powerful impressions of religion
on the mind -- what can be said, if any negligence is still observable to
those, who, at the same time, are confessedly the fairest and most elegant part
of the creation; who bear and nurse our offsprings, are admitted to our bosoms,
alleviate our cares; who, by their gentleness, compose the agitations of our
minds, and are formed to contribute to all the delicate pleasures and
transports of life? What pleas can we offer to extenuate our guilt? What
evasions can we make at the tribunal of reason or of Heaven, and what more than
even savage insensibility must darken our characters with an indelible disgrace.

The condition of women in England, no doubt, may justly be pronounced to be
supremely happy, if we compare it with what that of many females has been in
some of the ages, that have just passed in review before us, or what it is, at
present, in most countries of the world. They have certainly, in their
allotment here, as many obvious advantages, over women in general, as Nature
has given them a marked superiority of personal beauty, figure and attractions.
If Europe has been called the Paradise of the sex, Britain seems to be the
choicest spot of this Paradise, in which the sovereign Former has deigned to
place the fairest of the fair, and munificently, to distill, upon their favored
heads, the richest of his sweets. In a happy, and enviable temperature of
climate, in the riches of commerce, in the improvement of the arts, in the
blessings of liberty, and of a religion purified from bigotry on the one hand,
and fanaticism on the other, they are, doubtless, equal partakers with
ourselves. Nor in the present scale of society, do British ladies want
considerable weight. Is it the fashion of the times to pay them attentions; and
gallantry is planning honors for itself, when it seems only studious to
decorate the brows, and to enhance the consequence of women. Incivility to a
female, however frivolous, would, in modern estimation, redound upon its
author, however distinguished; and even men of rigid principles are led, almost
mechanically, to heap flattering compliments and encomiums upon women, for
which their private judgment does not always find a claim in their hearts or
understanding. Still if this sex could diseriminate nicely, and would divest
themselves of an infatuating vanity, perhaps they would discover, that even all
this amounts not to a rational or an adequate attention.

Is it not a strong impulse of passion, that suggests such smooth things? Is it
not a selfish vanity, that would be called polite, and stand well with the sex?
Is it not a studious accommodation of ourselves to (what we conceive) their
frivolous sentiments and taste? Is it not a policy, which shrinks from their
censure, and would not wholly sacrifice their applause and admiration? Is it
not the mechanical influence of manners, unaccompanied with any correspondent
conviction, or is it not a motley figure, composed of all these different
materials, which we offer at their shrine, without any very high opinion of the
sex, or any proper ^^timation.

It the Ladies knew what unreserved observations, we make upon them, in their
absence, and what degrading liberties are taken with their characters,
particularly by those, who offer them, when present, the most fulsome
adulation, they would know, that this is a necessary caution, and they would
learn to distinguish a supersicial politeness from a real respect. If they
would reason justly, they might soon be undeceived. They might conclude from
the very face of their prevailing education, that we wish them to bewitch our
senses by their beauty and accomplishments, instead of securing our love and
our esteem by any solid qualities or any rational acquirements.

But let us carefully analyze this subject. Let us come to first principles,
and reason from facts.

Till of late years, a very remarkable negligence prevailed in the culture of
their understanding.

It requires no violent effort of memory to recall the period, when there were
females, and of no trifling rank, that were not able to compose or even spell a
letter with propriety; and though of late, this defect has been considerably
remedied, yet how insufficient is the education, which we still, generally give
them to fit them to be prudent mothers, sensible companions, wise and valuable
members of society, or (what is most of all) thoughtful and religious
christians? As soon as they are born, we consign them over to the care of a
mercenary nurse who infuses, with her milk, the illiberality of her mind, the
ruggedness of her temper, and the p^p^^le diseases of her constitution, and,
when they are of age to discriminate, and lay in a stock of ideas, we fend them
to a boarding school to learn, what? Music, dancing, accomplishments,
dissipation and intrigue -- every thing but solid knowledge -- every thing but
humility -- every thing but piety -- every thing but virtue?

Is this an adequate discharge of the parental (that is) the highest of all
christian and social duties? Can a mother easily acquit her conscience, if a
girl thus vitiated from her early years, becomes the slave of folly, the
plaything of fashion, the dupe, as she grows up, of some insidious villain, or,
at least, the insipid poisoner of a connection, that promised every sweet and
every blessing? When such a mother lies upon her deathbed, will she feel no
melancholy regret for a daughter's past, and no dreadful anticipation of her
future indiscretions? Can she bid her the last adieu with a composed heart, and
will not these words dart, like a sunbeam, on her awakened conscience, And thou
shall teach these statutes diligently unto thy children, (of these surely
daughters are a part) and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house,
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down and when thou risest
up?

There are, doubtless, many exceptions to be made of parents, who are
studiously and religiously attentive to this important duty. The Queen of these
realms is an illustrious instance. Amidst all th^^^ incir^ling cares of
greatness and the enchantments of a throne, she has never forgotten, even for a
moment, the tenderest or the minutest attentions of a mother. Her royal
daughters do honor to her efforts and proclaim her success. Strangers and
foreigners are captivated with their persons, but they who know them best,
declare that they discover still superior charms in their hearts and
understanding. Group them in one part, as cultivating laudable improvements of
the mind, reading the best authors, proficients in the belles lettres, and
conversant with the studies, which particularly interest and ornament their
sex, Geography, Astronomy, Natural History, Poetry, etc. in another, as
excelling in all the creative efforts of the needle, fancy work, flowering,
embroidery, etc. and you will have a beautiful picture before The Princess
Royal of England independently of her ^^^n, is esteemed by people of real
taste, one of the most accomplished women in Europe.
you, that exhibits woman in her zenith of perfection, and will be viewed with
admiration, by the latest posterity, when all the little earthly distinctions
of royalty are fled.

Nor do I wish to deny the merit of those few, who have even handled the pen
upon this subject. I am ready to acknowledge every attention bestowed on the
sex, by the labors of a Halifax, by the the sensible and religious
observations of a Chapone, and the more elegant and judicious sketches of a
Gregory. The present writings of Madame la Comtesse de Genlis are a treasure to
young Ladies. And I review, not without a singular pleasure, the great and ever
pious Fenelon, esteeming it a^^^^st the highest of his pastoral cares, to
become as well by his pen, as his discourses, the religious guardian and
instructor of women; whilst the spectators, tattlers, the guardian, the world,
the rambler, in their respective times, must be confessed to have attended, in
many excellent, fugitive pieces of raillery and of seriousness, to their
knowledge and improvement. Still a few examples, to the contrary, do not affect
a general observation. Such a partial remedy is not calculated to remove the
malignant disorder. Even royal virtue, in this instance, has not spread with so
diffusive a rapidity, as would probably, have attended royal indiscretion.

It may be said, that England justly boasts many literary women. True. But who
can say that they are not so many prodigies in their species, or that general
rules admit not of exceptions? There are uncommon me^eors in the planetary
world. There are eccentrick bodies in the heavens, which challenge our
amazement. There are females, enriched with an etherial spirit, which mounts up
to its kindred skies. I wish not to deny the fame of a Graham, the knowledge of
a Carter, or to pluck one single, well earned laurel from the temples of a
Seward. But prodigies of female genius do not prove at all, the general state
of female talents, or the ordinary level of female understanding. I would ask,
at the same time, whether, for one of these cultivated few, we have not
thousands of an opposite description, unlettered and unread.

Besides, I am not arguing for these great seize. I am only contending
for that degree of cult^^e, and, particularly, of m^^^^ culture, which shall
conven^^^tly incorporate with the mass of common duties; which shall administer
a proper share of principles and taste, and, whilst it does not exalt a woman
to an unnatural and invidious eminence, does not depress her to an abject state
of frivolousness, insipidity and contempt.

Though the Thickness^'s Sketches of the lives and writings of the ^^^^es or
France.
French Ladies, by being educated in convents, and there relieving the
uniformity and loneliness of their prison with entertaining books, and
afterward by a constant intercourse with the other sex, have acquired
considerable knowledge and refinement, yet what principles of just morality or
decorum can have been graven on their hearts, when their characteris^^k feature
is levity, and fashion is int^^gue? It is obvious to any discerning observer,
that female literature, in this country, is swelled beyond its natural
dimensions. To sit as judges upon literary productions, is intruding on the
prerogative of the other sex. I want not a plethora, but a sound and
undistended state of the female understanding; and if a woman had every thing
that glitters in knowledge, or fascinates in taste, what comfort would she
administer to the possessor of her person, if he could not rely on the
tenderness of her friendship, and the sincerity of her affection? To trust
graces with such women, is putting weapons into the hands of one, who is
intoxicated or insane. To give the charms of knowledge, is only furnishing
incentives for a speedier seduction. It is laying thorns under pillows, that
thould have down; and it is cou^ting ease in the bosom of vexation.

France, indeed, is so far from being any proper model of female education,
that I conceive it to be the vitiated taste of this people, which, set off with
a graceful and bewitching manner, has infected many other countries of Europe,
but particularly, our own, and overwhelmed them, at least, with a deluge of
frivolity, if not of crimes.

The levity, or (to speak in softer terms) the vivacity of this people, arising
from air, climate, food, education, government, frequency and peculiar kind In
France old and young associate much together, the melancholy and ph^legm of age
are dissipated in the (...)
of intercourse, and unchecked by a religion, that is contrived to be made very
easy to the conscience, No nation in Europe, has, perhaps, less real religion
than France. A gay, ^^vely people, they disbelieve the absurd^^^^ of p^^ery,
they spain at its shackles, they are disgushed with it, ^^^om, and make a
natural, easy transition to the other extre^e of deis^n and infidelity. Their
hi^^ re^^^^ for monarchy and the danger of inte^^^ring in posi^^^^ o^ ^^^^^on,
keep them, in general, from attempting innovation. But their w^iters, who burst
these pru^ear^^^^ (...) are most particularly distinguish (...) by then a
b^^her. ^^elve^^^ l'E^p^^t Vol ^^^e, Rayna^, Rou^^^^ the Com^^^^ Ba^^^on, etc.
what a g^o^p!
has burst those ^ber barriers, which either principle or delicacy would
impose, and, and where the female sex are concerned, thinks of and studies
nothing, but the graces.

In this school, a Chesterfield learned his art of profound dissimulation. From
such originals, he took his disgusting portraits of the whole sex. From this
source, principally, issues the impure stream of British indiscretion, intrigue
and infidelity.

In proportion as our people of quality have been connected with the French,
they have imbibed their maxims. Morals have been sacrificed to graces,
principles to politeness. Hence the fashionable mode amongst ladies of high
taste, is to be frank and easy. Hence a system, which calls delicacy,
prudishness; and reserve, the unweildy encumbrance of a gothic age, though a
celebrated writer has, somewhere, remarked, that "There Is no woman, where
there is no reserve."

It may be necessary, perhaps, to inform some readers, that, ^hen an ^talian
Lady is married, she chooses for herself a Cecisbeo of Gallant, who is to be
her almost inseparable attendant, to pay her all the petit attentions, do for
her a thousand ^ind offices, escort her to public pla^^e, and frequen^ly take
airings with her in her carriage. From t^^^e excurtions, the Lady is not
shocked at retus^ning with her Gallant by her side, in the dusk of the evening;
and that husband wou^d be an object of eternal ^i^ cule, whom such
circumstances could lead to entertain the most distant suspicion of her virtue,
or, rather, who could not sacrifice to the preva^ence of fashion, ad the
privileges of marriage, and all the delicate ^eelings ^f the mind. Barretti's
Travels, Vol. 1. p. 79. Sharp's Trav. P. 75.
The depraved education of females in Italy, is abundantly obvious from every
page of their writers. We trace it sufficiently in the prevalence of a
ridiculous custom, which, affecting all the quixotism of platonic, fosters at
least, the strong suspicion of indulgence to the impurest love; a custom, which
degrades a husband into the mere, passive, uncomplaining beholders of nameless
indiscretions; which represents a woman as the dupe of a foolish, visionary
refinement, the slave of vanity, or of still more criminal and indelicate
desires; and which under the pretensions of subliming sentiment, counteracts
the visible appointment of providence, and robs the happiest connection in the
world, of all its reciprocal confidence and sweets. How is it that such a
vision has not, long since, disappeared in the cultivation of philosophy, and
the progress of civilization? In what future, happy era shall the sun of reason
shine, uneclipsed, on the fair inhabitants of this enviable, and delicious,
quarter of the globe? When shall a religion, purified from absurdity, whisper
with success, this plain and obvious article of its creed, in their ears, that
marriage is the providential tie of one man to one woman, for their mutual
society, comfort and assistance? When their education is more rational. they
will know the^r true dignity. When they understand their true dignity, they
will seek, at once, their happiness and their honor in the sole exclusive
friendship and attentions of the man, to whom they have already disposed of
their hands, and should, at the same time, have given their affection. Their
present system of culture and maxims, is absurd in the extreme; an injury to
the other sex, a libel upon their own. It is a mortal, grasping at the clouds.
Or, in a truer sense, it is Vanity, tissued with indelicacy and with guilt.

In Spain, S^inburne's Trave^^ p. ^86.
whether the true spirit of philosophy has never yet been able to penetrate,
and where the bigotry of a dark and clogging religion still reigns in all its
force, we Even the moral ridicule of the inimitable Cervantes has not been able
to extirpate the empire of absurdity in this kingdom.
are delighted with the sight of many beautiful women, but have no pleasure
from contemplating their character or education. We view their persons and are
charmed; we survey their minds and prejudices, and turn away disgusted and
amazed.

On the minds of this people, the ancient rage of Knight Errantry has, still,
left such a wild and romantic enthusiasm, that a woman, happening to be left
alone with a man, would consider herself as highly neglected, if a sensibility
to her charms did not prompt him to such indecent liberties with her person, as
the females of most other countries would esteem an indignity, and think them
selves obliged to punish with eternal resentment.

With such sentiments, how fallen and how undesirable is Woman! In such a
country, what can be her culture! Under the tyranny of such notions, what the
pleasures she is able to bestow! Can they be mixed with confidence, can they be
relished by the heart? What sweet flowers perish in such a clime, for want of
expansion? What rich and what luxuriant boughs spread around their possessors,
only a moping and a melancholy darkness, which, if they were judiciously pruned
and directed, might serve to furnish out a most agreeable shade to refresh and
enliven all their retirements. From the high soul'd enthusiasm of Spanish
Ladies, under proper regulations, what might not be expected?

The great and despotic Frederick, a prodigy of talents, boundless in his
genius, and restless in his schemes, in a very long life, that has been still
more extended by continual exertions, has done nothing over his extensive
dominions, that evinces any great attentions to the sex. They are much in the
same predicament of ignorance and frivolity here, as in many other quarters of
the globe: The Moore in his travels, and Sherlock in his letters, have given a
much more favorable opinion of this monarch, than we have been accustomed to
entertain. We have always consifered him as a great warrior, and a consummate
politician; but they represent him, as united with these neither qualities, all
the finest seelings of humanity, and very enviable literary seize.
only creatures of his kingdom that have not shared in the benefits of his
political greatness, and his wise legislation.

What advantages they have enjoyed, have arisen from pure, physical causes of
society and manners, unconnected with any moral force from religion, or any
political edicts from the throne.

Like other great warriors, the King of Prussia has been swallowed up with
views, of too immense a nature, to attend, in any great degree, to the
softness, to the charms and blandishments of woman. Unlike some other heroes,
he seems to have experienced little even of the physical instinct, that
attaches to the sex; like many other great and insulting Legislators, he has
studied more the fecundity of their nature, than the formation of their minds;
through his territories, rewards have been offered to women, who were pregnant
with an offspring, that matrimony has not legitimated The King of Prussia does
not seem to have one grain of religion. Dreaming little of another world, he
studies only to agrandize himself, as much as possible, in this. When I think
of him, and many other despotic princes, thus tyranizing over their species,
and seeming to suppose the bulk of men, born only for their convenience; when I
consider their cruel edicts, the blood they have shed, and the ravages they
have made in all ages of the world, I always recollect that passage in the
Revelation, and tremble for them; And the kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men hid themselves in the den^ and rocks of the mountains,
and said to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of
him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.
with its sacred rites; the interests of morality, he has not scrupled to
sacrifice to those of population; and though with a mind, that grasped at
universal knowledge, and unlimited fame, his palace at Sans Souci, has been the
hospitable retreat of Frederick's civility to Voltaire is universally known.
The quarrel which ensued, does infinite discredit to the latter, and proves him
to have been one of those irritable, proud, jealous and vindictive men, with
whom it was impossible so live on terms of friendship or esteem.
literary men, poets and philosophers, seems not to have entertained one single
thought of calling forth the dormant abilities of women. Too little or too
frivolous to engage his notice, they have not been so happy as to experience
his protection.

The Emperor, bent as he seems on universal reformation, aiming, with an
enlightened mind and an enlarged philosophy, to found a powerful and an
extensive empire, on the ruins of an absurd and desolating religion, appears
not, any more than his illustrious neighbor, the patron of this sex. Amongst
the various projects of his inventive fancy, and his restless, ambitious mind,
female culture has not been dignified with a place; and, if monasteries are no
longer to immure in chains and darkness, the weeping or misguided fair, it is
not that they may become inteligent companions, or diffuse a soster charm and
luster on society; but only that they may turn out more prolific mothers, and
more robust and healthy nurses of embryo heroes, warriors, politicians,
subjects and servants, to carry on his vast and complicated schemes. Still
their value is placed in their persons; still their milky bosoms are supposed
to comprise all their virtues and their charms.

Over Williams on the northern Governments. Letters on the present state of
Poland.
the immense territory of Russia, a darkness and a barbarism have, hitherto,
prevailed, which obstruct every idea of female, or indeed any other species of
cultivation. In a country, where the Clergy themselves have been represented as
palpably Williams on the Nor. Gov. Vol. 2. p. 643.
ignorant, little information can be supposed to have dawned on the bulk of the
people. In an empire of so much savageness, where, not very long ago, even
punishments of the K^im's Sketches, and Wraxall's Tour through the northern
parts of Eur. p. 249 and 313.
most indelicate nature were inflicted upon females, where, the, spirit of
their religion forbids all enquiry, and the throne rests most securely on the
basis of ignorance, it would be contrary to one of my grand positions, that
women should rise into any great degree of consequence or notice. And though
the present adventuring spirit of the Empress wishes to make Petersburgh the
residence of the An imperial academy of arts and sciences is now established at
Petersburgh, and Catherine is diffusing, by every possible method, the spirit
of enquiry of literature and refinement. Royal rewards are held forth, as
prizes, to rouse emulation, and to call the sciences from their "present, lowly
bed."
arts, civilization and politeness, yet there is little in her character to
encourage the hope of any great attention Wraxall, however, in his Tour through
the northern parts of Europe, has mentioned a princely and magnificent building
at Petersburgh, designed by her predecessor. Elizabeth, for a nunnery, which
the wisdom of Catherine has converted into a place of public education for
young women of all conditions.
to the women of her kingdom. Herself wanting true, female taste, she is not
likely to issue forth the laws, which regulate and enforce it. A great and
uncommon heroine, she seems to know little of those charming graces, timidities
and delicacies, which culture should call forth in woman, and encouragements
should ripen; her portrait is made up of all the glowing colors, without any
softening shades from the mild and the attractive. She may be a great woman,
and the wonder of the North; but she is not a Charlotte, more beloved, than
feared; a pattern of graces and virtues to her sex, and infinitely more
distinguished by these, than all the splendors of her throne.

One wonder strikes us on the whole of this investigation. Whilst the Christian
religion is professed in these kingdoms, whither is its spirit fled? Under all
its varying forms and ceremonials, what becomes of its actuating principles, of
its spirit and its power?

The truth is, Christianity is the proteus image of every varying country and
taste, debased with the impurest mixtures of men; now shackled with
superstition, then as falsely sublimed by fanaticism; often forging chains for
the person or the conscience: Always made subservient to the established
polity; seldom enlightened or strong enough to influence the conduct, and as
rarely looking to the real happiness or interests of mankind.

I will not shock the reader, or any longer exhaust his patience with the
horrid pictures I could draw Williams on the Northern Governments, Vol. 1.
of Danish, Vol. 2. p. 643.
Polish, or Vol. 1. p. 636.
Swedish women. If I was disposed for it, a rich abundance of materials is at
hand, to convince him that in none of the last recited countries, the condition
of women is at all less unhappy, or the clouds of their oppression and
ignorance dispersed. Enough has been said to evince their general degradation
and neglect. The fact is too notorious to be mistaken, and too strong to be
controverted. Even in the most civilized kingdoms, women, in the same moment,
are courted and despised. With an exquisite organization, lively passions and a
happy imagination, that give a disposition for most talents, and for every
virtue, we train them up to be FRIVOLOUS and INSIPID; and, whilst we rob the
shade of all its sweetest comforts, are doing injuries to society, that can
never be repaired.

ESSAY II.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings;
Reigns here, and revels not in the bought smiles
Of harlors, loveless, ^oyless, unendear'd;
These lulled by nightingales, embracing slept;
And on their naked la^^s, the flowery root
Shower'd roses --
PAR. LOST. QUID DE^^AT, QUID NON, QUO VIRIUS QUO FE^AT ERROR. --

Hor. Art. Poet.
This Essay is intended to be a philosophical theory of the progress of love,
as unconnected with any particular religion, or indeed with any system of
Revelation. In moulding this passion, moral causes will, doubtless, have their
influence, but the physical will, generally, preponderate over all others.
THAT the passions were implanted in us by the Deity, as the springs of all our
actions, and are therefore, in a certain degree, innocent and lawful, is too
obvious a doctrine, in the theory of morals, to need any illustration.

Amongst these passions, the love of the other sex is infinitely the strongest
and the most universal; and by operating at a time of life, when the character
and habits are most essentially affected, has given rise to the greatest
revolutions in society, and to some of the most extraordinary incidents of
common life.

To touch upon the subject of love, is gliding with an electrick force and
quickness, into every bosom. The description of it never fails to create an
universal interest, or to arrest the general attention, whether we read its
progress, its adventures and its revolutions in the sublime and dignified
language of history, in the patherick tragedy, in the visionary novel, or hear
it only glanced at in the casy and familiar play of social conversation. To the
old, it recalls, in an agreeable manner, early glowing fondnesses, and early
scenes, which the chilliness of years, only, now, permits Imagination to enjoy;
whilst younger people with a rapture, that thrills on all their finest
sensibilities, apply the picture, thus gratefully exhibited, to the nearest and
the dearest favorite of their hearts.

Love, like all other passions, has suffered in the wrong opinions, and the
perverse representations of different men. Libertines have degraded it into
downright brutality, forgetting that sentiment is a part of our frame, and that
we are something raised above the grovelling nature of the beasts that perish.
The platonic doctrine is the fanaticism of love, It is the pride of sentiment,
raising to itself a temporary fabric, on the ru^s of mat^er It is an unnatural
effort to become what nature never meant we should be. It is a false delicacy,
concealing under romantic names, a passion, which neither needs to call ^orth
apologies nor blushes. No man, perhaps, ever entertained a warm friendship for
a woman, and no woman for a man, in which difference of sex did not make an
essential consideration. Possibly this is the primary movement, which sets all
our partiality for them at work, if we could nicely trace the subtle and
electrical working. of the ^^ind to their source. Platonism, in short, may be a
fine spun theory, and convey an agreeable sound to the soueam^sh ears of
delicacy, but has, in few instances, I believe, been reduced to practice. Young
ladie^ talk without reserve; they think they may do it with safety and
plansibility, of friendship for a man. -- Let me warn them, that it is, often a
tenderer passion, and that some circumstances and a little opportunity have
frequently proved, much at their expense, the truth of my doctrine.


Platonists, on the other hand, have refined it into an abstracted union of
souls, independent of matter, as if we were pure, disembodied spirits, or as if
the physical instinct, for the propagation of the species, had not been
implanted in us by a Being, who never errs; whilst a gloomy religion, ever
intent on its own power, emoluments and grandeur, has exalted vows of
continence and perpetual virginity into an high degree of sanctity, and
esteemed it meritorious to triumph over feelings which a God of purity and
perfection had ordained.

I need not enter on a serious refutation of opinions which carry their own
absurdity on their forehead. The creed of libertines is contrary to every
dictate of reason, conscience, religion and to every principle of sound policy
and wise legislation. It militates, in the strongest manner, against that wise
appointment of providence, which, obviously, from the near equality of numbers,
designed to appropriate one woman to one man. It strikes at the root of a
sacred connection, which is the parent of every social and tender relationship,
the replenisher of private families, and the storehouse of the state. It would
destroy, at least, the happiness of an union, whose very essence is reciprocal
confidence, and reciprocal esteem; a train of children to be rationally and
religiously educated by those, who discern in their features, and would impress
upon their manners, a resemblance of their own. And it would, ultimately, be
subversive of that increase of population, which the commerce of the sexes was
designed to promote.

The second opinion is too visionary too be noticed; an attempt at being angels
in this tabernacle of clay, and an attempt, which has generally sunk its
abettors as much below the point of their real dignity and excellence, as they
had raised themselves above it in airy speculation. These purest of the pure
have betrayed frailties, which the pride of their philosophy forbad them to
confess; their Stuart's view of Soc. in Europe, p. 145. G^annone's H^st. of
Naples, Vol. 1, p. 283, 446. Mezeray Moeurs de l'Eglise du 11th Siec^e.
spirit has wonderfully amalgamated with matter, and a friendship formed,
seemingly, in heaven, (by what they have called a sympathy of souls,) has been
impurely consummated on earth, whilst nature has asserted her trampled rights
over the devotees of a particular church by telling all the world in the
anecdotes of history, that they have only substituted the stolen debaucheries
and excesses of a convent, for the pure and hallowed pleasures of the marriage
bed.

Nothing but a sound and comprehensive philosophy, grounded on the principles
of nature and of truth, will ever stand the test of experience, or of a
critical investigation. All other notions of this passion, not founded in such
philosophy, will quickly disappear with the authors, who abet them. The frothy
bubble bursts, as soon as it is handled. The cobweb system is deranged by the
touch of life. Love is a passion, not to be cradicated, but only to be properly
regulated and controuled. And it will always rage with a violence in private,
proportioned to the unnatural restraint laid on it before the public eye.
Priestcraft and fanaticism may appear to have totally extinguished the flame;
but the embers will revive with the first gale of opportunity, and the fire
will consume happiness and morals.

This passion of love will always receive its particular form and modification
from the peculiar circumstances of rudeness or civilization, from the
particular climate, government, religion and temperament of the people, amongst
whom it is found. The mode, in which love is considered, will always prescribe
the method of treating women, who are the objects of it. The light, in which
females are viewed, whether of respectability or degradation, will produce
their particular kind of education. Their education will principally form their
character and manners; and, if we consider the strong and universal force of
this passion, the manners and characters of women will have the strongest
reciprocal influence on the pursuits and habits, on the complexion and the
taste, on the private and the public happiness of any people.

This sympathy for the other sex is then in its proper state of vigor and
perfection, when, to that ardour of passion, which is directed to their
persons, we join a tenderness of sentiment, which esteems them as companions,
as formed to soften the sorrows and misfortunes, and to communicate a zest, an
elevation and a poignancy to all the real pleasures and enjoyments of life. The
first of these causes multiplies the species and extends population; the latter
tissues animal with rational, sentiment with sensation, and makes the knowledge
and understanding of the man rise above the g^ossness and stupidity of the
brute.

Such a rational and proper sentiment of women will not be the produce of every
age, or of every situation. Many happy circumstances must concur to produce and
cherish it. The first and latest stages of society, in any country, will not be
propitious to its growth. It is but in a certain state of manners, that it will
vegetate or spring Rudeness is a frost, which nips it in the bud, and, under
the scorching sun of extreme refinement, it gradually dies. It is very late in
making its appearance, and, like other of the sweetest flowers of mortality, it
is but for an hour. It wholly depends upon the state of kingdoms; and kingdoms
never long "continue in one stay."

It has occurred, in the course of the former essay, how savages treat women.
Love, with them, is mere animal instinct. It has nothing of sentiment in its
grovelling composition; and they gratify it with as little ceremony, as their
hunger or their thirst.

Women, in such places, and such aeras of society, are the mere involuntary
slaves Millar on the Dis. of Ranks in Soc. Chapter 1. Ka^m's Sketch Vol. 1.

Robert. Hist. of Amer. Vol. 1. p. 318.

Dr. Stuart, in his history of Society in Europe, has, in a very masterly
manner, combated this idea of women, in a savage condition, being in a state of
abject servility; but, with all proper deference to his elegant pen, and
distinguished abilities, I feel myself inclined to think, that the instances he
has adduced, are only so many exceptions, which may easily be admitted, without
destroying the truth or validity of the general rule. His history of Society in
Europe is, however, in my idea, a masterly sketch of genius and learning, and
ranks him with the first writers of the age.

Falconer in his Essays on the influence of Climate, has likewise, adopted this
opinier. p. 283, For very contrary sentiments, see Arist. Pol. Lib. 1. C. 2.

Robert. Hist. of America, Vol. 1. p. 3^^.

Lasitau Moeurs des Sauvages Amerie^ (...) ^10. Tom. 1. p. 564. Histoire
Generale des ^^^^ages Tom. 4. Live. 7. C. 13.. 1. Nouveaux V^^^ages aux Indes
Orientales. Tom. 2. p. 1^. ^ampier's Voyages. History of Kam^schatk^.


of their despots. Their charms do not appear of sufficient consequence to
instigate the desire of an exclusive appropriation. Every comer is admitted to
their bosoms; and a bosom, struggling with indiscriminate violence, feels no
preference, and can know no distinction.

As society emerges from the infancy of rudeness into some degree of form, the
idea of property of every species will begin to prevail, and women will be
included in the estimation. That desire, which has lavished on the sex at
large, will be confined to a few. Considering females, as a species of
treasure, a man will wish to become the sole, exclusive proprietor of one or
more of them, as of any other object, according to the laws and circumstances
of his country. The same taste, which appropriates a fine garden or an estate,
will prompt him to fill his little ser^glio with the fairest of the fair.

When any people have arrived to a certain degree of knowledge, civilization
and politeness, women will have all that rational consequence, which I have
described. The finest feelings of the soul will vibrate to their charms, their
delicacy will inspire attention; their weakness will be the strongest claim to
protection. Love and friendship will bow at their shrine, and offer them that
mingled tribute of sentiment and of desire, which is alone worth their
acceptance. The virtue of such an era will both produce and preserve the purity
of their morals, and the purity of their morals will be reflected back on the
honor, the existence, and prosperity of such a state. This will be the golden
age of the sex. It will be the epoch of their triumphs, and their conquests.

I know not whether this idea may be overstrained, and drawn beyond the line of
human imperfection; but, in revolving over the history of the world, I feel
myself inclined to doubt, whether a period has ever existed, it does not appear
in the annals of Of all people, perhaps, the ancient Germans had the greatest
veneration for women. Tacit. Germ. C. 8. Mallet's Northern Antiq. translated, 8
vo. Vol. I. p. 317. Plut. de Virtut. mulier. Polyaeni Stratagem. Lib. 7.
antiquity. It is not visible in the present face of Europe. Has it been in the
past?

As prosperity and riches increase in a kingdom, the morals of the women, like
those of the other sex will not fail to suffer in the general corruption.
Passions, heated by excesses, and unrestrained by religious principles, will be
violent and ungovernable; and that luxury, which seeks every other sensual
pleasure, will not fail to dissolve in that, which is confessedly the highest
species of animal gratification. Licentious writings, (the produce of so rank
an era) Romances Novels, Pictures, and the varied, indelicate representations
of the stage Tacitus says of the ancient Germans, septa pudicitia agunt, nullis
spectaculorum illecebtis, nullis conviviorum irritationibus corruptae. Tac. do
Mor. Germ. C. 19. Whatever may be said of the sublime, moral sentiments
contained in some plays, it is certain, that, on the whole, the representations
of the stage are highly pernicious to the morals of young pebple. Such
sentiments, no doubt, are, occasionally, interspersed through them, but, in
fact, serve only, as a specious sweet to gild over the poison, that lurks
beneath. For it is not these sentiments, that give to plays the amazing
interest they have over our hearts. Let any person endeavor to recollect the
most serious and sentimental plays we have in our language, and he will find
them, at the same time, to be the worst received of any others in the
representation. And what is the reason? they have not so much of that love plot
and denouement, they have not enough of that vivid coloring and appeal to the
tender passions, which give these entertainments, particularly with young
people, such inexpressible charms. Can it be prudent to heighten passions,
always of themselves sufficiently fervid, or to blow up flames, which already
rage so powerfully, as to threaten the destruction of the house we live in?

Mr. Addison has justly said, that the stage, under proper regulations, might
be made an excellent source of entertainment and instruction; but, if is was
laid under such severe restrictions, as the chastity of this good man's taste
would have prescribed, there is reasson to apprehend, it would soon be deserted.

It is true that palys are purified from some of their former indecencies; and,
that the public, car would be shocked at indelicacies, which, once, it heard
with the highest approbation. But this seems more an effect of refinement, than
of virtue. we still can bear the sentiment, though we should blush at te
expression; we love the impurity, if it comes but in a cleanly garb. Our taste,
in short, has taught us to shudder at all vulgar things, (and indelicacy is in
the number) whilst the progress of licentious passion and the history of
intrigues, prove that our hearts are not less, but perhaps, more deeply,
corrupted. And it is known to be the essntial doctrine of Religion, that the
"Almighty looks at the heart and reins."


will accelerate the last convulsions of virtue, and smother the just expiring
embers of female reserve. An enervated body in the sex cannot long resist this
extraordinary ferment. An enfeebled mind will not have vigor to struggle with
temptation. Marriage will be a burdensome, and intolerable restraint on a
roving inclination. Inconstancy will be frequent, and divorces sued for as the
only resource, however poor, and however disgraceful, from an unhappy
connection. A vagrant, ever restless appetite will pant for variety. Libertinism
will erect its desolating standard on the ruins of delicacy; and, in the
general perversion of taste, chastity will become an unfashionable virtue. Such
have been most nations of antiquity in a certain stage and progression of their
empire. Such were Nineveh, Babylon, Tire, Athens, Rome, in the accumulation of
successes; and (not to mention other invidious instances) such in some degree,
at the present moment, is the prosperous and opulent island of Greatbritain.

The absurd and romantic spirit of Chivalry never yet totally extinguished,
which pays unmeaning compliments, where it feels no esteem, in conjunction with
the other causes, which have been enumerated, composes that motley mixture of
attention and neglect, of flattery and contempt, of homage and of insult which
we extend to the fair. For in fact, whatever a cold hearted politeness says, or
the affectation of sensibility may pretend to feel, women in this country, by
the majority of men, are considered but as instruments of vanity and pleasure.
Our love is chiefly fashion, mixed with a considerable portion of ingredient,
which it would be improper and indelicate to name. The latter we gratify with
those unhappy creatures, whose ruined character requires no reparation; and for
the first, we shift attentions, in an endless rotation, with those more
illustrious names, whose fashionableness can give eclat and dignity to our
choice, and whose fortune has propitiously placed them in a rank to resent our
seductions. Our eulogies have no sincerity; our attachments have no ardour, no
constancy, no zest; we seek a pleasure from the sex, but we do not find it,
because it is not sought in the qualities of the heart.

What but this strange opinion of women, sanctified by fashion, and connived at
by our penal laws, could have emboldened the worthless and puny libertine to
boast of his triumphs over the innocence of a credulous and tender sex, whose
honor it is certainly his business to guard, and whose delicacy to protect?
What but the idea of a fashionable consequence annexed to intrigue, and of
credit resulting from a multiplicity of amors, could have qualified, with any
accommodating softness, the natural horrors, indecency and guilt of violating
the marriage bed? What other cause could have effectually skreened either of
these characters from the universal odium and infamy they deserve? And what
else could have induced an injured and insulted sex particularly to caress
these assassins of their peace, and to consider the number of seductions in a
man, as so many scar^ of glory, gained in the field of love, which entitled him
to superior notice and distinction.

I need not stop, a moment, to enumerate the evils (for they occurred in the
beginning of this essay) resulting from such a taste. An absolute dissolution,
a weakening, or a total prevention of that union which is the very bond and
cement of society; suspicion substituted into the room of confidence,
inconstancy of attachment; vague and criminal pleasures, which communicate
disease, which hinder propagation, and suppose a total absence of sentiment and
esteem; a youth emaciated from early excesses, without principles, without
constitutions and without love, leave a nation nothing to expect but a race of
puny, spiritless creatures, ill prepared to become the defenders of their
country, and bearing, on their very characters and faces, every foreboding
symptom of its approaching dissolution.

With this sentiment of women, we are cautious to give them a corresponding
education. It is wholly turned on vanity and trifles, calculated only to
embellish those persons, which we wish to enjoy; to feed that vanity, over
which we mean to triumph, and to observe that abjectness and inferiority of
mind, which are favorable to oppression. Person and manner are the great
object in the education of this sex. To render the one beautiful, and the other
enchanting, are our highest care. This in general, is the employment of the
governess. To this are devoted all the labors of the toilet. To this are
consecrated their mornings, and their days. The consequence is, that they
dazzle or inflame the senses, but convey no joy or relish to the heart. The
artificial flower has no smell or essence! The painted statue has no soul or
animation.

The company of women, whatever may be their taste, will always, in a greater
or less degree, be courted by the other sex. With the vain and fashionable, it
has passed into a system, to devote a very considerable portion of his hours to
the fair, and it is generally esteemed a necessary step to politeness and the
graces.

I shall not stop a moment to examine the truth or fallacy of this opinion.
Suffice it to remark, that in this intercourse all young men indiscriminately,
will endeavor to please. In order to be agreeable, they must have such
qualities, as captivate the sex and converse upon subjects, in which they are
interested. What is this conversation? The Parva leves capiunt animos.
little anecdotes of the day; the last intrigue or amor which public fame has
glanced at, or some well informed friend has confidentially whispered; the
brilliance of a birth night; the adventures of a ball; or which is most to be
preferred in colors, lilach or peagreen. The man who attempted to change the
ton of such a conversation, and substitute in its stead, any thing of science,
or any thing of taste, would be esteemed an horrid boor, Pendent opera
interrup^a Virg. I am sensible, whilst I am writing these lines, that these
attentions to virtuous women, are much on the decline. Our manners are so
undomesticated, and our morals so depraved, that the generality of youth seek
only from women, those ^^centious favors, which it is in the power of any
^^male to confer; and, having found these, with unblushing effrontery, in the
arms of the impure, they have no further taste or wishes for the united
pleasures, which all the virtuous and accomplished of the sex could bestow, in
delicacy of sentiment, in vivacity of manner, in confidence of friendship, or
in ease, ga^ety and sprigh^liness of conversation. Still there will be
multitudes amongst men, of an happier and a more virtuous description, and to
these the observation will forcibly apply.


unfit for polite or rational society, to be exposed with ridicule, and branded
with contempt.

In this career of gallantry, much time must be spent, and, in that precious
and important season of life, when the foundations of every thing great should
be laid, when activity should be roused, when talents should be ripened, and
when the thirst of glory should be felt, as the grand and stimulating movement
of the foul. With men of finished gaiety, scarcely is a little life sufficient
for the purpose. Attention and attachment must be varied and multiplied in an
endless succession. This fair one must be forsaken, and another must be
addressed. It were horrid to be constant, where variety is the fashion, where
fashion only gives the laurel of distinction, and adjudge^ it to sit most
gracefully, upon the brow^ of those, who can make their ravages amongst the
sex, diffusive as their connexions.

Nor is the loss of time the only disadvantage, arising from this system. The
propensities it gives are unfavourable to every great and magnanimous exertion.

Young men become insensibly assimilated to the frivolousness they address, and
affect to admire; and that frivolousness extends itself to all their habits and
modes of thinking, to all their designs and all their undertakings, to all
their actions and intercourse with the world. They get modes of levity,
effeminacy and dissipation, which are equally incompatible with the acquirement
of science, or the laborious efforts of virtue. Their pursuits of every kind
will be marked with this frivolity. The youth, which should be the glory of a
nation, will become its reproach. Instead of climbing, with arduous labor, the
sacred hill of virtue or of learning, they will endeavor to transform and
remodify their nature, and take up with such imperfect fragments of both, as
they are able to find in the bosom of pleasure, or the inglorious vale of
indulgence. Such a revolution this age has experienced. This expedient has been
ridiculously attempted. Phisosophy has resigned its usual sternness, and
dropped in, abstracted language to please the Ladies. Authors, in general,
affect to lie upon the toilet. They skim the surface, and publish the beauties
of fine writers. Morality assumes the matricious dress of novels to captivate
the taste. We have very pretty preachers; we have amiable Senators; we have
very polite officers, and few great men. Consequences so malignant, and so
comprehensive in their effects, deserve consideration. A disease, so interwoven
with the vitals of the constitution, should not be neglected.

I have not enumerated half the evils of this fashion. If it prevents many
marriages, it robs those, which do exist, of all their sweetness and all their
joys.

It is in retirement, that sensible minds look for real, heartfelt
satisfaction. It is in women, as the friend and companion of that retirement,
that selfish is exalted into social enjoyment, and that the sweets of
friendship and the luxury of confidence leave us nothing to desire but their
stability and their duration. How does the most distant prospect of such a
state, amidst the toils of labor, the wrinkles of care, and the agonies of
disappointment, charm the most elevated and penetrating mind! How often has it
administered courage to the hero, eloquence to the senator, and how equally do
the monarch and the peasant court it, as a relaxation from their toils! The
tender interview of Hector with Andromache, immortalized by Homer, and the
modest, timid shrinking Astyanax from his helmet, are pleasures which the
purest virtue may acknowledge for her own, and which the greatest Scholars,
Generals or Politicians need not blush to accept as a recompense for their
fatigues! How pleasing to resign the scepter and the laurel for the softnesses
of such an intimacy, the caresses of such a friend; and to forget, in the
affection of a virtuous woman, tumults, conflicts, disappointment and the world!

But let not fancy dream over all the bliss of such a scene, to be awakened
only in disappointment. The present education of women blasts this prospect,
and destroys such an hope. Sensible men, if they be determined to form this
connection, must do it often to a disadvantage. They must, in general, marry
females merely. They must not always expect in them, associates or friends. The
union of knowledge and talents witl^ frivolousness and insipidity, cannot be
agreeable. What is not agreeable, will not be lasting. The heart can feel no
durable attachment, where it knows no esteem. Without the secret concurrence of
the heart, there cannot be enjoyment. Marriage is nothing more than a bare,
ceremonious union of hands. This seeming paradise of sweets, will roughen, as
we approach it, into a wilderness of thorns. The senses are soon palled.
Disgust succeeds to satiety, quarrels to disgust, where the soul has no fresh
graces to expand, and there remain no new and unexplored treasures in the
understanding.

Though this subject is of so immense a magnitude, and so intimately connected
with the first and dearest interests of society, as to deserve the attention of
any monarch or legislator in the world, yet, in a free and opulent country like
our own, where education cannot be made a public concern, and where any
particular edicts of a prince would be esteemed a gross infringement on the
liberty of the subject, it is only in the power of parents or guardians to
remove or palliate so malignant an evil. If there be a specific, it is a
better and a more rational education of women; and, if that education is to be
better and more rational, it must not be left to a vain, a superficial or
mercenary governess, but planned by the wisdom, and executed by the zeal and
affection of those mothers, who under providence, have given them existence.

If we consider the exquisite pleasure, which Nature has annexed, in every
creature, to an early care and protection of his offspring, it is amazing that
they, who are dignified with the human form and the privilege of understanding,
should form the only melancholy exception, by appearing wholly insensible to,
or not shiving to enjoy it; that woman who lays claim to an exquisite
sensibility, can tamely give her child, from the moment of its birth, into the
bosom of an illiberal, low, or perhaps, a diseased nurse, to imbibe at once in
her corrupted milk, the unhappy peculiarities of her mind and constitution! But
how much more wonderful is it, and melancholy still, that she can be contented
with barely affording existence to a girl, and afterward resign her to the
frippery, the pride and nonsense of a public school, regardless of her early
morals and impressions, whilst she is seeking for herself an artificial
enjoyment in the glitter of gaiety, in the tumult of pleasure, or the
intoxicating fumes of public admiration.

Though fashion may sanctify such a scandalous inattention, and she may limit
the horizon of good and evil, of virtue and of vice by the applauses or the
censures, by the customs and extravagancies of a licentious age, yet the moment
is at hand, when she must think that a daughter, stepping into a world of
seduction and of snares, needed every salutary caution, and every prudent
admonition; that a woman formed to be the mistress of a family, should have had
her accomplishments mixed with substantial qualities and domestic attention;
that a woman exposed, from the nature of her sex, to frequent sicknesses,
sorrows and misfortunes, would have wanted a powerful balm of religion to
alleviate and heal; that woman formed to be a help meet for the man, the
partaker of his fortune, as the sharer of his bed, should have cultivated an
ability for rational knowledge and amusing conversation; and (what is the
highest consideration of all) that a woman, born for an eternal existence, born
for the society of glorified spirits, and the enjoyments of God in a future
existence, should certainly have received some more interesting lectures than
the graces of manner, the fluctuations of fashion, or the trifling, and empty
study of elegance or admiration.

If a mother can think that there is not only an unnatural indecency, but even
the highest criminality in the neglect of such instruction, she has yet to
learn what are the first, initiatory principles of nature and of virtue, and
perhaps her awakened conscience may teach them at a time, when, her beauty
being shrivelled with the wrinkles of age, there is no siren voice of flattery
to bewitch, and repetition has made all the circle of her pleasures too stale
to amuse!

Why indeed had woman her existence but to dignify and ennoble it by such
superior employments? When doe^ she appear to so much advantage, as when,
surrounded, in her nursery, by a train of pratlers, she is holding forth the
moral page for the instruction of one, and pouring out the milk of health to
invigorate the frame and constitution of another? When is her snowy bosom half
so serence, or when thrills it with such an innocent and pleasing rapture, as
in these silent moments of domestic attention, or these attitudes of
undissembled love? What painter, wandering, with a creative fancy over all the
exhaustless riches of nature, can give us so enchanting and delightful a
picture in so elegant a frame? What pleasures of the Levee, the Drawing Room,
or masquerade can vie, in flavor with these more retired, maternal
satisfactions? And when can woman ever be said to consult the real dignity and
happiness of her sex, but when she is thus conscientiously discharging her duty
to the man, to whom she has plighted, at the altar of her God, her vows and her
affections?

Such maternal culture, such a revolution in the sentiments and conduct of that
sex, would be attended with the happiest advantages. An alteration would soon
be visible on the face of society.

If the minds of women were placed upon solid objects, by a judicious and early
culture, they would become at once the ornament and blessing, as now there is
but too much reason to apprehend, that they are only the bane and corrupters of
society. Their charms would be the stimulating prize of valor, merit, and
understanding. Their conversation would be a soft, but powerful spur to every
noble action; and, in the intervals, which would be then devoted to their
company, the soul would be acquiring an elasticity and a vigor for every great
and dignified undertaking.

Little do women know of their own real interests, if they do not think
themselves essentially interested in such a revolution. They would then be
approached with esteem and veneration. The frothiness of compliment would,
gradually, be changed into the language of truth. Their empire over our hearts,
then, founded on the immutable qualities of the mind, would be glorious and
permanent, not subject to expire in the wrinkles of age, or wither with the
transient roses of beauty. Their conversation would give cheerfulness and
delicacy of sentiment; and ours would give instruction. There would be a gentle
conflict and emulation of talents, and both parties would be mutually improved
by the mutual collision. Their friendship would be courted, and our morals
would be improved. In the refinement of our taste, we should disdain to stoop
for pleasure to an harlot; we should look for real enjoyment with women, who
had sentiment and understanding.

We should dare to converse upon rational subjects, and they would listen with
attention. They would not expect that extravagant homage, which steals our
time, as well as our attention from elevated pursuits. They would incite us to
great and noble atchievments in the senate or the camp, in science and the
arts; and their glory would consist (as it always should) in sharing our
distinctions. The petit maitre would dwindle into his native insignificance.
Without qualities to procure the esteem of one sex, this poor, amphibious
animal would justly become the derision of the other. Marriage would be more
frequent, inviolate and sacred, not checked by extravagance, not disgraced with
infidelity or poisoned with dissipation. Unimpaired constitutions would produce
a race of hardy and of healthy children, who, in time, might become the
defenders of their country, and the pillars of a declining state. Women would
attain to that golden age, which I have been describing; and men, though not in
paradise, would have delicious pleasures spread round their retirements.

ESSAY III.
Quis autem dicat Naturam malign cum muliebribus ingeniis egisse, aut virtutes
illarum in arctum retraxisse? Par illis, mihi creed, vigor; par ad honesta
(libeat) facultas est. Laborem doloremque ex aequo, si consucvere, patiunter.
--

SEN. IN CONS. AD MARC. Who can say that Nature has been unkind to the
faculties of women, or restrained their virtues within narrow limits? They have
(believe me) an equal vigor with ourselves and an equal ability for honorable
actions. Labor and sorrow, if exercised with them, they bear with equal
fortitude and resolution. -- -- TO KNOW NO MORE IS WOMAN'S HAPPIEST KNOWLEDGE,
AND HER PRAISE. --

MIL. PAR. LOST.
THE nature of my undertaking calls for some reflections on the quality, the
degree and extent of female talents. And this will involve me in the hackneyed
comparison, which has so frequently been made, betwixt the natural endowments
and understanding of the different sexes -- an enquiry, which though it has
agitated the curiosity, and employed the pens of so many ingenious writers,
does not seem to have been pursued with that disinterestedness and candor,
which had so much in contemplation the discovery of truth, as the supporting of
a system.

The talents of women have been degraded by some to an unreasonable ebb of
feebleness and frivolity, and exalted by others to as unnatural an eminence of
brilliancy and distinction. In the ages immediately succeeding those of
Chivalry, it was fashionable to speak of women, as of prodigies in science, and
to decorate, with equally lavish encomiums, their understanding, and their
charms. Nor was this taste confined merely to individuals. Even nations have
been as See Feyjoo's vindication of women, translated from the Spanish, by J.
B^ett Esquire in which is given a li^^ of females distinguished with every specie^
of knowledge, and graced with all the polite accomplishments.
proud of producing a list of literary heroines, as of tracing their antiquity
from the remotest ages or their origin from kings.

Interest, policy, or fashion have continued what enthusiasm thus began.

Authors, who have wished to stand well with the sex, to lie upon the toilet,
to be distinguished with their favors, and to acquire the reputation of
gallantry and taste, have supported the same fulsome panygericks. A rational
enquirer has only to observe, that, if such extraordinary women ever did exist,
they were only a kind of phenomena in their horizon, and neither prove the
general state of female talents nor the general superiority of female
understanding. From the foot of an Hercules, there is no deducing the usual
stature and proportions of a man. The Alps would give a most improper idea of
the common mountains and scenery of nature.

Though I am privately convinced of the absurdity of this comparison betwixt
talents of the sexes; though I conceive it to be more a matter of curiosity
than use, more calculated to amuse or display ingenuity than to serve the cause
of science or of truth, yet philosophers have condescended to enter into it
with so much minuteness, and to enlarge upon it with so nice a discrimination,
as to have rendered it a plausible, and to the general design of this work,
something of a necessary and an essential investigation. They have dissected
the peculiar organization of women to discover the most latent stamina of
talents, or the physical, unhappy causes which obstructed their existence. From
the size, formation, temperature and quality of their brain, Arist. 5. Quaest.
26. Macrob. Saturn. Lib. ^.
Aristotle, Almaricus, Malabranche, and many others have reasoned to their
particular degree of capacity and understanding; but whoever has read their
observations must allow, that such a species of research is but laborious
trifling, from which no certain inferences can be drawn, and no solid or
rational improvements can be reaped.

It may be supposed with great probability and fairness, that their very
outward frame is marked with a physical inferiority. It appears not to be
calculated for such efforts of thinking, as the more abstracted sciences
require, and which entail on the most robust constitution even of men, languor
and disease. The delicacy of the everlasting pea, which so happily unites
elegance with sweetness, would be easily oppressed. The tender plant, which is
refreshed with gentle gales, would be entirely overwhelmed or exterminated by a
whirlwind. Providence always wise, and always benevolent, has adapted the frame
and organization, to their burdens. -- Where robustess is denied, vigorous, and
athletick exercises are not expected.

Principles of analogy are favorable to my argument. Observations on the brute
creation confirm it.

Buffoon's Histoire Naturelle. Chap. concerning the va^^eties of human species.
Amongst birds, beasts, insects, animals in general, the males are observed to
have greater strength, courage, vigor, and enterprise; females, superior
beauty of plumage, form, proportion, more delicacy and softness, but withal an
higher degree of timidity and weakness. The great God of nature is thus uniform
in all his plans and in all his operations. Superiority, for the sake of order
and protection, must be lodged somewhere. And it seems providentially lodged in
the males. But let us not take up with this presumptive reasoning. Let us
rather have recourse to experience and facts.

There are but two points of view, from which we can see this subject, or
pursue the comparison with fairness and precision. Culture makes so great a
difference in favor of our sex, that, to discover the precise bounties of
nature to each, we must compare a boy and girl at the age of six or seven; or
we must look into some savage countries, where both are in their primitive
state of rudeness without knowledge or instruction. At this age, in point of
quickness, docility and imitation, females may be pronounced to have the
advantage. But this is, by no means, any adequate proof of their general
superiority. Possibly the profounder thoughtfulness of the boy may obstruct the
more brilliant and shewy exertions. It is not the most solid bodies, that
sparkle most in collision. Gold does not glitter half so much as tinsel. The
louring, heavy cloud involves more moisture, than is contained in the
glistening dew drops of the morning.

The conceptions of a girl, instantaneous as lightning, astonish and surprise.
She interests us by the liveliness, with which she enters into all our
instructions. Her fancy gives a pleasing hue to every image she receives, and
reflects it with advantage; nor does human life afford a more agreeable
employment, than carefully to tend the beauties of this opening flower, and
show them in perfection. Pitiable is the mother, who knows not that such an
office has sweets beyond the giddiness of pleasure, the incense of admiration
and the essence of perfumes.

At the same time, the very nature of these qualities precludes that
superiority of strong judgment and of nice discrimination, which are the more
peculiar prerogative of men. Vivacity is unfavourable to profound thinking and
accurate investigation. And yet it is profound thinking and accurate
investigation, which carry all knowledge and all literary improvements to their
zenith of perfection. Even men, who are gisted with a fine imagination, and the
more lively talents, are frequently observed to be, proportionably, defective
in the substantial. Whilst they cultivate the charms of poetry, or the polite
arts, they have not extension, subtility, or comprehensiveness of mind enough
for more severe and abstracted speculations. Amongst the ancients, Homer stands
unrivalled as a genius, who united all the fertility of invention with the most
correct and regulated judgment. Virgil had an exquisite tas^e, but not equal
originality. Milton, if we consider the peculiar difficulties of his subject,
possessed both these faculties in a very wonderful degree of perfection. His
imagination, however, predominated over the other. Shakespeare with his
astonishing imagination, sometimes erred in judgment, but was it not by way of
accommodation to the popular taste? The comparison, in point of genius, betwixt
Cicero and Demosthenes will, probably, lie in favor of the latter. He had more
of that true aetherial fire, which peculiarly deserves the name, though the
latter yields not to him in point of taste or correctness. Amongst the French,
Rousseau had an ardent, but an ungoverned fancy: Originality was his forte, but
its fallies were wonderfully wild and excentrick. Voltaire, on the other hand,
had more taste, than fancy. Ariosto's Imagination was superior to his judgment.
Tasso abounds with tinsel, which wants the pruning assistance of a sober
judgment, and a corrected taste. Though the philosophy of Sir Isaac Newton had
been previously sketched out by the all comprehensive mind of Bacon, still he
made such amazing improvements in it, as to be entitled to the praise of a
first rate genius, and certainly united both the essential qualities of the
character in a stupendous degree. Mr. Locke's invention cannot be doubted, and
little censure, I think, can lie against his judgment.

Amongst painters, Correggio excelled more in coloring, than design; he had
greater judgment, than imagination. Rubens, on the other hand, had more
invention than judgment. Michael Angelo had great invention, but sometimes
erred against propriety in taste. Raphael seems to have united all the
distinguishing qualities of genius in his profession. But parallels would be
endless, and these examples are only produced to show, how rarely, even in the
greatest men, these separate, and, seemingly, discordant excellencies are
united.


The union of a warm and a vigorous imagination, with a very sound and
discriminating judgment, is rare indeed. Nature has conferred so rich a fortune
on few of her children. Her favors are, in general, dispensed with a nicer
equality, and with a seeming parsimony, to individuals, that has generously had
in contemplation, the portioning of all. In some instances, indeed, they have
been blended. and they have worked miracles. The fire of Aetna has boiled up in
the cold and chilling regions of the North.

Bussoon's Hist. Nature.
Savage countries do not invalidate, but strengthen this opinion. There, in
general, women appear to have the advantage over the other sex, because nature
displays the lively, and because the substantial endowments of the mind are not
unfolded by culture, or roused by emulation.

But there seems to be an error and absurdity in making the comparison. The
sexes were providentially formed as counterparts of one another. They have each
of them abilities suited to the sphere in which an all wise providence intended
them to move; but, as that differs essentially in the two sexes, so Arist. de
Hist. Anim. Cap. 1. In omnibus ver^, quorum procreatio est, foeminam et marem,
^mili fere modo, natura distinx^ (...) bus, quibus mas differt a foemina, quod
(...) tum in homine, tum ^^iam in ^s, quae magnitudine praest^nt, et
quadrupedes vivi^arae (...) pere^^itar; funt enim foeminae moribus mol^o^ th^s,
m^eseunt eclenus, et malum facilius pacu^^^; dileunt eriam ^mitanturque
inge^osius.


likewise does the nature of their faculties and the texture of their
understanding. Who would think of contrasting the oak with the willow, or a
myrtle with the delicate and almost transparent balsam? Who would compare the
abilities of an Archimedes with those of an It is always bo^d and invidious to
appreciate the separate merits of different writers. Yet no (...) I trust, need
be ^^ended, when I say, that, (...) usefulness, for promoting the interests of
(...) d^ty and virtue, for laughing abs^^dity and (...) ^^tion out of
countenance, and for fixing the (...) standard of deli^acy in sentin^ent, and
pr^^^iety in taste, the British nation owes an eternal obligation to the very
elegant labors of Addison. I would rather be Author of the Spectator, than of
almost all the labored systems of Physics or Metaphysics, that ever made
their appearance in the world. Whenever I have been reading any of this
excellent writer's Saturday's papers, I always regret that Dr. Johnson's
criticisms on him ever fell in my way. I feel myself reluctant in supposing,
that he inherited the little forbles of humanity, and that literary envy,
jealousy, or ambition had any footing in a breast, that seen's so much expanded
with the noblesi sentin^ent^, and elevated with the sublimest speculations.


Addison? Their merits were wholly opposite in their cast; yet merits they both
had, which have challenged the universal admiration of the world, and to which
the very latest posterity must bear an ample tribute of applause.

Let us, however, look more nearly at the contrast. Women then have a more
brilliant fancy, a quicker apprehension, and a more exquisite taste. When they
apply these faculties to their proper studies, how wonderfully do they charm
and how poignantly do they delight! In works, that require the efforts of
Imagination only, how animated and descriptive is a woman's pen! What pictures
does the exhibit! How soft are the tints, how glowing are the colors, and how
impassioned the touches of her pencil!

But whether it arises from an original defect in their frame and constitution,
whether it is that an unquiet imagination and ever restless sensibility afford
not opportunity or leisure enough for deep meditation, it is very certain, that
they cannot, like the men, arrange, combine, abstract, pursue diversify a long
train of ideas, and in every thing, that requires the more substantial talents,
must submit to a strong and a marked inferiority. The truth is, that
restlessness of sensibility, and that inquietude of imagination, which debar
the possibility of great seize, were providentially designed to compose
the very life and essence of their graces. They are the very medium by which
they please. If they were constituted to have our firmness and our depth, they
would want their native and their strongest attractions. They would cease to be
women, and they would cease to charm.

It may be said, that judgment is principally formed by comparison and
observation; and that the weakness of theirs arises from their want of
opportunities to improve it; the reserve of their sex, their domestic duties,
and sedentary life chiefly confining them to a very narrow circle, whilst
business, ambition, curiosity or pleasure, lead us into the world, to see
various countries, manners, customs; to hear in different coffee houses, clubs
and societies the sentiments of all ranks and denominations of people, and to
witness characters of every kind and magnitude, of every different shade and
every opposite complexion. This is all in some measure, true. Still it does not
account for that original difference betwixt the intellects of man and woman,
which is discoverable at an early period of life, for that palpable opposition
of the thoughtful to the lively, of the firm to the delicate and of the
profound to the chearing, which nature seems industriously, to have made
characteristick of (...)

I would ask the warmest panegyrist of women, whether he can fancy that there
ever existed one in the world, who, with the utmost stretch and cultivation of
her mind, could have pursued such a train of thinking as a Lock, could have
combined with a Montesquieu, arranged like an Euclid, or scrutinized the
secrets of nature like a Newton. It is true I have mentioned only prodigies of
men. It is true that nature, by extraordinary efforts in the production of such
characters, seems to have exhausted, for a considerable time, all her riches
and her powers. The question, likewise, it may be urged, will always be unfair,
till women have enjoyed equal advantages, and been called forth, by similar
encouragements, into literary greatness. But dropping all the subtle ties of
argument, and reasoning only from what appear the original stamina in the minds
of both, I conceive it to be a question, which every man's convictions and
private observations will answer in the negative, whatever tenderness to the
sex may lead him to affect, or delicacy to conceal.

But here again comes in false panegyric. Women have been described with every
talent, that does honor to humanity. Illustrious Semiramis, the two Aspasias,
Elizabeth of England, Catharine of Medici, who is said to have dispelled the
fears, and vanquished the sloth of Ferdinand; Margaret of Denmark in the 14th
century, the Amazons, Catherine of Russia, Artemisia, Thomyris, Z^^obia, the
Maid of Orleans, etc. To deliberate, in public, on national concerns, was a
privilege common to women, in all the Goth^^k and Celtick tribes. Plut. de Vir.
mulier.

In some parts of America, at this very hour, they are called to the national
meetings, to give their advice and counsel. Charlev. Jour. Hist. Let. 13.18.

In the days of Tacitus, the German women debated in the assemblies of their
tribes. The ancient Britons, he tells us, made no exception of sex, with
respect to government, etc. Vit. Agric. C. 16.

At Sparta, the women interfered in the affairs of state, and assumed a
superiority over the men. It was so in Egypt.

Pliny informs us, that in the island of Meroe, they reigned for many
successive ages.

Amongst the Lacedaemonians, they had a great share in the political
government. Arist. Pol. Lib. 2.

In the Island of Formosa, they exercise the sacerdotal function. Les Femmes
(says Cha^^^voix of the Americans) ont la principale autorite chez tous les
peuples, de la langue Huronne, si on en except le Canton Iroquois d'Onneyouth,
ou elle est alternative enter les deux sexes. Charlev. Jour. Hist. L. 18.

On the subject of the warlike courage of women, see Hist. of Amer. by Antonio
de Herrera, Vol. 3. p. 170. translated by Stevens. D'Orleans Hist. des
Revolutions d'Espagne, Tom. 1.


Queens, Politicians, Heroines, glitter in the historick page. Some women have
encountered the abstruseness A Spanish book, entitled El Theatro Critico, has
produced the following instances of surprising literary women in Spain. Ann de
Cervaron, Lady of the bed chamber to Queen Ferdinand, the Catholic's second
consort.

Isabella de Joya, in the 16th century, preached in the cathedral of Barcelona,
and solved many points, in the books of the subtle Scotus, before the whole
college of cardinals.

Louisa Sigea is represented as Mistress of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic and
Syriack.

Oliva Sabuco de Nantes is said to have written excellently on physical,
medical, moral and political subjects.

Bernada Ferreyra is described, as well versed in rhetoric, philosophy and
mathematics.

Juana Morella is said to have possessed a profound knowledge of philosophy,
divinity and jurisprudence, besides speaking fourteen different languages.

As great things are said of several French and Italian Ladies. Susan de
Habert; Mary de Gourney, corresponding with all the Cardinals, Richlieu,
Bentivoglio, Perron, Francis, and the most famous literati of her age.
Magdalene Schuderi, authoress of several excellent poems, honored with an
admission into all the academies, in 1671 gaining the French Academy's prize of
eloquence, bountifully remembered in the will of Cardinal Mazarin, and
enjoying, from Louis the 14th, a considerable pension for life. Ann la Fevre,
or Madam Dacier, of whose talents it is unnecessary to speak.

In Italy, Dorothea Bucca had a Doctor's degree conferred on her by the
University, and held lectures in the 15th century, which were greatly
frequented.

Isotta Nogarola, born at Verona.

Laura Ceretia native of Brescia, in the 16th century, who taught philosophy in
that city, at the giddy age of eighteen.

Cassandra Fideli, Catherine de Cibo, Duchess of Cametino. Lucretia Helena
Cornaro, born in the year 1646.

In Germany, Anna Maria Schurman, whose history is so curious and
extraordinary, that I cannot forbear transcribing some passages of it^ In her
sixth year (says the Author) she could cut most delicate figures in paper,
without any teacher or pattern; at eight she in a few days, learned to draw and
color flowers in a masterly manner; in her ^^^th year, only three hours
practice brought her to an admirable delicacy in embroidery; she was perfectly
acquainted with the German, Dutch, English, French, Italian, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, Syriack, Ch^^dean, Arabic and the Ethiopean languages; and her poetical
genius has left several monuments still much esteemed. She likewise handled the
pencil, chizel and burin with great delicacy, etc. etc. Credat Judaeus appella!!

In Ireland, Constantia Grierson, who died in the year 1733, and in the twenty
seventh of her age, was certainly, a prodigy of talents. The Greek and Latin
languages, history divinity, philosophy and mathematics were familiar to her.
Of her skill in the Latin tongue, she gave a striking pro^^, by her dedication
of the Dublin Edition of Tacitus to Lord Carteret, and by that of Terence to
his son, to whom she likewise, wrote a Greek Epigram. See an account of this
Lady in Mrs. Barbe's poems.

In England, Lady Jane Gray was undoubtedly a literary phenomenon. So are some
others at the present day. The curious reader will meet with more particulars
on this interesting subject by consulting Thicknesse's Sketches of the lives
and writings of French Ladies.


of mathematics. Others have loved to wander in the labyrinths of
metaphysics. But what progress have they made? What great feats have they
achieved? Let cool experience answer the question.

If we admit that such descriptions have not been exaggerated; if we could
suppose that we were not treading upon fairy ground (and yet who must not have
his doubts?) have any of these female efforts pleased, or have any of these
unnatural labors gained immortality? Either they never existed at all, or they
have been raised infinitely beyond the bounds of probability and truth.

As to politics, what were they, at any of the periods, when women have been
celebrated for their political seize? Were they not the petty interests
of as petty a territory, whose views and wants terminated chiefly in itself,
without looking into any other quarter of the globe? Did they ever require that
universal penetration, that comprehensiveness of research, that stretch and
vigor of thought, that wonderful combination of schemes and ideas, that
retrospection and anticipation, that bringing past and present into one common
point of view, which the immense, diffusive, complicated concerns of large,
extended kingdoms, at the present period, and in the modern circumstances of
Europe, absolutely demand? It will follow from the observations, likewise, that
have been already made in this essay, that women are not calculated to preside
over kingdoms. They were not formed to hold the reins of empire, to penetrate
into the views and wants, or adjust the various and complicated interests of
conflicting states. The reign of queens has generally, been a burlesque upon
government, the tyranny of some capricious favorite, whom they have espoused,
and whose sentiments they have adopted, in proportion as they have admired his
person or address. On him have devolved all the burdens of the state, and to
him has been allotted the more enviable office of apportioning the royal
smiles. For the undue influence which favorites have had over Queens, see
Letters on the present state of Poland, p. 68. Stuart's Hist. of Scot. Vol. 1.
p. 95. Buchan. Hist. Rer. Scot. Lib. 17. Melvil's Mem. p. 109. Macpher. Hist.
of Brit. Vol. 2. p. 379. Rapin's Hist. of Eng. Vol. 8. p. 275. and Vol. 9. p.
198 410. Hume's Hist of Eng. Vol. 4.410.
He has been the real pilot of the vessel, whilst the woman he has governed by
his policy or his attractions, has sat, in ostensible majesty, at the helm.
Besides the political greatness of these Ladies is equivocal from the peculiar
circumstances of their age. Amidst a race of pigmies, a person of ordinary
stature is a giant. When times are ignorant and barbarous, common knowledge is
considered as a prodigy. The Rustic, who can spell a newspaper, is at once the
scholar and the oracle of his village. The star, that twinkles in a dark and
gloomy night, is welcomed as a sun.

Nor let the sex suppose me their accuser or their foe. If I have not wholly
mistaken the method, I mean to be their advocate and friend. I have left them
the seeds of every thing, that pleases and captivates in woman. Their brows
were not intended to be ploughed with wrinkles, nor their innocent gaiety
damped by abstraction. They were perpetually to please, and perpetually to
enliven. If we were to plan the edifice, they were to furnish the
embellishments. If we were to lay out and cultivate the garden, they were
beautifully to fringe its borders with flowers, and fill it with perfume. If we
were destined to superintend the management of kingdoms, they were to be the
fairest ornaments of those kingdoms, the embellishers of society, and the
sweeteners of life.

If we consult scripture, we shall discover, that such was the original
intention of heaven in the formation of the sexes. The sentence of
subordination obviously implies, that man should have the preeminence on
subjects, that require extensive knowledge, courage, strength, activity,
talents or laborious application. Women were not formed for political eminence
or literary refinement. The softness of their nature, the delicacy of their
frame, the timidity of their disposition and the modesty of their sex,
absolutely disqualify them for such difficulties and exertions. Their destiny
of bearing and nursing children, the necessity of superintending domestic
concerns, and the peculiar diseases, to which they are liable, leave them
little time for such public undertakings, whilst the humble offices in which
they are engaged, confer a blessing and a benefit upon society, that are
infinitely beyond the coldness of knowledge, and the apathy of speculation. The
wife, the mother and the oeconomist of a family would unfortunately, be lost in
the literary pedant; the order of nature would be totally reversed, and the
population of the globe preposterously sacrificed to the cold, forbidding pride
of a studious virginity. The woman of the cloister would grant the graces of a
citizen of the world. In that ardour of understanding, which rouses emulation,
she would lose that soothing manner, which conciliates and endears. The world
would be deprived of its fairest ornaments, life of its highest zest, and man
of that gentle bosom, on which he can recline amidst the toils of labor, and
the agonies of disappointment.

So far as the qualities of the heart are concerned (and this has, sometimes
formed a part of the question) I think the sexes will not bear a comparison.
Women, in this respect, have every claim to a marked superiority. If their
retired, domestic life did not, of itself, lead to more innocence and
contemplation, their natural dispositions are certainly more favorable to
piety and virtue. Their strong sense of weakness prompts them to supplicate the
protection and assistance of a superior, invisible power, whilst their
exquisite sensibility powerfully disposes them for all the energy and ardours
of devotion.

In the list, which Scripture has given us of converts to Christianity, in the
very early ages, we meet with holy women, not a few, The fathers of the Romish
church maintained an opinion, which was borrowed, no doubt, from close
observation, that the number of glorified females in heaven, would exceed that
of men; and monasteries can produce their thousands of this sex, who, impelled
by a holy, though misguided zeal, have sacrificed beauty, fortune, friends;
every thing that could charm and every thing that could engage, for the
loneliness of a convent and the rigid austerities of a perpetual devotion!

It has been said that women are more artful, and fond of subterfuge than the
men, and perhaps there may be some degree of justice and authenticity in the
observation. But does not this arise from the just and necessary jealousy they
entertain of the other sex, and from the cruel task we impose upon them, of not
knowing whether in the guise of a friend they may not meet with a betrayer and
a foe? If a woman has not reserve upon many occasions, we criminate and despise
her; if she has, we load it with the odious name of artifice and dissimulation.
In so rigorous a system, we do not leave her the possibility of escaping
without censure. Either she is called a prudish hypocrite, or she is called
indiscreet.

If we carry our researches through the whole creation, we shall find, that, as
any creature is deficient in strength, it is always furnished with a
proportionate share of art and contrivance; and a little more reflection will
serve to convince us, that such is the all wise appointment of the Deity, and
that these inferior qualities are absolutely necessary to its existence and
preservation.

In the intercourse of Love, which forms an essential part in the history of
this sex, how powerfully do they eclipse our own, and wrest the palm of triumph
from the men! If a woman has once a proper confidence in a man's sincerity, how
generous is her breast! How noble is her conduct! How undisguised and unbosomed
her soul! How tender is her friendship! How ardent and how immovable is her
affection! The love of man, in general, has many foreign ingredients of
selfishness or vanity in its composition. He affects to love (perhaps,
persuades himself he loves) a woman, whose connexions, beauty, fashionableness,
e^lat, do honor to his choice, or whose fortune gives the widest range to his
hopes, or opens the most unlimited prospects to his ambition. If a woman loves,
it is the men himself. She has but this one object in view, and it engrosses
her soul. Pride, ambition, vanity, dissolve into tenderness, and are humbled by
the passion. She risks friends, character, fortune, ease, for the sake of her
idol. In privacy, she broods over the beloved image, and if mentioned in
public, she tinges it with blushes. This man is become her Universe; for him
alone she lives; with him she would die!

Let this favorite be called by business or pleasure into some foreign
country, her days are melancholy, her nights without sleep! Life is insipid,
and her soul has no joy! Her fancy conjures up a thousand apprehensions. In her
few, slumbering moments she dreams of his danger, and she starts, at once from
thought and repose! Every billow is his grave! Every traveller is besmeared
with the blood of the endeared absent! How despicable is the villain, who can
betray so much fondness; how insensible is the soul, that can laugh at so much
tenderness; and how execrable is that fashion, which substitutes, in its place,
the windings of art and the coldness of affectation!

At the same time, if the merit of virtue is to be estimated (as it always
should) from the strength or the weakness of the determining motives, how much
superior is woman's! The love of fame, riches, honor, consequence, give birth
to almost all great achievements that distinguish our own sex. If a man be
celebrated for valor, science, enterprise, he is received into all companies
with eulogies. His Sovereign applauds. Theaters welcome him with bursts of
admiration. In the countenance of his admiring friends, he continually reads
his glory and his greatness; and, when he dies, history sheds over his
unperishable memory, an immortal perfume.

Not so with women. Their virtues, exercised in solitude and springing purely
from the heart, make no noise, and court no observation. Lavished chiefly on
their children and their friends, they blaze not on the world, nor are they
thought of dignity or consequence enough to embellish the recording page.

Still let not these degrading fair ones despond. Let them not complain of
their humiliating lot. Whilst virtue, taste, sensibility or discernment remain
in the world, they will always have a high degree of influence and respect.
Their rank, though subordinate, is not unimportant. The services they do to
society, though not trumpeted by fame, are recorded by gratitude, and graven on
the heart; and they share in the honor and distinctions of the men. Their
influence often lends considerable aids in the formation of those characters,
which history distinguishes with its undying honors. Many are the heroes they
have roused into glory. Innumerable are the statesmen they have raised, by
their secret magic, into fame; and whenever they are tempted to repine at the
appearance of insignificance and inferiority, it becomes them to remember that
their greatest strength lies in their weakness, their commands in their His
lacrymis vitam damus, et miserescimus ultro. Virg. Mulieres urbem, quam armis
viri defendere non possunt, precibus lacty unsque desenderunt. Lie. Hist. Romans
Memoriae proditur, quasdam acies inclinatas jam et labantes, a soemims
restitutas constantia p^ecum et objectu p^etotum, et monstrata cominus
captivate, quam long impatientius, soeminarum suarum nomine, timent. Tacit. de
Mor. Germ. C. 78. -- Stu. View etc.


tears; that their softness has frequently disarmed the rage of emperor's and
tyrants, that their blandishments have a soothing and persuasive energy, which
great and generous souls are seldom able to resist; that charms have worked
miracles in every age and nation, and brought about the most important
revolutions of the world.

ESSAY IV.
Legimus epistolas Corneliae, matris Gracchorum: Apparet cjus fi^os, qui
eloquentia floruerunt, non solum in gremio matris educatos tuisse, red etiam ab
ea sermonis elegantiam hausisse. Maximum autem matronis orhamentum esle liberos
been nistitutos, merito putabat sapien^^ss^ma illa mu^^er. C^m Campana matrona,
apud illam hospita, oruamenta sua, quae erant illo seculo pretiosistima,
ostentaret et mutrebriter, traxit eam sermon, quoso^e a schola redirent
liberi. Quos revertos hospitae exhibens; "Et haec, inquit, or^amenta mea sunt."
Qu^nt. Lab. 1. C. 1. Cic. in Brut. N. 210. Val. Lab. 4. C. 4.

Sic Corneham, Gracchorum, he Au^cham Justi Caesaris, sie Attiam, Au, usti
matrem praefuisle educatiombus liberorum accep^mus.

DIALOGUE ON THE DECLINE OF ELOQUENCE.
HOW far a public or a private education is most to be preferred, is an
enquiry, that has agitated the curiosity, and employed the pens of many
distinguished writers both of ancient and modern times. From the days of
Quintilian to the present moment, plausible things have been frequently
advanced in favor of both, and attacked with as many and forcible objections.
Some, indeed, seem to have undertaken the subject only from a partial, selfish
principle of recommending the plan, which was best accommodated to their own
private interests or peculiar situation, and notwithstanding the various
theories, that have prevailed, the general opinion seems considerably unfixed;
at least, both schemes are indiscriminately adopted, as other, collateral
circumstances of fortune, convenience, connection or accident influence and
direct.

Without entering at all into the detail of the argument, or attempting to
appreciate the separate merits of the different reasoners, a sensible mind
forms this conclusion, that a private education is more favorable to morals,
that young people at least, should never be trusted to the dangerous infection
of public schools, till principles and even habits of virtue have had time to
take ro^t, but that neither a private, nor public, but an education uniting,
in some degree, the advantages of both, is most eligible for those, who wish
their children to be, at once, possessed of talents and of virtues.

But every thing, in fact, that can be offered on this subject, will be only
vain or amusing speculation, till the nation is disposed to be liberal in
rewarding the Instructors of our youth.

Whilst an exorbitant profusion, and extravagance of expense, in almost all
other cases, characterize the kingdom, the education of children, though an
object of the highest, private and national importance, is an article, which we
treat with the most abject and ill judged parsimony, except only, in those
circumstances which relate to frivolousness, accomplishments or conceit, to a
dancing, a music, or a fencing master, who are to teach them I would not here
be understood, as intending to throw a stigma on any of the pleasing qualities
or accompli^hments. Though "the Graces, the Graces," were so perpetually
trumpeted forth from the profane ^nouth of a Chesterfield, as absolutely to
have sturned our ears, yet, when properly understood, and practiced to
conciliate affection, they have not los^ their consequence, they may be made
compatible with every virtue, and should not be neglected. In general, the
youth at public schools, attend too little to them; and, whether it arises
from the ignorance and aukwardness of preceptors themselves, from so many boys
being grouped together without any of the softer sex to temper their ferocity,
from their being so wholly swallowed up with the severer studies, that they
have little leisure for mixing in good company, or from the notion of an
effeminacy, annexed in all classick writers, to these little attentions --
whatever be the cause, nothing is a more common sight, than the union of an
excellent Classick, and a bashful, awkward, or uncivil clown in the very same
person. Such a spectacle degrades, dishonours and raises prejudices against
learning; at the same time, graces are surely but an inferior and secondary
consideration, whilst solid improvement, knowledge and virtue should always be
the first.
graces, and initiate them in all the petits trifles of fashionable life.

Circumstanced as we are, public schools are the only possible, general
receptable for the education of youth; and, as we pay the teachers, in order
that a person may not starve by his profession, these seminaries must contain
such numbers of young people, as it is impossible for him to tend with any
adequate vigilance, so as either to know their dispositions or their talents,
their virtues or their vices.

Hence men of any liberal sentiments, or any decent fortune will not submit to
the humiliating task. Hence (excepting in a few public schools, endowed by the
munificence of our more virtuous ancestors, and requiring a graduate from the
universities) masters, in general, are but poorly qualified for the office they
assume; and hence an employment, in itself the most elevated and honorable of
all others, in its tendency the most useful and important to the state, in the
eye of religion and of enlightened reason, requiring the strongest union of
goodness and of talents, and, in the sounder policy of the ancients, devolving
only on the most distinguished and unexceptionable characters, is sunk amongst
the frivolous and dissipated moderns, into considerable disrepute, whilst its
professors entitled to the public gratitude, generally meet with little but
the public contempt.

Let it not be said, that their manners have deserved it. Let it not be urged
that their ignorance of life and customs, their rudeness, their pedantry, their
carrying into society the imperiousness of a school, and expecting
indiscriminately from the people they converse with, the homage paid by pupils
to their despotick throne, have been the real cause of such an odious stigma
thrown upon their order. Though the conducting of a school is not favorable to
the temper or manners, yet a person of real education and good sense, will
generally rise, in his intervals of relaxation, above such little
disadvantages; but, if our avarice forces others, and of a lower cast, into
this department it is our avarice, chiefly, that should be blamed for their
foibles and defects.

With regard to women, I do not know that this famous question about a public
or private education has ever been agitated. Indeed it is not necessary. Though
such parents, as think of being generous and liberal, seldom fail to give them
the first, yet the latter, in the estimate of sober reason, is certainly to be
preferred; and, whatever elegant or high sounding schools may be sought out for
a girl, yet a mother seems the only governess, intended by nature.

Three principal advantages of public schools for boys are; 1st. That they
cure a timid bashfulness, and establish a confidence, so necessary for any
public character or employment; 2dly. That they excite a proper emulation by
the collision of talents; and 3dly. That they foster early, lasting
friendships, sometimes of a powerful kind, which frequently lead the way to
worldly honor and advancement.

The first of these effects will not, by a judicious friend, be recommended to
women. Confidence, in them, "is a horrid bore;" and let a silly fashion suggest
what it will, their sweetest graces are the crimsoning blush and the retiring
timidity.

As to emulation, there are often children enough in their own family, or in
the circle of their nearest acquaintance to communicate the spirit, so far as
it is necessary or useful amongst those, who are not to hold the reins of
government, the offices of state, or the post of a commander, and who cannot
aspire to sacred greatness in the honors of the purple.

The last effect is superseded, likewise, by the nature of their sex; as the
grand promotion, of which they are capable, is a dignified marriage, which
their sister acquaintance are not capable of conferring; which a public life
is not likely to ensure, and which they will always have the greatest chance of
forming to advantage, of they rather court the shade of a meritorious
retirement, than the intoxicating notice of the public eye.

So far, therefore, from their receiving any solid advantages from this method
of exposure, I conceive that it often subjects girls to numerous
inconveniences, dangers and temptations, which their early age, and yet
unripened virtue are not always found sufficient to resist.

Thrown together in shoals, into one common reservoir, at a dangerous age, when
nature bids an unusual fervor rise in their blood, when they feel themselves
sprung into a new epoch of existence, actuated with similar feelings and
similar desires, and when a restless leisure awakens all the powers of
imagination and the senses, they insensibly convey an infection to each other
by tales of sentiment, sympathy and friendship, and by various communications,
schemes and artifices, which the vigilance of no governess is able to discover,
nor her power to suppress. In the heat of imagination, her restraints are
considered as but a prudish bar to the only solid happiness in life; a
connection with the other sex. In the taste of a licentious age, viewing
passion, as a business; in the fervor of nature, feeling it as an instinct;
and, in the inexperience of youth, fancying it a paradise, in which are no
thorns, a country, whose landscapes are all real, as they are beautiful, they
behold an enemy in the woman, who restrains them, and have recourse to every
private method of breaking through the chains, the despotism and formalities of
their temporary convents.

Hence, from so many offensive breaths all pent up together, proceeds a total
putrefaction of the moral air. Hence swarms of novels to inflame their fancy,
and effectually to pave the way for their future seduction. Hence private
correspondences, assignations and intrigue. Hence levity, giddiness and a total
forfeiture of that delicacy and softness, without which it is impossible for
any woman to be lovely, or to secure the esteem, whilst she engages the
partiality of an impassioned beholder.

If I have exaggerated in the description, let experience contradict me. If I
have said the truth, the prejudices or the interests of particular individuals
should not be regarded.

The qualities, which every man of real taste and sense wishes, particularly,
to find in a woman, are innocence, simplicity and domestic worth. To these he
would sacrifice all the fanciful accomplishments. They are to soothe his
sorrows, they are to bless his marriage and sweeten his retirement.

Boarding schools wholly counteract these dispositions. They trample upon
nature, and give us artificial creatures, artificial looks and artificial
smiles. In their formal walls, airs, gestures, syllables, articulation, all are
studied, and are sure to disgust. Like hot beds, they give a forwardness to
fruits, but deprive them of their natural healthiness and flavor; and the fine
ladies they send into the world, feel themselves ridiculous^y exalted above
(what they conceive to be) the grovelling offices of family economy, or
domestic attentions.

If women wish to please, they should consider that nothing can please long,
but the simplicity of nature; at the same time, it behooves them to remember,
that they were certainly born for something more important, and that when the
short reign of their charms, shall expire, they will be able to procure a
durable esteem by nothing but the solid qualities, and the domestic virtues.
The mistress of a family is no longer a girl; and, if men are to distinguish
themselves by business, or letters, by enterprise, or valor, females are
surely called on, in their turn, by motives of gratitude and a dignified
ambition, to immortalize themselves, if possible, within their own walls, and
to tend, with unremitting care and vigilance, the little tender pledges of
their mutual affection. What says the wise man? "A good woman looks well to
the ways of her household, and all her family is clothed in scarlet."

Whatever undomesticates a woman, so far unmakes her, as to all the valuable
purposes of her existence, and is at once the bane of her usefulness, her
happiness and virtue. It rifles her of her tenderness, sensibility, delicacy
and of all the sweetest of her virtues and of her graces. It is undomesticated
women, that poison the sources of our sweetest comforts. It is undomesticated
women, that have houses without any order or arrangement, servants without
discipline, and children, without instruction; that are friends, without
friendship, w^^^ without constancy, and parents, without affection. And it is,
I conceive, a public education, which first inspires the rage for pleasure and
dissipation.

Almost every thing in and about these seminaries, has a tendency to corrupt
the heart. What is it these fair pupils are taught to pant for? Admiration.
What is proposed as the highest object, the ne plus ultra of all their
endeavors? Admiration. What are considered as the steps to it? Elegant dress,
appearance, equipage, wit, smartness, dancing, singing. In the mean time what
becomes of the love of God, which Christianity represents, as the first of
duties? How little do they study the example of their savior, who was meek and
lowly in heart? Where, all this while, is the mortification, and religious
government of their passions, indifference to the world, the discipline of
their heart, thoughts, and imagination, modesty, humility, heavenly mindedness,
and all the lovely train of christian and evangelical graces? With such
impressions, how vain and grovelling must be the heart! How full of petty
jealousies, and paltry competitions! How closed to all the nobler sentiments
and affections, and how great a stranger to any solid, or any permanent repose!

Without unreasonably suspecting the abilities of a governess, it is impossible
she should attend to the prodigious number of young people she receives, so as
to discover their infinite varieties of talents or dispositions; and it may be
presumed, from the nature of things, that she will not be often equal to the
arduous undertaking.

It will be allowed me without controversy, that, in every education,
principles of religion and virtue should form the great and primary
consideration. Without these, all other qualities and all other accomplishments
are but a specious structure, raised on the sand, which must totter in the
moment of sorrow and of trial. But, to instill these in the best and most
effectual manner; to illustrate them with the most proper images and
embellishments; to diversify her efforts according to the endless variety and
taste of her fair pupils; to communicate her knowledge and virtue, in such a
manner as to make them, always, seem a rose without a thorn, requires no
ordinary talents and exertions.

To accomplish such an end, a governess, in the first place, should be a
prodigy of virtue. Like charity, "she should suffer long and be kind." She
should deny herself pleasure, ease, slumber, every thing for the sake of her
tender flock. She should love them, as her daughters, and consider herself
engaged in the noble employment of training up so many angels for the skies.

She should have great knowledge, and that knowledge should be embellished with
taste. It should appear, like the fair ones, to whom it is recommended, always
lovely, and always inviting. She should know the best books, and she should be
able to discriminate and select the most striking and interesting passages for
their instruction.

Her address, likewise, should be conspicuous above all her other qualities.
She should be able to see the heart in all its foldings and recesses. She
should know how to multiply and variegate herself, as exigencies require; here
she should sooth, and there she should expostulate; here she should endeavor
to affect by the spirited, and there by the pathetick; in one place, she should
be gentle like the dew, in another, thunder, lightning and storms.

It would display a great ignorance of human nature to suppose, that such a
combination of great talents is frequently to be met with in any female; and it
would argue a still higher degree of absurdity and inexperience to expect them
concentred in the character of such a one, as generally undertakes this
particular employment.

So little is the esteem, in which the character of Governess, like that of
Schoolmaster, is held, and so inadequate are the rewards, conferred on these
people, that the office, in the best point of view, will, very frequently,
devolve upon those, who, having once seen better days, but now fallen from
their dignity, have contracted not a little of that despondency and sourness,
which attend degradation; and, in the worst, will, as often be undertaken, as a
last resource, by many, who are not famous for the liberality of their
sentiments, as they have not been distinguished by that of their education. To
expect that such women should be patterns, either of the graces or the virtues,
would be hoping against all the probabilities of things, and amusing ourselves
with an airy and romantic shadow, that vanishes on the touch of experience and
fact.

Nor do I conceive that Boarding Schools have such a tendency, as has generally
been imagined, to give the so much valued excellence of politeness.

Without ease, there can be no grace. Without grace, there cannot be
politeness. But these seminaries nurse a formality and stiffness, and their
seclusion and restraints like those of a college, are unfavourable to these
seize. Whence springs politeness, but from collision with a great variety
of characters; from living in habits of genteel and mixed society; from being
frequently in the company of those, whom we look up to with a degree of
deference, and feel ourselves inspired with the ambition to please? None of
these circumstances generally exist in schools; and, if there was no other
reason, either of the sexes living aloof, and separated from the other will
always contract a number of peculiarities, ungraceful and unpleasing. But the
great consideration, after all, is virtue. And female virtue appears a plant of
too delicate a nature, to bear this scorching method of exposure.

It will appear from the general complexion of these remarks, that they are
designed, principally, to apply to people in the higher ranks of life. Amongst
others, cases, doubtless, will occur, in which a public school may have its
advantages, and be the best resource.

In a flourishing, commercial country, like Great Britain, some parents will
attain, from very low beginnings to so ample a fortune, as to wish their
children a much better education, than they themselves have enjoyed, or are
capable of imparting. And it will occur to every reflecting person, from the
nature of the case, that, under their roofs, daughters might imbibe only a set
of illiberal notions, or a system of vulgar, purseproud superciliousness. To
such, these seminaries, defective as they are, may have their uses and
advantage.

The sentiments of such girls, as well as their manners, may here receive an
elevation and refinement. They may feel themselves levelled, nay usefully
humbled by the company of their superiors. Little mortifications beget
humility, and little superiorities produce subordination. The Queen of the
village may be stripped of her usurped plumes, and insensibly taught to treat
those with respect, whom once she considered with scorn and aversion. But where
mothers are themselves equal to the task (if a task it must be deemed) there
cannot be a doubt about the difference of advantage, as a matter of duty, if
all the casuists of Europe were consulted, they could not bring the shadow of
an argument against it. No; reason, religion, the thrillings of affection, the
voice of nature, and the voice of God, the interests of society, the happiness
of private life, the honor, the dignity and true policy of woman -- all say,
that a mother should be the preceptress of her children, and that such children
would stand a chance of the happiest instruction. If well nurtured sons grow up
as young plants, such daughters would be as polished corners of the temple.

THE END.
BOOKS FOR SALE BY ISAIAH THOMAS jun, AT THE SIGN OF Johnson's head WORCESTER.
THE Romance of the Forest. The Sicilian Romance. Mysteries of Udolpho. Trials
of the Human Heart. Charlotte, A Tale of Truth. Juliet Grenville. Julia de
Robigne. Ela, or Delusions of the Heart. The Sorrows of We^ter. Mentoria, or
the Young Lady's Friend. Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress. The Lady's Pocket
Library. The Looking Glass for the Mind. Miscellaneous Works, Prose and
Poetical. Roderick Random. Fool of Quality. The Hive. Man of Feeling. The Sky
Lark. Wisdom in Miniature. Travels of Cyrus. Washington's Letters. Price's
Sermons. Watts's Glory of Christ. Rowe's Letters. Hunter's Sacred Biography.
Dignity of Human Nature. Gordon's American Revolution. Williams's History of
Vermont. District of Maine. Morse's Universal Geography. Pike's Arithmetic.
Also, Bibles of all sizes. School Books, etc. etc.

