George Blake's Oration.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4 th, 1795, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY GEORGE BLAKE.

Huic enim populo ita fuerat libertas insita, ut emori potius quam servire
prestaret.

BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY BENJAMIN EDES, Kilby Street. -- 1795.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Fancuil-Hall, on Saturday th 4 th Day of JULY, A. D. 1795.
VOTED,

THAT the SELECTMEN be (...) by are appointed a Committee to wait on GEORGE
BLAKE, Esquire. and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and
elegant ORATION this Day delivered by him, at the Request of the Town, upon the
ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA -- in which,
according to the Institution of the Town he considered the Feelings, Manners,
and Principles which led to that great National Event -- and to request of him
a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
A Request from the Selectmen of BOSTON, although it were at the hazard of my
reputation, I could not fail to gratify. -- The ORATION of the 4th Instant is
therefore humbly submitted to their disposal -- by

their obedient, and very respectful Servant, GEORGE BLAKE.
BOSTON, JULY 4th, 1795. The Gentlemen SELECTMEN.
AN ORATION.
ON this day, LIBERTY, the offspring of America, is Nineteen years old; and
since the earliest moment of her existence, not one year has yet elapsed
without bearing with it this customary testimonial of joy, this sacred offering
of gratitude to that divine Being, from whose pure essence she at first
emanated.

THE occasion is solemn, and joyous! solemn, because it conducts our
reflections to a period most anxious and awful in the history of our country;
joyous, because it renews in our imagination the scenes which were a preface to
our freedom, our happiness -- An occasion so deeply expressive of the sorrows,
the joys, the distress and the glory of a nation, can never cease to be
interesting and affecting.

THE heart that trembled with anxiety when the dubious scheme of our
Independence was first projected, and which leaped with exultation when our
freedom was eventually announced, cannot on this day stand still, as if palsied
with indifference -- The zeal, the fervor which we have felt for the
acquisition, has not, and I trust, cannot become stale by the calm quietude of
possession.

LIBERTY needs not the aid of novelty to excite the enthusiasm of its friends;
its value must increase with duration; its adherents will multiply with the
number of its years.

THE event which happened on this day, the feelings, manners and principles
which led to it, are the subject of our present contemplation -- A subject in
which is involved a history not more glorious to America, than it is
humiliating and disgraceful to the proud nation with whom she contended -- The
same feelings which are agitated by the first impression of injury, which are
heightened by an unwarrantable increase of the imposition, and which are turned
to desperation when the injury becomes cruelty insufferable; such were the
emotions which first propelled Americans to a contest with Britain.

THAT man has an unalienable claim to freedom, which neither time or
circumstance can affect; that Americans were early educated to a knowledge of
this right, and had courage to assert it in the face of tyranny itself; such
were the manners, such the principles which urged and sanctioned their conduct.

HAD the people of America been made up of that stupid, obedient clay, of which
the human machinery of kings is sometimes composed; had they been content to
have trudged with patient endurance beneath a burden of injury which an
unfeeling monarch would have imposed -- or had they not boldly refused to yield
their liberty and happiness, to the requisition of an audacious sovereign, the
event we this day commemorate, never had been recorded in the history of the
world.

AMERICA, now a nation of freedom, of honor, then would only have served to
lengthen the map of a monarch's territory. -- Americans now, the illustrious
progenitors of liberty, then would have been but as mere numbers of arithmetic
to swell the agregate of his miserable servile dependents. -- Indeed that very
nation, so renowned for having been first to liberate almost a world from
slavery, then would have been quoted by Tyrants as a new memorable precedent on
which to sanction their oppression of mankind.

THE new world and the old, would perhaps at this day, have been formed in one
indissoluble junction, for the fatal purpose to render slavery perpetual, and
to support forever that imperious authority by which they were both subjugated.
-- But I cannot dwell with patience on the hateful consequences which might
have happened to the world, had not the people of America been bold to repel
the very first advances of arbitrary power.

UNTIL the close of our late revolution, the true character of Americans, in
Europe, was almost unnoticed and unknown -- That they were the descendents of
Britain, seems to have been their only acknowledged claim to the little honor
or distinction which they enjoyed among the nations of the earth. -- But the
dignity of their origin was supposed to have become debased, the virtues of
their illustrious ancestry were not yet recognized in the character of their
posterity. -- Affected with this illiberal prejudice, even the historians and
philosophers of the elder world, did not hesitate to pronounce, that on this
side the atlantic, the soil and climate were unfriendly to the growth of
European virtues. -- That the sturdy Briton, since he was transplanted to
America, through a number of successive generations, had pined, like a sickly
exotic had withered and languish'd at the loss of his native soil.

ON this mistaken estimate of the American character, may we account for the
scheme which was first projected to reduce our nation to the dominion of
Britain.

THE pride of Englishmen, which had ever before been proverbial, was at this
period swollen to a degree of actual infatuation. -- Their armies had lately
gathered in the field, a little transitory short-lived glory -- Transitory I
say, because but a short time elapsed, ever they were compelled to strew their
laurels, to prostrate their glory at the foot of injured America.

THE pride of their recent victories was now divided between military arrogance
and parliamentary presumption.

THEIR statesmen and their soldiers were alike confirmed in the belief that in
policy or arms Britain was invincible -- Such was the vain confidence in their
own imagined superiority, and such their contemptuous opinion of our ability,
when a misruling ministry first proposed a system of tax on our nation which
was to render us forever tributary and subservient to the purpose of their own
dignity -- A system whose object was to delegate to the colonies, as their only
privilege in a Government, almost the exclusive right, and absolute necessity
to support the burden of its expenses.

INDEED the whole continent of America according to ministerial calculations,
was destined to become a mere appendage to the patrimonial inheritance of
George the third -- and the people of America like the dragon of Hesperides,
would have been allowed the honor to cherish and protect the fruit, of which
they were refused the power to participate.

A PROJECT so infernal in its design, at the same time so uncertain in its
event, could have been generated but by a ministry in the very dotage of
wickedness, approved but by a monarch in leading strings, and seconded only by
the unthinking automatons, who never move or act but from the impulse of their
sovereign -- In justice however to the more rational part of that deluded
people, we shall not forget the feeling remonstrances which were poured forth
by the purer spirits of the Kingdom -- But in vain -- In vain did a Chatham and
a Cambden, like the oracles of old, foresee and pronounce the fatal issue that
awaited the measures of their Government.

THE season had now arrived when the iniquitous schemes of parliament had
reached their crisis, when their vile production was to stand displayed in its
nakedness to the world.

AT this period, the first offspring of their labors, was exhibited in an act
which carried with it the stamp of the crown, and the eternal seal of its
disgrace -- Every artifice was applied, every species of ministerial magic was
exercised to conjure away the imposition, and to render the act less obnoxious
to America -- But art served only to enliven suspicion, terror but to
strengthen courage -- The evasions of law, the delusions of ministry, were too
transparent to darken the radience of truth -- Americans were too sagacious to
be duped, too intrepid to be alarmed into approbation of a measure, which was
intended to destroy the very essence of their liberty.

THEY felt the first impression of the iniquity and with the resolute voice of
millions, with a voice that rent the veil of the throne in twain, they demanded
its removal in terms that could not and did not fail of success Stamp Act
repealed.
-- But in the language of a Republican, Tyranny seldom commits an outrage
without seeking some positive law from, whence, to borrow an apparent
authority, on which to sanctify its pretensions, and legalize its crimes.

SUCH was the wretched alternatiive of Britain, when her real designs on
America had become too flagrant for concealment -- when the mere affectation of
attachment to her colonies would have demanded a firmness more inflexible, a
consistency more undeviating than the most practiced hypocricy had power to
display -- Such, I say, was the contemptible apology of Britain, when her
parliament in an audacious mimickry of omnipotence pronounced its authority to
bind us forever -- In the usual tone of their arrogance, the decree was
promulged, and as if a law from heaven had been revealed, the roaring of their
cannon seemed to mock the thunders on Sinai, and commanded us to listen,
tremble, and obey -- But from the first appearance of this hateful presumptuous
act, the doom of Britain was settled, and the last closing catastrophe of her
schemes hastened its approach; deception was worn out, and was now divested of
its power to deceive -- The king that professed defender of the faith, who amid
the splendour of a throne, had been viewed as a gracious affectionate sovereign,
was now stripped of his courtly disguise, and exhibited a monster of perfidy,
of cruelty.

PARLIAMENT by their usual sanctity of pretension, could no longer conceal the
real malignancy of their designs -- That secret cabinet of iniquity was now
thrown open and behold like the den of the Cyclops, it exhibitted a group of
demons busied in forging engines of destruction; -- in fabricating chains,
daggers and fetters, to enslave or destroy her devoted colonies.

SUCH was the frightful picture of Britain, when Americans, once the most loyal
of her subjects, turned from her with abhorrence; -- when attachment the most
cordial, was converted to hatred most inveterate -- when their courage was
summoned to contend against that very nation, whose honors, whose glory it had
often been conspicuous to defend. -- Such I say was the hostile picture of
Britain, when an intrepid band of Patriots, undismayed by the clangor of arms,
or the rocking of battlements, pronounced the Independence of our nation.

AT this period, how awful, yet how sublime must have been the emotions of my
countrymen? -- On that eventful moment, when the existence of their country was
suspended in the dreadful balance of uncertainty -- when even the destinies of
America were appalled at the dreary questionable aspect, and alarmed at the
magnitude of the work before them, seemed to stand in solemn dilemma, whether
to support or renounce the cause of Freedom for ever.

BUT -- The sentiments of the colonists, which had so long been balancing
between a loyal respect for their sovereign, and a manly resentment of his
injuries, were ultimately fixed and resolved. The issue which had been so long
tenreded to the colonists, and appeared insultingly to challenge their
resentment; -- the alarming issue on which their life and liberty were
involved, was now boldly accepted -- From national tribunals, the justice of
our claims was appealed to the judgment of heaven, and the fortunes of our
contest submitted to the GOD of battles.

TO pursue the details of heroism on the one part, and to mark the ravages of
cruelty on the other, during a war which ensued, would demand a language of
eulogium and reproach, more powerful than I have talents to bestow -- Yet let
me ask what favored portion of this now peaceful continent, but was at some
time in the contest desolated by the merciless hand of a base perfidious enemy?
-- Even the muses were routed from their abode; and this very sanctuary,
dedicated to the peaceful services of God, was converted to an hostile parade;
to a vile nursery where a band of Ruffians were instructed in the infernal
rudim^^^^ of murdering mankind. -- Tyranny! cannot we trace its footsteps in
blood, from the nether shores of our ocean, almost to the western boundary of
our wilderness?

YET dreadful as were the scenes of our distress, vengeance is appeased by the
reflection, that the injuries we suffered were not inflicted with impunity --
That hardly an inch of our soil was embraced by the victories, which was not at
the same time fertilized by the blood of the invaders. -- The height of BUNKER,
so long as the earth that sustains it endures, will stand an unshaken monument
to the honor of American bravery --!

YE deluded victms, who on the day that distinguished that memorable spot, were
compelled to bite the ground ye profaned, ye whose enmities are now buried in
the dust that covers you, could ye speak from your graves, what solemn
testimony would be given that ye were victims of no ignoble foe! That the arm
which slew you, was stretched in the cause of freedom, and dealt a blow which
justice demanded.

BUT I need not invoke the slumbering tenants of the grave to confirm the honor
of an army, whose (...) have drawn many an acknowledgment from (...) unwilling
mouths of their bitterest adversaries -- whose valor has often extorted a
confession from that very nation, which it had scourged and vanquished.

BUT if the revival of the sanguinary scenes of our war, may have touched a
chord of sensibility which had long since ceased to vibrate for the death of a
friend, a brother, or a father that were slain, may our sorrows for their loss,
be soothed by the remembrance of the glory they have gained -- Their deaths
were revenged, their memories have been attended with pity and with honor.

BUT for the last, the most conclusive proof that Americans were brave, we need
only proclaim that their country is free. That a nation whose power had
hitherto proudly stalked beyond every boundary assigned to it, was compelled to
acknowledge the shores of America, as the insurmountable limits of its
victories; and to retreat in confusion and disgrace, from that country it had
menaced and invaded with triumph.

A WAR which had been not less distressing in its progress, than it was cruel
and iniquitous in its origin; -- which for seven long years had been feeding on
the very vitals of our nation, must necessarily have consumed most of those
resources, which even at its commencement were much too narrow. -- The expense
of our army, that severest pressure of the revolution, was to be born at a time
when those very energies which had been so gallantly displayed in the field,
were now most wanted to alleviate or support the burden. -- In the determinate
language of justice, the soldier now demanded, of his country, a recompense for
his services, which in the piteous tone of poverty, his country could but
refuse to bestow -- To rectify difficulties of this magnitude, at the same time
to provide for the multiplied concerns of the states, it cannot be surprising
that our old constitution was wholly incompetent -- A constitution, whose very
basis was confusion, whose incongruous materials were hastily thrown together,
when the deliberations of the cabinet were continually disturbed by the noise
of arms.

INDEED at this period, such was the debilitated, unquiet state of our country,
that it is less derogatory to the American character, that a temporary discord
prevailed, than it is honorable and felicitating, that general distraction did
not ensue.

BUT my friends! when the disorderly fabric of our old government was pulled
down, and on its ruins erected the present admirable system of state, then, and
not till then, could we boast that our work was complete, freedom secure, our
nation triumphant!

AN attempt to display the virtues of our present government; to do justice to
the characters of those eminent men who formed, and who who now administer it,
would be but a feeble echo of that sublimer eulogium, which has so often and so
justly been conferred.

IN general however I may remark, that for wisdom in its plan, for harmony and
concordance in its operation, the Federal Government has never been rivalled
since the first association of mankind.

BUT panegyric unqualified, is little less obnoxious than censure undeserved;
that the present system, perfect as it is, has still some faults, even the most
enthusiastic of its admirers cannot and will not deny. -- Far, very far is it
from my intention to criminate the measures of our rulers, or to question the
purity of the motives on which they are bottomed -- But on this subject I
cannot refrain to express a belief that our system of finance, whatever may be
its present operation, will hereafter become a dangerous, perhaps fatal
principle in the constitution of our government. -- It is a system which seems
to be established rather on the narrow mercenary calculations of arithmetic,
than on the broad basis of justice -- which may perhaps enrich a small, very
small portion of the present generation, but will it not diminish and incumber
the legacy that must descend to our posterity? An institution which I apprehend
is at this moment more admired for ingenuity, than it ever has, or ever will be
esteemed for its justice or utility.

IT is a question for intelligent politicians to decide, whether our running
System was not originally intended rather to perpetuate than to extinguish the
national debt? -- But whether it was productive of complete justice, to all who
had claims (the most sacred) on Government, has, I believe, already been
resolved.
A national debt funded on the fashionable principles of the age, has been
justly compared to a worm that never dies, that never will cease to prey on the
very stamina of our constitution. -- But in justice to the distinguished
talents of the man who projected it, we must presume his system to be as
perfect as it could have been, and we have then but to lament the
impracticability of a measure, which would have relieved from beggary the
protectors of our country, and silenced for ever the voice of complaint.

CITIZENS! The courage of soldiers is not more necessary for conquest, than
their prudence and firmness to protect, the victories they have gained.

AT a moment of the most confident security, it behooves you still to remember,
that fugitive and transitory, are the motto, which the finger of Deity has
inscribed on the very firmest of his earthly productions; that our own
government, substantial as it is, cannot be privileged from that common
catastrophe which has hitherto closed the acts of other nations and empires. --
But although no human application can remove the principles of its mortality,
it is within the reach of your exertions to interdict a premature unnatural
dissolution.

THE same vigilance which led you to detect the first attempts on your rights,
even in times the most prosperous and peaceful, should not be suffered to sleep
in profound security.

THE same firmness which induced you to resist the first incursion of arbitrary
power, should ever be prompt and ready to repel the future efforts of tyrants.

FROM the late inhuman outrages on our commerce, we have a most unquestionable
proof, that our former enemies have not yet become our friends. -- That their
fall (terrible as it was!) did only for a time choke the respiration of
vengeance, and interrupt the prosecution of their designs.

THE old adversary of America, stung by the tortures of disgrace, like
Beelzebub in his exile from heaven, in the abyss of infamy, still broods on
mischief, and meditates our destruction. -- But may the conduct of our
government announce to Britain, may it proclaim to the world, that America is
too watchful to be surprised, even in the arms of victory and peace -- That her
people are as little disposed to be the sufferers as the authors of an injury.

AN example like this must discourage the attempts of our enemies, and secure
to us a long, a peaceful enjoyment of our freedom. It must surely be a subject
of regret, that our late Treaty with Britain appears as little calculated to
defend us from the future aggressions of that nation, as to retribute us for
those which have already been committed.


YET it is not more important that our country be protected from external
violence, than secured against internal corruption.

NEVER should we forget, that though wisdom and virtue at this time preside in
our councils, folly and vice may ever long become their successors -- But it is
the pride, the boast of Amemericans, that they are inhabitants of a country
where freedom of opinion, where unbiassed liberty of discussion are authorized
in the fundamentals of our government -- where no department is too high or too
low for inspection -- where neither splendour of title, nor the ostensible
dignity of office, can for a long time protect a bad character from scrutiny or
censure -- In a country where the very smallest individual of community would
be applauded for his boldness, should he dare to mount to the very chair of
magistracy, to strip off the mask of wickedness from the most exalted hypocrite
of our nation.

ON this privilege your rights are secure, and this privilege it is your duty
to protect not less from the abuses of faction, than the infringements of
prerogative.

BUT for the more surprising, the more wonderful scenes which have followed
from the event we contemplate, we must turn our reflections to that nation, who
are now boldly contending in the cause of freedom.

THE exertions of our own country, heroic as they were in defense of Liberty,
when compared to the present desperate struggles of France, were but as the
first achievement of Hercules in his cradle to the wonderful labors that were
reserved for his manhood.

ON an occasion like this, it cannot be expected that we dwell with particular
emphasis on the various causes which gradually terminated in the late
convulsions of Europe. An attempt of that kind, would be to compress within the
limits of a few pages, within the narrow compass of a single moment, a series
of cruelties which the voluminous history of ages is almost too small to
contain, and which a long line of successive tyrants, most industrious in the
business of iniquity, within the lengthened period of centuries, hardly had
time to inflict. -- But severe as was the oppression of France, it was the
example of America, which roused the virtues of her people into action. -- But
for that example, France might still have continued a most singular and
distressing phenomenon in the regions of tyranny. -- A nation the most
enlightened, and yet the most oppressed. -- A people who had sensibility to
feel, courage and power to repel, and yet for ages tamely tolerating all the
complicated horrors of the most abject servitude.

THAT tyranny in the extreme is usually productive of Liberty, has been often
asserted, but never yet substantiated. -- Happy would it be for mankind were
oppression and its antidote so nearly allied -- were the blessings of freedom
the certain recompense for the sufferings of slavery, and the death of Tyrants
the never-failing penalty for their cruelty and crimes.

FROM the fatal experience of almost every nation on earth, the truth of that
principle has become too doubtful, too uncertain.

YET whatever may have been the more dis^^^^ causes of the French revolution,
its effects will be most seriousandinteresting to the world -- It is a warfare
not of men, not of nations only, it is a conflict of principles -- An impious
effort of vice, to usurp the dominion of virtue -- Of tyranny to overwhelm and
destroy the empire of reason and justice. -- It is a contest, in which (to the
shame of tyrants be it spoken) we behold a single nation advanced as a champion
for the rights of humanity; while on the other hand, half a world is engaged to
oppose and destroy them.

AMERICANS!! The question serious as it is to Europe, is still more serious and
important to America -- If tyranny is victorious, France and other nations must
lament the loss of that freedom which they had tasted in prospect, but had
never fully realized in possession. -- A relapse to slavery would indeed be
more i^^^lerable, than had been an eternal continuance of their bondage.

BUT for America -- How dreadful to be compelled to abandon the Liberty which
was dear indeed, for the blood that purchased it, but is dearer still for the
enjoyments it has yielded.

HOW dishonorable! how humiliating to posterity, should they be compelled to
bend a knee of obedience to that imperious monarch, whom their fathers had
humbled and vanquished.

BUT I will not rest on the contemplation of events which the present
appearances of Europe, will hardly suffer to exist even in the airy visions of
fancy. France, environed, unaided, alone, like Sampson of old, has already
nearly vanquished the whole collected host of its enemies. -- Her adversaries
are too numerous for computation, and yet her victories have been too splendid
for description. -- To her allies she beckons for friendship, but requires as
little of their services as they can have the power or disposition to bestow.
-- Neither our blood nor our treasure are wanted to complete their success. --
But in the name of honor! of humanity! can we refuse to yield her the sanction
of our warmest approbation?

THE feelings of Americans cannot dwell with uncommon anguish on the melancholy
catastrophe of a fallen monarch, while millions of his brave injured subjects
invite our joy and our enthusiasm to the fields of their conquests. -- Nor can
the zea, of chivalry so far control the emotions of patriotism, that our
sympathy for the sufferings of a single woman (peerless illustrious as she was)
can diminish our friendship for a nation, or lessen our wishes for the
happiness of more than twenty millions of mankind.

SCENES like these may cast a temporary gloom on our minds, but the very
thickest cloud which the furies of faction or despotism can conjure up, will
not darken the splendour of their cause.

AMERICANS! the cause is half our own, and does not our policy and our honor
urge us most forcibly to cherish it? Can it be dishonorable or hazardous to
American to confirm an alliance with a nation, which the combined despots of
Europe are on the point to pronounce invincible. -- A nation by whose armies
Liberty has been escorted in triumph to the ocean, whose navies will waft her
in glory to the utmost boundaries of the earth -- a nation before whose
tremendous artillery even Neptune himself, that fabled monarch of the ocean,
will ever long abandon his dominion, and yield his Trident to the management of
Republican hands.

WITH a nation like this for your foe -- Tyrants! how dreadful, how threatening
is the prospect before you? Your fates are already begun; the seventh vio^ of
your destinies will ever long be emptied. -- The period is fast approaching,
when your honors and your titles which have so long dazzled the world with
their splendour, like the dreary lamps of a sepulcher, will but light us to the
spot where lie the mouldering relics of your departed greatness. -- When the
earth itself, which has so often been deluged by the blood of your cruelties,
shall gape wider and wider to receive you; when Tyranny shall be extinct,
Liberty triumphant!

FINIS.

