Philip Quarll and Beausidelle.


THE HERMIT: OR THE UNPARALLELED SUFFERINGS AND SURPRISING ADVENTURES OF PHILIP
QUARLL, An ENGLISH MAN.

WHO WAS LATELY DISCOVERED UPON AN UNINHABITED ISLAND IN THE SOUTH SEA, WHERE
HE LIVED ABOVE FIFTY YEARS, WITHOUT ANY HUMAN ASSISTANCE.

CONTAINING,

I. His conference with those who found him; to whom he recited the most
material circumstances of his life: His being born in the parish of St. Giles,
educated by the charity of a lady, and put out apprentice to a lock-smith. II.
His leaving his master, and being taken up with a notorious house-breaker, who
was hanged; his lucky escape, and going to sea a cabin-boy, marrying a famous
prostitute, (...) a common soldier, turning (...) master, and afterward (...)
three wives, for which (...) tried and condemned at the Old Bailey. III. His
being pardoned by the King, turning merchant, and being shipwrecked on this
desolate island on the coast of Mexico.
WITH AN ELEGANT FRONTISPIECE. A NEW EDITION.

PRINTED AT EXETER, BY H. RANLET, FOR I. THOMAS, AND E. T. ANDREWS, Faust's
Statue, No. 45, Newbury-Street, Boston.

M,DCC,XCV.

PREFACE.
TRUTH and fiction, have, of late, been so promiscuously blended together, in
performances of this nature, that, in the present case, it seems absolutely
necessary to distinguish the one from the other. If Robinson Crusoe, Moll
Flanders, and Colonel Jach, have their admirers among the lower rank of
readers, it is as certain that the morality in masquerade, which may be
discovered in the travels of Lemuel Gulliver, has been an equal entertainment
to the superior class of mankind.

Now it may without the least arrogance, be affirmed, that though this
surprising Narrative be not so replete with vulgar stories as the former, or so
interspersed with a satirical vein, as the last of the abovementioned
creatises, yet it is certainly of more use to the public than either of them,
because every incident herein related, is real matter of fact. But because my
share in this work is no other than, that of a bare Editor, I think it my duty
to account for the possession of this manuscript.

It was put into my hands about a year ago, by Mr. Dorrington, an eminent
merchant, with full liberty to publish it when, and in what manner. I thought
most proper. I hope, therefore, it will not be deemed impertinent to give some
account of my friend, as a reputation to the work itself.

"Mr. Edward Dorrington is descended from a very ancient and honorable family
in Staffordshire; his grandfather, Mr. Joseph Dorrington, removed out of that
county, to From in Somersetshire; his employ was that of a very considerable
grazier: The issue he left at his decease was one son, Richard, (the father of
my friend) and two daughters. Mr. Richard Dorrington, for some time, was a
student of Gray's Inn; but, liking a country life best, he having thoroughly
qualified himself, retired to From, the abovementioned residence of his
father; where be married Mrs: Margaret Groves, of Tounton, a gentlewoman of
about a thousand pounds fortune. Soon after his marriage, he went and settled
at Bath, where the integrity of his fair practice, soon rendered him eminent in
his profession. He acquired a very competent estate, and died in the year 1708,
having no other issue than his only son, the present Mr. Edward Dorrington,
whom he had put to be bred a merchant, under the care of Mr. Stephen Graham of
Bristol. His diligence and courteous behavior, during his servitude, so highly
recommended him to his master's esteam, that when his time was expired, he
admitted him into a moiety of his commerce, (...) him to his daughter and gave
her an handsome portion suitable to his merit.

"The happiness of my acquaintance with him began in his apprenticeship; and
has, with the greatest satisfaction to me continued ever since."

As to the genuineness of this treatise, I am farther to assure the (...) that
as Mr. Dorrington is allowed, by all who know him, to be a gentleman of
unquestionable veracity, and above attempting an imposition upon the public; so
the first book hirein was wholly written by himself, and the second and third
books were faithfully transcribed from Mr. Quarll's parchment-roll, which was a
continuation of what my friend had begun.

When Mr. Dorrington undertook this voyage, he set fail, as it is well known,
from Bristol to the South Sea; and traded all along that coast to Mexico, now
called New-Spain.

And he has since made several voyages to the same places.

To proceed to the work itself: The first book contains a relation of Mr.
Dorrington's discovery of Mr. Quarll, his several conferences with him, a
description of the island, and the manner of our Hermit's living there; with
many other curious particulars.

The second and third books are the contents of the Hermit's parchmentroll
abovementioned, and contain the most surprising, as well as various turns of
fortune ever yet recounted in any work of this kind. And although (...)
continued series of misfortune which attended him, seemed to render his (...)
an example of the most unhappy state of human nature; yet we do not (...) so
great an enormity in his actions, that vengeance should pursue (...) so closely
by unparalleled crosses. If polygamy could ca^ down such divine resentments, we
must be silent; nor farther urge his fate.

However, for this fact he was brought to justice by the laws of his country;
and he accounts for the inducements of his committing that sin, at his trial.
This reflection therefore should be wiped off since he is now become the
humblest of penitents.

The observations throughout these sheets will be found to be modest, serious,
and instructive, and all center in the unerring moral, that, Whatever we do, or
wheresoe'er we are driven,
(...), we must own, such is the will of Heaven.


To conclude: In the publication, of these papers, I have discharged two
promise; the one made by Mr. Dorrington to the Hermit, and the other made by
myself to Mr. Dorrington: And that they may meet with a reception as candid as
they are useful, is the hearty wish of

The reader's humble servant, W. L.

THE ENGLISH HERMIT.
BOOK. I.
Account of Mr. Quarll's being found out; description of his dress, habitation,
utensils; his conversation with the persons who first discovered him.

HAVING concluded those mercantile affairs, which I undertook, by this voyage,
to negociate; and being upon my return for England, and wind-bound; during my
stay I daily walked about the sea shore. Very early one morning, the weather
being extremely fair, and the sea wonderfully calm, as I was taking my usual
turn, I accidentally fell into discourse with a Spanish Mexican inhabitant,
named Alvarado: and as we were viewing the rocks which abound in those seas, he
desired me to take notice of a vast long one about seven leagues from shore,
which he said was supposed to enclose some land, by its great extent; but the
access to it was very dangerous, by reason of the rocks, which reach so far
under water, being in some places too shallow for boats, and others too deep to
ford over, and the sea commonly very rough in that place, hitherto prevented
farther research, supposing the advantage which might accrue from the land,
would not countervail the cost and trouble of making it inhabitable: for that
he and some friends had on a fine day, as it now was, the curiosity to go as
near as they could with safety, which was about fifty yards from the main rock,
but were forced to return as they went; only that he had the pleasure of
catching some delicious fish, which lay playing upon the surface of the water,
having a rod in his hand, and lines in his pocket, being seldom without, when
he walks on the sea shore: These fish are somewhat larger than a herring in its
prime, skinned like a mackarel, made as a gudgeon, and of diverse beautiful
colors; especially if caught in a fair day; having since observed, that they
are more or less beautiful according to the serenity of the weather.

The account he gave me of them excited my curiosity to go and catch some; and
he being, as usual provided with tackle, we picked up a parcel of yellow
maggots, which breed in dead tortoises upon the rock, at which those fishes
bite very eagerly.

Thus equipped with all necessaries for the sport, we agreed with a young
fellow, one of the longboat's crew, belonging to the ship I was come over in,
whose master being just come on shore, and not expected to return speedily, he
readily consented to row us thither for about the value of a shilling.

Being come to the place, we found extraordinary sport; the fishes were so
eager, that our lines were no sooner in but we had a bite.

Whilst we were fishing, the young man that rowed us thither espying a cleft in
the rock, through which he saw a light had a mind to see what was on the other
side; so put off his clothes in order to wade to it: Thus having taken the
hitcher of the boat, he gropes along for sure footing, the rock being very full
of holes.

Being come to the cleft, he creeps through, and in a short time returns,
calling to us with precipitation, which expressed both joy and surprise.
Gentlemen! gentlemen! said he, I have made a discovery of a new land, and the
finest that the sun ever shone on: Leave off your fishing; you will find here
much better business. Having by that time caught a pretty handsome dish of
fish, we put up our tackling, fastened our boat to the rock, and so we went to
see this newfound land.

Being come at the other side of the rock, we saw as he said, a most delightful
country, but despaired of going to it, there being a lake about a mile long at
the bottom of the rock, which parted it from the land; for neither Alvarado nor
myself could swim; but the young fellow, who could, having leaped into (...)
finding it all way the but breast-high, we went in also, and waded to the other
side, which ascended gently, about five or six feet from the lake, to a most
pleasant land, flat and level covered with a curious grass, something like
chamomile, but of no smell, and of an agreeable taste: It bore also abundance
of fine lofty trees, of different kinds and make; which in several places stood
in clusters, composing groves of different height and largeness. Being come to
a place where the trees stood in such a disposition as gave out sight a greater
scope, we saw, at some distance, a most delightful wood of considerable extent.
The agreeableness of the perspective made by Nature, both for the creating of
pleasure, and condolence of grief, prompted my curiosity to a view of the
delights, which the distance we were at might in some measure, rob us of: But
Alvarado, who, till then, had discerned nothing whereby we could judge the
island to be inhabited, was fearful, and would not venture farther that way,
least we should of a sudden be sallied upon by wild beasts out of the wood;
and, as I could not discommend his precaution, the thickness of it giving room
to believe that there might be dangerous creatures in it; so we went southward,
finding numbers of fine trees, and here and there small groves, which we judged
to be composed of forty or fifty several trees: But upon examination, we found
it to our great amazement, to proceed only from one plant; whose utmost lower
branches, bending to the ground, about seven or eight feet from the middle
stem, struct root, and became, plants, which did the same; and in that manner
covered a considerable spot of ground; still growing less as they stood
farthest from the old body.

Having walked some time under that most surprising and wonderful plant,
admiring the greatness of Nature's works, we went on, finding several of the
same in our way, wherein harbored monkeys; but their swift flight prevented
our discerning their colors: Yet going on, we found there were two kinds; one
having green, backs, yellow faces and bellies; the other gray, with white
bellies and faces; but both sorts exceeding beautiful.

At some distance we perceived three things standing together, which I took to
be houses: I believe, said I, this island is inhabited; for, if I mistake not,
yonder, are dwelling-places. So they are said Alvarado; and therefore I don't
think it wisdom, to venture any farther, least they should be savages and do us
hurt; so would have gone back: But I was resolved to see what they were, and
persuaded him to go on; saying, it would be time enough for us to retreat when
we perceived danger. That may be too late, said he: for as evil does not always
succeed danger, danger does not always precede evil; we may be surprised. Well,
well, said I, if any people, should come upon us, we must see them at some
distance; and if we cannot avoid them, here are three of us, a good long staff
with an iron point at one end, and an hook at the other; I shall exercise that,
and keep them off, at least till you get away: Come along, and fear not. So I
pulled him along.

Being come near enough to discern better, we found, that what we took for
houses were rather ^arbours, being apparently made of green trees: -- Then
indeed, I began to fancy some wild people inhabited them, and doubted whether
it were safe to go nearer; but concealed my doubt, least I should ^ntimidate
Alvarado so that he should run away, ^o which he was very much inclined. I only
slackened my pace, which Alvarado perceiving, imagined that I saw some evil
coming, which he thought unavoidable; and not daring to go from his company, he
only condoled his misfortune; saying, he dearly repented taking my advice: That
he feared we should pay dearly for our silly curiosity; for indeed those things
were more like thieves dens, or wild people's huts, than Christians'
habitations.

By this time we were come near a spot of ground, pretty clear of trees, on
which some animals were feeding, which I took to be goats, but Alvarado fancied
them to be deers, by their swift flight at our appearing: However, I inferred
by their shyness, that we were out of the way in our judgment concerning the
arbours: For, said I, if these were inhabited, those creatures would not have
been so scared at the sight of men; and, if by nature wild, they would not
graze so near men's habitations, had there been any body in them. I rather
believe some hermit has formerly lived there, and is either dead or gone.
Alvarado, who to that time had neither heard nor seen any thing that could
contradict what I said, began to acquiesce to it, and goes on.

Being come within reach of plain discernment, we were surprised: If these,
said I, be the works of savages, they far exceed our expert artists. Their
regularity appeared unconfined to the rules of art, and complete architecture
without the craft of the artist; nature and time only being capable of bringing
them to that perfection. They were neither houses, huts, nor arbours; yet had
all the usefulness and agreements of each.

Having sufficiently admired the uncommon beauty of the outside without
interruption, but rather diverted with the most agreeable harmony of various
singing birds, as perched on a green hedge which surrounded about one acre of
land near the place, we had the curiosity to see the inside; and being nearest
the middlemost, we examined that first. It was about nine feet high, and as
much square the walls were straight and smooth, covered with green leaves,
something like those of a mulberrytree, lying as close and regular as slates on
a slated house; the top went up rounding like a copula and covered in the same
manner as the sides; from each corner, issued a straight stem, about twelve
feet higher, bare of branches to the top, which (...) very full of leaves, and
spread over, making a (...) pleasing canopy to the mansion beneath.

Being full of admiration at the wonderful structure and nature of the place,
we came to a door which was made of green twigs, neatly woven, and fastened,
with a small stick, through a loop made of the same.

The door being fastened without, gave us encouragement to venture in; it being
evident that the host was absent; so we opened it, and the first thing we saw,
being opposite to the door, was a bed lying on the ground, which was an hard,
dry earth, very smooth and clean; we had the curiosity to examine what it was
made of, and sound it another subject of admiration. The covering was a mat
about three inches thick, made of a sort of grass, which, though as dry as the
oldest hay, was as green as a leek, felt as soft as cotton, and was as warm as
wool; the bed was made of the same, and in the same manner, but three times as
thick; which made it as easy as a down bed: under that lay another, but
somewhat harder.

At one side of the room stood a table made of two pieces of thin oak-board,
about three feet long, fastened upon four sticks driven into the ground, and by
it a chair made of green twigs, as the door; at the other side of the room lay
a chest on the ground, like a sailor's small chest; over it, against the wall,
hung a linen jacket and breeches, such as seamen wear on board: on another pin,
hung a large coat, or gown, made of the same sort of grass, and after the same
manner, as the bed's covering, but not above half an inch thick; and a cap by
it of the same^ these (...) supposed to be a winter garb for somebody.

Having viewed the furniture of the dwellingplace, we examined its fabric which
we could not find out by the outside, it being so closely covered with leaves;
but the inside being bare, we found it to be several trees, whose bodies met
close, and made a solid wall, which, by the breadth of every stem, we judged to
be about six inches thick: their bark being very smooth, and of a pleasant
olive color, made a mighty agreeable wainscotting; the roof, which was hung
very thick with leaves, was branches, which reached from end to end, and were
crossed over by the side ones that were woven between, which made a very even
and smooth ceiling, so thick of leaves and branches that no rain could
penetrate. My companion's uneasiness, expecting the ^^ft's return every moment,
hindered my examining every thing more narrowly; and having slightly looked
into the chest, which lay open, wherein we saw nothing but sheets of parchment,
which his haste would (...) me to look into, we went away.

Going out we saw at one corner of the room, behind the door, a couple of
firelocks, the sight of which much alarmed my company, and, I must confess
startled me; for, till then, I was inclinable to believe some hermit dwelt in
the place; but finding arms (...) the room of a crucifix and religious
pictures, which were the common ornaments of those religious men, made me waver
in my opinion: and having taken the pieces in my hands, which, for rust,
appeared not to have bee^ fit for use for many years, (...) my former opinion;
supposing them to be the effects of some shipwreck, which the hermit found upon
the rocks. But my company, persisting in their own, hastened out, and would
have gone quite away, without seeing any more-had I not, by many arguments,
made them sensible, that if those arms had been intended for the evil use
Alvarado had imagined, they would have been kept in better order; to which
being obliged to acquiesce, he consented to go and examine the other, it being
as worthy of admiration as that we had seen, though quite of another nature,
but much of the same height and make.

The next we came at was covered all over with the same fort of grass as grew
on the ground, which lay as even as though it had been mowed and rolled: behind
it was several lodges, made, as it were, for some dogs; but we neither saw nor
heard any.

Having viewed the place all round, we posted the young fellow with us at the
outside, to give notice when any body appeared, lest we should be surprised
whilst we saw the inside; so having opened the door, which was made and
fastened after the manner of the first, we went in expecting to find another
dewlling place, but it proved rather a kitchen; there being no bed, but only a
parcel of shells, of different sizes, which we supposed to be applied for
utensils, some being, scorched at the outside as having been on the fire, but
exceeding clean within; the rest were, both inside and outside, as fine as
nakes of pearl.

At the one end of the room was a hole cut in the ground like stew-stoves, in
great kitchens; about three or four feet from that there was another
fireplace, made of three stones, fit to roast at; in both of which places
appeared to have been fire lately, by wood coals, and ashes fresh made (...)
his confirmed my opinion that it was an hermitate. Alvarado, who all along
feared we should meet with men who would misuse us, was not a little pleased to
find fireplaces in the room of beds, and kitchen utensils instead of weapons. I
hope, said he, we are not in so great danger as I feared; here cannot be many
men, unless they crowd together in yonder place; and if so, they would have
been here before now, had they been in the way. His fears being a great measure
dispersed, we looked about more leisurely; and seeing several shells, that were
covered, on a shelf that lay cross two sticks that were stuck in the wall which
was made of turf, we had the curiosity to see what was in them; and found in
one, pickled anchoives; in others, mushrooms, capers, and other sorts of
pickles. Let them, said I, be who they will that dwell here, I am sure they
know good eating; and therefore, probably, may be no strangers to good manners.
Upon another shelf, behind the door, lay diverse sorts of dried fishes; and upon
the ground stood, uncovered, two chests with fish and flesh in salt.

These provisions being some what too voluptuous for an hermit, gave as room
for speculation. I have lived (said Alvarado) at Mexico these six years, and
have been at Peru above twenty times and yet never heard talk of this Island:
the access to it is so difficult, and dangerous, that I dare say, we are the
first that have been on these sides of the rocks. I am very apt to believe that
a company of determined Buccaneers, which are said to frequent these seas,
shelter here; and that the habitation we have seen, and this place, belong to
their captain; and that the company resorts in caves up and down these rocks.
Really I could not well gainsay it, being too probable; yet I would not
altogether acquiesce to his opinion, (...) thereby should take a motive to go
away before ^he had seen the other place. I must confess, said I, here is room
for conjectures, but no proof of certainty; however let it be as you say, it is
a plain case here are none to disturb us; therefore, whilst we have liberty,
let us see the other place: so we fastened the door as we found it, and with to
the next which was shut after the same manner as the two preceding, but made
of quite different stuff; being a complete arbor, composed of trees, planted
within a foot of one another, whose branches were woven together in such a
regular manner; that they made several agreeable copartments, and so close that
nothing but air could enter: it was of the same height and bigness with the
kitchen; which stood at the other end of the dewlling place which made a very
uniform wing to it.

The coolness of the arbor removed our doubts of its being another dwelling,
unless only used in hot weather.

Having sufficiently viewed the outside, we went in, and found several boards,
like dressers or tables in a pantry, on which lay diverse broad and deep shells,
as beautiful as those in the kitchen; in some of which was butter, in others
cream and milk. On a shelf lay several small cheeses, and on another a parcel
of roots like Jerusalem artichokes, which seemed to have been roasted. All this
did but confirm the opinion we were in, that it was no hermitage: there being
sufficient to gratify the appetite, as well as to support nature. Therefore,
not knowing what to think of the master of the house, we made no long stay, but
concluded to haste, and get our fish dressed, it being near dinnertime; and as
the trees stood very thick inland, and might conceal men from our sight till we
came too near to shun them; we thought it proper to walk on the outside, near
the rocks, that we might see at some distance before us.

Walking along, a phlegm sticking in my throat, I happened to hawk pretty loud;
the noise was answered from I believe twenty places of the rock, and in as many
different sounds; which alarmed Alvarado, who took it to be a signal from men
concealed up and down the rock, not considering the difficulty of their coming
at us: there being a lake at the foot of it, which they must have been obliged
to wade over, and which would have given us time to get away: but fear, which
often blinds reason, represented the evil infallible to his thought, which was
morally impossible. I did all I could to make him sensible they were but
echoes; and to convince him thereof, I gave a loud hem, which was answered in
like manner; but being a second time repeated, and by a louder voice, I was
certain the last did not proceed from me; which put me in apprehension that
somebody, besides myself, had hemmed also. My companion, whose countenance,
being turned as pale as death, expressed the excess of his fears, would have
run away, had not the voice come from the way we were to go. Now said he,
(hardly able to (...) his words for trembling) you are, I hope, convinced that
it would have been safer for us to retire, instead of gratifying your
unreasonable curiosity: What do you think will become of us? The young fellow,
at these words, falls a weeping, saying, he wished he had missed the getting
that money, which was like to be dearly earned. I must confess, I began to be a
little apprehensive of danger, and I wished myself safe away, but concealed my
thoughts; heartening them as well as I could: and representing the danger
equal, either moving, forwards, or standing still, I at last persuaded them to
go on.

We were scarce gone forty paces farther, before we perceived at a considerable
distance, something like a man, with another creature, but presently lost them
among the trees, before we could have a full view of them; which made every one
of us conceive a different idea of what we had seen. Alvarado would have it to
be a giant, and a man of common size with him, and both armed cap-a-pe. The
poor lad, who was already as bad as a slave, being bound to an ill natured
master, feared death more than bondage: so took what he had seen for some
she-bear, and one of her whelps with her, to make her yet more dreadful; and,
by all means, would have thrown himself into the lake, in order to get at the
other side of the rock: thus the danger appeared to each of them to be what
they dreaded most: but I was somewhat better composed in mind than they. I gave
the object I saw the likeliest resemblance the time it was in sight would
permit, which I could adapt to nothing but a man of common size. and somewhat
like a dog with him; so persisting in my opinion, made them waver in theirs;
thus we went on something better composed.

Being gone about a hundred yards farther, we saw the same again, but nearer
hand, and without interruption, the place being pretty clear of trees: thus,
having a full view, we were all, to our great satisfaction convinced, that what
we had been taking for a formidable giant, and a terrible she-bear, was but an
ordinary man; but that which was with him running up a tree as soon as he
perceived us, prevented our discerning what animal it was: but the man, who
walked on apace, soon came within the reach of a more certain discernment, and
appeared to be a venerable old man with a worshipful white beard, which covered
his naked breast, and a long head of hair, of the same color; which spreading
over his shoulders, hung down to his loins.

His presence, which inspired respect more than fear, soon recalled the
frightened folks scared senses, who to recover this faint heartedness, excused
themselves by the misrepresentations distance causes on object. The old man,
who, by that time was come near enough to discern our speaking English, lets
fall a bundle of sticks he had under one arm, and a hatchet he carried in the
other hand, and runs to me, being the next to him, embracing me, and saying,
Dear countrymen, for I hear ye are Englishmen by what accident are ye come
hither? A place the approach whereof is defended by a thousand perils and
dangers, and not to be come at but by a narrow escape of death. Are ye
shipwrecked? No, thank God, said I, most reverend father; it was mere curiosity
that brought us hither; these perils, which you say defend the approach of this
island, being absent by the extraordinary calmness of the sea. But, if I may
ask, pray how came you hither? By the help of Providence, replied the good old
man; who snatched me out of the ravenous jaws of death, to fix me on this safe
and peaceable spot of land. I was shipwrecked, thanks to my Maker, and was
saved by my being cast away. I conceive, Sir, said I, you have been chased by
some pirates, and escaped slavery, by striking upon the rocks, which surround
this Island; but now you have avoided that dismal fate, embrace the lucky
opportunity of getting away from a place so remote from human assistance, which
your age makes you stand in need of. This is your mistake, replied the old man:
He who trusts in God, needs no other help. I allow that, Sir, said I; but our
trust in God does not require us to cast away, or despise the help of man. I do
not in the least question your piety, but mistrust the frailty of human nature,
and debility of age; therefore would have you come and live within the reach of
attendance. You may, without slackening your devotion live in the world; you
shall have no occasion to concern yourself with any cares that may disturb your
pious thoughts. No, replied the old man; was I to be made emperor of the whole
universe, I would not be concerned with the world again: nor would you require
me, did you but know the happiness I enjoy out of it. Come along with me; and
if, after you have seen how I live here, you persist in your advice, I will say
you have no notion of a happy life. I have, good Sir, said I, already seen,
with great admiration, your matchless habitation; but there are other
necessaries your age requires; as clothes, to defend the injuries of the air,
and meat suitable to the weakness of your stomach. This is your mistake, cried
the old man, I want for no clothes: I have a change for every season of the
year: I am not confined to fashions, but suit my conveniences. Now this is my
summer dress; I put on warmer as the weather grows colder: and for meat, I have
fish, flesh, and fowls; and as choice as a man can wish for. Come, you shall
dine with me, and ten to one but I may give you some venison, and perhaps a
dish of wild fowls too; let us go and see what Providence has sent us. So we
went to a wood, about a mile farther, where he had fastened several low nets,
in different gaps, in the thicket; in one of which happened to be an animal
something like a fawn, twice as big as an hare, the color of a fox, and faced
and footed like a goat. Did I not tell you, said the good man, I might chance
to give you venison? Now let us look after the fowls. So we went a little
farther, at a place where he had hung a long net between high trees, at the
bottom of which was fastened a bag of the same to receive the fowls; who in the
night, being stopped by the net fluttered to the bottom. There happened also to
be game. A couple of wild fowls made like woodcock, but of the bigness and
color of pheasant, were taken at the bottom of a bag. Now, said the old man,
these I have, without committing the sin of bidding less for them than I know
they are really worth, or making the poulterers swear they cost them more than
they really did. Well, now I may give you a dish of fish also. It is but going
half a mile, or thereabouts. There is no need Sir, said I, for any more, there
are but four of us, and here is provision for half a score; but if you are
disposed for fish, we have some in a boat on the other side of a rock; it is
but going for them. Very well, said the old man; it is but going about a mile,
then strip and wade over a lake, then climb up a rugged rock twice backward and
forward, to fetch what we can have for only taking a pleasant walk, all the
while diverted with the sweet harmony of a number of fine birds. Look here:
this complaisance often puts men to a world of needless trouble: come we'll
make a shift to pick a dinner out of these. Plenty! said the old man; why, I
tell ye, this is a second garden of Eden; only here is no forbidden fruit, nor
women to torment a man. I see, Sir, said I, Providence supplies you plentifully
with necessaries, if age does not deprive you of strength. Age! replied the old
man, why I am not so old as that comes to neither: I was but eight-and twenty
when I was cast away, and that is but fifty years ago. Indeed if I lived as you
do that dwell in the wise world, who hurry on your days as if your end came on
too flow, I might be accounted old. I do not gainsay, reverend father, but
that you bear your age wonderful well; but a multiplicity of days must make the
strongest nature bend: yes, time will break the toughest, constitution, and by
what you say, you have seen a considerable number of years. Yes, replied the
old man, a few days have run over my head, but I never strove to outrun them,
as they do that live too fast. Well, says he, you are a young man, and have
seen fewer days than I; yet you may be almost worn out: Come, match this, says
he. With that he gave a hem, with such strength and clearness, that the sound
made my ears tingle for some minutes after. Indeed, Sir, said I, you have so
far outdone what I can pretend to do, that I will not presume to imitate you.
Then I am afraid, said he, you will prove to be the old man. Well, then, you,
or your friend, the strongest of you, fetch hither that stone; it does not look
to be very heavy (pointing at a large stone which lay about two yards off.)
I Will endeavor, Sir, said I, to roll it; for I dare say, it is past my strength
to lift it. So, to please the old man, I went to take it up; but could hardly
move it. Come, come, said the old gentleman, I find that must be work for me.
With that he goes, takes up the stone, and tosts it to the place he bid me
bring it. I see, said he, you have not exerted your strength too often, which
makes you now so weak: Well, you see the advantages of living remote from the
world. Had you less of human assistance, I am apt to believe you would not want
it so soon as you are likely to do. Come, let us make much of that little
strength we have left, taking necessary support at proper times: it is now past
noon; therefore let us lose no time, but haste home to get our dinner ready. So
we went back to the place where the bundle of sticks lay, which we made the
young fellow with us carry, and went directly to the kitchen; where, whilst he
made a fire, one uncased the animal, and the other two pulled the fowls. I am
sorry, said the old man, you must take that trouble; but your presence has
frightened away my servant, who used to do that work for me. Have you a
servant, then, Sir? said I. Yes, said he, and one and native of this island.
Then I find, Sir, said I, this island is inhabited. Yes, answered the old man,
with monkeys and myself, but no body else, thank God; otherwise I can tell you,
I should hardly have lived so long. Then. Sir, said I, that was it we saw run
up a tree. Yes, said he, my monkey like myself, loves not much company. Pray,
Sir, said I, how did you bring him so much under command, as to keep with you
when he has the liberty to run away? I wonder the old ones do not entice him
from you. I had him young, replied the old man, and made very much of him,
which those creatures dearly love: besides, when he was grown up, the wild ones
would not suffer him amongst them; so that he was forced to remain with me. I
had another before this; but he, I may say, was sent by Providence, both to be
an help and diversion for me; for he was so knowing that he took a great deal
of labor off my hands, and dispersed many anxious hours, which the irksomeness
of my solitude had created. It is now about twelve years since; for I keep a
memorial, which indeed I designed to have been a journal; but I unfortunately
let the regular order of the days slip out of my memory; however, I obseved a
seventh day, and reckoned the years from winter to winter; so I cannot well
mistake.

One day, when I had roasted a quantity of roots, which I eat instead of bread,
having spread them on my table and chest to cool, in order to lay them by for
use; I went out, leaving my door open, to let the air in.

Having walked an hour or two, I returned home, where I found the monkey, whom
the smell of the hot roots and brought: who, during my absence, had been
eating. My presence very much surprised (...) yet still he kept his place, only
discontinued eating (...) me in the face: The unexpected guest at once startled
me and filled me with admiration; for, certainly no creature of its kind could
be compared to it, for beauty. His back was a lively green, his face and belly
of a lively yellow; his coat, all over, shining like burnished gold. The
extraordinary beauty of the creature raised in me an ardent desire to keep him;
but I despaired of ever making him ^ame, being come to his full growth:
therefore having resolved to keep him tied, I went in and shut the door. The
beast, which, till then, had not offered to make his escape, appeared very much
disturbed and stared about him for some place to get out at: perceiving his
disord^^ I did not advance, but turned my back to him, so give him time to
compose himself, which he did in a short time, as appeared by his falling to
eat again; which made me conceive hopes that I should, in time, make him
familiar. Having about me stale roasted roots which eat much pleasanter than
the fresh, and are less stuffing, I threw some at him, at which he seemed
displeased, and stood still a while, staring in my face; but my looking well
pleased, which I believe the animal was sensible of, made him pick them up, and
fall to eating with a fresh appetite. I was overjoyed at his easy composure; so
reached him water in a shell, that the want of nothing might induce him to a
retreat. I set it down as near him as I could without disturbing him, he came
to it very orderly, and having drank his fill, he laid it down, and looked me
in the face, carelessly scratching his backside; seeing he had done, I
advanced, and took away the shell, at which he never stired.

The forward disposition of the beast toward a perfect familiarity, made me
resolve to stay within the remainder of the day, no wise questioning but my
company would, in a great measure, advance it. So I made shift to sup upon a
few roots I had about me, and went pretty early to bed; where I was no sooner
said, but the creature got across the feet thereof and continued very quiet till
the next morning, when I got up; which time he was also watching my actions. I
made very much of him, which he took very composedly; standing still to be
stroaked. Then, indeed I thought myself, in a manner secure of him, and gave
him his belly full, as I had done the day before; but, having a pressing
occasion to go out, I went to the door, thinking to shut him in till my return:
but he followed me so close, that I could not open it without endangering his
getting out; which, though he appeared pretty tame, I did not care to venture,
our acquaintance being so very new; yet, as I was obliged to go, I did run the
hazard; so opened the door by degrees, that, in case the beast should offer to
run, I might take the opportunity to slip out and keep him in but the creature
never offering to go any farther than I went, I trusted him to go with me,
hoping that, if he went away, the kind usage he (...) with would, one day or
other, make him come back again: but, to my great surprise, as well as
satisfaction, he readily returned with me, having waited my time, yet, as I had
occasion to go out a second time, wanting sticks to make a fire, for which I
was obliged to go near the place where most of his kind resorted, I was afraid
to trust him with me, least he should be decoyed by the others; therefore,
having taken up a bundle of cords, with which I tie up my faggots, I watched an
opportunity to get out, and leave him behind: but the beast was certainly
apprehensive of my design; for he always kept near the door, looking steadfastly
at my bundle of cords as desirous of such another; which I not having for him,
cut a piece off mine, and gave it him: and, seeing I could not leave him
behind, ventured to let him go with me, which he did very orderly, never
offering to go one step out of the way; though others of his kind, came to look
at him as he went by.

Being come to the place where I used to cut dry sticks, having cut down a
sufficient quantity, I began to lay some across my cord. The creature having
taken notice of it, did the same to his, and with so much dexterity and
agility, that his faggot was larger, and sooner made than mine; which by that
time being large enough, and as much as he could well carry, I bound it up:
which set him to do the same with his, which was abundantly too large a load
for him.

Our faggots being made, I took up that which had made, to see how he would go
about taking up his; which being too heavy for him, he could not lift: so
running round it, I believe, twenty times he looked me in the face, as craving
help. Having been sufficiently diverted with the out of the way shifts he made,
I gave him mine, and took up his: the poor animal appeared overjoyed at the
exchange; therefore cheerfully takes up the bundle, and follows me home.

Seeing myself, according to all probability, sure of the dear creature, whose
late actions gave me such ground to hope from him both service and pleasure. I
returned my hearty thanks to kind Providence for its late prodigious gift; for
certainly it was never heard of before, that, in a desert place, one of those
wild animals, who fly at the single appearance f^an human creature, should
voluntarily give itself to a man, and, from the very beginning, be so docile
and tractable. O! surely it was endued with more than natural instinct! for
perfect reason was seen in all its actions. Indeed I was happy whilst I had
him; but my happiness, alas! was not of long standing. As he spoke, I perceived
tears in his eyes. Pray, Sir, said I, what became of that wonderful creature?
Alas! said he, he was killed by monkeys of the other kind, which fell upon him
one day, as he was going for water by himself: for the poor dear creature was
grown so knowing, that if, at any time, either firing or water was wanted, I
had nothing to do but give him the bundle of cords, or the empty vessel, and he
would straight go and fetch either: in short, he wanted nothing but speech to
complete him for human society. Indeed, Sir, said I, I cannot blame you for
bemoaning the loss of so incomparable a creature; the account you give of him
well entitles his memory to regret: but I hope this you have now, in a great
measure, makes up your loss. -- O! not by far, replied the old man: Indeed, he
goes about with me, will carry a faggot, or a vessel of water, pick a fowl,
turn the spit or string, when the meat is a-roasting: yet he is nothing like my
late dear Beausiddle; for so I called that most lovely creature; besides, this
is unlucky; for in imitating me, he often does me mischief. It was but the
other day that I had been writing for five or six hours; I had occasion to go
out, and happened to leave my pen and ink upon the table, and the parchment I
had been writing on close by it: I was no sooner gone, but the mischievous
beast falls to work, scribbling over every word I had been writing; and when he
had done, he lays it by in the chest. as he saw me do what I had written, and
takes out another, which he does the same to, and so to half a score more; my
return prevented his doing more mischief: however, in a quarter of an hour,
that I was absent, he blotted out as much as I had been full six months
writing. Indeed I was angry, and could have beaten him: but that I considered
my revenge would not have repaired the damage, but rather, perhaps, add to my
loss, by making the beast run away. Pray, Sir, said I, how came you by him? Did
he also give himself to you? No, replied the old man, I had him young, and by
mere accident, unexpected and unsought for; having lost both time and labor
about getting one in the room of him I had so unfortunately lost. The old ones
are so fond of their young, that they never are from them, unless in their play
they chase one another into the other kind's quarters, where their dams dare
not follow them: for they are such enemies to one another, that they watch all
opportunities, to catch all they can of the contrary sort, which they
immediately strangle: which keeps their increase very backward, that would
otherwise grow too numerous for the food the island produces; which is I
believe the cause of their animosity.

About eight years ago, which is the time I have had this beast, I was walking
under one of the clusters of the trees where the green sort of monkies harbor,
which being the largest and most shady in the island, I took the most delight
therein: as I was walking a small distance from me this creature dropped off a
(...), and lay for dead, which being of the gray kind, made me wonder less at
the accident. I went, and took him up; and, accidentally handling his throat, I
opened his windpipe, which was almost squeezed close by that which took him,
which my sudden coming prevented from strangling quite. I was extremely well
pleased at the event, by which I got what my past cares and diligence never
could produce me. Having pretty well recovered its breath, and seeing no
visible hurt about it, I imagined that I soon might recover it quite: so
hastened home with it, gave it warm milk, and laid it on my bed: so that with
careful nursing, I quite recovered him: and, with good keeping, made the rogue
thrive to that degree, that he has outgrown the rest of his kind. No question,
Sir, said I, having taken such pains with him, you love him as, well as his
predecessor. I cannot say so, neither, replied the old man; though I cannot say
but that I love the creature; but its having the ill fortune to be of that
unlucky kind which was the death of my dear Beaufiddle, in a great measure
lessons my affection. Besides, he falls so short, both of his merit and beauty,
that I must give the deceased the preference: and, was it not for his cunning
tricks, which often divert me, I should hardly value him, at all; but he is so
very cunning and facc^ious, that he makes me love him, notwithstanding I
mortally hate his kind. I must divert you while dinner is getting ready, with
an account of some of his tricks.

Being extremely fond of me, he very seldom would be from me, but followed me
every where, and as he used to go with me when I went to examine my nets,
seeing me now and then take out game, he would, of his own accord, when he saw
me busy writing go and fetch what happened to be taken.

One day finding a fowl in the net bag, he pulled, it alive as he brought it
home; so that I could not see any thing whereby to discern its kind. As soon as
he came i^^ he set it down with such motions as expressed joy: the poor naked
fowl was no sooner out of his clutches, but that it took to its legs, for want
of wings: its sudden escape so surprised the captor, that he stood amazed for a
while, which gave the poor creature time to gain a considerable scope of
ground; but the astonished beast being recovered from his surprise, soon made
after it; but was a considerable time before he could catch it, having nothing
to lay hold of; so that the fowl would slip out of his hands. The race held
about a quarter of an hour, in which time the poor creature having run itself
quite out of breath, was forced to lie down before its pursuer, who immediately
threw himself upon it; so took it up in his arms and brought it home, but was
not so ready to set it down as before: for he held it by one leg till I laid
hold of it.

I had a second time as good diversion, but after another manner. One morning
early, whilst I was busy in my cottage, he went out, unperceived by me: and
having been a considerable time absent, I feared that such another accident had
befallen him as that which happened to his predecessor; so I went to see after
him; and as he would go and visit the nets in the woods, I went there first,
where I found him very busy with such an animal as this we have here, which he
found taken in one of the gapnets, and, being near as big as he, he kept him a
great while struggling for ma^ership; sometimes he would take it by the ears,
now and then by one leg, next by the tail; but could not get him along; at last
he laid hold of one of his hind legs, and with the other hand smote him on the
back, in order to drive him, not being able to pull him along; but the beast
being too strong, still made toward the thicket, where he certainly would have
hauled the driver, had I not come up to help him. The old gentleman entertained
us with his monkey's (...) whilst dinner was dressing.

The dinner being ready, we went to the dwelling place to eat it, leaving the
young fellow that was with us to attend the roasted meat, while we eat the
first dish.

The old gentleman having laid the ^loth, which though something coarse, being
made out of part of a ship's sail, was very clean, he laid three large shells
on it about the bigness of a middle-sized plate, but as beautiful as any nakes
of pearl I ever saw, Gentlemen, say she, if you can eat off of shells, you are
welcome; I have no better plates to give you. Sir, said I, these are preferable
to silver ones, in my opinion; and I very much question whether any prince in
Europe can produce so curious a service. They may be richer, replied the old
man, but not cleaner.

The first dish he served was soup in a large deep shell, as fine as the first,
and one spoon made of shell, which he said was all his stock, ^^ing not used
to, or expecting company: however, he fetched a couple of mussel shells, which
he washed very clean; then gave Alvarado one, and took the other himself,
obliging me to make use of the spoon: so we sat down, Alvarado and I upon the
chest, which we drew near, the table; and the old gentleman (though much
against his will) upon the chair.

Being sat down, we sell to eating the soup, whose fragrant smell inv^^ed my
appetite; and I profess, (...) taste thereof ^as so excellent, that I never eat
any comparable to (...) at Pomac's, nor any where before: It was made of one
half the beast we took in the morning, with several sor^s of herbs, which eat
like artichokes, asparagus, and celery; there was also bits of roasted roots in
it, instead of toasted bread, which added much to the richness of it, tasting
like chestnuts: But, what surprised me most there were pease in it, whose extra
ordinary sweetness was, discernible from every other ingredient. Pity, said I
the access to this island is so difficult: what a blessed spot of land would it
make, were it but inhabited! Here naturally grows what in Europe we plow, till,
and labor hard for. You say, replied the old man, this would be a blessed spot
of ground, if it was inhabited: Now I am quite of another opinion; for I think
its blessing consists in its not being inhabited, being free of those curses
your populous and celebrated cities abound in; here is nothing but praises and
thanksgivings heard: And as for nature bestowing freely, and of her own accord,
what in Europe you are obliged, by industry and hard labor, in a manner to
force from her, wonder not at. Consider how much you daily rob her of her due,
and charge her with slander and calumny; do not you frequently say, if a man is
addicted to any vice, that it is his nature, when it is the effect and fruit of
his corruption? So nature, who attended the great origin of all things at the
creation, is now, by vile wretches, deemed in a fault for all their wickedness:
Had man remained in his first and natural state of innocence, nature would also
have continued her original indulgence over him: We may now think ourselves
very happy, if that blessing attends our labor which before the fall of man
flowed on him, accompanied with ease and pleasure.

Now these pease, which have so much raised your surprise, are indeed the
growth of this island, though not its natural product, but the gifts of
Providence, and the fruits of labor and industry. I have tilled the ground;
Providence procured the seed; nature gave it growth, and time increase: With
seven pease and three beans, I have, in four years time, raised seed enough to
stock a piece of ground, out of which I gather yearly, a sufficient quantity
for my use; besides preserving fresh seed. No doubt, Sir, said I, but when
right means are taken prosperity will attend. By that time, having eaten
sufficiently of the soup, he himself would carry the remains to the young man
in the kitchen, and fetch in the boiled meat and oyster-sauce, which he brought
in another shell much of the same nature with that which the soup was served
in, but something shallower, which eat as delicious as house lamb.

Having done with that, he fetches in the other half of the beast roasted, and
several sorts of delicate pickles, which I never eat of before, and mushrooms,
but of a curious color, flavor, and taste. These, said he, are the natural
product of a particular spot of ground; where, at a certain time of the year,
he said he gathered for the space of six day only, three sizes of mushrooms:
For though they were all buttons, and fit to pickle, yet, by that time he had
gathered all, he had also some to stew, and some about four inches over, which
he broiled, and they eat as choice as any veal cutlet.

These pickles, Sir, said I though far exceeding any I ever did eat in Europe,
are really at this time needless; the meat wanting nothing to raise its relish;
no flesh being more delicious.

Having done with that, I offered to take it away, but he in no wife would
permit me; so went away with it himself, and brought the fowls, at which I was
somewhat vexed; for I feared I should find no room in my stomach for any,
having eat so heartily of the meat, but having, at his pressing request, tested
them, my appetite renewed at their inexpressible deliciousness: so I fell to
eating afresh.

Having done with that dish, the young man having nothing to do in the kitchen,
came and was bid to take away, and fall to; In the mean time, the good old man
fetched us, out of his diary, a small cheese of his own making, which being set
down, he related to us the unaccountable manner he came by the Ant^lopes which
supplied him with the milk it was made with; which introduced several weighty
remarks on the wonderful acts of Providence, and the strictness of the
obligations we lie under to our great Benefactor; like the vast encouragment we
have to love and serve God, the benefits and comforts of a clear conscience, as
the inestimable treasure of content: From that he epitomized the different
tempers and dispositions of men, much commending timely education as being a
means to reverse and change evil inclinations; highly praising the charity of
those pious people, who choose to bestow good schooling-upon poor folks
children before clothing, and even food; the first being rather the most
necessary, and the last easiest to come at.

That discourse being ended, he enquired very carefully after the state of his
dear native country, which he said he left fifty years ago in a very indulgem
disposition. I gave him the best account I could at that time of all the
transactions that had happened in England since his absence. The relation of
past evils, said he, are like pictures of earthquakes and shipwreck, which
affect the mind but slightly: And though I think myself out of any prince's
power, yet I shall always partake of my countrymen's grief: Pray be explicit;
What King have you now? A complete patriot, and father to his subjects, said I;
both tenderhearted and merciful, encouraging virtue, and suppressing vice, a
promoter of religon, and an example of charity. Then, said he, in a manner
which expressed zeal and joy, long may that pious monarch live, and his blessed
posterity for ever grace the British throne! And may Old England by its
faithful obedience and loyalty, henceforth atone for its past, rebellions, that
it may remove that execrable reproach that it now lies under! To which we all
said, Amen. Then he filled up the shell we drank out of, and drank good king
George's health, which was succeeded by that of the royal family, and
prosperity to the church. Thus ended a most delicious and splendid dinner, and
a conversation both delightful and instructive: But, having not as then
mentioned any thing about his history, which I exceedingly longed to enquire
into, I begged him to inform us by what accident he came hither, and how he had
so long maintained a good state of health. To which he answered time would not
permit him to relate his own history, being very long, and the remainder of the
day too short: but that he would before we parted, give it in writing; having
for want of other occupation, made a memorial: But as to the maintaining of his
health, he would tell me by word of mouth. The receipt, said he, is both short
and easy; yet I fear you will not be able to follow it: Look you, you must use
none but wholesome exercises, observe a sober diet, and live a pious life: Now
if you can confine yourself to this way of living, I Will be bound that you will
both preserve your health and waste less money: But, what is more valuable than
all that, you will not endanger your precious soul. I returned him thanks for
his good advice, and promised him I would observe it as strict as I could. I am
afraid, replied he, that will not be all: you have too many powerful obstacles,
the world and the flesh, from whom your affections must be entirely withdrawn,
and all commerce prohibited, which is morally impossible while living:
Therefore, since you are obliged to converse with the world, I will give you a
few cautions, which, if rightly taken, may be of use to you.

Make not the world your enemy, nor rely too much on its fidelity.

Be not too free with your friend: repetitions of favors often wear out
friendship.

Waste not you vigor or substance on women, lest weakness and want be your
reward.

Secrets are not safe in a woman's breast; it is a confinement the sex cannot
bear.

Pass no contract over liquor; wine overcomes reason, and dulls the
understanding.

He who games puts his money in jeopardy, and is not sure of his own.

There is but little honor to wager on sure grounds, and less wisdom to lay
upon chance.

And in all your dealings take this for a constant rule: He whom unlawful means
advance to gain,
Instead of comfort, finds a constant pain:
What even by lawless arts we do possess,
Old age and sickness make it comfortless.
Be ruled by me, not to increase your store
By means unjust; for 'twill make you poor,
Take but your due, and never covet more.


I returned him thanks for his good morals, the copy of which I begged he would
give me in writing, for my better putting them in practice: to which he readily
consented, wishing I might observe them; and being very sure that I should reap
a considerable benefit thereby, both here and hereafter.

The day being pretty far spent, I was obliged to think of going, which grieved
me much; for I was so taken with his company, that if I had not had a father
and mother, whose years required my presence, I would have spent the rest of my
days with him. I was so delighted with his company, and pleased with his way of
living, that I almost, overlooked my duty; but, after a struggle with my
inclination, I was obliged to yield to nature. Thus, having expressed my
vexation to leave so good a man, I took my leave. The good old man perceiving
my regret to leave him, could not conceal his to part with me. Indeed, said he,
with tears in his eyes, I should have been very glad to have had a
fellow creature in this solitary island, especially one whom I think possessed
of a good inclination; which I perceive you have, by your reluctance at leaving
this innocent garden of life. I imagine that you have relations in the world
that may stand in need of you; Heaven protect you, and send you safe to them! I
do not imagine that you will ever see this island again; nor would I advise you
to venture, the approach of it is so dangerous: Therefore, before you go, let
me show you some of he rarities with which it abounds. I told him, I was afraid
time would not permit; but as he said, that about an hour or two would do, and
we had daylight enough, I went along with him.

Going out, and seeing the guns stand behind the door, I asked what he did with
them? I keep them, said he, for a trophy of Providence's victory over my
enemies, and a monument of my fourth miraculous deliverance. As we went along,
he related to us the manner in which he had been once sacriligiously robbed
once by Indians; villainously, is vested twice by pirates; the ruffians having
combined to carry him away, like a slave to their own country, and there make a
show of him, as if he had been a monster.

Talking we walked under several of the before mentioned clusters of trees
which proceed from one single plant: Being come to one larger than the rest,
and which he said he frequented most, it being the largest in the island; this,
said he, covers, with its own branches, a whole acre of land; so made several
remarks on the wonderful works of Nature; which, said he, were all intended for
the use and pleasure of man; every thing in the universe containing such
different virtues and properties as were requisite to render life happy. From
that he made several more reflections on the fatal effects of disobedience;
which is accounted a slight breach in duty, but is the mother of all sins.

That discourse held for a considerable time till a parcel of each different
kind of monkeys, having met, fell to fighting, observing an admirable order
during the affray; which withdrew our admiration from the preceding subject,
and stopped us a while to observe them.

The seu^^^e was very diverting while it lasted, which was but a short time;
for they happened to perceive us, at which they parted, each sort running to
their own quarters, which were not very distant from one another, so that from
it they could see each other's motions. I am sorry, said I, the battle was so
soon over; they cuffed one another so prettily, that I could have stood an hour
to see them. If you like the sport, said the old man, I can soon set them at it
again. With that he takes out of his breeche's pocket some roasted roots, which
he commonly carried about him, to throw at them when he went that way, which
made them less shy of him.

Having broke the root in bits, he laid them down in their sight; for they on
both sides were peeping from under the leaves of the trees where they
harbored: Then he cuts a score of sticks, about the bigness of one's finger,
and near a soot and an half long, and laid them over the bits of roots: Then we
retired to some small distance, and hid ourselves behind the trees.

We were no sooner out of sight but that they hastened to the meat; the green
monkeys, having less ground to go, were at them first; yet never stopped, but
went on to hinder the others approach, who vigorously strove to gain ground.
The struggle was hard, and the victory often wavering; each party alternately
gave way: At last the gray sort kept the advantage, and drove their adversaries
back, who being come where the sticks lay, immediately took them up and charged
their enemies with fresh courage, like a yielding army that has recieved new
forces: Thus, with their clubsters in the front, they fell on their adversaries
with great vigor, knocking them down like our English mob at an election; so
drove them back again almost to their own quarters.

In the mean time, stragglers of both the kinds, who had not joined with the
main bodies of the armies, seeing the coast clear, and the provisions
unguarded, unanimously fell to plunder, and quietly did eat what their comrades
fought for; which the combatants perceiving, left off fighting, and of one
accord turned upon the plunderers, who, by that time having devoured the booty,
left them the field without contending any farther.

The battle being over, the old gentleman would have us to go on, left, said
he, they should fall to it again out of revenge; for those creatures are very
spiteful.

Having dispersed them by our advancing, as intended, we walked from under the
trees at the outside to have a better view of the rock, which in some places,
he said, changes its form as one approaches it: And, as the said, being got
clear of the trees, we saw at a distance, as it were, a considerable number of
buildings, and here-and-there something like steeples, which represented an
handsome city: and seemingly the houses appeared so plain, that had I not been
apprized of the illusion. I should have taken it for such; but Alvarado and the
young fellow, could not be pursuaded but what we saw were really buildings, and
even in the island, though the old gentleman made us stop a while, the better
to observe every thing; then bid us keep our eyes fixed at what we looked at,
and go on: We perceived every particular of what we observed to change its
form; that which at first seemed to be fronting, showed itself either sideways
or backwards; and so of every object, till being come at a certain distance,
all the agreeableness of the perspective, of a sudden turned its real shape
like a phantom; which, whilst visible, screens that which it stands before; but
by its vanishing, leaves discovered.

Being come as near the rock as the lake that parts it would permit, we could
discern nothing in it that could in the least soften its ruggedness, or give it
a more agreeable aspect, than those which are represented in the pictures of
shipwrecks.

The old gentleman, thereupon made several learned observations on the
alterations that distance works upon objects, and showed how easily our organs
of sight may be deceived: drawing from them this inference, that we ought not
to be too positive of the reality of what we see afar off, nor to affirm for
truth that which we only heard of.

Having ended that discourse, he carried us to the other side of the jetting
part of the rock, which, advancing like a bastion of a fortified wall, screened
from our eyes a second piece of wonder; a fine rainbow, issuing, as it were,
out of the mouth of a giant, lying on a rock, reaching quite over the lake: At
the bottom of it I could not but stop to admire the various colors it
consisted of, which far exceeded in beauty and liveliness, any I ever saw in
the sky, I presently imagined that it proceeded from the rays of the sun
falling upon some pond or other standing water, whose reflections rose, and met
the tops; which caused that beautiful circle. But Alvarado, who, by what he had
seen before, concluded that the island was enchanted, said it was another
illusion, which the place was full of; and would have gone away, but that the
old man fell a laughing, and said, it is a sign you seldom inquire into natural
causes; Well, do but come a little nearer to it, and you will find that which
you term an illusion, is the natural effect of all fountains when the sun
shines.

Being come to the place it proceeded from, it proved, as he said, only a
fountain, but of the clearest and sweetest water that ever was tasted; but the
place it issued out of was changed from the likeness of a giant to that of some
strange sort of creature; which, though having no particular resemblance, yet
would bear being compared to several different things. The old man's opinion
was, that it resembled a whale spitting water out at one nostril. Alvarado
supposed it was more like an horse or a cow; and rather the last, there being
horns plain to be seen. For my part, I could find no proper similitude to it,
but that of an old ruined monument, which formerly they built over the heads of
springs. Timothy Anchors (for that was the name of the young fellow that was
with us) being asked, what he could make of it? Why, really, said he, nothing
unless it be an old patched up pump that stands at the end of my mother's court
in Rosemary-lane (which every spring runs out of itself); which comparison made
us all laugh.

Thus we differed in our opinions as to the likeness, yet agreed, that it was
the finest fountain, and the best water we ever saw or drank. What surprised me
most, was, the force wherewith it sprung from the rock that stood full five
yards from the place it fell on, which was another subject of admiration; for
certainly the art of man could not have invented nor completed a more compact
or pleasanter basin though it had been for a fountain, to adorn a monarch's
garden: Indeed there were no masons, nor any expert artist's exquisite works to
be seen, but a great deal of Nature's matchless understanding: Their
regularity, dimension, and proportion, concerted to make it useful, convenient,
and agreeable.

The basin was very near round, about eight feet diameter, a bank around it
near a foot high, and as broad at the top, slanting gently at the bottom, both
inside and outside, which made a most pleasant and uniform bank, adorned with
various small flowers and herbs of beautiful colors, and most fragrant smells.

Having viewed with pleasure and amazement such regularity in a wild and
uninhabited place, I walked about as long as the time I could stay would
permit: I proposed going, but the old gentleman, taking me by the hand, stopped
me: You have said he, bestowed a considerable time in observing the fertility
of this island; now pray allow one minute for consideration: The object you
have been admiring all this time is as wonderful and surprising, as beautiful
and pleasant; You see this fountain, which runs stiff, and as large as your
thumb, and therefore by computation, may be allowed to give near an hundred
gallons of water in an hour: Now it runs night and day; it neither decreases
nor runs over its bank, but keeps to the same height. This, as you say, Sir,
said I, is really worth inquiring into: So I went several times round it,
searching for the place whereby the overplus of the complement did issue; but
could not discover it. Come, said he seek no more for that which nature has so
well concealed; I have spent many hours in that inquiry, and still remain
ignorant; but I have found the place out of which it runs into a fine
fish pond, about a mile inland; we will make it in our way to the lake; we may
look at it as we go by, but can make no long stay. So we went on.

Going along, we came by an hollow part of the rock, which went in like an
alcove, with a great many concavities in it, in rows one above another as round
niches where figures stand. Now, said the old man, we are here, I will
entertain you with an invisible chorus of harmonious voices, little inferior to
hautboys, trumpets, or other melodious music: Here I twice come and pay my
devotions each day. Alvarado, who, by what he had already seen, was
prepossessed that the island was full of enchantments, was now certain of it:
and looked upon that place in the rock to be the receptacle of fiends, and evil
spirits; so would by no means stay; but takes his leave, saying, he was not
very curious of supernatural things. Supernatural, said the old man, you cannot
well call it, though to you it may be very amazing: It is therefore well
deserving your sight; I mean your hearing; the eyes having no share in the
entertainment: We shall only sing a few psalms: I am sure there can be no harm
in that, but rather good, being an holy exercise in Divine Worship, in which
all good souls ought to join. That may be, said Alvarado; but I love to see
those with whom I worship: I do not as yet think myself company for spirits. As
for your part, said Alvarado, (speaking to me) you may do what you please: but
take care your curiosity does not cost you too dear Tim and I will wait for you
in the boat; but pray be not too long before you come. So, having returned the
old gentleman thanks for his kind entertainment, they went away; at which the
good man was much affronted. What! said he, do your friends imagine I deal with
spirits? Besides, where did they ever hear, that devils loved to sing psalms?
For here shall nothing else be sung: I would not for the world, that those
admirable echoes, that hitherto have repeated nothing but the Almighty's
praises, should be polluted with the sound of any profane words. I endeavored
to excuse their timourousness, saying, it was not a failing peculiar to
themselves only, but to many besides. The old man allowed it, attributing the
cause thereof to a very pernicious custom nurses have to frighten children when
they cry, with bugbears, and such things, to make them quiet; which frightful
ideas often make such deep impressions on their puerile minds, that when they
come to mature age it is hardly worn out; which intimidates many.

That discourse being ended, we advanced as near that part of the rock as the
lake would permit, which in that place was not above seven or eight feet broad;
so that we were within the concavity of the rock. Now, said the old man, let us
sit down on this bank, and sing the hundred-and-seventeenth psalm. Indeed, Sir,
said I, I do not know it by heart, and I have no psalm-book about me. Well
then, said he, I will sing myself: so begins; but with such a clear and loud
voice, managed with so much skill and judgment, that it exceeded all the
singing I ever heard before; and was repeated by such a number of melodious
echoes, that one would have belived there were an hundred voices in chorus.

The (...) transported me, that I willingly would have (...) only the remainder
of the day, but the succeeding also; the ecstacy having quite put out of my
mind the necessity of my going, and the danger of delaying: But the good man
having sung an evening hymn after the psalm which he said he sung every night,
he takes by the hand: Now, said he, is not this emulation? Who would not sing
with such a chorus of choristers as you might imagine was there? Indeed, Sir,
said I, this has so great a resemblance to the relation we have given us in
holy history of the superior joys the blessed possess in heaven, that I thought
myself already there; for which reason I would willingly end my days here. This
is impossible, said the old gentleman; nor can you spend here many more
moments: I have the fish pond to show you yet; come let us go. So we went on
about fifty paces from thence more inland: We say at a small distance between
the trees, a parcel of fowls like ducks, but considerably larger, which flew
away from the pond; at our approach toward them. He told me how he came by the
old one that bred them, of which he was robbed.

At length being come to the pond, I was surprised at the clearness of the
water, at the bottom of which seemed to be large rubies, emeralds, jacinths,
and other colored stones; till being come to the brink of it, those which I
took for precious stones, proved to be fishes by their swimming about, which,
to my thinking looked like stars shooting from place to place in the sky.
Having spent several minutes in admiring the surprising nature and beauty of
the fishes, I took notice of the pond, which was about forty yards in length,
and near thirty in breadth: Its form was a broken oval; sinking in and out
here-and-there, which made it the more agreeable: All around it grew diverse
sorts of herbs intermixed with flowers of different colors and here-and-there
a basket on sticks, which the old man told me he made and set there for his
ducks to breed in. The day being far spent, the old man, after having showed me
the places at one side of the pond wherein the basin emptied itself, as also
the other side whereby the pond ran into the lake, takes me by the hand: Come,
said he, I will keep you no longer; night comes on a pace, and the retreat from
this island is dangerous; therefore I would have you improve the short remains
of the day, to avoid the dangers the darkness of the night may lead you into:
So let us go home, that I may give you the memorial I have promised you, and
then my blessing, and hearty prayers for your safe departure, and happy
arrival. So we went to his habitation, where he gave me a roll of parchment.

Here it is, said he, in a rough and unpolite language; for I did not write it
out of ostentation, or to exert my parts, but to keep me in mind of the many
mercies I have received from Heaven ever since my youth, and to record the
wonderful effects of Providence; that if ever these writings should have the
luck to fall into the hands of men after my decease, they might be an
encouragement to the destitute, and a comfort to the afflicted, that he who
rightly applies himself and firmly trusts in the Almighty, shall, at his
extremity, find relief: And now my intent is in some measure answered,
expecting you will revise and publish it when you come to Old England, I must
enjoin you not to give it out as my own dictation, but an history taken from
heads out of my memorial; for I have been obliged to insert particulars, and
use such expressions, without which the account I give of myself would have
been imperfect; and which being related as by me, may chance to be accounted
self-flattery, which is a censure I would willingly avoid. I told him he might
depend upon it, I should always, and on all accounts, be very tender of any
thing that could in the least lessen the merit of subjects, or tarnish the
luster of the history.

With that the good man takes me in his open arms, and embraced me over and
over with all the tenderness words and actions could express; saying, with
tears in his eyes, that my exit was renewing his pall grief, and would for a
considerable time damp the pleasures he before my coming did enjoy in his
solitude; since now he again has had the comfort to converse with one of his
dear countrymen, after full fifty years being severed from human society. The
height of his grief having for some moments stopped the utterance of his words,
he sighing laid his head upon my neck, squeezing me close in his arms.

This most tender and moving action moved me to a reciprocal grief: Never did
any man reflect with more reluctance than when I parted with that good old man,
who having recovered in some measure his former firmness of mind, his soul
being again resigned, we repeated out embraces with a mutual affection. Then I
took my leave; but he would not part with me there: he would by all means wait
on me to the lake I was to wade over to come at the rock, on the other side of
which the boat lay waiting for me: And when I came thither he would also have
waded over with me, that be might have the satisfaction of seeing me safe from
the dangerous rock; but I would in no wise permit him. Thus having prevailed
upon him to stay behind, I prepared to wade over: so after a few more embraces,
I crossed the lake, and came to my impatient companions, who received me
with-heavy reprimands for trusting myself so long alone with that necromancer:
For nothing, said Alvarado, shall ever persuade me a man can have all such
plenty of dainties with only the help of Nature: No, no, he may talk of
Providence as much as he pleases; he applies to the black art; and those voices
he calls echoes are his invisible imps, which (if truth be known) are often
employed in raising the wind, and causing storms, which render these seas often
so dangerous: And it has been observed, that few or no ships come near these
rocks, and escape being staved. For my part, I assure you I do not think myself
safe, whilst within the reach of his enchantments. With that he takes one of
the oars out of young Tim's hand, and falls to rowing. Indeed said Tim, as you
say, he looked very much like a conjurer with his long hair and beard; and I
believe he is a conjuring now. See here is bad weather coming; let us make
haste from these rocks.

Even as he said, in short, so it happened; for in a little time after the wind
rose, and the sea began to be a little rough; so that I was forced to take the
hitcher, and with it keep the boat from the rocks, whither the waves very often
drove us; but, by standing out to sea, the wind grew more calm, and fair for
the continent: I took one of the oars, and, by help of our sail, in a short
time we got safe to shore, where being arrived very much fatigued, we put up at
the first cottage, which was inhabited by an old man and woman, Indians, where
we dressed our fish, and went to supper; which was scarce over, but I was
hurried on board, the wind being tacked about, and fair for our departure.

We weighed anchor on the 17th day of May, and stood out to sea, and sailed
south and by east till we arrived on the 26th at Panama on Terra Firma, after
meeting some stormy weather. Here we began to traffic, in our way home, for
some corn, necessary for our following voyage; as also cotton, some metals,
rosin, gums, and pepper. Our stay was not long here; for we sailed from thence
on the 5th of June, the wind then being very favorable: But we had not sailed
above twenty leagues, when we met with a violent storm, which lasted some
hours, and the wind blowing hard at north north-east; wherein we had the
misfortune to lose our surgeon, one John Davis, who, being imprudently upon
deck, was washed overboard by a prodigious wave coming in at the forecastle:
Our ship received no damage in the storm; but our loss of Mr. Davis was very
great, and worse than if any other man on board had been missing; for we might
also call him our chaplain, as well as surgeon: And by his exemplary, pious
life, during the time he belonged to our ship, he might really be called a
divine. He was a man, who, as he told me, had been educated at Hart-Hall, Oxon,
in his early days, and designed for the sacred robe: But his genius very much
inclining to those most pleasant studies, viz. physic and surgery, he
afterward made them his practice; but meeting with some misfortunes, about the
35th year of his life, he (...) England, and embarked on board the John and
Mary for New England, where he lived a considerable time, when our ship arrived
at that country, at that time wanting a surgeon; for our own died just at our
approach near the continent. Our captain, on inquiry, agreed with him for our
voyage till we returned back thither again. I think it but just to enternize
his memory in these memoirs, and give him the character he merited.

He was a pious, good man, sober, just and virtuous; ready to serve, but never
to offend any man. His morals were instructive to all those who knew him and
his constant exhortation (while on board our ship) to frequent daily prayers,
was the reason that we esteemed him the doctor of our souls, as well as surgeon
to our bodies. Nay, which is still more, while he was with us, though he never
entered into sacred orders, yet he told us, he thought it his duty to give us
the best instructions he was capable of, for the preservation of our souls and
bodies, both of which were always in danger: And accordingly after divine
service (as I may call it) was performed by him in a very solemn manner, he
would frequently discourse on the nature and heinousness of the sin of man,
which occasioned the sufferings of Christ; on the terrors of hell, and the joys
of heaven; as also on the glorious creation of the world, setting forth the
works of Omnipotence in very lively colors, telling the advantage, pleasure,
and beauty, that attended a good life, Sometimes his discourses would be on
natural philosophy, which he delivered extremely well: At other times on some
of the sciences, most of which he well understood, and to which we gave very
great attention, as being disirous of such useful knowledge; In short his death
^as greatly lamented by the captain as well as myself, and indeed by all the
ship's crew; for he was a man of a quick thought, and lively apprehension; had
an universal knowledge in things entirely free from reservedness, but of
perfect humility and condescension; most agreeably entertaining in his
conversation, and dear to all that over kn^w him.

Thus, having given an imperfect character of that great man, to whose memory I
owe so much, I shall proceed to a further description of our voyage. As to the
coasts on those seas, I think it needless to make any (...) thereof, they
having been so well described already by our modern geographers, nor is it
any-ways useful to my purpose; so that I shall entirely omit it, and only give
an account of the places where we traded or touched at for provision or
necessaries, and remark what happened most worthy our notice in our voyage home
to England.

The weather now proving more favorable, I began to peruse the memorials of my
good old hermit: But oh! with what moving sympathy did I share with him in the
multitude of his misfortunes during his minor years! Nor could I less
sympathize with him in the ecstasies of his hermitical life. I read with
pleasure and amazement what he had laboriously transcribed, being at that time
doubtful whether it would ever be perused by any mortal; where he set forth a
continued series of misfortunes, as if linked together by Divine Providence
(whilst he lived in the wise world, as he called it:) And in this account,
during his abode on that desolate island, denotes that the Omnipotent Being had
always an immediate direction in every circumstance or point of time. I was
more and more astonished and amazed by this good man's precepts, who has
abandoned the world, content to live in a desolate and lon^some island,
uninhabited by any mortal but himself where he has had the space of fifty years
to reflect and contemplate on the follies and misfortunes of man; during which
time his maxims were always his rules of life in every case. O! may I once more
see that dear old man, whose habitation is free from anxious cares, from
oppression and usury, and all the evils that attend this populous world! There
would I abide, and never depart from that happy solitude, which he so
peacefully enjoys -- but whether am I running? These contemplations have made
me forget the remarks of my voyage.

We sailed from Panama on the 6th day of June, and had frequent thunder and
lightning, attended with some rain; but nothing else extraordinary happened. On
the 15th we made Gorgona bay in Peru, where our boat went on shore to a village
on the main, with twenty hands well armed resolving to get some fresh
provisions at any rate; for we began to be in want, having taken in but very
little at Panama. It is a low land, full of mangrove trees, and, within land,
pretty high: The village was but poor; however, they brought away fix hogs and
four goats: some limes, and plantains. Not far from hence are some gold mines,
but of no great note, as we were informed by some Indians. They are a very
warlike people who live on that coast, and often engage one another with clubs
and darts, made of hard wood. The island is about six leagues in length. There
are monkeys, lizards, hares, and Guinea pigs; also several sorts of snakes,
some of which are as big as one's leg; so that it is dangerous to walk in some
parts of the island. One of our men happened to be bit by one, and did not live
above six hours after; though his death had been prevented, I believe, had we
not met with that misfortune of losing Mr. Davis, our surgeon. Here, also, we
caught some mullets, and several sorts of fish extremely g^od, though unknown
to us as to their names. In this island there is a creature which the Indians
call a Mundago, but the Spaniards a Sloth, which I think is its properest name,
for it is a creature which seems to sleep as it walks, by its slow motion: And
it is reported, that it eats the leaves of trees, which are its only food but
it is so prodigious lazy, that when it has cleared one tree of its leaves, it
will be almost starved to death before it attempts to climb another: In short,
it is a very ugly creature, and seems to be of the monkey kind by its make; but
its hair is thicker and longer, nor is it so agreeable to look at, and is
different in its nature. Here we also got fresh water and wood; for there are
very good brooks on that island, and wood enough. While we lay near the island.
I went ashore: and in my conversation with a Spaniard, he related to me the
following account of one. Thomas Jenkins, a Lancashire man, who was boatswain
on board a merchant's ship, whose name I have since forgot, who was left on
that island, and lived alone there two years and there months; but was first
seen on that island by some Indians, who came from the main for oysters, and
other shell fish, which they frequently gather for the Spaniards. He made his
escape from them, and hid himself in the woods; fearing that they would carry
him to the Spaniards; and by that means, he might be made a slave; choosing
rather solitude, than to enter into bondage for his life. However, an English
ship-trading on that coast had notice of it from the Indians; and, imagining
that he might be an Englishman castaway, or set on shore there (as he really
was) by some pirates who had been in those seas, they sent their boat with six
hands, to the island, in search of him. They took their speaking-trumpet with
them, and by that means, after about six hours stay on the island, they found
him out. He told them, that, at his being first set on shore upon the island,
it seemed very melancholy, and frightful; when he began to reflect on the
barbarity of the pirates, to leave him there without provisions, or any manner
of necessaries, whereby he might support himself (they leaving him only his
wearing clothes, and his pocket-knife.) If they had left him any firearms and
ammunition his case would not been near so desparate; because he then might
have not only defended himself against any enemy, but likewise have killed some
goats, or fowls, for his subsistence. He also said, that what made him very
melancholy, was, to think his habitation, and place of abode, was an island
that he, at first, knew not whether there was any thing on it for his
subsistence, as never being on that coast before. But the second day of his
being there, he took a survey of the island, and found that there were monkeys,
goats, etc. and also good fish. He dreaded greatly the snakes, which were
larger than he had ever seen before; however, as they endeavored to get from
him, he rested pretty well satisfied; hoping there was no beast of (...) to
hurt him there: for fear of which at first, he climbed up into a pimento tree
to sleep. He was well pleased to find such good shellfish, which was the only
food he lived on for the first five days; when, by accident, he caught a young
kid, which very much rejoiced him: But he was at great loss for fire to dress
it; till, having nothing to employ himself with but thinking, he remembered that
he had heard, that the rubbing of two pieces of wood together produced fire; he
tried the experiment: And, by rubbing two pieces of pimento wood together, did
produce fire (after the manner the Indians make use of it.) He then made a
fire, as having wood enough, and broiled part of his goat, which was a
delicious meal to him. He afterward began to build himself a hut to dwell in
where he lived, and dressed his fish and goat's flesh; but could at first only
broil it, till he had driven two stakes in the ground, where he roasted it,
with a wooden spit. As to freshwater, as I observed before, there were very
good brooks in the valleys. At length he invented away, by thicksets, to
ensnare a goat sometimes, which furnished him with flesh: Here were
cabbage-trees, which furnished him with sauce to his meat, it being very
agreeable, when seasoned with the fruit of the pimento-tree, which is much like
Jamaica pepper: but afterward he could run a goat down. Sometimes he had the
good luck to find some eggs; for there were very good fowls: He caught some
young (...) also; and, by cutting their wings, and keeping them always cut, he
preserved them in a brook, just by his hut, which he had enclosed. There they
bred and were tame. But being one day gone a pretty distance from his hut, a
great number of monkeys finding them out, and that they could not fly away,
destroyed them all. His clothes were almost worn ou^ nay, his shoes were quite
gone, and had been for some time; but to preserve his feet, he cut the goat
skins in the shape of stockings, and sewed them or laced them up with thongs of
the same; and also laced the foot-part, making holes with his knife for the
thongs, three or four times doubled together, to serve for soles. The Spaniard
told me, that he was so well inured to that way of life, when he was taken from
the island, that if was a considerable time before he could (...) either drink,
or any kind of victuals, which was (...) on board the ship. I gave the Spaniard
account of the hermit, to which he gave very great attention.

So, having refreshed ourselves, we sailed from hence, after a stay of three
days only in the bay; having got a pretty many goats from the island, and some
maize, indian corn. From thence we steered for the Gallapago islands, but, in
our passage; met with several storms and tornadoes attended with great rains.
Some of our men began to be very sickly, which we thought proceeded from their
eating the livers of some young seals they had caught, they being unhealthy.
After about three days sail, we met with frequent calms. During this voyage,
one of our negro women, of which we had three on board, being with child, and
near her time, was delivered of a fine boy, which was of the swarthy color.
She had been on board us ever since we came from the Brasils, and proved very
useful in washing our linens. etc.; but Juno, for that was her name proved with
child by one of our men, whose name was Thomas Higgins: I, with the help of the
other two negro women which were on board, performed the office of midwife, and
delivered her. I had purchased a little wine at Panama, which proved very
useful to mull for Juno, to comfort her in that condition: also the other negro
women. Tom Higgins and I drank one bottle after her delivery; and we were
really merry on that occasion. The captain was somewhat displeased at this
accident: but being unwilling (in so long a voyage, attended with so many
difficulties as we had met with) to inflict too heavy a punishment on his men,
he only obliged Tom to agree that he should allow Juno two pistoles, when she
went ashore at Brasil, to take care of the child. Tom readily agreed thereto,
but had some remorse of conscence, and began to reflect, and was really much
concerned to think, that the child got by him (though on a negro, yet she was a
woman, and the child in likeness of himself, and firmly believing that it was
really got by him, and no other person) should be bred up in Paganism.
Accordingly he grew very dull and melancholy at the thoughts thereof, which he
communicated to me; asking my advice about it. So I Pursuaded him to be merry
and not to cast himself down; for that many such accidents had happened in the
West Indies before then, among the Englishmen, who never thought much of it
afterward. However, this had no effect at all on him. He told me, that
whatever crimes other people had been guilty of, he could not reconcile himself
thereunto. Finding him so very uneasy, I acquainted the captain of it: Ah! says
he, if Tom under so great a concern about the child's being not to be educated
in the Christain Religion. Yes, Sir, said I; and I am apprehensive that it
(...) grow upon him very much to his prejudice, he is (...) extremely concerned
about it: For less things (...) that, I have known people, grow melancholy
((...) he seems to be;) and they have entered into (...) state of lunacy, and
never could be brought (...) their former reason, but have laid violent (...)
on themselves. As he is a very honest, good natured fellow (setting aside his
slip) said I, I wish some expedient could be found out to make him easy. Well,
then, Mr. Dorrington, says the captain, we have the common prayer book on
board; audit (...) we have lost poor John Davis, our surgeon and chaplain; he
could have christened the child and that would have satisfied Tom. O, Sir, said
I, with your leave, as we have no chaplain belonging to the ship, now Mr. Davis
is dead; yet as we are tolerated to bury our dead. pray, why may not (...)
christen the living also? It can be no crime to do a good action. The captain
approved of what I said; so I told him, with his leave, I would be chaplain, in
that case, as well as I had been man-midwife before: But, Sir, said I, there is
an obstacle that will hinder us still. He asked me what it was! Why, Sir, said
I, we have neither godfathers nor godmothers; and you know it is not accounted
lawful to perform that ceremony, which is one of the sacraments, unless it be
done with order and decency, as the church directs. To which the captain
replied, Is there not Mr. Clark our lieutenant? I and he will stand godfathers;
and he shall, as he is Clark by name, perform the office of clerk in the
ceremony. But, Sir, said I, what must we do for a godmother? You know there
ought to be one, and we have no woman on board that is a christian. Well, then,
said the captain, the women we have on board, by a little persuasion, may be
willing to be christened themselves; and, if they consent, they are of age, and
therefore capable of answering for themselves, by which means they may become
godmothers, on occasion, to the child. So, accordingly, the captain called for
a bottle of wine, and sent for Diana, one of the negro women, aged about
twentythree years. When she came into the cabin, the captain filled a glass of
wine, and gave it her: After she had drank it, the captain said, So, Diana, it
is hoped that you will not be troubled with the wantons, and play the trick
your sister Juno did. Pray, how does the child do? To which she answered, It be
ver well; but it cry, cry, ver much, great deal. Well, says the Captain; but,
Diana, I sent for you on another occasion: Do you not remember Mr. Davis, our
surgeon and chaplain? Yes, says she, me ver well know him; he give me ver great
goot stuff (meaning a dram:) But, says the captain, you know, Diana, he was a
good man, and used to tell you your duty, and teach you how to say your
prayers. Yes, says she, me ver well remember dat he be ver goot man. Why, then,
said the captain, Diana, what do you think of being made a Christian, and
christened as we Christians are? Me make Chirstian, (says she) hou? Why, says
the captain, you know Mr. Davis taught you to read, and you learned to say your
prayers: They are very good prayers, are they not? to pray to GOD. Yes, says
she; they be ver goot prayer; me love them ver great mush. Well, then, says the
captain, are you willing to be good, and to do as those prayers learn you to
do? Yes, said she, me be always ver goot, me be ver glad, me lern me prayer, me
lern more, me tank you. So by the captain's advice, I read the public baptism
of those of riper years, and baptized her; she answering the questions by the
instruction of the captain; and we christened her by the name of Elizabeth,
which was the name of our ship. As soon as the ceremony was over, the captain
ordered Elizabeth to dress the child in as decent a manner as she could, and
bring it to the cabin: In the mean time we drank the bottle of wine. As soon as
the child was dressed, Elizabeth carried it to the captain, who sent for Thomas
Higgins, and told him that Diana was christened, and that he himself and
lieutenant, were to stand godfathers to his (...) and Elizabeth godmother; and
that it was to be christened; and desired to know what name should be given to
the child: To which he answered, his own viz. Thomas. But I never saw such an
alteration in any man in my life, as I immediately observed in him. So suddenly
it appeared, that it surprised us all. For he who before was dejected even to
the greatest degree imaginable, now appeared fully satisfied in his mind; and
conscience no longer seemed to fly in his face; but he became full of mirth and
jolity. So by the captain's order, I christened the child in a very decent
manner: the captain and lieutenant ^^ood godfathers, and Elizabeth stood
godmother. When the ceremony was over, the captain said, Tom, as this child was
begot and born on board my ship, and I am its godfather; and as it is now a
Christian, I think it properly belongs to me (though I am not the father of it)
to see it brought up in a Christian manner, which, if it please GOD to bless me
with life, I will see performed; and not only that, but will take care of it,
if it lives, during my life; and see it well educated. -- So the captain
ordered half a goat to be roasted; and he, the lieutenant, and I, with Tom and
Elizabeth whom he permitted on that occasion, supped at his table, and were
very merry: Which so rejoiced Elizabeth, tha she, immediately after supper,
related what had happened to her fellow negro woman, who was called Antiope;
and they both went to Juno, and told her, that her son was baptized by the name
of Thomas.

The weather here was extremely hot in the daytime; but there were cold dews at
night, which were very dangerous; for three of our men died in our voyage to
the Galliapagoes.

As we sailed, on the 25th at night, the sea very much surprised us, it seeming
to be as red as blood; which occasioned Stephen Jones, who was upon the watch,
with some others, to call us up; for they had never seen the like before. When
we came upon deck, we supposed it to be a great quantity of the spawn of fish
swimming on the water; it being very fair. Having passed the line, we made the
Galliapagoes on the 5th of July, where we anchored about a mil off the shore,
in a good smooth, sandy ground. We sent our boat ashore for water, but could
find none. Some of our men began to be sick, but none of them died before we
arrived at Puna isle, in Peru; from thence we sailed a little way up the river
Guiaquil, where we saw a great many ^lligators, and sold some of our goods: But
the Spaniards being jealous that we came as spies, and belonged to some other
ships on that coast, which were Buccaniers, we thought it best to leave that
place, having taken in some fresh water, and a few provisions, to serve us to
the isle of Labos. We stood out to sea, and made the island of St. Clara, where
we anchored on the 10th for that night (our ship proving crank, and sailing
very heavy;) The next morning, when we were preparing to sail, we found that
our ship had sprung a leak; so that we were obliged to have one hand at the
pump continually. Before we had sailed six leagues, the wind freshened upon us,
and the sky looked extraordinary black at north-east, and it moved toward us,
which made us take in our topsails; and afterward we reefed our mainsail and
mizzen, at which time it began to rain, and poured down as if through a sieve.
The sea seemed as if it had been all on fire, by the prodigious thunder and
lightning. It then being night, the elements overhead looked most dismally
black, but all round the horizon was red as blood: The waves which seemed to
dash against the clouds by the violence of the wind, sparkled like lightning,
which, together with the thunder, made a terrible noise; at last breaking in
upon our deck, it carried away one of our anchors; and we (...), not bring our
ship to the wind for fear of her foundering; it being dangerous in a storm, to
turn a ship back ward and forward; so we were (...) to lie in the trough of the
sea. But the wind and rain abating, we observed to our great joy, a corpus
sanct at the top of our spindle: These corpus sancts are good signs when seen
aloft; but bad omens, and denote a great storm, when seen on the decks. It is a
small glimmering light, like a star, when seen aloft; but when on the deck, it
appears like a glowworm. It is the opinion of mariners, that it is a sort of
jelley, incorporated by the wind, rain, sea vapors, and air: because it is
never observed unless in stormy weather.

We sailed right before the wind, which was southwest, but were obliged to keep
continually pumping till the eighteenth day; when we made the isle of Labos,
about twelve at noon. That night we got safe into the harbor, and anchored, at
twenty fathoms water, in clean ground, between the two islands: Here we
resolved to careen our ship. Accordingly, observing the time of high water, we
put her into a cove, in the southermost island, where we hauled her up as far
as we could on the land; and our carpenter and all hands set to work the next
day. This island is barren and without fresh water. Here we killed several
seals, sea-lions, boobies, and penguins; a sea fowl about as big as a duck,
whose flesh is very ordinary food, but the eggs exceeding good: Here, also, we
found a small black fowl, which makes holes in the (...) to roost in at night,
whose flesh is very good; (...) at many vultures and crows. We had car^en^^ our
ship, and were in readiness to sail on the (...), and sailed to the island
Fernandos, and made the middle bay on the 7th of August, (...) being just over
there; which continues only (...) ^onths, viz. June and July. We have verbal
(...) where, of several men who have been left, or (...) and have lived some
time, and very well, on this island. Here we mended our sails. There is plenty
of very good fish of diverse sorts. It is very pleasant on the shore, and very
healthy; so that the men who had been ill on our voyage, perfectly recovered
their healths; for the green pimento trees diffused a very agreeable and
refreshing, healthy smell all over the island. Here we spent some time in
taking wood on board, and likewise in laying water up, which here is very good;
we also boiled a considerable number of sea lions, of which there are plenty
here: We had, also, plenty of young seals, which eat very well; only their
livers are unwholesome. At the south end of the island we found some goats, of
which we killed about thirty, which were excellent good. Here were, also,
plenty of turnips and watercresses, which were of great service to us in curing
the scurvy; of which we gathered a very large quantity.

So, having refreshed ourselves very well on this island, we resolved to steer
for Cape Verde in Chili; on the (...), made the island of St. Jago, where we
anchored, and sent our boat on shore. Here we bought some hogs and black cattle
(for our voy^^ round Cape Horn to the Brasils,) as also some corn and maize.
Here the people, from the ill usage they had formerly met with from the French,
are extremely sharp, and really dishonest; for if they trade with you, and
cannot get the advantage of you which they think you would have of them, they
will snatch your goods, and run away with them.

We weighed anchor on the twentieth, and sailed from hence (...) Horn, in 51
degrees 15 minutes lat. (...) informed me, I being only a merc^^^^ on board,
and therefore do not intend to (...) a (...) journal, only as I promised to
give an account of the most material passages in our voyage (...). Round the
Cape the weather favored us extremely, and nothing happened that was material,
only that we were chased by a private-(...) for about twelve hours, on the
29th; but the night coming on, it favored us so, that we lost her. On the 4th
of September we made Falkland's islands. Here we saw a great number of
porpoises, which often leaped out of the water, of an uncommon sort. On the 5th
we had the misfortune to have one of our men fall into the sea as he was
throwing the lead, and he was drowned before we could give him any help. We had
very brisk gales at south west. We sailed, and made Cape St. Antonio, near the
mouth of the river de la Plata, in Paragua, on the 25th, the wind south by
west; when we stood out to sea, and made the isle of Grande, on the coast of
Brasil, on the 29th. We got a pilot, who conducted us into, the watering cove,
at the inner westermost point of the island. -- In sounding as we went in, we
hardly met in any place, with less than ten fathoms water. -- The island is
about nine leagues long, high land near the waterside: It abounds with wood,
has monkeys and other wild beasts; plenty of good timber, and fresh water,
oranges, and lemons. We had pleasant weather, but extremely hot. We here
received a letter from our owners, commanding us home, and not to sail for New
England, as designed. Here we got beef, mutton, hogs, fowls, sugar, rum,
oranges, and lemons (so that now we did not want for good punch.) During our
voyage from the Gallipagoes, I applied myself to the perusal of my good old
man's memoirs, which I took very great delight in; and finding the whole series
of his minor years attended with such a number of unaccountable accidents,
hardly to be paralleled, I thought proper, as I designed them to be published
at my arrival in England, to digest them in a more regular manner than I found
them wrote in his manuscript; but neither added nor diminished; nor did I in
the least vary from what he himself had wrote, as to the accidents of life;
only I made some amendments which I thought necessary: For his absence from
England so long as fifty years, had occasioned him, in some manner, not to be
well acquainted with the language, as it is now spoken, and (by his living
without any conversation so long a time) had made him, in some measure, forget
his own mother tongue. Though I really think, taking that into consideration,
that his account was very polite, yet, had his life been published, as in his
memoirs, it would have appeared very obselete, and difficult to be read, though
ever so entertaining. I accordingly collected all the passages of his first
twenty eight years together, and thought proper to make a book, or part by
themselves, that part of his life being different from his hermetical
confinement on the island, which at first sight appeared so full of horror, and
nothing but a prospect of the most miserable condition that could befall him. He
no sooner looked round him, and depending upon Providence, as the supporter of
the distressed, but he found almost every thing necessary for human life on
that small island; and he, who then thought of nothing but immediately
perishing in the most miserable condition, has lived, by the help of Divine
Providence, in a safe and plentiful manner; and is now so inured thereunto,
that he despises the populous world and its vanities: He also considers its
pompous glory to be of no more substance than a shadow; and that there is no
felicity on earth, unless in solitude.

I likewise methodized his account, during his residence on the island in the
former manner; and made another book, or part; which with this account of my
finding him on the island, and my conference with him, completes my design: So
that it cannot be called an imperfect description, but complete, in three
books. And now I return to my voyage.

In our voyage from Juan Fernandes we saw a very large bird, which is called
Alcatres: These birds spread their wings from eight to ten feet wide. In the
Brasils is a serpent called Liboya, or the Roebuck serpent, the report of which
is incredible (in my opinion) but affirmed by some of the Portuguese, viz. that
there are some of them thirty feet long, its body being as big as an hogshead,
and destroys a Roebuck at one meal. Here we trafficked for several sorts of
drugs. We treated the Portuguese very civilly; who supplied us with all things
necessary for our use. During our ^^ay here there arrived a brigantine ^aden
with negroes, for the gold mines. Here four of our men died and three ran away
from us, the last of which we had just occasion to be thankful for, rather than
sorry; for Timothy Anchors overheard them discoursing, that they designed to
mutiny at our next sailing, but was doubtful whether or no they might get
enough on their side to overpower the captain and his party; and agreeing,
among themselves, that it was a very difficult matter to become masters of the
ship: And, besides, considering the hazard they run, in being punished, after
such a severe manner as they should be, if found out by any means, before they
could accomplish their design, or if they should sail in their attempt; made
them rather choose to desert the ship, than continue any longer. Though our
captain was an extraordinary good man, yet rogues will be always employing
their wicked thoughts; and neither clemency nor good usage can make them
perform their duty in their stations.

The 10th of October, after having set Antio^e, one of our Negro women, on
shore, who refused to be christened as Diana was, we began to sail, but kept
Elizabeth and Juno on board; the captain resolving that she should live with
him as his servant and by that means would bring up Tom's child: -- We did not
meet with any thing very remarkable; but after about twenty-four hours easy
sail, we passed the tropic, and the next day saw land. We stood from it south
south west, and had close cloudy weather all night, with showers of rain. When
day broke, we saw Ascension island, at about a league's distance; and about
nine o'clock we came to anchor. The sea is here very deep. The next day we
weighed anchor, and sailing north north east, till the 17th with a fresh gale
at west south-west, we crossed the line. The next day an ugly accident
happened; for we brought a young bear from Mexico; and our men being of en used
to play with her and teaz^ her, it proved very fatal to one Thad Obrian, an
Irish boy, of about sixteen years of age, who had been fretting the creature
with a small rope, which he had made a noose to, and slipped her hind leg into
it, and so worried her. Her blood growing warm, and she being enraged at his
hunting her to and fro on the deck, where he happened to slip down; the bear
immediately seized poor Thady by the neck, with such violence that, before any
body could (...) liver him from her paws, the poor boy's throat was tore to
pieces: so that he died instantly.

We sailed but very slowly now, meeting with continual calms, and directed our
course for Cape Verde islands: but on the 26th we had a heavy tornado, attended
with lightning, which fell as if the element had been on fire; but it continued
only for a short time: Afterward the weather proved extremely fair, the wind
being full south. A sailor going up to furl the main top-gallant on the 3d of
November, in the morning saw land and supposed it to be one of the Cape Verde
islands, bearing northeast, distant about seven leagues smooth water, and fresh
gales: About four o'clock we bore north northwest and went with an easy sail
till daylight, and made the island of St. Vincent; when, about nine o'clock,
we anchored in the bay, in about five fathoms water, where we (...) till the
next day; and then we went to St. Nicholas, another, and one of the largest of
the Cape Verde islands. These islands are so called from Cape Verde in Africa,
and are mostly inhabited by Portuguese. One of them is called Sall: It derives
its name from the prodigious quantity of salt which is naturally congealed in
saltponds. There are some poor goats on this island, and some wild fowls. Here
are flaming^es, a large fowl much like an heron, but bigger, and of a reddish
color: They feed together in muddy ponds, or where there is but little water.
They are hard to shoot, being very shy.

In St. Nicholas we traded with some of the Spaniards for ambergris; but they
were very fraudulence having counterfeited it much. Here are some (...) yards,
and plantations, belonging to the Portugue^^ and wine, much like Madeira, of a
pale color (...) and thick. The people are swarthy, and the inhabitants live
scattering in valleys.

While we were at this island, we scrubbed our ship's bottom, and dug some
wells on the shore, where we got fresh water. Here an unlucky accident had like
to have happened; for one of our men, going down to the hold with a candle, set
fire to a bale of cotton, which by his carelessness, had like to have been the
loss of our ship: But, (thanks to God) it was discovered, by its smother, just
before (...) began to blaze out; so that by immediate help, (...) got it
extinguished. Very soon after we hoisted (...) upon deck for fear any of the
fire should remain, and revive again; and because we would have it in mind for
our safety.

On the 8th we went to the isle of Mayo, another of the Cape Verde islands, but
made no stay. We saw at south west, the island del Fago, which is remarkable
for being a volcano, or burning mountain, out of which issue flames of fire;
but they are only discerned in the night and then are seen a great way at sea:
Yet there are inhabitants on this island (as I have been informed by the
Portuguese of the island of St. Nicholas) who lived at the foot of the mountain
near the sea. There are also cocoanuts, plantains, goats, and fowls.

In the island of St. Aritanio another of the Cape Verde islands, there is a
very large spider (as I was informed by the same Portuguese) which weaves its
web between the trees; and it is so strong that it is difficult for a man to
get through. Here are also wild asses; likewise, salt pits, where great
^^^antities of salt are naturally made by the sun's (...); with which they load
yearly several ships, (...) are able to sell much greater quantities than (...)
do, if they had but vent for it.

(...) having despached our affairs at the Cape Verde (...) we weighed with the
flood, having a small (...) at south south west: on the 17th it began to (...),
and veered to the south-west by south. That evening we saw three sail of ship
at west north-west, bearing as we supposed, for the Canary islands, as well as
ourselves. The night coming on, which was extremely clear and fine, we passed
the tropic about break of day; soon after which we observed a north-bank lying
in the horizon. We then provided for a storm, which those clouds denote. The
wind was at north-west. We brought the ship under our main sail and mizzen
only, and ballasted our mizzen; but yet the wind and seas were too high for us,
and every wave seemingly threatened to overwhelm us; so that we beat up and
down with only our bare poles which we feared would break in upon our deck,
which must have foundered us, in case it had so happened: We also lowered our
main-yard, and fore-yard down to a port-last, as I observed the sailors called
it, that is pretty near the deck; and the wind blew so extremely fierce, that
we did not dare to loose any head sail at all: For, if we had they certainly
would have been blown away. During the storm, it rained exceeding fast, which
continued for about four hours, when it changed, and was pretty calm; and we
began to get every thing in good order. The wind that evening, changing to
south-west, about six the next evening, we saw the peak of Teneri^f, at about
nine leagues distance. We saw some flying fish and a great deal of sea-thistle
swimming. We sailed all night with a small easy gale, and at break of day made
the Canaries; bearing at north west by west, about three leagues. We crowded
all our sail, and came to an anchor, in the harbor of Sancta Cruz, in the
island of Teneriff, on the 21st, in about thirty fathoms water, black slimy
ground, about half a mile from the shore. The land being for the most part
pretty high, it is very bad going ashore here in boats; and ships riding here
are often forced to put to sea, or slip their anchors, by reason the road lies
so open to the east. Ships are here supplied with good water between the coves,
where they generally water.

Sancta Cruz, a small town fronting the sea, has two sorts to secure the road:
Here some English merchants reside. Their houses are low and uniform, covered
with pan tiles. Here are oranges, lemons, and other fruits, also, flowers, and
salading; and a great number of pleasant gardens: At Oratavia the country is
full of risings and fallings, that it is troublesome to walk up and down in it:
Mules and asses are most used by them. Here grows the right and true Malmsey
wine; here also Canary and Verdona, or green wine: Likewise, a great many
convents. Ships are forced to slip their cables perhaps three or four times, by
reason of the winds, and put to sea before they can take in all their lading.
Here are wheat, barley, maize, beans, pease, apples, pears, plumbs, cherries,
pomgranates, citrons, oranges, lemons, and several other fruits, excellently
good; also, horses, asses, mules, cows, goats, hogs, deer, and fowl, both same
and wild in great plenty. Provisions are dear on the trading islands, but cheap
on the others.

Fero isle is very remarkable: It has no fresh water, only in the middle of
the island, where there grows a tree; which being continually covered with
clouds, from its leaves always drop great quantities of excellent water. These
Canar^ islands are commonly the rendezvous of the Spanish West India fleet,
where they generally receive orders for unlading their wealth.

From the harbor of Sancta Cruz we sailed, on one 25th of November, to the
Canary islands: Here the soil is so fertile, that they have two harvests in a
year. Its commodities are, honey, wax, sugar, and the best of wines; of which
we took a sufficient quantity of each: Here are also dragon's tree, which
produces a red liquor called dragon's-blood. These islands are exceeding
wholesome, though they are inclinable to beat.

Having taken in the cargo which we designed from these islands, we sailed from
thence on the 3d of December for the Madeira island, with a fair wind at south
south-west, and saw several ships sailing toward, the Lizard: The next day at
eight in the morning, we made land, which was the Madeira, at about four
leagues distance, and came to an anchor: Here are many fountains and rivers,
which refresh the country. It is a very beautiful island, exceeding fertile,
and produces excellent wine, which is very stronst. We anchored in the port,
which resembles an halfmoon, not far from the town. Near this island is
another, not so large as this (which is about sixty leagues in compass) called
Porto Sancto, which affords much the same commodities as Madeira: Here we took
in about thirty pipes of Madeira wine; and having accomplished our business, we
left that island on the 10th, and sailed for the Lizard with a westerly wind.
We had not sailed above six leagues, but it changed to north-east, and the sky
begun to be covered with small hard clouds, very thick one by another, which we
imagined an approaching storm: Accordingly, we provided for it, by reefing our
topsails, and took in our sails as fast as possible. The wind began to blow a
very brisk gale, and soon after the storm began; the wind still increased by
squalls of rain and hail, which came very thick and fast, and the sea run very
high: so that we were obliged to run before the wind. We shipped little or no
water, though some washed into our upper-deck; and with some of the waves a
dolphin was cast thereon. The wind blew very hard, but about eight hours after,
it abated its fierceness, and then the wind veered to the west, and the foul
weather broke up, and we had smaller gales, with some calms, and fair weather.

On the 18th the wind veered to the south southeast, which continued a brisk
gale till the 29th, and we kept right before wind and sea, the wind still
increasing; and we made the Lizard on the 27th, at about three leagues, and
stood in for the land, and came to an anchor in King's Road.

Thus I have given an account of our voyage from Mexico, as I promised, which I
hope may not, be offensive to any body; it being my intention to divert the
readers, rather than displease them.

N. B. The ship belonged to B^istol; I communicated the following memoirs to a
friend in London, in order to be published; which if approved of by the public,
I shall, at my return, be very well satisfied. In the mean time, I have
business calls me to Pe^^ and Mexico again; in which voyage I hope to see poor
Phil my good old Hermit. And so I take my leave, and end the first part.


EDWARD DORRINGTON.

BOOK II.
Account of the birth and education of Philip Quarll; as also, the most
surprising transactions of his life, from his infancy to his being cast away.

Taken from the memoirs he gave to Mr. Edward Dorrington, the person who found
him on the island.

PHILIP QUARLL was born in the parish of St. Giles in the Fields. His father
Thomas Quarll, formerly a master builder, having unfortunately ruined himself
in building, was at last reduced to work at the laborious and mean business of
brickmaking: His poor wife, also, was obliged to lay her hands to the laboring
oar; so went a chairing: which slavish and confining occupation robbed her of
the necessary time to attend the fruit of her conjugal affection, her beloved
Phil. so that she was obliged (whilst she and her poor yoke fellow were
drudging to get him bread) to commit him to the care of one kind neighbor or
another, for a small consideration, till he could prattle and go alone: at
which time she put him to school to a good old a^ms woman, where he continued
till he was six years old.

One day a neighbor, who formerly had the care of the child in his mother's
absence, having contracted a particular love for him, being a very pretty
child; finding him, after, school-time, sitting at his father's door, takes him
by the hand, and leads him to his mother, then at work at an old lady's house
in Great Russel Street.

The housekeeper, who was naturally fond of children, seeing this pretty
child, takes him up in her arms, and runs to her good old lady, who had just
ended her customary private devotion.

The child, whom the poor woman kept very neat and clean, beyond what could be
expected out of her small gettings, was naturally very handsome; being tall for
his age, and well shaped; his features regular, and well proportioned; his
complexion fair; his hair long and curling; his countenance mild and sprightly;
his behavior gentle and easy: All which qualifications rendered him completely
amiable, and made the old lady conceive an inclination for him, uncommon for a
stranger's child, especially of so mean a birth.

Thus, having often kissed him, she wished he had been her own. But why, said
she, cannot I do for this lovely creature, though no kin to me by birth?
nature, who has endued him with qualifications so proximal and suitable to my
inclination, has, by sympathy, made him related to me. His mother gave him
birth, which, without prejudice to his own life, she could not refuse; now I
will give him education, the principal and most necessary care by which real
love can be expressed to a child.

So, having given orders, that a good school might be inquired after, she put
him to board to a master whose most commendable character of instructing his
scholars in their duty to God and man, as well as in literature, had procured
him a considerable number of children of the best families. There she intended
to have kept him till he was by years and learning, qualified for some genteel
trade; intending to leave him in her will, forty pounds to set him up, when out
of his time.

But now (...) fate begins to show its averseness to poor Phil's happiness: The
worthy lady died suddenly, and was intered a few days after, to his unspeakable
prejudice, and threatening ruin. But watchful Providence, who had decreed him
good, averted the apparent evil, and only permitted some interception to her
purposes, the better to raise his esteem of her succeeding favors, when
sensible of them.

The master having conceived a particular love for the boy (whose uncommon
docility, and extraordinary aptness in learning, had overtaken the rest of his
school fellows, though of much longer standing) was very much vexed at the
thoughts of his going away to his parents, they being no longer able to
continue his schooling: He was unwilling to part with the boy, and much
disturbed to lose twelve pounds a year for a boarder. His love for the child,
whom he had in a manner, adopted for his own, would now and then rouse
slumbering charity, whom self interest too often ^asts asleep: Pity, said he,
such blooming wisdom and forward learning should wither away for want of
cultivation. Thus having pondered a while, love and charity, after a long
struggle with interest, gained the victory: The old man concludes to give him
his learning, if his relations would only find him in board and ^^her
necessaries.

This being concluded upon by both parties, Phil, continued going to school for
the space of four years longer; during which time, he made himself a complete
master of the grammar, writing, and arithmetic; he also made a vast improvement
in singing, having all that time been taught by a master, who attended some
boarders three times a-week; who, finding an extraordinary voice, and natural
disposition, in the boy, took a fancy to teach him: So that Phil. was in some
respects, qualified to attend the school, in the nature of usher, had his age
permitted it. But as he was yet too young to keep the scholars in that awe
which is necessary in a school, the master only gave him his board, till the
elder scholars left off, and he was grown bigger; intending then to allow him
sufficiently to maintain himself, as others in that station: But ill fate still
attends the poor boy: The good old man died in less than a twelvemonth, and was
succeeded by a superanuated nonconformist minister; who, having not so
prosperous a school as his predecessor, had no business for an assistant: so
Phil. was second time obliged to return to his poor mother (his father being
dead;) who, not being in a capacity to do for him, as his education and natural
parts really deserved, proposed to him to learn some trade, in order to gethis
bread honestly and creditably, when she should be no more able to help him;
having, by her hard working, and frugal living, made shift to lay up five
pounds, which she dedicated to that purpose.

Poor Phil. who had conceived a notion that there is a servitude and hardship
entailed upon that station, was very loath to resolve upon entering into it; but
as he was a very discreet boy, not inclined to play, as children commonly are,
and seeing that there was a necessity for him to resolve upon something; to
make his choice the more easy, he consults his master's nature and temper,
rather than the goodness and profitableness of the trade: And as there-lived in
the neighborhood a locksmith, ever since he was born, who, being great with
the father, would often play with him, when a child, and now and then give him
farthings to buy fruit; he chose to be bound to him; which was done in about a
month's time.

They both agreed wonderfully well, the master being very kind and good
natured, and the man as diligent and careful; so that those fears of meeting
with hardship being dispersed, he cheerfully worked on, without thinking the
time tedious. But this happiness, though slight, is but of a short lasting; for
the poor man, having been bound for a relation, who failed, had all his effects
seized upon, and himself thrown into goal; and poor Phil. in a year's time, was
obliged to come to his mother again.

This accident was a vast disappointment to the boy's learning his trade, he
being obliged to be idle, his unfortunate master begging that he would seek
after no other; hoping every day to make up, his affairs, and carry on business
again: So that the lad, for want of employment, would play about the streets
with neighbor's children.

One day, as he was playing at leap-frog with other boys, there happened to go
by one James Turner, an house breaker, who taking notice of his activity, which
much exceeded the rest, judged he might be of great use to him in the practice
of his art. The meanness of his dress, which spoke him of no considerable
family, gave him room to hope that he might easily get him: So having stopped a
while, he took the opportunity, that the boy, being hot with running, and
jumping, went to drink at a pump hard by. He takes him by the arm, saying, do
you mean to kill yourself, child, to go and drink cold water now, when you are
hot? Come along with me, and I will give thee a draught of good ale: You shall
only go a short errand for me. Will you ^aster? the innocent boy answered, I Will
go your errand, if it is not too far: so followed him to an alehouse, in a
blind alley, not far from thence, which ^he commonly used.

Being come, he calls for a quart, and bids the boy take a hearty pull; which
he did being very dry, and the liquor as pleasant: This being-done a second
time, it began to creep into his head, not being used to strong drink; and in a
little time he fell asleep on the bench on which he sat.

The seducer, thinking himself secure of him, leaves him to take his nap,
shutting the door upon him, and charging the people of the house not to awake
him, nor let him go away, when awake, till he returned; so went to get ready
the implements necessary to set his evil project in execution; having
determined to rob a rich merchant that night, in which wicked action be
intended to make the harmless boy his chief instrument, by putting him in at a
hole he was to break, and then to open the door for him, under the pretense
that it was his uncle, who was so illnatured as to lock him out, if not at home
at the shop shutting up.

Having got the ^o^ls, he returned to the boy, whom be found just awake, and
very uneasy to go home, having slept till it was dark, being afraid to anger
his relations by staying out late, contrary to his custom, being used to
orderly hours, and would have gone away, had not Turner, whose projects would
have been quite unhinged, used all the devices he was (...) of to persuade him.
First he be^^eaks a supper of that which the boy liked best, who since his
being come from the boarding school, had been used to none but coarse meat, his
poor parent's ability affording no better: Then, to divert away the time he
intended to prolong till his opportunity suited, he told him several stories,
and, most particularly, that of his pretended uncle's unkindness to lock him
out of doors, and of his cunning invention to get in at his own time, and
unknown to him; but that he was afraid he must be forced to lie out that night,
which would be his death, being not used to such a hardship. The poor
tenderhearted boy, who could scarce forbear crying, whilst he related this
dismal story of his uncle's unkind usage, asked him what was the matter he
could not get in that night as well as at other times? Because, replied the sly
knave, the poor boy that used to let me in is sick of the smallpox, as I have
heard since you fell asleep. What! cannot you get somebody else? said simple
Phil. I would do that for you, if I could tell how to get in at my own home;
for my mother goes to bed betimes, being obliged to get up early. As for that
matter, answered the subtle serpent, do not trouble yourself, I Will provide a
bed for you. Thus having removed both that, and all other obstacles the boy
raised, he persuades him to stay.

But ever watchful Providence rescues his ensnared innocence. Some hours before
he was to go about the execution of that evil project, Turner was apprehended
for a great robbery he committed the night before in Lime-street; and the boy,
being in his company, was also carried before a magistrate. But the justice
understanding, by the innocent boy's defense, he hardly was yet guilty of any
robbery, having regard to his youth and modest countenance, reprimanded him for
his easiness of being drawn into bad company, and warned him to be more
cautious for the future: So dischared him, and committed Turner; who was hanged.

That accident, though very lucky, by preserving innocent Phil. from being made
accessory to a robbery, which would have put his life in jeopardy, at the end
proved fatal, he having thereby gained the character of belonging to some ill
gang: For which reason nobody cared to be concerned with him, which grieved his
poor mother.

The poor widow (being left with her unfortunate son who she feared would take
to some evil way for want, which often tempts the most innocent inclined) not
being able, out of her small gettings, to maintain him, as when assisted by her
late husband; and seeing no prospect of his master's coming out of prison, and
being set up again, endeavored to get him into some place to wait upon some of
her mistresses: But the unluckly accident of being had beforee a justice of the
peace, with a notorious house-breaker, frustrated her endeavors; so that poor
Phil. was obliged to continue with his mother in a very mean condition, which
his honest mother very much feared would induce him to evil company, of which
the parish, she lived in swarmed: But the good instructions which were given
him in his infancy, before bad examples could have made any impression on his
mind, kept out of his thoughts all wicked devices. Thus seeing no probability
of amendment in the station he was in, he resolved upon going to sea, wanting
or that employment neither character nor recommendation, which he was sensible
would be a hard matter to get, by reason of this most fatal accident.

Thus, having imparted his design to his loving mother, who, with much
reluctance, acquiesced in his going from her, and leaving his native country,
where she once had hopes to see him well settled; she, with weeping eyes,
implores the Almighty to direct and receive him into his protection: And as she
was acquainted with no one that could direct and advise him in that matter, she
bid him go to St. Catharine's; there, said she, you may chance to hear of some
captain or master of a ship, bound for some short voyage, who perhaps may want
a cabinboy; which is, my dear child, all that your age and strength qualifies
you for: In a few years, with the help of God, you may find some advantageous
opportunity to advance yourself by your learning. So, having given him sixpence
to bear his charges, with a tender kiss, she goes to her wonted occupation, and
he straight to St. Catharine's, where Providence had prepared a master for him;
he being no sooner come thither, than a captain of a ship, bound for the
East Indies, taking a particular fancy to him, asked him whether he would go to
sea; and that, if he was so disposed, he would take him to look after his
cabin, and provide very well for him.

The gentle manner in which he spoke to the boy, and his mild countenance, made
a vast progress in his affection: So, having joyfully accepted his offer, he
desires he may run home, and acquaint his mother of it. The captain having
taken his name, and place of abode, gave him half a crown to spend with his
mother, and then to come to him, at the sign of the Black-Boy, near the
Iron-Gate; that he need bring no clothes with him; for he would provide every
thing necessary for the voyage.

The overjoyed boy, having told his mother of his extraordinary success, gave
her the money, being in great haste to return to his new master: So, having
embraced his tender mother, and she her dear son, weeping over one another for
some time, he leaves her at her work.

The good woman, though she had all the reason in the world to be easy in her
mind, that the boy was out of those temptations which great want, and bad
company, might lead him into, could not be reconciled at his going from her:
But, seeing no remedy, she sends crowds of prayers after him, accompanied with
showers of tears, recommending him to the care of Heaven, to whom she daily
made addresses for his prosperity.

Phil. who from his infancy had been used to be from his mother, was less
disturbed at his leaving her; nothing but his new intended voyage running in
his mind; so hastened to the rendezvous his new master had appointed him; who,
not expecting that he would return, was so glad to see him, that he went that
moment and brought him both clothes and linen fit for the sea; so equipped him
a new cap a pee; then took him home, and in a few days after set sail for a
three years voyage.

During their sailing, Phil. whose agreeable aspect and temper had gained him
the love of all the ship's crew, being often with the man at the helm, soon
learned the compass; and by the instructions every body on board strove to give
him, in a little time he was qualified for a sailor; which his master hearing
of, whom he had often diverted with his singing during that voyage, allowed him
sailor's pay the following voyage, which was soon after; for in less than three
weeks time the ship was new laden, and set out again for the same place, and
was gone as long as before; at the end whereof it returned home richly laden,
in shorter than was common: Which being put in the news, as usual, prompted a
certain number of Drury Lane nymphs to go down to the place where they heard
the ship was arrived; supposing that the lusty sailors, having a long time been
confined to salt meat, would at their arrival, being flush of money, purchase a
bit of fresh at any rate.

Being come to Gravesend, where the ship lay, they found, according to custom,
the jolly crew in an alehouse, spending, like asses, what they had earned like
horses, even before they had received it.

At the ladies coming, the elevated sailors, who had been sailing on salt water
for the space of three years, and since set their brains floating in strong
drink, for six hours, having lost the rudder of their reason, ran headlong upon
those quicksands, where most of them lost all they had, before they could get
off.

The ingenious ladies, who had more wit than honesty, improved the absence of
their understanding; and, being very expert in the art of fathoming they fell
to examining the depth of those shallowbrained fellows' pockets; which finding
very low, they were much disheartened from going on, for fear of running
a-ground: But, understanding that their ship had not yet been cleared, they
cast their anchor there, waiting for a fresh gale.

Mean time the merry sailors, fearing no storm, gave themselves up to sport;
and, for better diversion, every man takes a play fellow and goes aside,
leaving bashful Phil. behind; who being a stranger to the game they were going
to play at did not dare to put in for a partner: But cross fate still attending
him, a snare is laid in which he must fall. Every man, but modest Quarll, being
gone away with a wench; one, being a supernumerary, stayed behind. The crafty
creature, who, from her first coming in, had fixed on the innocent young man
for her quarry, kept at some distance from her comrades; waiting their absence;
to work her design.

Unthinking Phil. having no suspicion of her cunning devices, lying entirely
unguarded against her sly attacks, stood no long siege, but capitulated at the
first summons. It is true, she was provided with such artillery as no
fortifications against love could withstand; but would force the most stubborn
to surrender, or at least parley, which is a forerunner thereof.

Thus, having fixed her bassilisk's eyes upon him, as being the first
battering-piece the sex plants, when they purpose a breach in a man's heart;
she charges him with a volley of engaging words, whilst her looks and carriage
offer him such prevailing terms, as no man of any feeling can refuse;
therefore, being an exquisite mistress of her art, she soon obtains her ends.

Poor Quarll, whose heart till then, had never been besieged, finding the
invader more tempting than dreadful, she having a very agreeable shape,
charming complexion, and most engaging features, surrenders up at discretion,
and submits even to bear the yoke of matrimony; which, in less than an hour, is
laid upon him; the chaplain of a man of war, who lodged in the house, happening
to come in at that critical minute.

By that time, the absent revelling crew were cloyed with their mistresses, and
had dismissed them with rough usage, and ill language, of which they generally
are flush, when money is scant.

The disappointed wretches, seeing no redress for their treatment lately
received, which they well knew proceeded from want of money, concluded upon
staying in that place till their ship was cleared; by which time their appetite
being sharpened again, and they flush of money, and hoping they would also be
better chaps; they took a garret in a little strong-water stop, where they made
shift to kennel together, and live upon short commons.

Our new-married couple, whose money was but scanty, were also obliged to put
up with indifferent quarters; but the hopes of receiving the poor husband's ray
soon, and withal, the thoughts of being protected from a goal, which she was in
danger of, before married, being the principal advantage she proposed to
herself by having a husband, it made her now easy. But she and all the rest of
her companions, were disappointed. The ship being unladen, the cargo proved
damaged, by the leaking of the vessel, which is commonly made good by the
sailors: So that instead of three years wages being due, the poor men stood
indebted to the merchants.

That disappointment put the unfortunate seamen, and especially the ladies,
into a sad consternation; the former being obliged to go another voyage with
empty pockets, and the latter to seek for cullies to support their
extravagance, and to pay for n^w lodgings.

Phil. who, during the voyage, had saved a little money, which his master gave
him at sundry times, being disgusted at the sea, by the late accident, resolves
to seek his better fortune in another manner.

His crafty wie, who was, by her marriage, screened from her creditors,
depending upon her former occupation, indulged him in that resolution; so they
set out w^^h that little they had, and arrived pretty bare. Finding no friends
in London, his master being dead while he was at sea, he resolves to list in
the foot guards for bread, having no other dependence; so consults with his
spouse about a lodging, till he had quarters appointed for him. She, indeed,
was best acquainted with the town, and knew of several that would suit both
their stock and station, but durst go to none, having bilked most of them, and
left a score with the rest. But lodging must be had before night; and the day
was far spent: which set her a thinking, necessity being the mother of
invention: And she, as is peculiar to women of her employment, being well
acquainted with it, was no stranger to shifts; and presently finds one. Having
pondered for a short time, she concludes upon going to her last lodgings:
where, though she was considerably in debt, she question ned not but she should
still find a kind reception, and that her land-lady, where she had been about a
fortnight, having given over her debt, would at her coming slacken the ill
opinion she had conceived of her, and afford her kind usage: So, having fixed a
rendezvous for her husband; she hastens there, where she found, as was
expected, the old woman was as over-joyed as surprised to see her; and much
more, when she understood she was married to a sailor, lately arrived from a
three years voyage; who in a short time, would be cleared, and that then she
would rub off her score. The old woman thinking herself secure of her debt, and
sure of a good customer, bids her kindly welcome; and that she hoped she would
take no other lodging but in her house; that she would make every thing as easy
and convenient as she should desire; being as welcome to score, as with ready
money.

The subtle woman having gained her ends, goes and fetches her husband, whom
the overreached old woman receives most kindly: expressing her love by a
quartern of all-fours, the chief commodity of her house: That being drank, was
succeeded by a second, at the new tenant^s cost; which, being bro't with a
cheerful welcome to as many as they pleased, encouraged the coming-in of half a
dozen more: These warmed the company, and particularly the landlady; who having
greeted Quarll for his most happy marriage over and over, fell upon praising
his wife, whom she had known for a long time; giving her all the encomiums that
virtue itself could deserve.

In this manner they lived about a fortnight, still upon score; which
increasing very fast, and no prospect of money, it obliged the landlady to put
them in mind; often asking when they expected the ship to be cleared. Quarll,
who discerned, by the cloud which appeared over her brow, a threatening storm,
begins to think of an harbor, and forthwith goes and lists himself in the
foot-guards.

In that mean station, which often is the last spite of a surly fate, a
continuation of misfortunes attends him: The company where he listed in, was
full of mercers and shopkeepers, who for a protection took on in the service,
and quitted their pay to the covetous colonel, to be exempted from duty, which
made it fall heavy on the effective men: But kind Providence, who ever limited
the evil that attended him by fortune, ordered this its vexatious influence to
turn to his advantage.

One day that he mounted guard out of his turn, being upon duty at the
park-gate next to Chelsea, about ten at night, the place being clear of people,
he fell a singing to divert melancholy thought, which solitude is apt to
indulge: At that time happened to come by a colonel of the same regiment who
being merrily disposed, stopped for several minutes to hear him sing: Quarll
having made an end of his song, fell a whistling the tune; at which the colonel
came to him saying, how can you profane, such a fine tune with whistling, when
you can sing it so well? pray let me hear you do it once more; and grace it
with that good voice nature has given you. Quarll, having made some few modest
excuses, yields to his pressing solicitations, and sings the same song over
again, and with more care than before; which so pleased the gentleman, that he
stood half an hour with him, asking him questions; And being by him informed
whose company he belonged to, having his consent to be exchanged, he gives him
five shillings to drink his health; and charges him to come to him at the Mitre
tavern at Charing Cross, the next day at eight o'clock in the evening, and ask
for colonel Bonguard: So went away.

Quarll, being off duty, the next day went to the place, at the time appointed;
where he finds the colonel, in company with half a score more gentlemen, who
received him with more civility and complaisance than is commonly paid to men
of his coat: So, having desired him to sit down amongst them, and the glass
gone round once or twice, the colonel having praised his singing to the
company, he was desired to complement them with a song; if he pleased, with
that he sung to the colonel the night before. Quarll, having modestly told the
gentlemen, he wished that his skill and voice deserved the honor of their
hearing, and that he would do the best he could, having, at their request,
drank another glass, he sung the song they desired, to their great satisfaction
and applause.

After a short space of time was spent in the praise of singing, and a talk of
what an engaging accomplishment it is, either in man or woman; some of the
company, holding that the charms of music are no-wise inferior to the power of
love, it occasioned a very agreeable debate; there being in the company a
gentleman unfortunately under the circumstance, who would give love the
surpremacy over all that can effect our minds; seeing it strips a man of the
benefit of his own senses, of the strength of his reason, and soundness of
judgment. No object is fair, but that whose idea has impressed the mind; no
harmony heard but in the beloved voice, or that which sounds its praise;
dainties have no favor in the absence of that which every thing relishes; the
fairest days are dull, if not enlivened by the light of the charmer's presence.

Thus he ran on, till the company, perceiving he was beginning to be uneasy,
desired Quarll to sing the gentleman a love song, who spoke so much in its
praise; which he did, and pleased the lover so exceedingly, that he made him a
present of half a guinea. The gentleman, who was altogether for music, having
asked Quarll whether he had any thing in the praise of it, having also his
request answered, made the rest of the company crave a song in the commendation
of what suited their inclinations: some being for a bottle, others for roving,
and others for a country life.

Quarll being provided with such songs, entertained them to their desires till
supper was brought up; which being over, the company who had been so well
diverted with Quarll's singing, consulted together to do him service: and, as
he was well qualified to teach, they proposed to recommend him scholars. A
gentleman in company, having a sister, who intended to learn, he writes a
letter to her, desiring she would make use of no other master; which letter he
was to carry the next morning: -- And as his regimental clothes might lessen
her opinion of his merit, he bids him, before he goes to call at his lodging,
and he would present him with a suit of clothes, which he wore but part of last
summer, and therefore little the worse for wearing. And, as he wanted but a hat
to be completely dressed (having an extraordinary good head of hair) another
gentleman bids him call on him for one; so that he had all he wanted to set him
out.

The gentlemen having given him directions where to go for the things, and the
colonel his promise to get him discharged out of the company he did belong to;
at least to have him exchanged in to his own; they every one gave him a crown
apiece: So they departed, bidding him not fail coming thither again that day
seven-night.

This unexpected but lucky adventure, like a sudden surprise, unframed his
reason, and makes poor Quarll overlook the only obstacle that could obstruct
his blooming happiness. Thus transported with seeing himself master of more
money than ever he was worth before, and in a fair prospect of advancing
himself; he hastens home, and in his guard clothes, in which he ought not to be
seen there; being a dress obnoxious to most, and more especially to creditors.

His landlady, who, till then had been made to expect her money, thinking he
only waited the ship's being discharged to go another voyage; seeing him in
that hope killing dress, gave a shriek, as if she had seen the devil: Slanders
and abuses striving for utterance, crowd in her foaming mouth; and like a rapid
torrent, which running from a large extent into a narrow channel, swells, and
overflows its banks; so her passion, finding her mouth too small a passage
breaks out through her eyes: Thus, having shrieked and roared a while, which
occasioned all her lodgers to come down, she charges poor astonished Quarll
with shoals of abuses, in the vilest and most insulting terms, the most
inveterate malice can express.

Thus having exhausted her stock of slanders, her tongue having uttered all the
evil she could, she set her mischievous hands to work upon his wife; who being
come to see the occasion of her shrieking, stood like one bereft of her senses:
So, having torn her head clothes off her head, with words suitable to the
barbarous deeds, she thrusts them both out of doors; which though the rudest
action that could denote the unmercifulness of her intended revenge, was to
them at that time the kindest act she could perform.

That unexpected treatment was no small check to Quarll's cheerful disposition,
but having considered that one time or other he must have stood the shock he
rejoices that it is over; and being free from the care of getting her paid, he
has at that time nothing to think of but of find another lodging; which being
then too late to go about, he concludes to wait for morning at a certain cellar
at Charing Cross, which is open all night. Going along, she mildly blamed him
for his unadvised coming in that dress, which he might imagine, could produce
no better effect. To which he answered, he never could have wished for better:
For, by her turning him out of doors, she had paid herself; which he would have
done, had he staid: But now he was come away, being better provided, and in a
better way, he would have better lodgings; so told her of the adventure which
much rejoiced her; and from that time made her resolve to forsake her former
way of living, which misfortunes only drove her to, being not led by evil
inclination, as many are. The morning being come, whilst she went to seek for
lodging, he went for the clothes he was promised the evening before, which
fitted him as if made on purpose, and made him recommended for. Being now
shaved and powdered, he went with the letter, according to orders and was
received suitably to the recommendation given him. The lady, being just up,
made him drink chocolate with her; then having required a song, she agrees with
him for a guinea a month, the usual rate, and gives him a guinea at entrance,
as it is common; so began that very morning, promising to recommend him to a
lady, who had two daughters; which she accordingly did, and sent him the next
time became.

This fair prospect of an handsome and genteel living, which he always was
desirous of, made him forget his past misfortunes. Thus joyfully he returns to
the cellar, where he had spent the night before, and where he had appointed to
meet his wife, after she had fixed upon a lodging; who accordingly came in less
than a quarter of an hour, hoping she had pleased her husband, which she
resolved for the future to endeavor. She sat down, expecting his coming, not
knowing he had already waited (...) his change of dress concealing him from her
not expecting to see him in so different a garb from that which she left him
in: Which he perceiving, comes up to her, and takes her by the hand, going to
ask her the success of her walk: but she putting it out of his power, in angry
manner bidding him go about his business, having none with her, prevented his
speaking. His silence, which she took to proceed from bashfulness, occasioned
her looking him in the face; in which discovering her dear husband's featurers,
to whose natural handsomeness his genteel clothes were no small addition, she
was seized with such surprise, that struck her speechless for some minutes.

Quarll, discerning her disorder by the fading of her fresh complexion, was as
much surpised as she. Thus trembling, he takes her in his arms: My dear, said
he, what is the matter? Are you not well? Having recovered her speech, she
embraced him, saying, how can I be ill, when my dear heart and soul appears so
well?

These kind words, and the return of that flush which first kindled love's fire
in their heart, inflames it afresh; hardly can he govern his new raised
passion: Thus, giving her a kiss, My love, says he have you got a lodging? Yes,
my dear, replies me loving wife; you shall ever dwell in my heart. But I want
to lie in your arms, answers he; that cannot be done here. Well, then, said
she, I have provided a fit place. So, having each of them taken a dram, they
went away.

Sally, who till then was a stranger to real love, now feels its true smart;
and though she has for some time enjoyed the fruition, the only bliss
painstaking lovers aspire at for the reward of all their toils and labors, and
the happy shore love's compass points at; yet she seems uneasy, as expecting
something more: She cavils with time for flying too fast. Whole days and nights
are too short for her to behold her dear. She continually bears his image in
her heart, and wishes she could forever have him in her arms; which from that
time she con^ecrates to chaste embraces, devoting herself wholly to the
diligent and assiduous practice of the necessary qualifications in a wife, to
render an husband truly happy: The execution of which wife and virtuous
resolutions gained her the tenderest and most sincere love and affection a real
fond husband can show of express to a darling wife.

They lived in that truly happy state about half a year; at the end of which,
cruel fate, envious of his uncommon happiness, most barbarously robs him of it,
almost as soon as he had savoured its incomparable and matchless sweets.

One summer morning, loving and truly observing Sally, knowing her husband
delighted in slowers and greens, went to Covent Garden, in order to buy some to
garnish her windows and chimney, being the only things wanting to complete the
neatness of her lodging, which she kept in the greatest order. -- As she was
going, she most unfortunately met with the perjured knight, who deceived her
out of her virtue, and with whom she had lived a considerable time, in
expectation of his fulfilling the promise he made her, when she put him in
possession of her maiden-treasure; who being glutted with his sacrilegious
theft, most basely and ungratefully left her destitute. Fain would she have
shunned the fatal principal and origin of her past misfortunes, and hellish
motive of her late evil life, which she mortally abhorred, and zealously
renounced: But inexorable sat has decreed her ruin; she can no wise avoid him;
he was too near before she perceived him, and bad hold of her hand ere she
could shift out of his way. Being thus suddenly stopped by him, she would have
embraced the severest death, to avoid the vile seducer, by whom her innocence
was first betrayed. The irreconcilable antipathy she had conceived for the
mortal enemy of her newly retrieved virtue, being startled at his terrifying
appearance, set her whole faculty in an uproar, and scares away her senses, not
so much as a word left her to express her trouble.

The amorous knight, whose late love for the ^air Sally (whose regular living
had repaired those charms her former lewd life had very much damaged) was
revived, and grown more passionate than ever, flattering his hopes with the
thoughts, that her present disorder proceeded from joy and surprise, took the
opportunity of an empty hackney-coach which was going by, to bring her to his
lodgings: So having stopped it, he puts in the poor disperited woman,
altogether insensible of what was done, or designed; but having, with the
shaking of the coach recovered a little spirit, and finding herself so much in
his power, as aimed at her total ruin, she gave a loud shriek, which occasioned
the coach to be stopped by some people who were going by; but his protesting he
had no other design but to take her to a friend's house till she was entirely
recovered, representing also the danger of exposing herself by opposing his
kind intention, being then near a street where he and she had lived together a
considerable time, in some measure pacified her: So having put his head out of
the coach, he tells the people who stood by, that his wife who had been lately
overset, was afraid of the like accident, which made her scream; so bid the
coachman drive on; during which time he entertains her with all the marks of a
passionate lover, swearing over and over, he was her slave for ever, and that
now kind fortune once more brought them together, none but death should severe
him from the person he loved so dear; and that he would expire in those soft
arms which often gave him life.

These fond expressions, which she formerly had given credit to, are now
upbraidings and reproaches for her too easy credulity, and only increased her
hatred for the deluder; which, at that time, she thought proper to conceal:
Thus, restraining her passion, she assumes a seigned calmness, and mildly
returns him thanks for his love, which she cannot indulge, being married.
Married! said he, and I living! Was you not mine? I was, indeed, replied she,
blushing with anger and shame. But what was I! I tremble to think on it. Why,
said he, my love and heart's delight, and shall be, whilst breath keeps it in
motion. Oh! false man! said she, weeping most bitterly, repeat not those
deluding words, which betrayed my virtue. Come, said he, cease that flood which
overflows my soul with the bitterest of sorrows, and reprieve the most penitent
of men from the cruelest of deaths: My submissive observance of your
inclinations shall henceforth a^one for all past given displeasures. Mean you,
said she as you speak? By all that is sacred, I do, replied he. Then, said
Sally, joyful, set me down here, and I will forgive what is past. No, my dear,
this being a request I cannot in honor grant, I may, without breach of promise
refuse; I must see you quite re-established first.

By this time the coach was arrived to the directed place, which proved to be
an house where she had last lived with the knight; which being open, and the
landlady at the door, obliged her to go in without resistance; fearing it would
be of no use, but rather prejudicial to her design: So she quietly went in,
hoping she would have a better opportunity to get away, after she had made the
landlady understand that she was married. But the sordid wretch, hoping the
knight would lodge there again, who proved an extraordinary beneficial lodger
before, went out of the room, and left her to his pleasure.

Poor Sally, seeing herself at the point of being a second time undone, there
being no one to assist her within, nor hopes of any help from abroad, the room
she was in being back wards, next to large gardens, and distant from the house,
and therefore out of hearing, gives herself up to despair, seeking the
opportunity of laying hold of his sword, on which she was resolved to fall,
rather than yield to his adulterous desires. Thus, whilst the knight was
laboring to express the height of his love, by the most endearing terms, and
prevailing words, the most passionate, lover could invent, she of a sudden
snatched the sword from his side, and turned the point thereof toward her
breast, in order to execute her barbarous, though virtuous, resolution. What do
you mean? said he, laying hold of her arm. To get myself at liberty, said she,
which you basely refuse: So falls into a violent fit, which lasted some
minutes; which was no sooner over, but it was succeeded by another, and so on
for the space of three hours; at the end of which time she was so ^aint and
weak, that her life was despaired of, and so continued all day; which made the
knight repent that he had forced her to stay, so much against her will;
heartily wishing that he knew where she lived, that he might send her home;
which she not being well enough to tell, the landlady but the knight's order,
got the best room of the house fitted up for her; and the bed being warmed, she
was carefully laid in it, and a doctor sent for; who having felt her disordered
pulse, said her indisposition proceeded from passion and grief, and ordered
that she should be let blood, which would give her oppressed spirits a present
relief. The physician was no sooner gone, but the surgeon was sent for, to
perform the doctor's orders, which gave her immediate case, and in a little
time caused her to sleep, which lasted all the night.

This great and sudden amendment much rejoiced the most afflicted knight, who
made a vow not to leave her till she was restored to her wonted health; sitting
up by her all night.

The next morning, Sally, whose good night's rest had in a great measure
recovered both strength and reason, finding herself in a strange bed, and from
her husband, was again seized with surprise, which did much threaten a relapse.
Heavens said she, by what enchantment am I here! What fiends could ravish me
out of my dear spouse's arms? Then, seeing the knight stand by the bed side she
gives a loud shriek: Oh, vile ravisher! said she, is it then by another of your
hellish stratagems that I am again betrayed into your power? at which she fell
into a violent fit of crying. -- No, most virtuous woman, replied the knight,
falling (...) his knees, it is by accident, of which I own myself to be the
most miserable occasion; for which I ask both Heaven and your pardon. Then he
relates the whole matter, which the late illness her excessive grief and
passion brought upon her, and had made her forget.

That woeful relation did but add to her trouble, by heightening her grief. Oh!
said she, with a fresh shower of tears, how can I now look my dear husband in
the face, when my very justification turns to shame?

The knight, who was in as great a consternation as she could be in, takes her
hand, which lay motionless out of the bed, and bathing it with tears, begs her
to-forbear terrifying his most penitent soul, promising to rectify all past
wrongs: You remember, my life, said he, the vows I made when first you gave
yourself to me; I renew them now, and would fulfill them, but that would expose
you to the rigor of the law: Therefore I will only, for the present, settle
five hundred pounds a year upon you for your life, till, by your husband's
death, I am empowered to make you lawful mistress of all my estate. Pray
compose yourself, and sedately consider on it, and when it is come to a
conclusion, I Will attend for your answer: So withdrew for a while.

This generous offer, expressing the sincerity of his love, for whom she had
formerly more than a common esteem, in a great measure appeased her passion;
the offered atonement disarms her revenge; she now pleads for him she had
condemned, and blames herself for the crime she had charged him with. How could
I, said she, think my virtue safe in his hands, on whom love has such an
ascendant (which is itself guilty of as many faults as it covers?) if he went
away with my heart, it was but a breach of trust: Besides, his absence was no
flight, it being occasioned by business.

Having made these reconcilable reflections, and being at the point of
accepting his offer, conscience starts and opposes her resolution: Her husband
stands in the way, rigid ^n all those engaging qualifications which had won her
affection. This, coming into her mind, in a manner scares away her reason; she
cannot help loving both: Her love for the knight pleads seniority, and that for
her husband justice. The first is attended with interest, the last is prompted
by virtue. The debate is great, and both their arguments strong: Reason is
called to decide the matter, which, having (as it is her custom) sedately
weighed the cause, examined both accidents and incidents, at last seems
inclinable to favor the love for the knight; but justice who is always in the
right, will not resign it: Peace and content, the only motives worth contending
for, must be consulted. They, being also cautious of giving a rash verdict
examined on which side they were in most safety; and, finding themselves most
screened from upbraidings and reproaches (their mortal enemies) from the
knight, gave it of his side. So justice, who seldom gets its due, is forced to
drop the cause, and tacitly withdraws.

The knight's offer, being the softest choice for an easy and quiet life, which
she could not reasonably expect from her husband, who doubtless would, from the
late accident, conceive an ill opinion of her virtue, (which although at that
time blameless, she could not with modesty vindicate) having sent for the
knight, she speaks to him after this manner:

I have had so much reason to repent my being too credulous, by the many
vexations it has occasioned me now that should I, upon the bare repeating of
broken promises, expose myself to the same, you yourself could not but blame
me. Indeed, dear Sally, said the knight, interrupting her, I own you have
sufficient cause to question my sincerity; but I will this moment remove it: So
that moment sends for a lawyer, and makes the proposed settlement; then gives
orders that a mercer should be fetched for her, to take her choice of the most
modish silks, and then for a silk nightgown, for her to wear till her clothes
were made; as also for all manner of linen, shoes, and stockings. Then having
new riged her from top to toe, now, said he, my dear, you are entirely mine;
give me directions, that I may send your husband what he can challenge as his
own; so writes the following letter:

SIR,
Lest the absence of her, who unthinkingly gave herself to you for a vise
(though not at her own disposal, being mine before) should cause you any
farther trouble, these are to satisfy you that I have retaken possession of my
own; so send you back her clothes, as being all you can claim a right to.

I am yours, R. S.


Having sealed up the letter and bundled up the clothes, a porter was called,
to whom orders were give to carry the bundle and letter, to the most perplexed
and concerned Quarll, who spent the night in unspeakable torm^nt. A thousand
dismal accidents glared at his alarmed fancy, which created new racks for his
tortured soul. He tumbles on his bed like an unmasted ship tossed about by a
violent storm, cursing the tedious hours for creeping thus in the dark night;
taxing the sun with ^nkindness. Thus, like one bereft of his senses, and quite
void of reason, he snarles at the whole creation.

At length, the long wished for day having sent forth its dawn, to proclaim its
approach, he starts from off the bed whereon he lay as if upon thorns, and like
a madman runs about to inform himself of what he dreads, more than death, to
know. But having spent several hours in diligent inquiry after lately befallen
accidents, without hearing of any; jealousy creeps in, which in some measure
removes his former fears, but it no wise lessens his pains. Thus he returns
home as much racked as before.

Being arrived, he finds on his table a bundle, and a letter, which his
landlady told him were brought by a porter. His impatience to know the contents
of both were equal; but the bundle being more surprising to him, he
precipitately opens it first; which finding it to be every individual part of
the clothes his wife had on the day before, when she went out; with the
surprise, he lets it drop out of his hands, and like one thunderstruck,
remained speechless for several minutes. Then fetching a deep and heavy sigh,
attended with a shower of tears, he bitterly exclaims against himself for
questioning the faithfulness of that love, of which he not has such fatal
proofs.

Thus, concluding she had drowned herself, and that the letter would inform him
of the cause thereof; he takes it up, saying O! that thou had been a timely
forerunner of the fatal tidings thou art bearer of! Yet, for her dear sake that
wrote it, I Will peruse thee, though thy contents be but racks for me and the most
cruel tortures that ever were or can (...) invented. But great was his
surprise, when he found it to come from a man; and inexpressible his (...) at
the contents; his senses are all in an (...) he blames his eyes for not seeing
right; his apprehension for mistaking the meaning; His blind love ^axes his
reason with rashness, the mistaken expressions being but illusions proceeding
from an oppression upon the intellects: So lays down the letter till his
disturbed mind was better settled. Yet he cannot be easy he must, with some
other writing, try whether his eyes are still defective: On which, finding no
fault, he hastily takes up the letter again; but alas! it was the same as
before. My judgment, said he, has been as much wronged as my love. So after a
few considerations, calling to mind, that as an accident had procured her to
him, he ought, without reluctance, to surrender her again; having made a
resolution never to venture any more on that uncertain state, which commonly
promises happiness, but often brings sorrow; He shifts his lodging, and goes to
live where he was unknown, she batter to pass for a bachelor; in which free
station he enjoyed peace undisturbed, and pleasures uncontrolled, for the space
of twelve months: But cross fate still pursues him; he must again be fettered,
and bear yet heavier chains than before. A second male is allotted him, who,
though very chaste, dooms him wretched, being short of other qualifications
necessary in a wise to make a man happy.

This woman had been bred up from her infancy under the care of a lady, whose
two daughters Quarll taught to sing, and had lived with her in station of a
chamber maid, ever since she was big enough to officiate in that place; during
which time, having behaved herself to her mistress's content, she gained her
affection; so that this good lady, being desirous to advance her maid, whose
age fitted her for marriage, the chief settlement for a woman, she cast her
eyes upon her daughter's singing master, who she thought would make her a good
husband, having observed him ever since he came to her house, to carry and
behave himself very decently. Thus having declared her mind to her, who had
already a great inclination that way, she readily submitted to her lady's will,
who promised to bring it about.

The good lady, having conceived the principal means to bring her design about,
took the opportunity of Quarlls next coming, to propose it to him; promising to
make her worth three hundred pounds, which was the only motive that could
engage him to break the resolution he had made. They young woman being also
very agreeable in her person, and extraordinary obliging to him, he readily
accepted the offer.

The old lady, having so far prevailed upon him, is resolved to push on till
quite concluded; so has them married in less than a week, and gave them
lodgings in her house, where they continued but one month. The new married
wife, thinking herself, in some measure under confinement whilst in the good
lady's house, to whom duty and gratitude obliged her to be more than
indifferently observing, being somewhat ambitious of living great, persuades
her husband to take a house and furnish it; which being done according to her
desire, they went away from the kind old lady to live by themselves, without
considering the expense of housekeeping, which they both, till then, had been
strangers to, but, in a little time, became too well acquainted with.

The three hundred pounds being gone in furnishing the house and paying two
years rent, and as many years wages to a couple of maids, one whereof she kept
in the station she herself had but lately overcome; Quarll was obliged to
reduce his charges, and level his expenses to his income; so discharges the
superfluous servant, whose business was only to indulge her indolence and
increase her pride.

That sudden lessening of her attendants checked her ambitious disposition, in
such a manner that it threw her into the (...); which was like to have cost him
more money in doctors than the servant's wages which he endeavored to (...).

Being taken very ill, and knowing not what to complain of, a doctor was
granted, at her importunity, rather than her need; who being come, and finding
her indisposition he in her temper, more than a defect of nature, ordered her
medicines to make them both in the same condition.

Her strength decaying, and the apothecary's bill increasing, which are the
usual effects of imaginary illness, made her husband apprehensive, that
considerable charges might accrue from her fanciful and imaginary distemper,
which he would not indulge; and feared to check too suddenly, lest it might
produce some other ill effect: So, in compliance to her natural pride, he
proposes her going into the country, as being a proper expedient (...) save his
money, and to be rid of a grunting companion, at least during the summer.

This proposal, suiting her ambition to imitate quality (who, for the
generality, go out of town about that time of the year,) was soon accepted of:
and that opportunity of being freed from one of the greatest plagues which can
be^al a man, by him as soon approved.

Quarll, having got her in the mind, was no wise dilatory to get it performed;
but made diligent inquiry about the most convenient place in the country, for
remoteness and cheapness; which being informed of, he forthwith takes horse,
and having found a good old countryman, with his wise and daughter, in
Yorkshire, whose diligent care, and frugal living, whilst young and strong, had
been rewarded with a moderate competence, to keep him from toiling when grown
old; who, having a pleasant and commodious habitation, distant from meddling
and inspecting neighbors, and room to spare, were very glad to take in a
gentlewoman to board, being some company for them in their remote living, and
therefore stood upon no rate: which suiting Quarll's circumstances and wished,
he began to consult on means to keep his wife there for a constancy: And as he
well knew she never would consent, nor he be able to force her to it by
violence, he applies to stratagems. Thus, having given her the best character
he could to the old people for good humor, he tells them, that indeed she had
one failing, but that was no ways troublesome provided one gave her her way:
She is very vapourish, and looks for great attendance. O dear! that is quality
distemper. Well, if that be all, replied the old folks, she shall not want for
any one thing. More, said he, I must caution you of, which is this: She will
soon be tired of her lodging, and will be for returning to London; so will seek
all opportunities to steal away, if she finds herself opposed in her desires:
Therefore it is best not to contradict her directly, but be sure watch her
narrowly, left she gives you slip. Never f^ar, replied the good people, we'll
take care of that: She never shall go one step alone. She is not apt to lay
violent hands upon herself, and do herself a mischief? No, no, replied he,
there is no danger of that; you may trust her alone within doors at any time,
but never abroad. One thing more I must give you notice of; that is, when she
finds she cannot get away, she will be for sending letters: I charge you, let her
have no paper, only at first; to write me once or twice, or so; and that you will
guess, when proper, by her railing, which will be a token of her being
discomposed: And, as for her diet, she is something dainty; but I see you have
plenty of poultry, which she loves very well. O dear, Sir, answered the old
woman, she shall have fish, flesh, and fowl, when she pleases. We have a fine
pond in the ground, well stocked with fish; and cocks and hens enough you see,
about the yard; and for butcher's meat; it is but two or three hours ride to
the next town.

So Quarll having agreed, and paid one quarter, before hand, which he promised
to do whilst she boarded there, he returns to London, in order to fetch his
wife; who having projected a greatness of living in the country, which she was
disappointed of in town, immediately inquired into the appearance of the house,
the handsomeness of the lodgings, and the gentility of the neighbors: To which
questions Quarll took care to answer suitable to her inclination. So, having
concluded to go the next day, they went out to make pro^^sion of such things as
cannot well be had in the country; as Nantz brandy, rata^^a, usquebaugh,
coffee, chocolate, and such things as were necessary for genteel company.

Being provided with every thing, they set out the next day; but as neither
lodgings, house, or neighborhood, answered her ambition, nor his
commendations, he contrived to arrive in the night, that she might not find the
deceit; and as the good people of the house, according to direction, showed her
abundance of respect, giving her the title of lady, and a good supper being
prepared; she inquired no farther into the matter. The next morning Quarll,
having represented to his spouse, it would be of prejudice to him if he staid
any longer from his scholars, having already lost six days, took his leave of
her, and left her in bed, it not being her usual time to rise: So having
promised to be with her in a short time, to see how she liked her lodgings, he
returned to London, having first renewed his charge to the good people of the
house of giving her her humor; and, above all, not to let her go out alone,
nor consent to her coming up to London; which, in a little time, he questioned
none but she would be very desirous of.

Quarll being gone, the old people, according to their charge, were
extraordinary diligent and careful in pleasing their new lodger; who finding
her ambition gratified by their observance, kept in that day: but the next
morning, having a fancy to walk out, the young woman of the house took her to
see the ground and cattle which belonged to them, as being the principal things
she could show her; there being neither house nor habitation, but their own
little cottage, within sight. She, who thought her lodgings to be in a handsome
and creditable house, near a genteel neighborhood, with whom she might
converse; finding the reverse of her expectations, could not conceal her
passion at the disappointment; but falls a railing against her husband in such
a rage as frightened the poor young woman; who doubting she was going into one
of her fits, ran home to fetch her father and mother; who being come, were as
much frightened as their daughter, at her furious countenance, the blood being
ready to start out of her face, and her eyes out of her head. Thus, fearing she
would grow unruly, each of them took hold of one of her arms and so in a manner
dragged her home; where, being come, they would have laid her upon the bed: But
she, who took this act of their caution for an effect of their careful
attendance, told them that indeed she could not find fault with them; and that
their habitation might suit their birth; but really it did not hers, which her
husband very well knew; and therefore she never would forgive him for bringing
her thither, and that he should soon know: So desired them to give her paper
and ink, if the house could afford such a thing.

The good people, who had been cautioned to give her her humor in that at the
beginning, having none at home, sent the boy that attended their sheep on
horseback to the next town for them; then leaving her to compose herself, they
retired to bewail among themselves her misfortune, which they perceived to be
the effect of pride; reflecting upon the happiness of their own condition, and
the pleasure of a contented life.

The lines marked with (") are set down word for word with his memoirs, for
these reasons, 1. I thought it a pity to alter any thing from his notions of
the pleasures of a country life. 2. And the rather, because it gives us very
lively ideas of the perfect happiness be enjoys in (...) solitude.
Now, said they, she has been brought up in a city, where excess of pleasure
and luxury are made the only means to arrive at content; but alas! how widely
do they miss their aim? Their life is a continued series of cares; their
emulation and vanity in fashions, entertainments, and such like, together with
their inseparable companion, envy, only contribute to make an unhappy life
still more miserable.

Here this gentlewoman wants for no manner of necessaries to make life
comfortable, but has rather a superabundancy. Could she reject that horbid pain
causing quality of pride, and learn a little humility, it is that brings
content, and sweetens all the misfortunes of this life. How preferable is our
station to hers? How solid is the pleasure we enjoy in this solitary
habitation, compared to the trifling joys the great ones possess in the most
populous cities! O happy fields, and silent groves! where nothing but eternal
rounds of pleasure center! Here no debaucheries, riotings, fashions, and
luxurious entertainments; no envy of others good fortune; no drunkenness,
swearing, and blaspheming the mercies of the Almighty God, ever take place, as
in flourishing cities; but Providence gives us all things with a bountiful
hand: In short, we have all we desire, and more than we justly deserve. Here
the beauteous birds, joyfully hopping from bough to bough, stretching their
tuneful throats and warble out melodious anthems to their great Creator's
praise; whilst flowery hills in harmonious echoes, repeat the same to the
fruitful neighboring vales. Here Is nothing to be seen or heard but universal
acclamations of praise to the great God of all things. This is the real solid
pleasure; this is that makes us perfectly happy. For how much more eligible is
the company of irrational animals, or even inanimate things, than the society
of men, who have divested themselves of all things but shape, whereby to
distinguish them from the most deformed brutes, or indeed from more horrible
devils? This gentlewoman has put us in mind of our own happiness, of which,
before her coming, we were almost ignorant; but now we may see, that happiness
consists not in riches, nor content in gaudy apparel. -- But why do we tarry
here? It is not proper to leave the gentle woman so long alone, left, in one of
her fits, she should do herself a mischief: Therefore let one of us go to her.
So the good woman of the house went to her, and finding her in tears, used all
possible endeavors to divert her melancholy, but all to no purpose; for still
she was interrupted by exclamations against that villain! that rogue! her
husband. The good woman, finding that words could not prevail, thought a glass
of ratifia might do better; so desired her to comfort herself, and take a glass
of her cordial; to which she soon consented, and after that four or five more,
which had the desired effect, for her melancholy was by this time turned into
most violent fits of spleen, and presently into drowsiness. The landlady,
perceiving her condition, desired her to lie down, and refresh herself by
taking a little sleep: So, laying her down upon her bed, and watching her to
sleep, retired.

After she had slept an hour or two, she awakes, in a very splenetic humor,
and calls to know the reason, why pen, ink, and paper were refused her. Indeed,
said the old woman, we did not know that your ladyship was awake; and we did
not care to disturb you; but I Will bring it to you presently: So went and
brought it. Which she no sooner received, but she began to write the following
letter:

Most barbarous of men,
WAS you afraid that my indisposition (for which you most deceitfully did
persuade me to leave London) would not kill me quick enough itself, that you
have decoyed me to an oven the dullness whereof is sufficient to make any
well-bred do^ pine itself to death; here no^ being a rational creature to talk
to, but the insipid folks of the hut; who being-script of their clumsy human
shape, will be as complete brutes as their oxen and cows. Pray see that you
forthwith fetch me hence, or expect to incur all the resentment an injured wife
can show, as soon as arrived to London, where I shall surely come in a few
days, though, I was to travel all the way barefoot.

Yours, etc. MARY QUARLL.


This letter being wrote, the good people of the house were in a great
consternation, whether they ought to send it, or not; but, after some
consultation about the matter they concluded it should not go, left her husband
should take it amiss.

Quarll who expected some such letter from his haughty dame, as soon as she had
discovered the cheat had with a great deal of judgment, prepared the following
answer.

My Dear,
IF your pride and vanity do outrun your reason, it is no argument my
compliance to them should hasten my ruin: And if you consult your
circumstances, as I do my ability, you will not discommend

Your careful husband, PHILIP QUARLL


And with that, one to her landlord and landlady, whom he thanked for their
care of sending the letter; but desired they would not trouble themselves with
sending any more, nor give her opportunity of ^riting, seeing it did but
aggravate her distemper and, above all things, to have a particular care she
should not give them the slip, and he would take care to gratify them for their
trouble.

This obliging (...), together with a present of a pair of handsome green
stockings, and lemon color gloves to the daughter, did so win the old folks
affection, that they were extremely punctual in observing his orders: But that
to his wife, had a quite different success; for instead of putting her into
consideration, it set her in such a violent rage, as would scarce permit her to
read it throughout: So tearing it to pieces, she storms cut. Consider my
circumstances! vile wretch! let him behold my portion, whether it deserves me
no better a thing than a hovel! Landlady, send immediately to the town, and get
me a pl^^^ in the stage against tomorrow; for I will go and tear that villain
to pieces.

The good woman was not a little displeased to hear her thus despise her house,
which was the best within a mile round; but as she imagined it was the effect
of her vapors, instead of vindicating her house, which though old and
low-built, was tolerable large, and very convenient, she seemed to acquiesce
with her, wishing it had been better for her lake: But as for sending to take a
place, it was then too late; for by the time a messenger could be got to town,
the office would be shut up; but that the next time she went out, she would
take care a place should be taken: So excused it for that week. In the mean
time she gave her her humor, being very respectful and observing; which, (...)
her pride, made her something more easy and in some measure diverted her ^aving
fits; for she fully depended upon going the week following, but was again
disappointed by one mishap or other, and so from time to time; till at last she
began to doubt of their giving orders, meaning to keep her there: Thus resolved
to go herself, but not knowing the way, she desired somebody might be sent
along with her; which they were ready to grant, but never could be had, being
always out of the way, about some business or other.

This continuing for the space of a month, or more, and no news coming from
London, she began to think it was a contrivance of her husband's to be rid of
her with only paying for her board and lodging, which she understood he had
done beforehand, and agreed to do so during her stay, which, very probably,
might be for her life; but resolved to disappoint him, by privily stealing
away, and at a venture seek out the road to the next town, not questioning but
she should find somebody as she went that would direct her: But the old folks
having been warned of such an enterprise by her husband, were too vigilant to
give her an opportunity of attempting it, never leaving her by herself from the
time of her getting up to her going to bed again; which over attendance
convinced her of her imprisonment.

Then finding herself curbed in her ambition, disappointed in her pride, and
tricked out of her liberty, without hopes of being relieved; the letters she
sent to her friends being intercepted; she falls into a passion suitable to her
case and disposition; which, having vented upon the people of the house for
abetting and adhering to her perfidious husband in so traitorous a deed, her
spirits being exhausted so prodigiously with raving, that nothing but a cordial
dram could ever have brought them to their usual tone, and which she by long
experience knew, calls for her grand specific and after she had drank three or
four refreshing glasses, she became more easy, and retired to rest: When,
having slept a few hours, she awakes something better composed. Thus,
considering that all the resentment she was capable to show, could not mend her
condition; she therefore concluded to make the landlord and landlady her
friends that if she did not enjoy her liberty, as proposed, she might at least
enjoy a little more content in her confinement.

Thus she resolved and indeed kept her resolution a long time; laying a side
her haughty temper and curbing those violent passions she had so long
accustomed herself to, she now began to be much more familiar and
condescending, than what she had hitherto been, to the great joy and surprise
of the good people; who by this strange alteration, were in great hopes her
madness was wearing off; and upon that account were extremely industrious to
humor her in every point; using her with all the good manners they were
capable of: Which she easily perceiving, thought to make use of their credulity
to her advantage; for she was a woman of very quick penetration: And finding
how egregiously those ignorant people had been imposed upon, in relation to her
phrenzy, saw the only means to regain her liberty, was to pretend a recovery.
And, accordingly by a counterfeit change of temper, endeavored to persuade the
people into a good opinion of her; telling them, she could never requite their
extreme good services to her during her indisposition; and lamenting her own
unhappiness in being so troublesome and fatiguing to persons of so kind and
obliging behavior. They, in like manner, answered, that if their poor services
had contributed any thing to her ease or recovery, they were sufficiently made
amends for all their trouble.

Now the scene was entirely changed; the raving, proud, ill-natured gentleman
became the most pleasant, sociable, and best natured person they had ever met
with: And they, who just before conceived so great a dislike to her, were now
so delighted with her company and conversation, that she was less alone than
formerly, they always contriving some diversion or other to drive away her
melancholy, and to prevent a relapse; hoping to send the welcome news of her
perfect recovery to her husband: Frequently pleasing her with odd country
^ales, showing her all the pleasures their fields, gardens, and orchards could
afford, with many other little contrivances to pass the time away; while she
endeavored to divert them with the comical adventures of the Londoners. This
she endured almost a whole month, with all the seeming goodnature imaginable;
but finding herself in no way to procure her enlargement, and rather more
strictly guarded than formerly, resolved to obtain her liberty by stratagem,
which she designed in the following manner.

There was a servant in the house, whose name was Thomas, and a lively, brisk,
fresh colored young man, indeed a fellow of admirable sense, and good manners:
This spark was of a very amorous disposition, well versed in intrigues, and
extremely obliging in his temper and behavior; who, as soon as he saw Quarll's
wife, began to think of his former way of living. Now this young fellow was
born in London, of very mean parents, whose friends not being able to give him
a trade, he was obliged to enter himself a member of the ancient and honorable
society of (...). His first service was to a gentlewoman, where he learnt all
the necessary qualifications of his employ; but his mistress being a very
rebellious woman, going to church two or three times every day, where he was
obliged constantly to attend her, and so much gravity not suiting his mercurial
temper, soon obliged him to quit his post. But he being an arch wag, and fly
knave, soon advanced himself to be a footman to a young nobleman. Here he began
to show his genius; for his master, being a young gentleman very much delighted
with love adventures, frequently made use of him in those cases! and finding
him to be of a sharp, ready wit, very careful, and well skilled in taciturnity,
soon made him secret messenger in ordinary to all his in^^igues; in which
station he behaved himself admirably well, having all the accomplishments
necessary for so weighty a trust, viz. vigilance, dispatch and secrecy; and
these so well managed, that he seldom failed in his designs. This post of
honor he enjoyed for a long time, with great credit and reputation, and gained
so great a share in his master's affections, that he likewise made him first
minister of all his affairs.

Now Tom is arrived to the very summit of his fortune; regaling himself in all
kinds of pleasures, beloved and trusted by his master, honored and respected
by his fellow servants; and, in short, might be said to be perfectly happy. But
here that jilt, which so long flattered him with her kind embraces, at one
fatal blow, removes all the means whereby he ascended, and pushes him from the
lofty precipice to the deepest sink of poverty imaginable.

Tom's master being a lover of variety, his curiosity prompted him to see the
diversion of a country wake, in order to start-some fresh game; and to that
purpose, disguises himself like a plain country gentleman, and equipped his man
Tom in the same garb, on purpose to make him his companion in his adventure.
This place, where he wake was kept, was about ten miles from the nobleman's
seat; so each mounted his horse, and away they rode: When, being arrived at the
town, nigh which they were to hunt their game, they both alight, and put up
their horses at an inn; and having pulled off their boots, out they walk
toward the place of rendezvous: As soon as they came within sight of the
place, they beheld the fields prettily bespotted with different companies, at
as many different diversions. In one place a parcel of wrestlers, eagerly
contending, with broken shins, for a pair of gloves; in another, a company of
cudgel-players, with battered ribs, fighting for a laced hat; some at one game,
and some at another: But Tom and his master, who cared for neither broken shins
nor bloody brows, resolved to seek out softer combatants.

After they had walked up and down the field, seeing the several diversions;
Well, Tom, says the young nobleman, where is our diversion? Where are all our
girls got to? O says Tom, we shall be in with 'em presently. Hark! I hear the
noise of catgut; and I warrant we find them there. So, following their ears,
instead of noses, they came to a most spacious dome, vulgarly called a barn;
which they no sooner entered, but Tom says to his master, Here, Sir, here is
variety for you; here is nymphs of all sorts and sizes; and, faith, of all
complexions; they are all clean and neat; all fit for the game: Come, Sir, pick
and choose. Which pretty smiling rogue must be your nymph? Come, let us see what
yo'ull do; for I long to be at it. Do you long to see what I ll do? says the
nobleman; why, I intend to work miracles; I shall make my nymph a goddess,
before I leave her. Well, then, replied Tom, I suppose I may take the
^^iviledge to make my girl a nymph, at least.

While they were thus talking, they stood like two hawks hovering over their
prey, not knowing on which to six their fatal talons, and the rustics starting
at 'em with open mouth, and distended nostrils, not knowing what to thin of
'em. At length Mr. Scrape, by turning his ^^^lodious battered fiddle, summons
all the girls to readiness, each preparing her feet for the sport; while every
Hob began to seize a partner, and Tom and his master (in the mean time, you may
be sure) were not idle: For, offering their service to a couple of pretty
cherrycheeked rogues, as Tom called them, the innocent girls very gladly
accepted their offers, little dreaming of their wicked intentions; but the
mischief was the nobleman had got the girl which Tom had the most inclination
to; which caused such a secret envy in his breast, that became the fatal cause
of his unfortunate disgrace.

Now the dance was begun with great fury on both sides; the girls ramping and
tearing, and the fellows pulling, and hauling, and shoving, and kissing, and
tumbling like so many mad devils; while Tom and his master, being strangers to
such kind of diversion, stood like two images, and the country fellows mocking
them; which Tom observing, and seeing his partner very dull, thought they
should never out do him in caterwauling: Therefore, shrugging up his shoulders,
and rubbing his eyes a little bit, he began to be as brisk as the rest. The
nobleman, observing his man Tom's alteration, thought proper to follow his
example; so, pushing down two or three girls, fell upon them, and kissed them
till they were almost stifled; then, hoisting them up, extends his mouth to a
full yawn, and laughs as loud, and with as good a grace, as any of them; while
Tom, to show his activity, jumps about a yard high, always taking care to light
upon somebody's toes; which generally put the whole company into a loud fit of
laughter; except the person hurt; who, in compliance to the rest, was obliged
to put her mouth in a grinning posture.

Thus they became the most facetious companions imaginable (every one praising
the two gentlemen's good humor and activity) and, in short, became the wonder
of the whole company. But Tom and his master, having tired themselves and their
partners sufficiently, began to think of retiring, in order to refresh their
wearied limbs: and, mentioning the same to their nymphs, the poor girls, very
willingly accompanied them. Now, they thought themselves secure of their
intended sport, and conducted them, for that purpose, to the inn where they had
put up their horses.

As soon as they were set down, they ordered wine to be brought, and a supper
got ready, in order to detain and intoxicate the girls, if possible; and
therefore they plied them very close with liquor: Now Tom's partner, being a
very brisk, lively girl, never refused her glass; but the nobleman's was of a
very mild, easy dep^rtment, and would drink but little: He, seeing her temper,
began to be very amorous, on purpose to try what they would do; but she, in so
sweet and easy a manner checked his rudeness, that it raised in Tom a most
violent passion for his master's partner. At length, supper was brought to
table, which was no sooner over, but the night began to appear: The two girls
perceiving the time, desired leave to go home, which the nobleman absolutely
refused; but Tom, thinking to make sure of his game upon the road, consented to
go with his partner; which the other hearing, begged not to be left alone, but
that she might go likewise. The nobleman (thinking he had not brought her to
her desired pitch) as heartily desired her to stay, v^^wing that nobody should
wrong or hurt her; but when the other gentleman returned (meaning Tom) they
would both conduct her home: So, by mere dint of argument, prevailed upon her
to tarry till Tom's return.

Now Tom, as soon as he had got from the town, began to attack her fort, which
alter a little parley, surrendered at discretion; so Tom razed the walls to the
ground, entered the castle, and took possession of the city: All which being
transacted, he leaves her, promising to revisit her the next day, and bends his
hasty steps toward the inn, with a deal of impatience; muttering these words,
as he went: What a blockhead was I to let my master be too nimble for me! Ah!
fool that I was, to lose so delicious a morsel, and take possession of so easy
a fool! who as soon as asked, consented; when the other, with all the pretty
engaging airs, so modestly cheeks any thing that looks like rudeness. Well,
faith, since it is so, I Will (...) the best on to and try whether I cannot
chouse him of his partner: So said, so resolved, and indeed so done.

For, as soon as Tom came in, the girl claimed their promise; saying, the
gentleman was so rude, that she would stay no longer; desiring them either to
go home with her, or let her go by herself. But Tom desirous to renew the
sport, begged of her, with all the prevailing arguments he was capable of, to
tarry; telling her he was a little tired with the walk he had taken, and wanted
to refresh himself: So desired her to stay, while he only took a glass, and he
would go with her. The girl very unwillingly complied, and sat down again. The
nobleman, finding Tom had no mind to part with her, imagined he was bringing
about what he himself had so long endeavored in vain; and therefore, pulling
out his watch, he starts up in haste, and says he must needs go, for it was
past the time he promised to be at a certain place: So tells the girl he very
unwillingly left her; but he hoped this would not break their new acquaintance
for he would pay her a visit in a short time, desiring to be excused for this
time; and he believed he could prevail upon the other gentleman to conduct her
home. Tom, who understood his meaning, follows him to the door, and there
receives his charge, which was, that he should bring her to a house they both
knew about three miles off, as soon as possible: So took his leave, mounted his
horse, and went thither, impatiently waiting for his prey.

Now Tom was extremely pleased with his master's intentions, resolving to put
the bite upon the bitter; and, as soon as the nobleman departed, began to
attack the fortification with all the artillery wine and soft words could
supply him with: But the defendant, proof to battery of this kind, held out
nobly a long time, and moved strongly for a cessation of arms, desiring leave
to go home: But Tom, acquainted with the various turns of intrigues, resolved
not to lose his game, being well assured he should bring her to articles in a
little time; and began a fresh attack, which lasted so long, that she was
obliged to cry for quarters; but it being too late for going home, Tom
persuaded her to lie there; assuring her, that he would see her well provided
for; and so, in a short time, she blushingly consented.

Thus Tom, having gained his point, orders a bed to be got ready; and then
desired his mistress, who was, by this time, much overcome with wine and sleep,
to go to bed. The poor girl (still between doubt and fear) knew not what to
say, but, trembling, denies what her looks desired; and, after a great many
arguments on both sides, she resigns herself entirely to him. The sly knave,
joyful of his prey, conducts his mistress to bed; but, as they were going, the
old crafty innkeeper cries, in mere form, I hope, Sir, that is your wife, for I
would by no means have any thing dishonest in my house. Yes, yes (says our
rogue,) you may assure yourself it is my wife, or else I should not have
offered to go to bed with her; while the poor girl, hiding her face, ran up
stairs as fast as she could.

They had not been long above, when the nobleman, uneasy at their delay,
returns to the inn, and inquires after the couple he left. Why, Sir, said the
host, they are a-bed. A bed! says the nobleman; a-bed! Yes, answered he, it
being too late to go home they took up their lodgings here, What! are they
a-bed together? said the nobleman. Yes, says the innkeeper; I left them
together. The nobleman, hearing this, stood like one thunderstruck, his eyes
darting lightning, and his blood all in flame; but, bridling his passion; very
cooly inquired where they lodged, saying he had some business of moment to
impart to the gentleman, and he must that minute speak with him. The innkeeper,
unacquainted with his design, very complaisantly conducted him to their
apartment; and knocking at the door, told Tom the gentleman was returned and
wanted to speak with him. Tom not being yet undressed, knowing his master's
fiery temper, and the just resentment he was sure to meet with, opens the
window, and out he jumps, without saying a word; and, having bruised himself
with the fall, lay sometime upon the ground; till recovering himself a little,
he precipitately got over the garden-wall, into which he had dropped from the
window, and scours over the fields as fast as he could, without ever looking
back.

But having run himself out of breath, and thinking himself out of danger, down
he sits, reflecting upon his melancholy circumstances. O miserable wretch! says
he, what have I done? How dare I ever see my master, who always reposed his
trust in me? And I, like a perfidious villain, to deceive him! certain death
attends me, if I go home; and, if I tarry here, there is nothing but beggary or
starving; I have at once lost all credit and reputation, and see nothing but
ruin, unavoidable ruin. O woman, woman! cursed, bewitching woman! what an
infinite number of mischiefs are ye the source of! But why do I exclaim against
a woman so innocent, and so charming, when I, the traitorous deceiver, sought
nothing but her eternal misery? O just Heaven! it was you that saved her from
impending ruin, and deservedly threw all the fatal effects upon myself: well, I
will bear them patiently; load me with all the evils you can bring, till they
mount so high, you can lay no more. Raving and cursing in this manner, he tired
his spirits, and fell asleep.

Having slept sometime he awakes, wondering where he was: Did I dream, says he,
or is it real? No, it must certainly be true; I am the most wretched mortal
breathing; the very same ruin I intended the poor innocent girl, has justly
fallen upon myself; and what is become of her I know not, nor dare I to
inquire; but I hope, as Heaven has hitherto protected her, it will likewise
preserve her from the evil intents of my master. Reflecting upon himself in
this manner, he walked about till daylight, not knowing what to do, or whither
to go: He was a great way from London, destitute of friends or acquaintance,
little or no money in his pocket, and durst not see his master. Despairing in
this condition, he saw a company of haymakers going to work; it being
summertime; and resolves to make one of their number, if possible; hoping by
that means to keep himself from starving, and work his passage up to London.

With this resolution he attacks the haymakers, asking them from whence they
came, and whither they were going: which they answered very civilly, telling
him they came from London, and were going toward the north of England: So,
being balked in his expectation of coming to London, along with them, he knew
not what to do; but at last resolves to go along with them, hoping to meet
something in his way that might make his journey pleasant; so tells them his
resolution to make one amongst them: But they, seeing a man genteelly dressed
petitioning for a poor haymaker's place, took him to be only in jest, and told
him they should be glad of such a companion, if he spoke as he thought. He
protested to them the sincerity of his intention, telling them his misfortunes
drove him to such low circumstances. They then said they should be very glad to
serve him, and that their master would be in the field by and by, and he would
hire him, for he wanted hands: So he went with them, and tarried till the old
farmer came, who, finding a well-dressed young fellow wanting an employment of
that kind, asked him a great many questions, which Tom answered very
pertinently: The farmer, therefore taking it only as a frolic, was willing not
to balk him, and so hired him, saying, he might go to work that very day, if he
would: but Tom wanting a fork, told him, that as soon as he could get his tools
in readiness, he would come; so hires a man to go to the next town to buy him
one, with which, as soon as brought, he falls to work very pleasantly.

Tom went with them from place to place, conforming himself to their customs in
every point, being a very merry companion, and much beloved by his fellows: His
present life became much pleasanter than his former, never inquiring after his
master, or country girl, nor did he know what was become of them. At last, it
fell to his lot to be hired by the farmer he then worked for; who, seeing him a
tractable, brisk young fellow, asked him whether he would be his servant; for
he then wanted one. Tom, after a little hesitation, told him he should be glad
of such a master; so struck a bargain, and hired himself for a year.

Tom had not been there much above half a year, before Quarll's wife came down
thither, who being a genteel London Madam, reminded him of his former
intrigues, and raised in him an inclination for her; but being in so humble a
station, he dared not attack the haughty dame, till he might find a favorable
opportunity; and so took all occasions to oblige her, and was better respected
by her than any of the others; she often saying, that that fellow had a certain
je-ne-scai quoi in him which at once claimed love and respect. Tom,
understanding this, thought time would certainly bring about his purpose; which
not long after happened in this manner.

Tom, during her alteration of temper, had more liberty of conversing than
before; and often diverted her with entertaining stories; and one day being
alone with her, opened to her the whole series of his past fortunes and
misfortunes, which she heard with great attention and pleasure; for Tom had
never before discovered himself to any; but thinking to gain credit with this
gentlewoman, made her only privy to it. When Tom was gone, she began to reflect
on the fellow's dexterity; and, believing him well skilled in all kind of
adventures, thought he might be a fit instrument for her escape, and resolved
to advise with him about it: Accordingly the next day took an opportunity to
call him to her again, when she was alone, desiring him to divert her with some
of his merry tales, telling him she was then very melancholy. Madam, says Tom,
I am sorry I should find you melancholy; but I will do all I can to please you.
Ay, says she, if you knew the occasion of my melancholy, ^ou would pity me, as
well as be sorry; but you cannot be ignorant what a prisoner I am made here,
how con^^antly I am attended and have scarce any thing but brutes to speak to:
I can assure you that this usage is enough to make me as mad as the people take
me to be for I never was brought up in this manner, which my husband knows; it
is only a contrivance of his to keep me here a close prisoner, if possible; but
I will deceive him, for if a woman's invention can find any means to escape
this cursed place, he shall be sure to see me in London quickly, and that to
his great mortification.

The sly rogue heard her very quietly, and though it he might now have his desired
ends: So tell her she might be released that very night, if she pleased, and he
himself would accompany her to London; for he longed to be there again: She was
glad to hear him say so; and asked by what means he intended to convey her
thence. O Lord! says he, easy enough; I will tell you how; I will take a
ladder, and set it against your window, and so come into your room, and take
your clothes, and every thing you have a mind to send to London and carry them
to a particular acquaintance of mine: then I will come back and fetch you, and
conduct you to the next town, which is not above five or six miles off, and
stay there for the stage coach, and so both go to London together. The
gentlewoman, willing to get her liberty at any rate agreed to the proposal,
only desiring another day to look after all her things, and pack them up
conveniently, because she would not hurry herself, lest they should mistrust,
and stop her journey.

Tom consented to what she said, and wished for the approaching time; which
being come, and all things in readiness, he brings the ladder, and mounts up
toward the room; while she as readily delivers him, from the window, all her
baggage ready packed up; which Tom takes and carries away, and presently
returns to fetch the gentlewoman; who, overjoyed to think herself freed from
that tire some place, gets out of the window, and began to descend the ladder;
but being over eager, and not used to enterprises of that kind, her foot
slipped, and down she ^umbles, ladder and all; which Tom seeing, knew the
consequence, and ran away as fast as he could, leaving Mrs. Quarll to get up by
herself; for the ladder, in tumbling, broke the windows where the old farmer
lay, and made an horrid noise, so that it scared the old man out of his sleep,
who got up to see what was the matter; and perceiving the gentlewoman's window
open, and a fellow running cross the yard, cries out murder! thieves! thieves!
which alarmed the whole family; some getting pitchforks some pokers; some one
thing some another, in order to scare the thieves; but the old man, with his
fowling-piece in hand, like a noble commander, led the van, searching all his
house over for thieves, and to see what he had lost, carefully looking into
every hole and corner, not daring to advance too fast, for fear of a surprise;
and coming to Mrs. Quarll's room whose window he had seen open, calls to her
for a long time; but hearing no answer, fancied she was murdered, and therefore
breaks open the door, and searches the room; but there was no Mrs. Quarll to be
found; they sta^ed one at another not knowing what to think. However, when they
had examined all the house they boldly (...) into the yard to hunt the thieves
there: and looking about, they perceived something under the ladder, which
looked like women's clothes; so taking it up, they pulled from under it, a real
woman. something like Mrs. Quarll; and, looking more narrowly, perceived it to
be the very same individual person, almost dead with the fright, and bruises
she had received.

And now their greatest wonder was, how she came thither: The old man said, he
believed some thieves had gotten into the house, and to prevent her crying, had
stopped her mouth, and thrown her out of the window. But, says another
wiseacre, how came she to have her clothes on? I am sure she ought to have been
a bed. Now, adds he, I believe the devil tempted her to throw herself out at
the window; and that must certainly be he you saw run across the yard so
swiftly. Thus they disputed a long time, but at last agreed, that she ought to
be carried to bed again, and have care taken of her; and so carried her up
stairs; and then went to finish their search, while the good old woman and her
daughter undressed her, got her to bed, and sat up with her all that night.

After all was finished, the old man willing to know what quantity of men he
had lost, calls a general muster; and, finding Tom missing, wondered where he
was got to, asking if he lay at home that night: They told him no; but they
believed he was gone a sweethearting. A sweethearting! says the old fellow,
well, let him be there always; for he shall never come hither again: How do I
know but he has sent the thieves to rob me, or that he is one of them himself?
If he ever comes hither, I will turn him about his business as soon as I see
him. But Tom understood better things than to come thither again; for he knew
the adventure would be blown, and then he should certainly be discarded with
disgrace; so was resolved to make the best of what he had got; went away, and
never was heard of again.

Mrs. Quarll, as soon as come to her speech, confesses the whole intrigue, and
lays the blame upon her husband; saying, he sent her thither to be murdered;
and now he had his desired end, only that she was the unhappy cause of her own
death. The old man, as soon as he knew the matter perfectly, writes to her
husband a full account of the whole story; telling him he was in a fair way to
lose his wife; and that, if it should so happen, he had no occasion to send for
his wife's clothes for she had before lost them; and tells him by what means
Quarll, as soon as he had the letter, was very much troubled at his wife's
folly; but resolved, if she recovered, she should tarry some time without
clothes, which he knew would be punishment enough to her pride: So writes back
to them, that they should take all possible care to restore her to her health,
and likewise to prevent any thing of that kind for the future; telling them,
that in a little time he would send her some clothes, and make them amends for
their trouble.

Mrs. Quarll, in about a month, began to be upon the mending hand; which her
husband being informed of, resolved to make her stay another month without
clothes, which he knew would be a ^reater punishment than the other month of
sickness. But here he was mistaken; for it was almost three months before she
perfectly recovered; who, finding before that time, her husband had sent her
some fine new clothes, was in a great measure, reconciled to him; and resolved,
during her stay here, to be much more easy in her mind than before.

The good people, whom she had often scared with outrageous passion, were very
glad to see her calm, and took that opportunity to represent to her the
happiness of her condition; being well attended, and as well provided (...) all
necessaries, free from that subjection she might be under, if with her husband,
whose cross and ill humors she would be obliged to bear with; besides twenty
other vexations incumbent to a married life, from which she was s^r^ened by his
being from her.

The old woman's wise remonstrances, being backed with the sudden arrival of a
fresh supply of several sorts of choice drams, as also the ensuing quarter's
money for her board, and the season rendering the country extremely agreeable,
made her patiently submit to continue there till the fall of the leaf; against
which time she would contrive some way or other to go, if her husband did not
come for her.

But Quarll, who ever since her being in the country, had enjoyed the
uncontrouled pleasures of a single life, having no mind to interrupt them by
her presence, took care to secure her there; sending her guardians now and then
fresh charge to be watchful over her, and a small present to encourage them to
it.

But surly fate, who ever was averse to his happiness, suggests a new
interruption thereto. Quarll having given over housekeeping, happened to come
and live at a mantua-maker's of vast business, and reputed worth money. She was
a single woman, pretty handsome, but intolerable proud and conceited, which was
the cause of her being still unmarried, thinking herself too good for any
tradesman, or any thing below a gentleman; which seeing no prospect to get,
being courted by none, she became a general man hater: But Quarll, who was a
handsome young man, and of a genteel employ, though not a gentleman, coming to
lodge at her house, reconciled her to the sex in a little time, and made her
change her resolution never to marry, heartily wishing he would court her:
Therefore, by her more than common attendance for a lodger, did all she could
to give him invitation, but all to little success; for Quarll, who had been
already twice incumbered in the troublesome state of matrimony, and but lately
rid of his last plague, had no mind to venture any more; so did not answer her
expectation; but her love increasing daily, without being taken notice of, she
was obliged to declare it to an old gentlewoman, who lodged in the next room to
him; who having doubtless been in the same condition, was, by experience,
capable to give her advice.

The old gentlewoman (as it is peculiar to them, when past the sport
themselves, to love to promote it in others) took upon her the management of
that affair; and from that time watched the opportunity of speaking to him,
which was only in the morning before he went out, or at night when he came
home, being abroad all the day beside: So, having resolved upon it, the next
morning she leaves her own door open, which was opposite to his, waiting his
coming out, to invite him to a dish of chocolate, which she had ready for that
purpose.

Having, according to her desire, got him into her chamber, as he was drinking
his dish, she feigns a fit of laughing. You wonder, said she, what it is I thus
laugh at; but, I dare say, you will laugh as well as I, when you know: Why, our
man-hater is in love at last; in love up to her ears, as sure as you are alive.
Our man-hater, madam! says he; who is that? Don't you know? replied she; why,
our landlady, who has refused so many fine offers: Lord, how happily might that
woman have married! she might have ^ode in her coach years ago; but no man was
good enough for madam: This had such a fault, and that another: In short, none
could please her: It Is true, indeed, she is very deserving: The worst part of
her is in the sight, and that you know is not disagreeable; but did you see
what a fine body she has, you would be ready to run mad for her: Surely she has
the finest leg and foot that ever woman went on; and, for a skin, she may
challenge the whole sex: In short, she is fit for a king's embraces. She has
several good properties besides; and one above all, which perhaps you will say is
the principal; she has money, and a great deal: Well, that will soon be
disposed of, I dare say; I wish I knew on whom: Sure it must be some angel; for
I have heard her find fault with very handsome men that have addressed her.
Pray did you ever observe any man come here: He must be the person; for all her
concerns are with women. Indeed, replied Quarll, I never take notice who comes:
Besides, I am seldom at home; so have not an opportunity to make observations.
But I have, said she; and made my business to mind; yet never saw any man in
this house since I came, but you: Suppose you should be he at last? O madam,
there is no danger, answered Quarll; she, who has refused so many rich matches,
will hardly set her mind on a poor singing-master. How do you know that?
replied the old lady: Love comes by fancy, and marriage by fate, and it may be
yours to have her: So I would have you cultivate her love, which I could almost
swear you possess; you will find it worth your while: Here is an agreeable
woman in an extraordinary good business, a house well furnished, and I Will
warrant money bags, well filled: Now, if you are disposed to make your fortune,
here is a fair opportunity. Quarll was sadly puzzled what answer to make. His
present circumstances prompts him to soothe what his condition obliges him to
deny: His business slackens, and his charges no wise lessen: His income is
dubious, and expenses certain: the most prevailing arguments to embrace the
offer: But then a strong obstacle starts up; a wife: But she is out of the way,
and as good as dead, whilst her living is paid for, which this proposed
marriage will enable him to do, though other business failed. That objection
being removed, his answer was, he feared that happiness would be above his
aspiring to; which being according to the mediatress's wish, she promised him
her assistance. So he took his leave, and went about his daily affairs, leaving
the management of that to her; who immediately went to inform the amorous
landlady of her success.

Quarll being returned at night, the old lady pursuant to the business she had
taken in hand, follows him to his chamber, with the joyful news, that she had,
by her landlady's blushing, discovered what her modesty would have concealed;
that he was the man beloved; and, therefore, she would not have him delay his
being made happy: To which he answered, as she had been the first cause of his
happiness, he left the accomplishment thereof to her direction. Well, then,
said she, if I have the ordering of it, it shall be done next Sunday, as being,
of all the week the most blessed day. And so bid him good night.

The old gentlewoman, being made sole directress of that affair, was very
diligent in the accomplishment thereof; so had them married on the day she had
proposed. The business was done privately, but the joy it produced could not be
concealed: Every body read bride in the new married wife's face; so that the
greetings daily filled the house; which, for a month, was a residence for
mirth; and, during the space of a year, the seat of happiness; peace kept the
door, and plenty attended them. But churlish fate, which ever persecuted him,
would not permit that happy state to continue; and, the more to aggravate his
loss, makes love, the chief author of his bliss, now the principal instrument
of his sorrow; jealousy, the greatest plague that can befall a married life,
infects his wife. She is upon thorns whilst he is absent, and uneasy when
present, with the fears of what he had done abroad: A discontented mind often
urges the utterance of vexatious words, and breeds jarrings, enemies to peace;
which, being often disturbed, leaves her abode, which is immediately taken up
by strife, and is commonly attended with ruin, the decreed influence of poor
Quarll's surly fate. Business falling off from both their hands, makes them
negligent of the little they have. The husband diverts his cares abroad, whilst
the wife drinks away her sorrow at home. Thus money growing scant, credit must
be pledged; which, being not redeemed, exposes the owner to disgrace, which is
commonly the poor man's lot.

The mercer and silkman, with whom his wife dealt before she was married,
having received money but once since her marriage, and seeing her discontent,
imagined her husband (who appeared something too airy for one of her sedate
years) was the occasion thereof, by his extravagant spending what she, with
much care and frugality, had saved, arrested him, without giving him notice;
lest, being warned, he should get away what she might have left, and then
abscond.

Quarll, who till then had kept secret his being in the guards, where he
continued, to screen him from those debts his eloped wife might contract, is
now obliged to let it be known, to keep himself out of goal.

His proud wife, who thought men of the best and genteelest trades inferior to
her merits, seeing herself at last married to one, whose station was looked
upon to be as odious as that of a common bailiff, sell into such a passion that
it cast her into a violent fit; from which being recovered, she flies out of
the house in a great fury, swearing by all that was good, she would no more
live with a foot soldier; so left him in a sad confusion: Yet he staid in the
house, hoping she would, when cooler, consider of it, and be reconciled.

But great was his surprise, when next morning, instead of his wife's coming
according to expectation, a judgment is served upon the goods of the house, at
the suit of an upholsterer; so the house being entirely unfurnished, he was
obliged to seek new lodgings, where he continued a full quarter without hearing
of his wife.

Quarll, hoping his wife had left him in good earnest, indulges himself with
the thoughts of being a third time delivered from the greatest encumbrance that
can involve a man; wondering how he could so often fall into the same snare:
Three wives, said he, in three years! and every one equal plagues, though of a
different nature! The first a whore, of whom I was most luckily rid by
accident: The second a proud, lazy, indolent creature; she by a stratagem is
secured: And the third a conceited jealous wretch; to her ostentation I owe my
deliverance. Well, now, I am once more free, I Will take care how I hamper myself
again: So makes a strong resolution, let what would happen, to live single from
that time ever after.

But his resolution, though ever so strong, cannot avert fate's irrevocable
decree: A fourth wife is allotted him, which will bring upon him more vexation
and trouble, than he has yet gone through; his peace will not only be broken,
and his ease disturbed, but his life must be in jeopardy.

One evening that he was diverting his colonel, and the rest of his club, with
singing at the tavern, as he usually did once a week, the landlady who was then
in company, much praised his voice and skill: The gentlemen took that
opportunity to propose a march between Quarll, who went for a bachelor, and
her, being a widow: All the company liked the proposal, and earnestly urged on
the match.

Quarll, being a brisk, handsome, genteel young man, which qualifications have
a vast ascendancy upon the sex, especially on widows, made a considerable
impression upon the hostess; who, being already above forty, was willing to
intermix her supernumerary years with those of an husband of a lesser age: So,
turning to jest what she heartily wished to be in earnest* answers, in a joking
manner, that Mr. Quarll doubtless had* before that time, made a better choice;
so would hardly agree to their proposal. A better choice! said the gentleman, I
deny that: Here^^ a handsome jolly woman, a noble house well accustomed, a
cellar well stocked with good wine, and bags, doubtless well filled with money:
I say he cannot make a better choice, nor shall he make any other; so here is to
its good success: Thus he drinks to her, who, in a joking way, puts it about.
The glass having been round, Now, Mr. Quarll, said the Colonel, let us have a
love song to conclude the matter.

Quarll, who thought the gentleman had been but in jest, in his heart wished it
could turn to earnest. The notion of a good establishment, and prospect of a
considerable advantage, having blanched over those great obstacles his present
low circumstances, and elevated condition, made him overlook, he did all he
could to forward what had been proposed: So having, according to request, given
the landlady a love-song, he goes and salutes her with an hearty kiss; who,
smiling, asked him, whether he thought she was to be purchased with a song? To
which he replied, the song was only to express the thoughts of his heart, which
he offered to purchase her love. Indeed, said she, in a pleasant manner, I do
not know what your thoughts may be, but I never heard more agreeable
expressions. Well then, widow, said these gentlemen, you cannot, in gratitude
and good manners, but answer them kindly. Indeed gentlemen, said she, I can say
no more, but they are mighty pretty words, and charmingly sung. Well then,
replied the colonel, I Will say the rest for you. The lover having expressed his
passion in such soft terms, and engaging a way, you cannot, without doing
violence to your good nature, deny him what he requests in so melting a manner,
nor shall I say the word which was confirmed by all the company. To which she
making no answer, it was taken for granted. So the marriage being concluded on,
the next day was fixed upon for the performance thereof; being resolved not to
adjourn till it was over, they bespoke a splended supper, and so spent the
night merrily.

The wedding was kept all the week, during which time, every gentleman was
profuse in his expenses, for an encouragement to the new-married couple, whose
trade increased daily.

Their prosperous beginning seemed to promise an happy life, living in love and
peace at home, and being in good repute and credit abroad; but the same fate,
which all along haunted poor Quarll, is still at his heels: His bliss was but a
blast. His eloped wife unfortunately happened to go by as he was going out: She
had him immediately in her eye, which as speedily conveyed him to her heart:
The addition which a charming new suit of clothes, he then had on, made to his
natural handsomeness, put out of her mind the cause of that disdain she had
conceived for him, and turns it into a more passionate love than ever: She
cannot live any longer from him she must have him with her at any rate, and
will not rest till she finds out his lodgings; from whence she resolves to wash
all sorrow away with her tears, and settle him again in her arms. So she
straight goes to the tavern she saw him come out of, supposing it might be a
house he constantly used, on purpose to enquire where he lodged.

The new wife, who was then in the bar, to whom she applied, perceiving in her
some sort of disorder, was very inquisitive to know her business; in which the
poor woman refusing to satisfy her, she told her that he lived there, and that
she was his wife; and therefore the fittest to know her concern. At these most
dreadful words, she falls, like one thunderstruck, on the ground, deprived of
all her senses; and, for a considerable time, lies as though bereft of life.

This dull scene turns the new wife's passion into commiseration; and she
pities that misfortune which in her mind she before condemned as a crime. This,
said she, is a true sign of love, which a harlot is not capable of: I cannot
blame her for loving him, but rather condole her misfortune. So, having ordered
fair water and hartshorn drops to be brought, gave her some in a glass of
water, which in a small time fetched her a little to life; who, recovering,
cried out, had I not been so bewitched as to go from him, he would not have
left me. These words in a moment turned the officious condoler into a
revengeful rival, who immediately imagined she had lately lived with him as a
mistress, and doubtless, would endeavor to do the same again: So, giving her
hand (which she kindly held before) a scornful toss from her, why, you vile
woman, said she, would you have him to live for ever in whoredom? You judge me
wrong, madam, replied the poor afflicted woman; I am his lawful wife: So,
produced her certificate (which she happened to have about her;) which caused
almost as much disorder in the beholder, as she herself was lately in.

Having recovered her speech, which the late surprise had obstructed, she asked
her, in a violent passion, why she had been so base as to give him the
opportunity to come, and cheat her, by her leaving him; for she was his wife
also? To which she answered, that she could not justify her going from him,
though indeed she had great provocation, he not proving the man she took him to
be. What! replied she in the bar, was he not man enough for you? I think you
are very hard to please: However, since the deceit made you leave him, why do
you disturb yourself about him? He has not deceived me; unless it be in having
a wife before: But as you left him of your own accord, he had no more to do
with you. No! replied she, in a passion; but he shall find, and so shall you,
that I have to do with him: So went away.

It being then about noon, his usual time to come home from market, she went
into a public house opposite to the tavern, there to wait his return, which was
a little after. As soon as she saw him, she gave him a call over.

The sudden and unexpected sight of the only obstacle to the happiness he then
enjoyed, was most terribly shocking to him: He wished he had met with death to
have missed her; but to no purpose; She had him in her eye, and was fully
resolved to have him in her arms ere she went; and as he did not come as quick
at her call as her impatience requires, she attempts to go over to him; but
Quarll, who knew her fi^ry temper, was afraid she would break out in a passion
in the street; which would have exposed him, and brought it to his new wife's
knowledge, being near home: So hastens over to the house, she was in to prevent
her coming; and, judging his beginning to upbraid her with her elopement would
in some measure, moderate her railing at him, he tells her, as he enters the
room, I hope, madam, you have, by this time, found a man more to your mind.
This was sufficient to provoke a milder temper to reproach him with his
adulterous marriage, of which she was too certain; hers is but a fault, but his
a crime: But as reproaches are not proper means to advance a reconciliation,
which was her intent, she bridles her passion, and forces her nature to
submission; so throws herself at his feet, and falls a weeping; owning she had
committed a fault, for which she heartily repented, and promised to atone by
her future behavior; calling heaven to witness her chastity during her most
unhappy separation.

Quarll, being of a compassionate temper, was soon made flexible by her tears;
So takes her up by the hand, who as soon fell into his arms, incapable of
speaking for weeping; but Quarll, who was in haste to be gone, being waited for
at home, it being about his time of dinner, complied with the poor afflicted
woman's crying and sobbing, whose chief request was, that he would only see her
home that time; which he presently granted, to be quit of her: So ordered a
coach to be called.

His new wife at home, being uneasy at his staying beyond his time, came to the
door to look whether she could see him come. At that most unlucky time he was
handing his other wife into the coach; which she unfortunately spying, ran
over, as swift as a hawk slies after his prey, and pulls him back by the lapper
of his coat, as he was stopping into the coach after her: The disorder this
second surprise put him in, obliged him to go again into the house he just came
out of, where she immediately followed him, raving and raising as much as the
provocation and her passion did allow, leaving in the coach his former wife;
who, by that second terrible surprise, was again struck speechless, and like
one bereft of sense.

The coachman, having waited some time, being impatient, calls in the house,
desiring the gentleman to make haste, or else to allow him for waiting; at
which the new wife comes out in a violent passion, and bids him be gone, for he
was not wanted. What shall I do with the gentlewoman in my coach? said he; you
had best take care of her, she is not well; or tell me where I shall carry her.
Carry her to the devil, an you will said she; and so went in. You may carry her
there, replied the surly coachman; you best know the way: So goes to the coach,
and shakes her till she came to herself: Then, taking her up in his arms, I am
bid to carry you to the devil, said he; but I believe you are able to go
yourself; so I Will set you down here, that you may take your own time. Having
set her down, he then drives away. There being a millener's shop just by, she
goes in, desiring leave to fit a while, till she was able to go. She had scarce
been there three minutes, but she sees her husband handing his new wife over,
very complaisantly; which so exasperated her, that she fully resolved upon
revenge; choosing he should be hanged, rather than her rival should enjoy him:
So wem directly, and took out a warrant, which she immediately served, and had
him before a justice of the peace, who committed him forthwith to Newgate.

The following sessions happening to be extraordinary great, by the vast number
of criminals, his trial and several more were put off till the next; so that he
was confined at the time he used to send the money for his wife's board in the
country: And, not daring to employ any acquaintance in that affair, left they
should inquire into the occasion of his sending that money; he desired one, who
often came to visit a prisoner, to do him that favor; which he readily
promised, but did not perform: So that the people in the country, who were used
to be paid a quarter before hand, were a quarter in arrear: Which, with the
boarder's pressing importunity to come up to London, made them at last resolve
upon it: where being arrived, they immediately inquired, after the unfortunate
Quarll whose imprisonment they soon heard of, as also of the cause thereof.

This did not a little exasperate the already sufficiently provoked
inquisitress; who, presently imagining, with good reason, that his confining
her in the country was merely for that intent, resolved to prosecute him
according to the utmost rigor of the law; wondering who that good person was
that had him apprehended; so went and consulted her friends, who advised her
not to let her husband know of her being in town till his trial came on; and
then she should know the prosecutor, and, at her own discretion, back the
prosecution.

The mean time, his first wife, who had lately been dismissed (the knight who
kept her being not long since married to a vast fortune) having heard of
Quarll's being in Newgate, went straight to visit him. Her grief and his
surprise at her coming, stopped, for sometime the utterance of both their
minds: At last Quarll, who had a just (...) to (...) her as the author of his
present misfortune, reproached her with her leaving him, which was the original
cause thereof. The innocent, yet guilty Sally, whose inclination, disposition,
and resolution, had been violated, related the dismal account of her fatal
ravishment; and pleaded her cause with such a prevailing eloquence, as new
kindled his former love, and made him (though the sufferer) give it on her side.

Being thoroughly reconciled, and having spent some hours in expressing both
their griefs, they at last parted, after a thousand cordial embraces; and as
she was enabled, by the settlement the knight had made upon her, she supplied
him with money and necessaries during his confinement in Newgate; and was with
him constantly every day, almost from morning till night; and, when he was
called upon his trial, she attended in the court, more concerned than if she
herself had been arraigned.

The sessions being commenced, he was first called to the bar: His indictment
being read, he desired to be heard by his council; which was granted. The
deponent having proved her marriage, required the prisoner at the bar should be
obliged to live with her, or allow her a sufficient maintenance, as being his
first wife; at which she whom he kept in the country starts up: That belongs to
me, said she; I am the first wife: So produces her certificate. A third wife
appearing, startles both the judges, and the prisoner, who thought her secure.

Sally, who till then had been silent, seeing the priority of marriage so much
pleaded for, thought it might be worth her while to claim it, being her right,
which she may chance to turn to the pris^ner's advantage; so addressing herself
to the bench, My lords, said she, I did not think to apply for justice; but,
seeing these women contending for that which belongs to neither of them, I
think myself obliged to claim my right: I am the first wife, and please your
lordships. How! a fourth wife, and indicted but for two! said the judges in a
great surprise. Why, my lords, replied an old surly judge upon the bench, if
truth be known, he has half a score; I see it in his looks: These smockfaced
young fellows are so admired by the women, that they have not power to refuse
any thing. Sally, who thought to do the prisoner service, in taking the
privilege of first wife into her own hands, finding the success of her good
intent quite reversed, heartily repented appearing, and would have withdrawn,
but that the judges told her she was now become the prosecutrix, and was
obliged to go on in the prosecution. This caused such a disorder in her, who
imagined she should be the unfortunate occasion of his being cast, that she was
ready to swoon. Quarll's counsel, perceiving her disorder, imagined it might
proceed from a regret of the mischief she had done; so put her in a way to
invalidate her deposition: Now, madam, said the counsel, I very much question
whether you can make your assertion good: Pray produce your certificate; you
can do us no hurt else. Sally, overjoyed to hear that, said, she had none;
choosing to undergo the greatest disgrace, rather than he should come to the
least hurt. I thought as much, said the counsel. Well, well, replied the surly
judge, she may have lost it: Where was you married, child? At Chatham, my lord,
I think, answered she, very much discountenanced. At Chatham, did you say?
replied the counsel; I doubt yours has been a sailor's wedding, over a pot of
drink; a man's wife till the next voyage, and any body's when he is gone. Your
lordships see how the case stands. Yes, yes, answered a judge; if she is his
first wife that way, I dare say he is not her first husband, by many. So she
was hissed out of the court. Then the judge addressing to the next pretender, I
hope, says he, yours will not prove a sailor's wedding, as hers did. A
sailor's! No, my lord, replied the second wife; I have witnesses enough to
mine: My lady Firebrass, with whom I lived, and her two daughters, saw me
fairly married in St. Martin's church. How came it, said the judge, you did not
sue him before he married the third wife? You should have prevented his
cheating any other poor woman. Why, my lord, said she, I knew nothing of it; he
kept me a prisoner in the country, at this good woman's house, where he decoyed
me, under the pretense of being careful of me: I must go into the country for a
month or two, to take the air! but when he had me there, there he kept me ever
since, charging the people of the house not to suffer me to come up to London,
nor yet to go out; pretending I was mad, because I complained I was not well. A
very pretty device! replied the old judge. Yes, my lord, cried out all the
women in the court (who were come in great numbers to hear a trial about a rape
committed by a Quaker upon a maid of fifty years of age) and a very bad
precedent, if not severely punished: Should this be suffered, a poor wife will
not dare to be out of order, or complain, in hopes to be made much of, for fear
her husband, under color of giving her the pleasure of the country air, shall
when he has got her there, confine her, and so marry whom he pleases at London.

The judges, to quell their clamor, were obliged to call to them, and promise
them it should be no precedent; and that they might be sick at will, and groan
at their pleasure, and also accept of their husband's kindnesses when offered.

The court being silenced, the proceedings went on: And several of the judges
having been spoken to by some of Quarll's particular friends, who were related
to some of them, they were more favorable in their judgment, all but the old
surly judge, with whom no interest had been made.

The three wives then present having proved their marriage, the prisoner at the
bar was asked, what he had to say in his own defense.

Quarll, who thought his wife in the country was secure from coming against
him, not having given his counsel instructions concerning her, was obliged to
plead himself: My lords, said he, the first deponent against me being run mad,
and thereby unfit for human society, I was obliged to think of some retirement
for her, as it is necessary for people in her case. Unfit for human society!
replied the second wife, in a great fury; and was going on in the same temper,
but was bid to be silent, ^^d he to proceed: So, my lords, said he, I ^^oposed
the country, as the most pleasant and who some place, as also that which suited
her disposition best, being always ambitious to imitate the quality, who
commonly go into the country in the summer; which made her accept the offer:
There, my lords, I boarded her with very honest and sufficient people, in a
handsome, creditable, and pleasant house: A pleasant house, replied she; a
perfect hovel. There, my lords, I provided her every thing she could want or
desire, as her landlady here present can justify. His counsel, who, by what he
had said, had taken sufficient hints to proceed, took the plea out of his hand,
and went on: An't please your lordship, said he, since by her madness -- My
madness! said she, interrupting the counsel: I desire, my lords, this good
woman (with whom I had lived many years) may be sworn, whether she in all that
time, did see or discern the least symptoms of madness in me. Indeed, replied
the old woman, I have often seen you in the vapors; but I cannot say I ever
saw you, what they say, raving mad, but once. My lord, said the prisoner, I beg
this letter, which she sent me a week after she was there, may be read; and
then your lordships may judge whether I do her wrong.

Orders being given from the bench, the letter was read. The old woman hearing
her house so despised, where a well-bred dog would have run mad, if kept in;
and then her husband and herself compared to oxen and cows, was not a little
displeased: My house, madam, said the old woman, is not so despicable neither,
as that comes to: I am sure there is hardly a better, or more convenient,
within ten miles round it. As for the room you lay in, no gentlewoman, in her
right senses, but would be contented with, especially in the country; I must be
obliged to side with your husband there: And for my husband and me to be
reckoned no better than brutes, you have little reason to say so; for no woman
can be used with more humanity than you have been; and as for your being
confined you never were shut up any where, but always had the liberty of
walking about our ground; only indeed I would not consent you should trudge to
London, as you often did ofter to do.

The old woman having done speaking, Quarll's counsel put it to the bench,
whether the prosecutrix ought to be accounted in her right senses. The judges
having given their opinion that she was frantic, the old judge being displeased
at their answer, asked them, whether a man or woman's being frantic (which but
few in this town are not, more or less) do empower either to marry again; and
if they will allow that, why did he marry a third? The second is not mad. The
second, replied the counsel, eloped, my lord, and was from her husband half a
year; and it is to be questioned, whether she would have ever come near him,
had she not accidentally found this opportunity to trouble him. It Is a plain
case, my lord, said another judge, the prisoner is guilty of the crime he
stands indicted for: Yet I don't see but there is room for favor. His
constitution perhaps may require a woman for the maintenance of his health, and
his inclination is averse against vile women: Besides, my lord, we don't hear
that he did cohabit or correspond with more than one at a time; and never
sought a supply till he was destitute. In my opinion, my lord, he may be
favored a little. The ill-natured judge told them very surlily, that the fact
was plain; and that he was tried according to the laws of his country; and must
expect to suffer the penalty of those laws. But he could see no room for
favor, unless his Majesty would graciously be pleased to show it to him; and
it was entirely out of his own power: So sums up the evidences, and refers it
to the jury.

The jury went out accordingly: And, after having stayed some time, brought in
their verdict, Death. Sally, who was just by, no sooner heard the terrible
news, but fainted away, and was obliged to be carried out of court: The three
wives went away, upbraiding and reproaching one another with being the fatal
cause of losing their husband, wishing one another never to be relieved by man;
and so parted. But Sally, as soon as recovered, went back to the prisoner
again, and stayed with him till the court broke up; and then was allowed a
coach to carry him to Newgate, and attended him there all that night.

As soon as the keepers came in the morning he calls for pen, ink, and paper,
which was brought him; and wrote the following letter to his colonel:

May it please your honor,
I AM now under the terrible sentence of condemnation: I need not tell you upon
what account, my case being too well known to the world already; but as you
have bestowed so many particular favors upon me hitherto, this emboldens me
once more, in this my extreme necessity, to rely upon your goodness. It Is true,
my merit cannot lay claim to the least mark of your esteem; but it is your
generosity prompts me to beg my life at your hands, which, if you preserve,
shall always be devoted to your service, by

Your unfortunate humble servant, PHILIP QUARLL.


As soon as he had finished he delivers it to his dear beloved Sally, and
desires her to carry the same to his colonel: Sally, joyful to serve him, takes
the letter, and away she flies. Being come to the house, she delivers the
letter to the colonel; who, having opened and read it, told her, that she might
assure him, he would do all that lay in his power to serve him: So Sally,
expressing her gratitude, retired to carry the news to her husband: When she
came to the prison she sound him reading very seriously, leaning upon his hand,
with tears in his eyes: She stood sometime to look at him: but finding he never
stirred his head, nor moved his eyes, she went softly up to him, and spoke to
him: He no sooner heard her voice, but he starts, and looks like one just awake
from a dream; and then burst into tears, and could not speak a word, which
Sally seeing, could not forbear weeping; and fell upon his neck, desiring him
with all tenderness to stop the torrent, for she had some joyful news to tell
him. What joyful news, says he, can you bring a man under my wretched
circumstances? Can any thing elevate his mind whom Heaven itself has contrived
to depress? Am not I the very outcast and scorn of Providence? Have not I been
unfortunate from my infancy? And why will you still add to my misery; it is you
that now make me wretched: Had you not so compassionately aslisted me in this
my dismal calamity with so much tenderness, I then willingly should have left
this hateful world, without thinking of you: but why must I make you the
wretched partner of my misfortunes? It Is that adds to my uneasiness. O that I
had not seen you in these my last moments! Sally, interrupting him, said, come,
talk not of last moments; you may yet enjoy many happy years; your colonel has
promised to use his utmost endeavors to preserve your life. I do not flatter
myself with any thing of that kind, says he, but if such a thing should happen,
I am fully resolved not to tarry long in England, which has brought upon me so
many dire mishaps.

The colonel was as good as his word; for he loved Quarll extremely well: And
therefore, as soon as Sally was gone, he orders his coach to be got ready, and
away he posts to my lord Danby, who had a great influence at court at that
time, and who was his particular friend. When he came thither, his lordship was
no: stirring; so he waited till he got up; who, as soon as come down, cries
out, So colonel, what brings you here so soon? Did you come to breakfast with
me? The colonel seeing him so facetious and pleasant, told him his message. My
lord, as soon as he heard it, answered, that upon his honor, he certainly
would grant his request; and made him stay to breakfast with him.

As soon as breakfast was over, he took his leave of his lordship, and away he
comes to bring the tidings to Quarll, whom he found alone, Sally having just
left him. The colonel told him, he was sorry to see him there, with other
compliments usual in such ^^ses; and related to him the success he had with my
lord Dauby: So desired him to be of good cheer. Quarll fell at his feet, and
expressed his gratitude in the most thankful terms imaginable; telling him, his
life should always be at his service. His colonel, raising him up, told him he
was very well satisfied; and, after a little more conversation, left him.

Sally, in the mean time, was not idle; for she went and bought a rich piece of
plate, and presented it to the recorder, that he might favor Quarll in his
report to his majesty; which had the desired effect: For, when the death
warrant came down, he was excluded, and in a few days after, my lord Danby
procured his Majesty's pardon; which his colonel brought him with great joy.

Quarll, being discharged out of Newgate, resolved not to tarry long in
England; and told his beloved Sally, that he must now leave her, for he had
made a vow not to tarry in Britain. She endeavored to dissuade him from his
intentions; but, finding it to no purpose, desired she might accompany him. He
asked her, why she desired to be wretched, telling her, he was doomed to
perpetual misery: But she was resolutely bent to follow him wherever he went;
and accordingly sold what the knight had settled upon her, in order to carry
the money with her.

Quarll hearing of a ship bound for the South Seas, which in her return was to
touch at Barbados, the captain of her having been first mate of the ship to
which Quarll had formerly belonged; this encouraged him to venture the voyage.
Accordingly, he went to the commander, in order to agree with him about it; The
captain, after some talk, began to call to mind their former acquaintance, but
wondered to see him so much altered as to his condition: Quarll being very
handsomely dressed, and his behavior much better polished than formerly: So
desired him to give him an account how this s^^ange alteration had happened,
and by what means he came to this good fortune. Good fortune! do you call it?
says Quarll; I suppose then you look upon men by their outward appearance: But;
did you know the world as well as I do, you would judge the contrary. Now, adds
he, I ll give you a short account of my past life; and then I Will leave you to
say whether I am not rather the perfect scorn and mock of fortune: So related
to him his past misfortunes; which Quarll told him in so moving a manner, that
it almost drew tears from the captain's eyes. As soon as he had made an end,
well, says the captain, I thought that my way of living brought upon me more
troubles than land-men are subject to! for, since I saw you, I have been
shipwrecked twice; once upon the coast of Guinea, where I lost the ship and
cargo and but five men saved; the other time, homeward bound from the East
Indies, a violent storm arose, and drove us upon the coast of France, where,
with great difficulty, we cast anchor, in order to resit our ship, which was
very much damaged in the late storm: But about twelve o'clock the same night we
came thither, a most violent hurricane blew in upon us, broke our cables and
drove us ashore; where again I lost the ship and cargo, but all the men saved:
Thus I think I have been unfortunate; but since they are past never think of
them: We shall have a pleasant voyage; and as you say you have a mind to reside
at Barbados, where I must touch in my return, I Would have you lay out your money
in the woollen manufacture, and cutlery-ware, which are very good commodities
in those parts. Quarll thanked him for his good advice, and parted with him.

Away then he goes to Sally, and told her what he had been doing, and whither
he intended to go. Sally answered what was his pleasure should be hers; and
that she would be a partner in his fortunes and misfortunes, go whither he
would. So Quarll went and bought the goods which the captain advised him to,
and sent them on board; and soon after followed with himself and wife.

They had not been long at sea, before his darling Sally fell sick and died, to
his inexpressible grief; wishing ^en thousand times he had died with her. He
began to be extremely melancholy, took no rest, and would eat no victuals. The
captain was afraid that he would die also; and did all he could to divert him;
but he was a long time before he could bring him to his former temper.

They failed on with a side-wind for the space of a month; though, it changing
full in their teeth, and very high withal, obliged them to cast anchor, in
order to lie by till the wind did serve; but seeing themselves made upon by a
pirate, they were obliged to weigh their anchor, and make the best of their way
before the wind, in order to avoid being taken by those infidels, who pursued
them from four of the clock on Friday morning, till ten at night the following
Sunday; at which time there arose a storm; the sky looked very black, the wind
being at north-west, and clouds began to rise and move toward them, having
hung all the morning in the horizon: So that they took in their topsails, and
furled their main-sail: The sea ran very short, and broke in upon the deck:
However, they put right before the wind, and sailed so for three weeks, when
they made Cape Horn: They had no sooner got round the Cape, but the wind veered
to the south, and it fell flat calm; which continued for two days, when the
wind sprung up at south-west, and they scudded before the wind very swift, and
made an island whose name none of them knew, the ship having never been on the
coast before; but there they found wood, water, and herbs of several sorts some
seals and sea-fowls. Here they refreshed themselves for four days; and then
weighed anchor, the wind being fair at full south, and traded at several ports
on the coast of Peru, Chili, and Mexico. From Port Aqapulco they sailed, having
a fresh breeze at N. N. E. They had not sailed above one day before the wind
veered to the south-west, and blew a violent gale of wind; and there being a
great sea, so that their ship took in a great deal of water; the wind
continuing two days increasing to a very great storm, which held for one day
and two nights more; during which time they perceived themselves near some
rocks. The storm rather increasing, and it growing dark, they despaired of
saving the ship; and as the main-yard could not lower, the ship's tackling
being disordered by the violence of the storm; Quarll, being bold and active,
took a hatchet which tumbled about the deck, and ran up the shrouds, in order
to cut down what stopped the working of the main-yard; but, by that time he was
got up, there came a sea which dashed the ship to shatters against the rock;
and with the violence of the shock, slung Quarll, who was astride upon the
main-yard on the top of the rock; where having the good fortune to fall in a
clift, he was hindered from being washed back again into the sea, and drowned,
as every body were that belonged to the ship.

Quarll, in a dismal condition, remained the succeeding night in the clift,
being continually beaten with the dashing back of the sea, and being both
bruised and numbed, pulled off his clothes which were dripping wet, and spread
them in the sun; and being over-fatigued, lays himself down on the smoothest
place of the rock he could find, being quite spent with the hardship he had
undergone, and slept while his clothes were drying.

His sleep, though very profound, was not refreshing: The danger he had been
lately in, so ran in his mind, tha^ grim death was ever before his eyes; which
constantly disturbed his rest: But nature, who wanted repose, would be
supplied, though it be broken. Having slept a few hours, he awakes almost as
much fatigued as before, and faint for want of nourishment, having taken none
for thirtysix hours before: So, having looked upon his clothes, which he
perceived were not quite dry, he turned the other side to the sun, and laid
himself down to sleep again; but still nothing but horror entered his mind: His
soul was continually harrassed with the dismal apprehensions the effects of the
late storm had impressed upon him. He dreamt he was in a terrible tempest, and
the ship he was in was dashed backwards and forwards through the waves with
prodigious violence, the clouds pouring down vast streams of liquid fire, and
the raging Ocean all in flames. In this dismal condition he knew not what to
do; but 'spying some land, as he thought, at a little distance from the ship,
he was endeavoring to get thither; but not daring to trust the sea, which he
imagined was like a chaldron of oil in a blaze, resolved to try whether he
could not jump ashore: But just as he was going to leap, he saw a horrid
frightful monster, with glaring eyes, and open mouth, rush from the boiling
flames, and make at him to devour him; which scared him out of his sleep.

When he awoke, he was very much terrified with his dream, and stared about him
in a frighted manner, expecting every minute some creature to devour him; But,
taking a little courage, put on his clothes; which by this time were quite dry.
He then looks about him; but alas! could see nothing but the dreadful effects
of the late tempest, dead corpses, broken planks, and battered chests floating;
and such aspects as at once filled him with terror and grief.

Turning from those shocking objects, which presented to his eyes the dreadful
death he so lately had escaped, he sees at the other side the prospect of one
more terrible, hunger and thirst, attended with all the miseries that can make
life burdensome. Being seized with the terror of the threatening evil, he turns
again toward the sea, and looking on the dead corpses, which the sea now and
then drove to the rock, and back again, Oh! that I was like one of you, said be
past all danger! I have shared with you in the terrors of death: Why did I not
also partake with you in its relief? But why should I complain? and have so
much reason to be thankful! Had I been cut off, when the cares of saving this
worthless carcass intercepted me from seeking the salvation of my soul, I
should not have had the present opportunity of taking care of it. So, having
returned thanks for his late deliverance, he resigns himself to Providence, on
whom he fully relies; climbs up the rock, and being come to the top, sees land
at the inside, bearing both trees and grass: Heaven be praised! said he: I
shall not perish upon these barren rocks: So made a shift to go down to it, the
weather then being calms.

BOOK III.
Account of Quarll's wonderful shifts, and surprising manner of living; of the
miraculous acts of Providence, and of the strange events which happened in the
island since his being there.

BEING come to the other side of the rock, he finds at the bottom of it a
narrow lake, which separated it from the land: Therefore pulling off his
clothes, the water being but shallow, he wades over with them in his arms: and
dressing himself, walks up a considerable way in the island, without seeing any
human creature, or perceiving any sign of its being inhabited, which struck a
great damp to his spirits. He walks it over and over, crossways and long-ways;
yet could see nothing but monkeys, strange beasts, birds, and fowls, such as he
had never seen before.

Having ranged himself weary, he sat down under a cluster of trees that made an
agreeable arbor: The place being pleasant and cool, made, as it were, for
repose, and he being still very much fatigued, prompted him to lie down and
sleep; during which, his mind is continually alarmed with the frightful aspect
of grim death: Sometimes he fancies himself striving with the rolling waves,
stretching out his arms to catch hold of a plank tossing by; which just come at
is beaten back by the roaring billows whose terrible noise pronounces his
death; at other times he thinks himself astride upon a piece of a mast,
laboring to keep himself on, and of a sudden washed away and sunk down by a
bulky wave; on every side of him men calling for help; others spent and past
speaking; here some floating that are already parished, and there others
expiring; thus in every object seeing his approaching fate.

Being awakened out of that irksome and uneasy sleep, he falls into as anxious
and melancholy thoughts, I have, said he, escaped being drowned, but how shall
I avoid starving? Here is no food for man. But why should I despair? Did not
Nebuchadnezzar live upon grass for several years, till restored to his nation?
Cannot I do the same for a few days? by which time, Providence, who has
hitherto protected me, may raise me some means to get from hence. So, being
entirely resigned, he walks about to see the island, which he found surrounded
with rocks, at the bottom of which there was a small lake, which was fordable
in most places, so that he could with ease wade over to the rock; which he did
at every side of the island, to see if he could perceive any ship, whereby he
might get away: But, seeing none, and it drawing toward night, he returns, and
employs the remainder of the day in looking for the most convenient place for
him to pass away the approaching night; and, having fixed upon one of the
highest trees, he gets up as far as he well could, fearing some wild beast
might devour him if he slept below; where, having returned thanks to Heaven for
his late great deliverance, he commits himself to its care; then settles, and
falls to sleep, and slept till hunger waked him in the morning, having dreamt
over night of abundance of victuals, which he would fain have come at, but was
kept off by a cross cook, who bid him go and fish for some: To which he
answered, that he was shipwrecked; and had nothing to fish withal. Well then,
said the cook to him again, go where thou wast like to lose thy life and there
thou shall find where withal to support it.

Being awakened he makes reflections upon his dream, which though he imagined
it might proceed from the emptiness of his stomach, being customary for people
to dream of victuals, when they go to bed hungry, yet at that time may prove
omnious: So, driven by necessity and led by curiosity, he went to the same side
of the rock he had been cast upon; where having stood several hours without
seeing shipping, or aught that might answer his dream; the air coming from the
sea being pretty sharp, and he faint, having taken no manner of food for near
three days, he gave over all hopes of relief. Thus submitting himself to the
will of Heaven, which he supposed decreed a lingering death to punish him for
his past sins, he resolves to return where he lay the night before, and there
wait for his doom; but being stopped by a sudden noise which issued from a
creek in the rock, not far from where he stood, he had she curiosity to go and
see what occasioned it.

Being come to the place he heard the noise proceed from, he see a fine large
cod fish near six feet-long, dabbling in a hole in the rock, where the late
storm had cast it.

One under condemnation of death, and just arrived at the place of execution,
could not be (...) rejoiced at the coming of a reprieve, than he was at the
sight of the fish, having felt several sick qualms, fore runners of the death
he thought he was doomed to. Heaven be praised! said he; here is my dream right;
where Providence rescued my life from the grim jaws of death, there it has
provided me wherewithal to support it.

So having taken off both his garters, he gets into the hole where the fish
lay; and having run them through its gills, he hauls it out, and drags it after
him, being heavy, and he very weak. -- Going along, he finds several oysters,
mussels, and cockles, in his way, which the sea had cast up and down the rock;
and having a knife about him, he sat down and eat a few; so refreshed himself,
his spirits being exhausted for want of food. This small nutriment very much
recruited his decaved strength, and the thoughts of his supply of provision
having dispersed the dull ideas his late want had bred in his mind, (...)
cheerfully takes his fish, which he drags with much more vigor than before;
and filling his pockets with salt that was congealed by the sun which ^e found
in the concavities of the rock, away he goes to the place, where he lay the
night before, in order to dress some of the cod fish; where being come he picks
up a parcel of dry leaves, and with his knife, and a flint, struck fire, and
kindled them: Then, getting together a few sticks, made a fire presently, and
broiled a slice of his fish; of which he (...) so heartily, that it overcame
his stomach, being grown weak with fasting: Thus sick, and out of order. (...)
applies to the helpless recourse, which was lying down; and having much
fatigued and harrassed himself with hauling the heavy fish up and down the
rock, be fell asleep until the next morning; during which time his rest was
very much disturbed with the frightful dream of being attacked by a terrible
monster, such as never was heard of, (...) for bigness ^r grimness; which
pursued him (...) having run himself out of breath, he was forced to lie
exposed to his (...); but was preve^^ed being devoured by a grave old
gentlewoman of a most graceful and majestic countenance, at whose sudden
appearance the monster fled. Having recovered breath, and strength to speak, he
returns the old lady thanks for his deliverance, and begs leave to (...) on her
home, that he might know (...) to come and pay his constant duty to her for
this her late great kindness: To which she answered, that she was fixed in no
particular habitation, but dwelt at every poor man's house; her occupation
being to assist the helpless, but not the slothful and negligent: That he
should see her again before it was long. Mean time, she bid him not go on in
evil ways, but whenever overtaken, not to despair, for she was always at hand.
Nevertheless, she would not have him too depending, and so went away, leaving
him very easy and pleased in his mind that he had escaped such vast danger.

Having slept quietly the remainder of the night he awoke in the morning pretty
fresh and hearty, but very much disturbed at his late dream, which he feared
presaged and prognosticated some approaching evil; but as he could make no
comparative allusion of the old lady, who rescued him from the monster, he
concludes it must be an inspiration of Providence (whom the grave old lady did
personate in the dream) who lately had preserved him from a death, by all
appearance unavoidable, to keep him from despair in this his great extremity,
promising to be at hand upon occasion; yet would not have him neglect the means
to get away from a place where want threatens him. For though he might for a
while subsist upon fish, wherewith he might be supplied, being surrounded by
the sea; yet he could not imagine which way he could be furnished with clothes
and bed against the winter; for want of which he must miserably perish with
cold, unless supplied by some such dismal accident as exposed him to the want
thereof, which he heartily wishes and prays may never happen.

Having made these considerations, he, on his knees, returns kind Providence
his hearty thanks for all his mercies that had been extended to him; begging
the continuance of its assistance. Then, as he took directions from his dream,
watching the opportunity of getting away from that melancholy place, he goes to
the other side of the rock, to try if he could perceive any shipping in sight.

The wind, being pretty high, fed his hopes, that each succeeding hour would
gratify his wishing look with that object the preceding could not bring forth;
but was disappointed. The night approaching, kept back all probability for that
time; however, depending on better success the next day, he returns whence he
came; and being hungry, makes a fire, and broils another slice of the fish,
then lays the rest upon broad green leaves, and strews salt thereon to keep it
from spoiling, and then goes to rest; and as he lay undisturbed the night
before under the trees, and much more easy than at top, he ventured again,
committing himself to the care of Providence.

But his thoughts, which all day had been disturbed with the dread of those
hardships he must probably undergo, if obliged to continue there all winter, so
ran in his mind, that they occasioned ideas suitable to those he had formed the
day before; and cold being the greatest of (...) fears, it is also the
principal subject of his dream; which presented to his imagination, that he was
in a spacious place, paved with hail stones of a prodigious bigness, and
surrounded with high mountains of ice, which echoed with shivers: At the
farther end thereof he saw an old man resembling Time, as he is commonly
painted, with heaps of show and had about him. and himself very busy with
making more: At his side stood a very beautiful woman, whose shape and make was
uncommon, and her features and complexion extraordinary; but what surprised him
most, was her having three pair of breasts, wonderfully handsome, and curiously
placed, which seemed to adorn her bosom far more than the richest stomacher
made of diamonds or pearls could do; so that what in other women would look
monstrous, was in her an addition to her matchless beauty.

The sight of that most perfect and complete woman warmed his blood, which the
coldness of the place had chilled, and tempted him to come nearer the charmer.
As he advanced, every step he made seemed to add strength to his limbs, and
vigor to his life; which made him desirous to come nearer to the person from
whom he received such beneficial effluvia; but was suddenly stopped by the old
man's turning toward him with a grim and surly countenance, which threatened
his nearer approach with evil.

Not daring to come nearer, he stands still, wondering what business that most
charming creature could have with that surly, morose old fellow; when listening
a while he perceived she was asking boons of him in the behalf of a vast number
of all sorts of creatures that attended her at some distance behind, which he
refused in a most churlish manner; and as she still persisted in her suit,
following him up and down, the ill natured old man slily steps to the frosty
mountain, and pulls down a large clod of ice, which stopped a gap therein, from
whence came out a creature, made and featured like a man, but of a monstrous
size, and frightful aspect; his excessive broad cheeks hanging down on each
side of his long picked chin, like two empty bladders! and his preposterous
belly hung down looking just like a sail without wind. That monster was no
sooner out, but he had orders, from the spiteful old man to drive away the
woman, and all her attendants; which word of command was no sooner given, but
it was put in execution. Having filled his shrivelled jaws with wind, which
then stood out like so many kettle drums, he sails a blowing upon one of the
hills of snow, and turns it into a thick shower, which he drove with violence
against that angel-like creature, and her (...), who immediately fled for
shelter.

This barbarous treatment to the most deserving of creatures put him in a maze;
to whom the angry old man (seeing he did not go with the rest) came in a fury,
saying, Do thou put me in defiance? I Will bury thee in that which I only
shrewed over the (...) and went to lay bold of him: which caused him to awake
in a wonderful fright.

Being risen, he made reflections upon the late dreams: All my dreams, said he,
have ever proved ominous and, if I mistake not, this must have some
signification: Certainly this old man is time, laying up a store of frost and
snow against next winter and that goodly woman is Nature, who being tender over
all her creatures, interceded for moderation: And his surly refusal, and rough
usage prognosticate a forward and hard winter, to whose severity I must lie
exposed, being altogether unprovided.

These reflections bred various melancholy thoughts, which almost led him to
despair, Oh said he, that I was a mouse, bat, or a yet meaner creature! Then
should I (...) below the (...) persecutions of fate. But m^n, who was created
the noblest form, endued with reason and under standing, animated with an
immorial soul, must be aimed at as the only mark worthy its malignant darts!
But why do I thus rave at those evils we are the authors of? Had man continued
in his original state of innocence the very name of fate or fortune would not
have been known. Well, since this is the product of sin, I accept this black
lot as justly coming to my share; and humbly submitting to Heaven's decree, I
thankfully take this dream as a timely warning; and, in imitation of those
creatures represented in it, I Will provide what shelter I can against bad
weather comes.

Accordingly, first he begins to think of making himself an house to preserve
him from the injuries of the weather; but having nothing to make it of, nor any
instrument but a knife, which could be of little service to him, he resolves to
go to that part of the rock where he was shipwrecked, to fee if he could
discover any thing among the wreck that would be serviceable to him; and
therefore takes a branch of a tree along with him, and, coming to the place, he
strips himself, and goes into the water (the water being low, discovering the
points of several sharp pointed rocks) and gropes along with his staff for sure
footing, wading as high as his chin, diving to the bottom frequently, and
feeling about with his hands. This he continued doing for almost two hours, but
to no purpose, not daring to go out of his depth; for he well knew that he
could do little good there, because, he could discover no part of the ship, not
so much as the mast or any of the rigging, but fancied she lay in some deep
hole, where it was impossible to get at her.

Thus despairing, and fretting and teazing himself, he calls to mind that he
had a hatchet in his hand when he was cast away, and thought probably it might
lie in that clift of the rock into which he wan thrown; thither he went, and
looking about, perceived something like the handle of a hatchet just above the
surface of the water at the bottom of the rock; and, going down to it, took it
up; which, to his great joy, proved to be the very thing he wanted.

Having got his tool; he dresses himself, and goes on to the island again,
intending to cut down some trees to make himself a hut. Looking about, the
refore, for the properest plants, and taking notice of a sort of trees, whose
branches, bending to the ground, took root, and became a plant, he thought they
might be the fittest for this purpose, and cut a sufficient parcel of them to
make his barrack; which was full business for him that day.

The next morning, having paid his usual devotion, he walks out again to look
for a pleasant and convenient place to make his hut or barrack upon: He walked
several hours, and could find none more sheltered from the cold winds than that
where he already lay, being in the middle of the island, well fenced on the
north and east sides with trees, which stood very thick: The place being fixed
upon, he hews down some trees that grew in his way, and clears a spot of ground
about twelve feet square, leaving one tree standing at each corner; and, with
the young plants he provided the day before, filled the distance between quite
round, setting them about six inches asunder, leaving a larger vacancy for the
door: His enclosure being made, he bends the branches at top from both sides,
and weaves them cross one another, making a cover to it; which being something
too thin, he laid other branches over, till they were grown thicker: Having
finished the top, he goes about closing the sides; for which purpose, taking
large branches, he strips (...) their small twigs, and weaves them between the
plants as they do for sheep pens; then made a door after the same manner.

His barrack being finished, which took him up fifteen days hard work: Now,
said he, here is a house, but where is the furniture? This, indeed, may keep
the weather from me, but not the cold. The ground on which I do and must lie,
is hard, and doubtless, in the winter, will grow damp; which, with want of
covering, may occasion agues and fevers, the cholic and rheumatism, and twenty
racking distempers, which may cause me to repent my having escaped a milder
death.

In this great consternation and perplexity, he goes to see if he could spy any
shipping riding within sight of the island: As he was walking along, full of
heavy and dull thoughts, which weighed his looks to the ground, he happened to
find a sort of high grass that grows but here and there, round some particular
sort of trees, of which he never took notice before. Heaven be praised! said
he, I have found wherewithal to keep my poor body from the ground, whilst I am,
by Providence doomed to remain here: So passes on, intending at his return to
cut down a sufficient quantity of it to make mats that might serve him instead
of bed and bed clothes.

Having looked himself almost blind, without seeing the least prospect of what
he desired, he concludes upon going to cut the grass which he stood in such
want of, and spread it to dry, whilst the weather was yet warm: That piece of
work kept him employed the remainder of the day, and best part of the
succeeding evening, having nothing but a pocket-knife to cut withal. That work
being done, wanting a tool to spread and turn his grass, he takes a branch off
the next tree, which having stripped of all the small ones about it, all but part
of that at the top, being forky, made a tolerable fork: Thus being equipped for
hay-making, he went on with his work; and as he was at it, he saw, at some
distance, several monkeys as busy as himself, scratching something out of the
ground, which they did eat upon the spot, and carried the rest to their home.

He hopes that those roots might be for his use, those creatures being
naturally dainty, eating nothing but what men may, made him hasten to the place
he saw them scratching at, that by the herb they bear (which they tore off) he
might find out the root.

Having, by the leaves which he picked off the ground, found some of the same,
he digs them up, and carried them to his barrack, where he broiled a slice of
his fish, and in the ashes roasted them, which eat something like chestnuts done
in the same manner.

This new found out eatable much rejoicing him, he returned his hearty thanks
to kind Providence, that he had put him in a way to provide himself with bread,
and that of a most delicious kind. As soon therefore as he had dined, he went
out on purpose to dig up a good quantity: but, as he was going to the place
where he had taken notice they grew pretty thick, he sees a tortoise of about a
foot over, crawling before him: Heaven be praised! said he, here is what will
supply me both with victuals and utensils to dress it in: He ran therefore, and
turned it on its back, to keep it from getting away, whilst he went for his
hatchet, that he might cut the bottom shell from the top, in order to make a
kettle of the deepest, and a dish of the flat part.

Being tired of cod fish, he dresses the tortoise, an animal seldom eaten but
upon extremity, the flesh thereof often giving the flux; nevertheless he
ventured upon it, and liked it extremely, some part of it eating very much like
veal; which at that time was a very great novelty to him, having eaten no fresh
meat for a long time before.

Happening to eat of that part of the tortoise which is the most feeding and
less hurtful, he was in no wise discomposed: but, having boiled it all, he laid
by the remainder to eat now and then between his fish.

Being provided with a boiling utensil, he often had change, by means of those
admirable roots so luckily discovered; some of which he roasted for bread,
others he boiled with salt cod: This in a great measure mitigated his
misfortune, and softened the hardship he lay under; so that, seeing but little
prospect of changing his present condition, by getting away from thence yet a
while, he thinks on means to make it as easy as possible whilst he remained in
it; for, having projected a bed, and taking the grass, which by that time was
dry, he falls to work; and a mat being the thing concluded upon, he twists his
hay into ropes, the bigness of his leg; then he cuts a pretty number of sticks,
about two feet long, which he drives into the ground, ten in a row, and near
four inches asunder, and opposite to them such another row at six or seven feet
distance from the first, which made the length of his mat; then having fastened
one end of his rope to one of the corner sticks, he brings it round the other
corner stick, and so to the next at the other end, till he has laid his frame:
Then he weaves across shorter ropes of the same, in the manner they make
pallions on board with old cable ends. When he had finished his mat, he heat it
with a long stick, which made it swell up; and the grass being of a soft
cottony nature, he had a warm and easy bed to lie on.

The comfort and pleasure he found on his soft mat, (being grown sore with
lying on the ground for the space of a month or more) so liberally gratified
him for the time and labor he had bestowed in making it, that it gave him
encouragement to go about another; a covering being the next necessary wanted;
for though the weather was, as yet, pretty warm, and he, in a great measure,
seasoned by the hardship he had gone through; yet the winter approaching, and
the present season still favorable for him to make provision against it, he
goes and cuts more grass; which being made ready for use, he lengthens his
loom, to allow for rolling up at one end, instead of a bolster, and makes it
thicker than the first; which he intends, in cold weather, shall lie upon him
instead of blankets.

Being provided with the most necessary furniture he wanted, he thinks on more
conveniences, resolving to make himself a table to eat his victuals upon, and a
chair to sit on: Thus having cut several sticks about four feet long, he drives
them in a row a little way in the ground; then takes smaller, which he
interweaves between: Having made the top, he sets it upon four other sticks,
forky at the upper end, which he stuck in the ground at one side of his
barrack, to the height of a table; this being done, he cuts four more branches,
such as judged would do best for the seat and back of a chair, which he also
drove in the ground near his table; and having twisted the branches which grew
to them, with each other, from back to front, and across again, he weaves
smaller in between, bottoming his seat; which completes the furniture of his
habitation.

That care being over, another succeeds, of a far greater moment: Here is a
dwelling, said he, to shelter me from the weather, and a bed to rest this poor
body of mine; but where is food to support it? Here have I subsisted near one
month upon a fish, which the same dreadful storm, that took away forty lives,
sent me to maintain my own. Well, since kind Providence has been pleased to
preserve my life preferable to so many, who fatally perished in that dismal
accident, I am bound, in gratitude, to hold it precious; and since my fish is
almost gone, and I am not certain of more, I must by degrees bring myself to
live upon roots which I hope will never be wanting, being the natural product
of this island: So I must eat of the small remnant of fish, but now and then,
to make it hold out longer, Dainties or plenty were not allotted for him that
was doomed to slavery, but labor and hard living; and, if I meet here the
latter, Heaven be praised, I have escaped the worse; I can take my rest, and
stand in no dread of any severe inspector or task master.

Now being entirely reconciled to the state of life, Providence, on whom he
fully depended, had been pleased to call him to, he resolves to make provision
of those excellent roots; and with his hatchet he cuts a piece of a tree,
wherewith he makes a shovel, in order to dig them up with more ease: With this
instrument he went to the place where he had observed they grew thickest, which
being near the monkeys quarters, they came down from off the trees in great
numbers grinning as if they would have flown at him; which made him stop a
while: He might indeed, with the instrument in his hand, have killed several,
and perhaps dispersed the rest; but would not: Why, said he, should I add
barbarity to injustice? It is but natural and reasonable for every creature to
guard and desend their own: This was given them by Nature for food, which I am
come to rob them of; and since I am obliged to get of them for my subsistence,
if I am decreed to be here another season, I will set some in a place distant
from theirs for my own use.

Having stood still a considerable time, those animals, seeing he did not go
forward, each went and scratched up for itself, afterward retiring; giving him
the opportunity to dig up a few for himself: And as he was not come to the
place where they grew thick, he laid them in small heaps as he dug them up;
while those fly creatures would, whilst he was digging up more, come down from
the trees where they stood hid among the leaves, and steal them away; which
obliged him to be contented for that time with as many as his pockets would
hold, resolving to bring something next time which would contain a larger
quantity; and fearing those animals, which are naturally very cunning, should
dig them up and hide them, he comes early the morning following to make his
provision; and for want of a sack to put them in, he takes his jacket, which he
buttons up, and ties at the sleeves; and as he had observed, that every root
had abundance of little off sets hanging at it by small fibers, he pulled off
his shirt also, of which he makes another sack to put them in.

Being naked all but his breeches, and the day being pretty hot, he thought he
had as good pull them off too, and fill them, his jacket being but short and
therefore holding but few: Taking, therefore, his bundle in one arm, and having
the shovel in the other hand, he goes to the place he intended to do the day
before; and expecting to find the same opposition as he did then he brought
with him some of the roots he had dug up (...) preceding day, in order to throw
them amongst those animals, and so quiet them: But to his great wonder, and as
great satisfaction, those creatures which the time before had opposed him with
noise, and offensive motions, let him now pass by quietly, without offering to
meddle with any when dug up, though he had laid them up by heaps in their way,
and stood at a considerable distance from them.

This surprising reverence from those creatures, set him upon deep reflections
on what could be the cause thereof; whether it might not proceed from the
proximity of their shape and his: But, then, said he, my stature and color of
skin is so different from theirs, that they cannot but distinguish I am not of
their kind; No, it must be a remnant of that awe, entailed by Nature upon all
animals, to that most noble and complete masterpiece of the creation, called
Man, which, now appearing in the state he was first created in, and undisguised
by clothes, renew an image of that respect he has forfeited by his fatal
transgression, which ever since obliged him to hide the beauty of his fabric
under a gaudy disguise, which often renders him ridiculous to the rest of
mankind, and generally obnoxious to all other creatures; making a pride of what
he ought to be ashamed of: Well, adds he, since my clothes, bred the antipathy,
I will remove that cause, which will suit both the nature of those animals, and
my own circumstances. From that time he resolves to go naked, till the hardness
of the weather obliged him to put something on.

Having picked up a sufficient quantity of off-sets to stock about two acres of
land, he returns home, leaving behind him a considerable number of roots dug up
for those poor animals, which attended him all the time he was at work, without
offering to touch one till he was gone.

Being come home, he fixes on a spot of ground near his habitation, and digs it
up as well as he could with his wooden instrument, in order to sow his feed:
which having compassed in about twenty days, he implores a blessing upon his
labor, and leaves it to time to bring it forth. Thus having finished the most
necessar y work about his barrack, he resolves to take a more particular view
of the island, which till then he had not time to do; and taking a long staff
in his hand, he walks to the lake, which parts the land from the rock, and goes
along the side of it, quite round the island, finding all the way new subjects
of admiration: On the left hand stood a rampart made of one solid stone,
adorned by nature with various forms and shapes, beyond the power of art to
imitate; some parts challenging a likeness to a city, and clusters of houses,
with here and there a high steeple standing above the other buildings; another
place claiming a near resemblance to a distant squadron of men of war in a line
of battle: Further, it bears comparison with the dull remains of some sumptuous
edifice, ruined by the often repeated shocks of time, inciting the beholders to
condolence for the loss of its former beauty. At some distance from thence the
prospect of a demolished city is presented to the sight; in another place large
stones like small mountains, laid, as it were, a top of one another, impress
the mind with an idea of the tower of Babel; and on the right hand a most
pleasant land covered with beautiful green grass, like chamomile, and here and
there a culster of trees, composing most agreeable groves, amongst a vast
number of fine lofty trees of diverse heights and shapes, which stood more
distant, whose irregularity added much to the delightfulness of the place.

As he was walking on, admiring all these wonderful works of nature, having
caught cold, (not being used to go naked) he happened to sneeze opposite to a
place in the rock, which hollowed in after the manner of the inside of some
cathedral, and was answered by a multitude of different voices issuing from
that place: The agreeableness of the surprise induced him to rouse those echoes
a second time, by giving a loud hem: which was like sneezing, repeated in
different tones, but all very harmonious: Again he hemmed and was so delighted
with the repetition, that he could have spent hours in the hearing of it: But
why should I, said he, waste those melodious sounds, so fit to relate the
Almighty's wonderful works, and set forth his praise? Immediately he sung
several psalms and hymns, with as much emulation and devotion, as if he had
been in company with numbers of skilful and celebrated choristers.

Having spent a considerable time there with much pleasure, he proceeds in his
walk, being resolved to make that his place of worship for the future, and
attend it twice a day constantly.

About three or four hundred paces farther, having turned on the other side of
a jetting-out part of the rock, he was stopped a second time by another
surprising product of nature; a large stone, growing out of the rock, advancing
quite over the lake at the bottom of it, representing something of a human
shape, out of the breast whereof issued a fountain of exceeding clear milk as
sweet as milk; and, when looked afronting, was like an antique piece of
architecture, which in old times they built over particular springs; and on the
other side appeared as if springing from the nostrils of a sea horse: These
three so very different, and yet rightly compared likenesses, being offered by
one and the same unaltered object, made him curious to examine what parts of
every resemblance helped to make out the others: And having spent a
considerable time in the examination, he found every thing, wh ich the front
had likeness of, was employed in making the side representation, by being in
some places shortened, and others lengthened, according to the point of sight.

Being satisfied about that subject, he enters upon another as puzzling: The
basin, in which the fountain ran, which was about five yards distant from
whence the water did spring, being but about nine feet over every way, without
any visible place to evacuate its over complement, and yet keeping the same
height, without dashing or running over, although the stream that fell into it
ran as big as his wrist. Having a long time searched into the cause, without
any satisfaction, he conjectures it must make its way out somewhere under
ground; so went on, till he came to the place he had begun his march at, which
ended that day's work.

Having been round the island, which to the best of his judgment, was about ten
or eleven miles in circumference, of an oblong form, going in and out in
several places, extending from north to south, the south end near twice as
broad as the opposite; he resolves to employ the next day in viewing the
inside. Then recommending himself to Providence, as he never failed to do, both
morning and evening, he goes to bed; but not being sleepy, the over active
faculty in man roves from one subject to another; His mind runs from his
present station to his former, reassuming his past pleasures, which he must
never hope to meet with again, and calls in all the evils his present condition
of life lays him exposed to. These dull thoughts quite dislodge his late-born
hopes of Heaven's assistance, and shake his future dependence on Providence: He
snarls and quarrels with his fate, and repines at his condition; which not
being in his power to mend, he wishes for eternal sleep, to free his mind of
tumults and cares which crowd upon him.

Sleep was granted him, but not rest: His repining is chastised with terrifying
dreams of the punishment he had been condemned to; all his past troubles come
upon him in the most grievous and shocking manner they could appear; his raging
wives at once fall upon him, exerting their utmost malice and revenge, which he
cannot avoid, but by embracing either an ignominious death, or a severe and
vile bondage. These terrible aspects put him in the same pains and agony, as if
already feeling the assigned torment.

Having in his dream, with hard strugglings, escaped death, he finds himself in
an exceeding hot country, his half-naked body continually bending to the hard
and dry ground, grabbling round a nauseous weed for fulsome worms; every now
and then lashed by a cross and severe task-master, who hurries him to work: In
this great perplexity he cries out, Oh, that I had ended my woeful days at the
shameful gibbet! Sure it would have been a milder fate! At which he awaked in
such a consternation, that it was several minutes before he could be thoroughly
satisfied it was but a dream. Having recalled his dispersed senses, he made
this reflection, that it really was (...) penalty he had been sentenced to, and
by Providence preserved from. Setting then his present condition in opposition
to that, he acknowledges his ingratitude, for which he secretly repents, and on
his knees, with weeping eyes, asks pardon, imploring the continuation of
Providence's protection; resolving, for the future, never to think or wish to
change that state of life it had pleased Heaven to place him in; wholly
dedicating the remains of his days to God's worship: Holding henceforth, as
inestimable, the happiness of being freed from those e cares, which daily flow
on them who are concerned with the world, which might cool or slacken his duty
to so great a benefactor.

Having entirely resigned himself to the will of God, he casts off all cares,
and banishes from his mind all that could create any; resolving to employ those
hours that ran between the intervals of time he had dedicated to divine
worship, in the contemplation of the many wonderful works of Nature, manifested
in such various manners all over the island.

So he walks along the land, which he found very level, covered with a
delightful green grass and adorned with trees of diverse sorts, shapes, and
height, inhabited with several sorts of curious singing birds, of various
colors and notes, which entertained him with their melodious harmony: In some
places stood a cluster of trees, composing agreeable and delightful groves,
proceeding from only one main body, whose lower branches, being come to a
certain length, applied to the earth for immediate nourishment, as it were, to
ease the old stem that produced them; and so became a plant, and did the same.

Having for some time admired the agreeableness and curiosity of the plant, by
which Nature seemed to give human kind instructions; and looking about, if
perchance he could find any thing in his way for his own proper use; he took
away with him a sample of every different herb he thought might be eatable.
Crossing the island in several places; he comes at a most delightful pond,
about two hundred yards in length, and one hundred and fifty wide, with fine
trees spreading their branchy limbs over its brink, which was surrounded with a
beautiful bank, covered with diverse kinds of flowers and herbs, so naturally
intermixed, which completed it in ornament and convenience, as though intended
by Nature for more than mortal's use.

Having walked for several times round it, with much pleasure, he sat down a
while upon its bank, to admire the clearness of the water, through which, to
his great comfort, he saw many different sorts of fish, of various sizes,
shapes, and colors. Heaven be praised! said he, here is a stock of fresh water
fish to supply me with food, if the sea should fail me.

Being sufficiently diverted with their chasing one another, which were of many
beautiful and different colors, and made a most delightful scene, he proceeds
in his walk, and goes to the south of the island, where he finds another
subject of admiration; a noble and spacious wood, whose shades seemed to be
made for the abode of peace and pleasure: He walked round it with much delight,
which made the time seem short; yet he could guess it to be no less than two
miles about.

Having viewed the outside, whose extraordinary agreeableness incited in him an
unsurmountable desire to get into it, but where he was afraid to venture, left
there might be des^^uctive creatures; yet, having recommended himself to the
care of Providence, he ventured into it, finding several pleasant walks, some
straight, edged with lofty trees, as though planted for pleasure; others (...)
and winding, bordered with a thick hedge of pimentoes, which cast a most
fragrant smell: Here and there a large cluster of bushes and dwarf trees,
wherein sheltered several different kinds of wild beasts and fowls. Sure, said
he, this island never was intended by Nature to lie waste, but rather reserved
to be the happy abode of some for whom Heaven had a particular blessing in
store: Here is every thing sufficient, not only for the support, but also for
the pleasure of life; Heaven make me thankful that I am the happy inhabitant of
so blessed a land!

Being hungry, and tired with walking, he goes home, in order go get some
victuals, and having made a fire, he boils a slice of his salt fish with some
roots, and then the herbs he brought with him, which proved of diverse tastes
and all excellent; some eating like artichoakes, others like asparagus and
spinach. Now, said he, what can I wish for more! Here I possess a plentiful
land which produces both fowls, flesh, and fish; bears excellent greens and
roots, and affords the best of water, which by Nature was ordained for man's
drink. Pomp and greatness are but pageantry, which oftentimes prove more
prejudicial to the actor, than diverting to the beholder; Ease and indulgence
are apt to breed the gout, and various distempers, which make the rich more
wretched that the poor; now these evils, thanks to my Maker, I stand in no
danger of, having but what is sufficient, which never can do any harm.

Thus thoroughly easy in his mind, he proposes to spread the afternoon at the
outside of the rock, in viewing the sea, and looking for oysters; so takes in
his hand his long staff to grabble in holes; and his breeches, which he ties at
his knees, to bring them in. Being come to a place of the rock he never had
been at before, he sees at a distance, something like linen hanging upon it;
which, when come at, he found to be the mainsail of a ship, with a piece of the
yard fastened to it: Alas! side he, a dismal token of insatiable ambition!
which makes men often lose their lives in seeking what they seldom find; and,
if they ever do, it is commonly attended with a world of care. Happy is he who
limits his desires to his abilities; aspiring not above his reach, and is
contented with what nature requires. Then he falls a ripping the sheet from the
yard, which he finds in one place tied, with one of his garters! (having made
use of it for want of another string) Heaven be praised, said he, this is no
effect of another shipwreck, but a fragment of the unfortunate ship, whose loss
was my redemption; which reflection made him shed tears.

Having ripped the sail in pieces, he rolls them up in such bundles as he could
conveniently carry, and lays them down till he had got a few oysters,
proceeding to grope in holes with his stick as he went on.

About forty paces farther, he finds a chest in a clift of the rock, which had
been washed up there by the violence of the late storm: Heaven! said he, more
fatal effects of fate's cruelty, and man's temerity! Was the sea made for man
to travel on? Is there not land enough for his rambling mind to rove? Must he
hunt after dangers, and put death to defiance? What is the owner of this the
better for it now! Or who can be the better in a place so remote, and the
access to it so difficult? being not to be approached but on the wings of
Providence, and over the back of death. Now was this full of massy gold, or yet
richer things, I thank my God, I am above the use of it; yet I will take it
home: It was sent hither by Providence, perhaps for the relief of some so
necessitated and destitute. Then going to lift it, he could not; therefore was
obliged to fetch his hatchet to beat it open, that he might take away what was
in it by degrees. Having taken as much of the sailcloth as he could
conveniently carry, with the few oysters he had got, he went home, and fetched
the tool, where with he wrenched the chest open, from which he took a suit of
clothes, and some wearing linen: These, said he, neither the owner, nor I,
want; so laid them down: The next thing he took out, was a roll of several
sheets of parchment, being blank indentures and leases; these, said he, are
instruments of the law, and often applied to injustice; but I will alter their
mischievous properties, and make them records of Heaven's mercies, and
Providence's wonderful liberality to me; so instead of being the ruin of some,
they chance to be the reclaiming of others. At the bottom of the chest lay a
rundlet of brandy, a Cheshire cheese, a leather bottle full of ink, with a
parcel of pens, and a penknife: As for these, said he, they are of use; the
pens, ink, and parchments have equipped me to keep a journal, which will divert
and pass away a few anxious hours: As for the cheese and brandy, they will but
cause me new cares: Before I had them, I wanted them not; now, the benefit and
comfort I shall find in them, when gone, will make me hanker after them most: I
wish I had still been without them; but now they are here, it would be a sin
to, let them be lost. I will take them home, and only use them at my need;
which will both make them, hold out the longer, and me grow less fond of them.

So, by degrees, he takes home the chest, and what was in it; and now having
materials to begin his journal he immediately fell to work, that for want of
other books, he might, at his leisure, peruse his past transactions, and the
many mercies he had received from Heaven; and that, after his disease, whoever
is directed thither by Providence, upon reading his wonderful escapes in the
greatest of dangers; his miraculous living, when remote from human assistance;
in the like extremity, might not despair. Thus he begins from his being eight
years old (as well as he can remember, he heard an old aunt of his say) to the
day of his being cast away, being then twenty-eight years of age, resolving to
continue it to his death.

Thus having written the preceding account of the shipwreck, and what had
befallen him since, to the finding of the chest, he proceeds: But calling to
mind his last dream but one, which did but warn him to make provision against
winter, and the season being pretty far advanced, he gathers a good store of
fuel and roots; begins to line the outside of his barrack with a wall of turf,
and lays the same at top, to keep out the wet: And as he now and then found
small shellfish and oysters upon the rock, he makes a bridge over the lake,
which in warm weather he used to wade, that in the winter he might go over dry:
So, having completed his bridge, which was made of two strong poles, which
reached from the land to the rock, and several lesser branches laid across
pretty close, he retires home, the day being far spent: The following night
there arose at violent storm, attended with dreadful claps of thunder, which
the many echoes from the rock, rendered the more terrible; lightning slashing
in a most frightful manner, succeeding each other, before the preceding was
well out of the sky, which put poor lonesome Quarll in such a consternation,
that notwithstanding his reliance on Heaven's protection, he would have given
the world (had it been in his possession) to have been within the reach of
human assistance; or at least, to have some company; solitude adding much to
his terror and affliction.

The glorious rising of the next morning's sun having laid the mortifying rage
of the blustering winds, Quarll, whose late alarm was hardly quelled, still
suspecting its most reviving rays to be terrifying glances and flashes of
lightning; but having lain a while, and hearing no noise, but that which still
raged in his mind, was at last convinced the storm was over; and so gets up
with a resolution to go and see if he could discern any effect of the late
tempest.

Being come at the other side of the rock, he saw, indeed, surprising objects,
but not afflicting; the mischief that was done, being to the inhabitants of the
sea only, a vast number of which had, by the wind, been dis-elemented; a
quantity of whitings, fine mackerels, large herrings, diverse sizes of codlings,
and several other sorts of fish, with a great number of shells, of different
shapes and bignesses, lying up and down upon the rock. Heaven be praised, said
he, instead of damage to bewail, what thanks have I now to return for this
mighty benefit! Here the powerful agent of mischief is, by kind Providence,
made a minister of good to me: Make me thankful! I am now provided for all the
next winter; and yet longer; by which time I am certain to have a fresh supply.

He who, when in distress,
To God makes his address,
And his bounties implore;
Is sure, and may depend,
That relief he will send,
And at need help the poor. Left the reader should think, these and the
following verses to be the effect of my own brain, I solemnly protest, they are
what I found in (...), written with his own hand.

Thus having taken up as many fish as he could hold in his arms, he carries
them home, and brings his shirt, which he used instead of a sack: So, at
several times, he brought away all the fish, and as many of the shells as he
had occasion for; of some of which he made boilers and stew-pans, of others
dishes and plates: Some he kept water in, and others fish in pickle; so that he
was stocked with necessary vessels as well as provision.

Being very weary with often going backwards and forwards with his fish, which
took up all that day to bring them home, he fits down to rest himself; and the
rundlet of brandy lying by, he was tempted to take a sup, which was at that
time very much wanted, his spirits being very low; but was loath to taste it,
lest he should grow fond of the liquor, and grieve after it when gone: Some
moments were spent before he could come to a resolution; at last, having
considered the use of it, which suited the present occasion, he concludes to
take a dram, and to use it like a cordial as it was first intended for; but the
vessel out of which he drank being at his mouth, the cordial turns to a nectar;
one gulp decoys another down: so the intended dram became a hearty draught. The
pleasentness of the liquor made him forget its nature; so that poor Quarll who
had for the space of near three months before, drank nothing but water, was
presently overcome with the strength of the brandy, and fell asleep in his
chair, with the rundlet on his bare lap, from whence it soon fell to the
ground, and being unstopt, ran all out.

Being awaked with hunger, having slept from evening till almost noon of
another day, which he knew not whether the succeeding or the next to it; seeing
what had happened he was sorely vexed, and could have wept at the accident; but
considering the liquor which occasioned it, might perhaps, in time, have caused
greater mischief, he was soon reconciled with the loss, but could not with that
of the right order of days, which having entirely forgot, hindered the going on
of his journal; so was obliged to make only a memorial. That damage being
repaired, another appears of a far greater consequence; the Sunday is lost,
which he had so carefully observed to that time: How can that be made up? Now,
said he, shall I daily be in danger of breaking the Sabbath, knowing not the
day. Oh fatal liquor! that ever thou were invented to cause so much mischief!
murder, adulteries, and blasphemies, as are daily, by thy most pernicicious
use, occasioned. But why should I lay the blame upon the use, when it is the
abuse that does the hurt! and exclaim against a thing, which being taken in
moderation, is so great a benefit, reviving a fainting heart, raising sinking
spirits, warming cold and decaying nature, and assuaging several pains: So
blames himself highly for gratifying his appetite with that where with he only
ought to have refreshed nature; and since that often misguided faculty had
prompted him to commit the fault, he dedicated that day, in which he became
sensible of it to prayers and fasting; and every seventh, from that he sets
apart for divine worship only, which he hoped would keep him from breaking the
commandments, for keeping holy the sabbath day; it being not certain, that the
day appointed by the church for that purpose, was the very day that God had
sanctified for the rest: So went to the place where the echoes, in many
different and melodious sounds, repeated his thanks giving to the Almighty,
which he had fixed upon to pay his devotion, and there spent the rest of the
day in prayers, and singing of psalms.

The next morning, having breakfasted with some of his usual bread, and a slice
of the cheese he found in the chest, he goes about curing his fish, in order to
salt them: Having laid by as many, for the present use, as he thought he could
eat whilst fresh, he improves the fair weather to dry one part of the
remainder, and keeps the rest in pickle.

The winter being near at hand, and the weather growing damp and cold, hinders
him from his walks; so being confined within doors, he employs his idle hours
in beautifying his utensils, which were not to be used on the fire: and
bestowed some pains in scraping and polishing the rest of his shells, some as
fine as though they had been nakes of pearl; which made them not only more fit
for their intended uses, but also a great ornament to his barrack, which he
shelved round with plaited twigs, after the manner of his table, and so set
them upon it.

Thus he spent the best part of the winter, making no farther remarks, but that
it was very sharp, attended with high winds, abundance of hail and show, which
obliged him to make a broom to sweep it away from about his hut, which would
have been damaged by it.

But shivering winter, having exhausted his frosty stores, and weary with
vexing nature, retired: Boreas also, grown faint with hard blowing, is forced
to retreat into his cave; gentle Zephyrus (who till then kept up in his
temperate cell) now comes forth to usher in the blooming spring; so mildly
slips on to inform nature of her favourite's approach, who at the joyful news
put on gay enamelled garb, and out of her rich wardrobe supplies all vegetables
with new vesture, to welcome the most lovely guest. The feathered choristers
also receives new strength; their tender lungs are repaired from the injuries
the foggy and misty air did occasion; and, thus revived, and placed on every
budding tree, to grace his entrance with their harmonious notes.

Quarll also whom bad weather had confined within doors a considerable time,
which had in a great measure numbed his limbs, and dulled his senses, now finds
himself quite revived: He no longer can keep within; the weather invites him
out; the singing birds on every side call to him; nature itself fetches him out
to behold her treasures.

Having with unspeakable pleasure walked some time, diverted with the sweet
melody of various kinds of singing birds, and the sight of abundance of
different sorts of blossomed trees, and blooming flowers; all things within the
island inspiring joy, he had the curiosity to go and view the sea: So goes over
his bridge; and then, at the other side of the rock, where he finds more
objects, requiring as much admiration, but affording a great deal less
pleasure; vast mountains of ice floating up and down, threatening all that
(...) their way.

These terrible effects of the winter, which to that time he was a stranger to,
occasioned his making these reflections: He who on billows roves, riches or
wealth to gain,
Is ever in danger, and labors often in vain;
If fortune o^ him smiles, giving his toil success,
Each day new cares arise, which mar his happiness.
The only treasure, then, worth laying up in store,
Is a contented mind, which never leaves one poor;
He is not truly rich, who hankers after more.


So, having returned Heaven thanks for his happy state, he creeps to the north
east side of the rock, at the foot of which lay an extraordinary large whale,
which the late high wind had cast there, and died for want of water. If this,
said he, is all the damage that has been done last winter, it may be borne; so
went down, and measured the length of it, which was above thirty yards, and
proportionable in bigness: There were shoals of small fishes swimming about it
in the shallow water wherein it lay, as rejoicing at its death: Thus, said he,
the oppressed rejoice at a tyrant's fall. What numbers of those have been
destroyed to make this monstrous bulk of fat! Well happy are they, who, like
me, are under Heaven's government only. So with his knife, which he always
carried in his pocket, cuts several slices of the whale, and throws them to the
small fishes, saying, it is but just you should, at last, feed on that which so
long fed on you; and, as oil ran, in abundance, from the places he had cut the
slices out of, it vexed him to see that wasted, which might turn to good money:
But why, said he, should I be disturbed at it? What use have I for any?
Providence takes none, it gives me all gratis. So goes on feeling for oysters
with his staff which he always walked with.

Having at last found a hole, where by their rattling at the bottom with his
staff, he judged there might be a pretty many, he marks the place, and goes
home to contrive some instrument to drag them up, being yet too cold for him to
go into the water; and as he had no tool but his knife and hatcher, both
improper to make a hole in a board, as requisite to make a rake, which was
wanting for that purpose; he beats out the end of his chest, in which there was
a knot: So having driven it out, he fastens the small end of a pole to it. Thus
equipped, he went and raked up oysters, which added one dish to his ordinary,
and sauce to others; yet at length his stomach growing qualmish with eating
altogether fish, and drinking nothing but water withal, he wishes he could have
a little flesh, which he might easily, there being animals enough in the wood
apparently fit for food; but then he must deprive them of their lives, barely
to make his own more easy.

Thus he debates with himself for some time, whether or no it would not be
injustice for him (who only by a providential accident was brought thither to
save his life) now to destroy those creatures, to whom Nature has given a being
in a land out of man's reach to disturb. Yet nature requires what seems to be
against nature for me to grant: I am faint, and like to grow worse, the longer
I abstain from flesh.

Having paused a while; why, said he, should I be so scrupulous? Were not all
things created for the use of man? Now, whether is it not worse to let a man
perish, than to destroy any other creature for his relief? Nature craves it,
and Providence gives it: Now, not to use it in necessity, is undervaluing the
gift.

So, having concluded upon catching some of those animals he had seen in the
wood, he considers by what means, having no dogs to hunt, not guns to shoot:
Having paused a while, he resolves upon making gins, wherewith he had seen
hares catched in Europe: Thus, taking some of the cords which he found with the
sail at the outside of the rock, he goes to work, and makes several, which he
fastens, at diverse gaps in the thickest, within the wood, through which he
judged that sort of beast, he had a mind for, went.

Impatient to know the success of his snares, he gets up betimes the next
morning, and goes to examine them; in one he found a certain animal something
like a fawn, the color of a deer, but feet and ears like a fox, and as big as
a well-grown hare: He was much rejoiced at his game, whose mouth he immediately
opened, to see if he could find out whether it fed on grass, or lived upon
prey, the creature being caught by the neck, and strangled with struggling,
before it died had brought up in its throat some of the greens it had been
eating, which very much pleased him; accounting those which lived upon flesh as
bad as carrion.

Having returned thanks for his good luck, he takes it home in order to dress
part of it for his dinner; so uncases and guts it: But its proving to be a
female, big with three young ones, grieved him to the heart, and made him
repent making those killing nooses: What pity, said he, so many lives should be
lost, and creatures wasted! One would have served me four days; and here are
four killed at once. Well, henceforth, to prevent the like evil, I Will take
alive what I just want, and save all the females. So, having stuck a long stick
at both ends in the ground, making half a circle, he hangs one quarter of the
animal upon a string, before a good fire, and so roasts it.

His dinner being ready, having said grace, he set to eating with an uncommon
appetite; and, whether it was the novelty of the dish, or that the meat did
really deserve the praise, he really thought he never eat any thing of flesh,
till then, comparable to it, either for taste or tenderness.

Having dined both plentifully and deliciously, he most zealously returns kind
Providence thanks for the late, and all favors received; then, pursuant to his
resolution, he goes making nets, in order to take his game alive for the
future; and, as he had no small twine to make it with, he was obliged to
unravel some of the sail which he luckily had by him; and with the the thread
twist some of (...) bigness he judged proper for that use.

Having made a sufficient quantity, he makes a couple of nets, about four feet
square, which he fastens in the room of the killing snares; so retired, and
resolved to come and examine them every morning.

Several days passed without taking any thing, so that he wanted flesh a whole
week, which did begin to disorder his stomach, but not his temper; being
entirely resigned to the will of Providence, and fully contented, with whatever
Heaven was pleased to send. One afternoon, which was not his customary time of
day to examine his nets, being visible in the day time for game to run in; he
happened to walk in the wood, to take the full dimensions thereof, so chanced
to go by his nets; in one of which were taken two animals, as big as a kid six
weeks old, of a bright dun, their horns upright and straight, their shape like
a stag, most curiously limbed, a small tuft of hair on each shoulder and hip.
By their horns, which were but short, they appeared to be very young, which
rejoiced him the more, being in hopes to tame those he did not want for present
use; so carried them home, joyful of his game, depending upon a good dinner;
but was sadly disappointed: The animals he found were antelopes (calling to
mind he had seen them in his travels) which proving both females, he had made a
resolution to preserve. Though they were too young to be with kid, and he in
great need of flesh, yet he would not kill them; so, with cords, fastens them
to the outside of his lodge; and with constant feeding them, in two months time
made them so tame, that they followed him up and down; which added much to the
pleasure he already took in his habitation, which by that time was covered with
green leaves, both top and sides; the stakes it was made of having struck root,
and shot out young branches, whose strength increasing that summer; to fill up
the vacancy between each plant, he pulled the turfs, wherewith he had covered
the outside and top of the hut between them, to keep the cold out in the winter.

His former hut, being now become a pleasant arbor, gave him encouragement to
bestow some pains about it toward the embellishment of it, which seemed to
depend on being well attended. He resolved upon keeping it pruned and watered,
the better to make it grow thick and fast, which answered his intent; for in
three years time, the stems of every plant that composed the arbor, were grown
quite close, and made a solid wall of about six inches thick, covered with
green leaves without which lay most regular and even, and within had a most
agreeable smooth bark, of a pleasant olive color. His late arbor being by his
care and time, and nature's assistance, become a matchless lodge, as intended
by nature for something more than human guests, he now consults to make it as
commodious as beautiful. Here is said he, a delightful dwelling, warm in the
winter, and cool in the summer; delightful to the eye, and comfortable to the
body; pity it should be employed to any use, but repose and delight! So
resolved upon making a kitchen near it. Thus having fixed upon a place
convenient at the side of his lodge, about six feet from it, twelve in length,
and eight in breadth, which he enclosed with the turfs that covered the outside
of his arbor, before it was sufficiently thick to keep out the cold; then
having laid sticks across the top of the walls, which were about eight feet
high, he lays turf thereon, and so covers it, leaving an open place for the
smoke to go out.

The outside being done, he goes about inside necessaries, as fire places to
roast and boil at; thus cuts a hole in the ground, at a small distance from the
wall, after the manner of flew stoves in noblemen's kitchens; then, at another
place, he sets two flat stones, about eight or nine inches broad, and one foot
long, edgeways, opposite to one another; near two feet asunder; then puts a
third in the same manner, at the end of the other two; so makes a fireplace
fit to roast at: Then, for other conveniences, he weaves twigs about sticks,
stuck in the wall on one side of the kitchen, where he lays the shells fit for
utensils, which both adorned and furnished it.

Having completed that piece of work, he goes and visits his plantations, which
he finds in a thriving condition; the roots being in six months time, grown
from the bigness of a pea ((...) they were when first set) to that of an egg:
His an^elopes also were come to their full growth, and complete beauty, which
exceeded most four-fo^^ed bea^^s; having a majestic presence, body and limbs
representing a stag, and the noble march of a horse: So every thing concurred
to his happiness. For which, having returned his most liberal Benefactor his
grateful acknowledgements, he thinks on means to prevent any obstructions that
may intercept the continuation thereof; and as the want of clothes was the only
cause he could think of, to make him uneasy, having but the jacket and hose
which were given him on board, to save his own clothes, which, when worn out,
he could not recruit; therefore, to accustom himself to go without, he thins
those he had, so takes away the lining from the outside of his clothing, in
order to wear the thickest in the coldest weather; and so thins his dress, by
degrees, till at last, be went quite naked. Having thus concluded, as being the
best shift necessity could raise him, he falls to ripping his jacket, in the
lining whereof he found seven peace and three beans which were (...) in a hole
at the corner of the pocket.

Those few made him wish for more, which he had no room to hope for they being
raised by seed, which the island did (...) produce: These few, said h^, which
at present are hardly sufficient to satisfy a woman's longing, may, with time
and industry, be improved to a quantity large enough to serve me for a meal;
then lays them up against a proper time to (...) (...); so (...) remainder of
that summer in walking about the island, watering his lodge, weeding his root
plantation, attending his nets, which now and then supplied him with an
antelope or goat, to eat at intervals between fish he commonly found on the
rock, after high winds and storms; never failing to visit the sea three or four
times a week, according as the weather did prove; thus diverting many anxious
hours with variety of objects that element affords. Sometimes he had the
pleasure of seeing great whales chasing one another, spouting large streams of
water out of their gills and nostrils; at other times, numbers of beautiful
dolphins rolling amongst the waves; now and then a quantity of strange
monstrous fish playing on the surface of the sea, some whereof had heads (not
common to fishes) like those of hogs; others not unlike those of dogs, calves,
horses, lions, bulls, goats, and several other creatures: Some chasing another
sort; which, to avoid being taken, would quit their element, and seek refuge in
the air, and fly some yards above the water, till their fins being dry, obliged
them to plunge in again.

These pastimes being generally succeeded with bad weather, and dreadful
storms, checked the pleasure they gave, with a dread of the evil that
threatened to follow. Thus commiserating the case of those whose misfortune is
to be exposed to them; having spent some time in reflection, he goes to his
usual devotion, and calling to mind, that in all that time he never saw a young
fish in the pond, he conjectured that something might destroy the small ones;
and as he imagined, so it proved: For, at his approach, a large fowl slew out
of the pond with a fish in its bill, being too large for it to swallow.

At that distance, the bird being also upon the wing, he could neither discern
color or make; but he had the satisfaction of discovering the cause why the
fishes did not increase, they being devoured when young by that creature;
which, to prevent, for the future, he studies means to kill the destroyer, nets
not being proper instruments; it being requisite, for that purpose, to have one
all round, as also to cover (...) pond, which was impossible, by reason of its
largeness; and a less being of no use; the birds probably not coming to one
certain place. He wished for a gun and ammunition fitting, as being the most
probable things to succeed; but no such instrument being within his reach he
ponders again; during which time, a cross bow offers itself to his mind, but is
as distant from his reach as the gun: It is true there was stuff enough in the
island to make many, but no tools but a hatchet and a pocket knife; wherewith,
if he made shift to cut and shape a bow, he could not make a latch and spring
necessary to it; so he must not think on it: Yet, a bow being the only thing he
could apply to, he goes about on forthwith.

Thus having picked a branch of a tree, which had the resemblance of yew, and
as tough, of which they are sometimes made, he, with the tools he had, made a
shift to make one of about six feet long, and arrows of the same, which he
hardens and straightens over the fire; then, having slipped them at one end,
about two or three inches, he slips in a bit of parchment, cut sharp at one
end, and about three inches at the other; then ties the end close, to keep it
in, which served for feathers; and, with the ravelling of some of the sails, he
makes a string to it.

Thus equipped for an archer, wanting nothing but skill, which is only to be
gained by practice, he daily exercised shooting at a mark for the space ^f a
fortnight; in which (...) he made such an improvement that in three shoot he
would (...) a mark of about three inches lquar, at near (...) (...) distance.

Being sufficiently skilled he goes and lies in wait for his desired game; so
place himself behind a tree as near the pond, as he could, whither the bird
came in a few hours after.

The creature being pitched upon the bank never stood still, but kept running
round, watching for a sizeable fish to swallow; so that he had no opportunity
to shoot: Till having, at last, espied out one, it launched itself into the
pond but raised more easily, which gave him time to take aim; nevertheless he
missed it, being in motion; but when come to the top, he struck it through the
body, as it opened its wings, and laid it flat on the other side of the pond.
He took it up wonderfully pleased at his good success the first time of his
practicing his new acquired are; yet, having taken notice of the bird's beauty,
he had a regret for its death, though he might, in time, have rued its living;
the stock of fish weekly decreasing, by his own catching one now and then with
a small net he made for that use when short of other provision; and their
recruiting prevented by that bird's daily devouring their young. The
inexpressible beauty of the feathers which were after the nature of a drake,
every one distinguished from another by a rim round the edge thereof, about the
breadth of a large thread, and of a changeable color, from red to aurora and
green; the ribs of a delightful blue, and the feathers pearl color, speckled
with a bright yellow; the breast and belly (if it might be said to be of any
particular color) was that of a dove's feathers, rimmed like the back,
diversely changing; the head, which was like that of a swan, for make, was
purple also, changing as it moved (...) (...) like burnished gold: Eyes like a
ruby, (...) (...) of gold round it; the feet the same as the bill; the (...)
(...) the bird was between a middling goose and duck, and in shape resembling a
swan. Having bemoaned the death of that delightful creature, he carefully takes
cut its flesh, which, corrupting, would spoil the outside; then fills the skin
with sw^ot herbs, which he dried for that use; and having sewed up the place he
cut open, to take the flesh out, he set it up in his lodge.

His good success in archery, made him love the exercise; so that what odd
hours he had in the day (besides those he set apart for his divine worship, and
those necessary occupations about his lodge plantations, and making remarks) he
bestowed in shooting at the mark; which in time made him so expert that he
hardly would miss a standing mark the bigness of a dove, at forty or fifty
yards distance, once in ten times; and would shoot tolerably well flying;
having once occasion to try it upon a monstrous eagle, which often flew
rounding over the place where his antelopes and goats fed, near his lodge;
which he shot at, fearing it would damage them, and killed it with the second
arrow. The summer being over, during which, having been much taken up about his
habitation and plantations, he had neither time nor opportunity to make remarks
farther than that it was some days very showery, and for the most part
generally very hot; but now the weather being grown something cold, and the
wind pretty sharp, he must be obliged to put on some clothes to keep it off,
being as yet too tender to go any longer without; next to provide for his
antelopes against the approaching winter; so makes a lodge for them, at the
backside of his kitchen; with sticks which he drove into the ground, about two
feet from the wall, and then bends them about three feet from the ground, and
sticks them in the said wall, and smaller branches he interwove between them:
He^shuts up the front, and covers the top, leaving both ends open for the
antelopes to go in at; then lays grass (which he dried on purpose) in the said
lodge, for them to lie on. Thus having dug up a considerable quantity of roots,
and being already stocked with salt fish, both dry and in pickle he was pretty
well provided for his cattle and himself, against the ensuing winter, which
proved much like the preceding one, only not so stormy. The succeeding spring
having awaked slumbering nature, and reviving what the preceding hard season
had caused to droop every vegetable puts on new clothing and recovers their
wonted beauty; each animal assumes fresh vigor; the beasts in the wood leap
and bound for joy, and each bird on the trees sings for gladness. The whole
creation is, as it were, repaired and every creature decked with new life:
Love, by Nature's direction, for the increase of every kind, warms their
harmless breasts; each animal seeks a mate; our same antelopes quit their abode
and range the woods for the relief ordained to quell their innocent passion;
which being assuaged, they return home, pregnant with young, to their master's
great satisfaction; who having given them over, was doubly rejoiced to see them
come again in an increasing condition. Heaven be praised! said he, I shall have
a stock of my own; and will not fear wanting.

So, having made fitting preparations against their kidding, he goes and
examines the improvement of his now plantation, where he found his roots grown
full as large as any o^ those that grew wild. Make me thankful! said he; I am
now provided with all necessary food; I shall no more need to rob those poor
creatures of that which nature had provided for their own proper use. Next he
goes and views his small stock of peace and beans, which he found in a very
promising case: So whilst the weather was fair, he falls to clearing a spot of
ground to set them in as they increased. Turning up the ground, he found
several sorts of roots that looked to be eatable some whereof were as big as a
large carrot, others less. He broke a bit of every one; some of which breaking
short, and being not stringy, he judged they must be eatable: Then he smells
them; and finding the scent not disagreeable, he tastes them. Some were
sweetish, others sharp and hot, like horseradish; and those he proposes to use
instead of spice. Sure, said he, these being of a pleasant scent and favor,
cannot be offensive to nature: So, having manured his ground, he takes a sample
of every root which he judged eatable, and boils them, as the surest way to
experience their goodness. Most of them proved not only passable good, but
extraordinary; some eating like parsnips, others almost like carrots, but
rather more agreeable; some like beets and turnips; every one, in their several
kinds, as good as he ever eat in England, but of different colors and make;
some being bluish others black; some red, and some yellow: These, though not
wanted, having sufficient to gratify a nicer taste than his, were nevertheless
extremely welcome, being something like his native country fare and product: So
having returned thanks for this most agreeable addition to his ordinary, he
sets a mark to every herb which those roots bore in order to get some of the
seed to sow in a ground he would prepare: So, being provided with flesh, fish,
herbs, and several sorts of roots, he goes and examines what improvement his
peace and beans have made; which he found increased to admiration; the seven
peace having produced one thousand, and the three beans one hundred: Having
returned thanks for that vast increase, he lays them by, in order to set them
at a proper season, as he had done the year before. By this time his antelopes
had kidded, one of them having brought four young ones, and the second three:
This vast addition to his provisions very much rejoiced him, being sure now not
to want flesh at his need, which before he was in danger of; finding but seldom
any thing in his net: So makes account to live upon two of the young bucks
whilst they lasted; killing one as soon as sit for meat, and so now and then
another, saving only five to breed; one whereof should be a mate to keep the
females in rutting time, from the wood; lest, at on^ ^ime or other, they should
stay away for good and all. The old ones being well fed, as he always took care
to do, providing for them store of those greens he knew they loved; as also
boiled roots for them now and then, of which they are very fond; the young ones
throve apace, and grew very fat; so that in three weeks time they were large
and sit to eat. He killed one; which being roasted, proved to be more delicious
than any house lamb, sucking-pig, young fawn, or any other suckling whatever.
Having lived upon that, with now and then a little fish, about one month, which
was as long as he could keep it eatable, having dressed it at two different
times, five days interval; eating the cold remains in several manners;
reserving one of the other two males for a time he should be scanted, and in
want of flesh; but was unluckily disappointed by a parcel of large eagles,
which flying one morning over the place where the young antelopes were playing,
being of a gay, as well as active disposition, who launched themselves with
precipitation upon the male he reserved for time of need, and one of the
females which he kept for breed; seeing his beloved diverters carrying away by
those birds of prey, he runs in for his bow, but came too late with it, the
eagles being gone. Having lost his two dear antelopes, especially the female,
having doomed the male for his own eating, he hardly could forbear weeping, to
think of their being cruelly torn to pieces by those ravenous creatures: Thus
having for some time lamented his loss, and bewailed their hard fate, he thinks
on means to prevent the like evil for the time to come; and as his bow was not
always at hand, he resolves upon making a net, and fastens (...) he saw them
come in at.

The succeeding winter proving very wet and windy, gave him but little
invitation to take his usual walks; so having every thing he had occasion for
at hand, he kept close to his ne^-making; for which having twine to twist, and
thread to ravel out, to make the said twine, kept him employed till the
following spring, which came on apace. Having finished his net, and every thing
which belonged to it, he goes and fastens it to the trees, as he had proposed;
then takes a walk to his plantations, which he found in a thriving condition;
for which, and other benefits already received, he resolves, as in duty bound,
to attend at his usual place of worship, and sing thanksgiving psalms, which
the hardness of the weather had kept him from all the late winter; but it
coming into his mind, that whilst he was at his devotion, returning thanks for
the fair prospect of a plentiful crop, his antelopes would break into the (...)
hedge being as yet but thin, and devour the promising buds, which are the
principal occasion of his devotion; this not altogether improper consideration
puts a sad check to his religious intention. As he was debating in his mind
between religion and reason, he perceived his antelopes making toward the
peace, whither they doubtless, would have got in, had he not returned, and
driven them another way: Which accident convinced him he might find a more
proper time to go about his devotion; no man being required to worship to his
prejudice: So having put off his religious duty till he had better secured his
peace and beans, he cuts a parcel of branches, wherewith he stops those gaps to
prevent the creatures going in; and having completed his work he goes to his
devotion adding to his usual thanksgiving, a particular collect for his luckily
being in the way to prevent his being frustr^^^d of the blessing Heaven so
fairly promised to bestow on his labors. Having paid his devotion, he walks
about the island, being all the way delighted with the birds celebrating their
Maker's praise in their different harmonious notes: Every thing in nature, said
he, answers the end of its creation, but ungrateful man! who ambitious to be
wise, as his Creator, only learns to make himself wretched. Thus he walks till
evening making several reflections on the different conditions of men,
preferring his present state to that of Adam before his fall, who could not be
sensible of happiness, having never known a reverse; which, otherwise, he would
have been more careful to prevent. Being come home and near bed time, he first
eat his supper and then, having performed his customary religious service, he
goes to bed: The next morning, after paying his usual devotion, he takes a walk
to his plantations on which he emplores a continuation of the prosperous
condition they appear to be in; next he goes to examine his nets, in which he
finds a brace of fowls like ducks, but twice as large, and exceeding beautiful:
The drake (which he knew by a colored feather on his rump) was of a fine
cinnamon color upon his back, his breast of a mazarine blue, the belly of a
deep orange, his neck green, head purple, his eyes, bill, and feet, red; every
color changing most agreeably as they moved. The duck was also very beautiful,
but of quite different colors, and much paler than the drake's. The
disappointment in catching those delightful fowls, instead of ravenous eagles,
as he had purposed, no wise displeased him, but he rather was rejoiced to have
such beautiful fowls to look at; yet it went much against his mind to deprive
those creatures of their liberty, the greatest comfort in life) which Nature
took so much pains to adorn: But, said he, they were created for the use of
man: So, (...) keeping them for my pleasure, they will but answer the end of
their creation. Their confinement shall be no stricter than my own; they shall
have the whole island to range in. He then pinions them, puts them in the pond,
and makes baskets for them to shelter in, which he places in the branches of
those trees that hung closest to the water, taking particular care to feed them
daily with roots roasted and boiled; and the guts of the fish, and other
creatures, he used for his own eating, which made them thrive mainly, and take
to the place; so that they bred in their season.

The five antelopes had by this time kidded, and brought sixteen young ones;
his peace and beans also were wonderfully improved, having that season enough to
stock the ground the year following. Thus he returns kind Providence thanks for
the vast increase, and concludes to live upon the young antelopes as long as
they lasted, reserving only one for suck of the old ones, to keep them in milk,
of which he had taken notice they had plenty, designing to draw it daily for
his own use: so that in a little time he had enough to skim for cream, which he
used for sauce instead of butter, and made small cheeses of the rest: Now
having a pretty store of dairy-ware, he resolves to make a place to keep it in;
the kitchen wherein he was obliged to lay his salt fish (which commonly smells
strong) not being a proper place for cream and milk: For which end he makes a
dairy-house at the other side of his dwelling, with branches of trees, after
the manner of a close arbor, and thatches it over with grass; which answering
the kitchen in form and situation made uniform wings, that added as much to the
beauty as convenience of the habitation. Having completed his dairy, he
proceeds in his resolution of making cheese, having learned the way in Holland;
and for want of recent to turn his milk, he takes some of the horse-redish
seed, which being of a hot nature had the same effect: Having curd to his mind,
he seasons it with his palate; then with his hatchet, he cuts a notch round in
the bark of a tree, about eighteen inches in circumference; and a second in the
same manner, six inches-below that: Then slits the circle, and with his knife
gently opens it, parting in from the tree; Thus he makes as many hoops as he
judged would contain his paste, which, being girded round with cords to keep
them from opening, he fills with the said paste, and lays them by, till fit to
eat.

This being done, which completed his provisions, he returns thank for those
blessings which had been so, liberally bestowed on him: Now, said he, Heaven be
praised! I exceed a prince in happiness: I have a habitation strong and
lasting, a beautiful and convenient freehold, store of comforts, with all
necessaries of life free-cost, which I enjoy with peace and pleasure
uncontrolled: Yet I think there is still something wanting to complete my
happiness: If a partner in grief lessen sorrow, certainly it must in delight
augment pleasure. What objects of admiration are here concealed, and like a
miser's treasure, hid from the world! If man who was created for bliss, could
have been completely happy alone, he would not have had a companion given him:
Thus he walks about thoughtful, till bed time. In that disposition he goes to
bed, and soon fell asleep: The night also, being windy, added to his
disposition: But his mind finds no repose; it still runs heavy upon the
subject, that took it up the day before, and forms ideas suitable to his
inclination; as solitude was the motive of its being disturbed, he indulges it
with the thoughts of company, dreaming that the same of his station, and happy
state of life, was spread about the world; that it promoted a vast number of
people, from all parts, to come to it, which at last induced several princes to
claim right to it, which being decided by a bloody war, a governor was sent,
who laid taxes, demanded duties, raised rents, and warns him to be gone, having
fixed upon his habitation for himself to dwell in. Being sadly disturbed, he
cries out in his sleep, this is a great punishment for my (...); Could I not be
contented with being lord on this island, without provoking Heaven to bring me
under the power of extorting governors. There happening a great noise, he
starts out of his sleep, (...) the thoughts of hearing a proclamation; and
cries out, alas! it is too late to proclaim an evil which is already come: But
being thoroughly awake, and the noise still continuing he found he had been
dreaming, which very much rejoiced him: He therefore put on his clothes, and
hastens to the place he heard the noise come from. Being within forty or fifty
yards thereof, he saw a number of monkies of two different kinds; one sort
squealing and fighting against the other, without intermixing, but still
rallying, as they scattered in the scuffle. He stood some time admiring the
order they kept in; and the battle still continuing as fierce as at first, he
advanced to see what they sought about; for he took notice, they strove very
much to keep their ground. At his approach the battle ceased; and the
combatants retiring at some distance, left the spot of ground, on which they
sought, clear; whereon lay a considerable quantity of wild pomegranates which
the wind had shook off the trees the night before, and which were the occasion
of their strife. His coming having caused a truce, every one of those creatures
keeping still and quiet during his stay, he resolves to use his endeavors to
make a solid peace; and as that difference had arisen from the fruit there
present, to which he could see no reason but that each kind had an equal right;
he divides it into two equal parcels, which he lays opposite to each other
toward both the parties, retiring a little way, to see whether this expedient
would decide the quarrel: Which answered his intent; those animals quietly
coming to that share next to them, and peaceably carrying it away, each to
their quarters. This occasioned several reflections on the frivolous, and often
unjust quarrels that arise among princes, which create such bloody wars, as
prove the destruction of vast numbers of their subjects. If monarchs, said he,
always acted with as much reason as these creatures* how much blood and money
would they save! Thus goes on to his usual place of worship, in order to return
thanks, that he was free of that evil, the dream whereof had so tortured his
mind; though he confessed he justly deserved the reality, for his uneasiness in
the happiest of circumstances. Having paid his devotion, he takes a walk to see
how his peace and beans came on, which he found in a very improving disposition,
each stem bearing a vast number of well filled pods. Heaven be praised! said
he; I shall eat of this year's crop, and have sufficient to stock my ground the
ensuing one. Thus being plentifully supplied with necessaries, and in a
pleasant island, every thing about him being come to perfection; his dwelling,
which seems intended by nature for some immortal guest, being, by time, yearly
repaired and improved, leaving no room for care; yet the unwise man, as if an
enemy to his own ease, cannot be contented with the enjoyment of more than he
could reasonably crave, but must disturb his mind with what concerns him not:
What pity, said he, so delightful a habitation, attended with such
conveniences, and situated in so wholesome an air, and fruitful a land, should
at my death, lose all those wonderful properties, being become useless for want
of somebody to enjoy them! What admiration will here be lost for want of
beholders! But what kind of man could I settle it upon, worthy of so fine an
inheritance? Were it at my pleasure to choose myself an heir, such only appear
virtuous, whose weak nature confides to chastity: Every constitution cannot
bear excess: want of courage occasions mildness, and lack of strength good
(...): Thus virtue is made a cloak to infirmity* But why do I thus willingly
hamper myself with those cares Providence has been pleased to free me off Leave
the (...) the knowing care,
Who Will ^^cceed him, or be his heir;
That racks his soul with discontent,
Lest what (...) for should be spent.
His gold to (...) is far more dear,
Than all his friends or kindred near.


The next morning he takes his usual walks, and visits his nets: In that he had
set for eagles, he found a fowl as big as a (...), but the color of a
pheasant, only a tail like a partridge: This having no sign of being a bird of
prey, he was loath to kill it; but having ^ad no fresh (...) for above a week,
he yields to his appetite and dresses it, eating part thereof for his (...) It
was very fat and plump, and eat much like a pheasant but rather tenderer, and
fuller of gravy. Though he was very well pleased with the bird he had taken,
yet had rather it had been one of the eagles which kept his young antelopes in
jeopardy: But as he could not destroy them with his net, which had hung a
considerable time without the intended success, he projects the prevention of
their increase, by destroying their eggs, leaving his nets wholly for the use
they had been successful in; and searches the clifts of the rock next the sea,
where those birds commonly build; where having ^ound several nests, he takes
away the eggs that were in them, being then their breeding time, and carries
them home, in order to empty the shells, and hang them up and down in his
habitation, amongst the green leaves which covered the ceiling thereof; but
having accidentally broke one, and the yolk and white thereof, being like that
of a turkey, he had the curiosity to boil one, and taste it, which eat much
after the manner of a swan^s: The rest he saved to eat now and then for a
change, reaping a double advantage by robbing those birds; lessening thereby
the damage they might do him in time, and adding a dish to his present fare.

In this prosperous way he lived fifteen years, finding no alteration in the
weather or seasons, nor meeting in all the time, with any transactions worthy
of record; still performing his usual exercises, and taking his walks with all
the content and satisfaction his happy condition could procure; entirely
forsaking all thoughts and desires of ever quitting the blessed station he then
had in his possession. Thus having walked the island over and over (which
though delightful, yet the frequent repetition of the wonders it produces,
renders them, as it were common, and less admirable) he proceeds to view the
sea, whose fluid element being ever in motion, daily affords new objects of
admiration. The day being very fair, and the weather as calm, he sat down upon
the rock, taking pleasure in seeing the waves roll, and, as it were, chase one
another; the next pursuing the first, on which it rides, when come at! and
being itself overtaken by a succeeding, is also mounted on thus, wave upon
wave, till come to a bulky body, too heavy for the undermost to bear, sunk
altogether; This, said he, is a true emblem of ambition; men striving to outdo
one another, are often outdone. As he was making reflections on the emptiness
of vanity and pride, returning Heaven thanks, that he was separated from the
world, which abounds in nothing else; a ship appears at a great distance, a
sight he had not seen since his shipwreck: Unlucky invention! said he, that
thou should ever come into men's thoughts! The ark, which gave the first
notion of a floating habitation, was ordered for the preservation of man; but
its fatal copies daily expose him to destruction. Having therefore returned
Heaven thanks for his being out of those dangers, he makes a solemn vow, never
to return into them again, though it were to gain the world: But his resolution
proved as brittle, as his nature was frail: The men on board had spied him out
with their perspective glasses; and supposing him to be ship-wrecked, and to
want relief, sent their long boat with two men to fetch him away. At their
approach his heart alters its motion; his blood stops from its common course;
his sinews are all stagnated; which entirely unframes his reason, and makes him
a stranger to his own inclination; which struggling with his wavering
resolution, occasions a debate between hope and fear: But the boat, being come
pretty nigh, gave hope the advantage, and his late resolution yields to his
revived inclination; which being now encouraged by a probable opportunity of
being answered, rushes on to execution. He now, quitting all his former
reliance on Providence, depends altogether upon his getting away, blessing the
lucky opportunity of seeing his blessed country again, for which pleasure he
freely quits and forsakes all the happiness he enjoyed! gladly abandoning his
delightful habitation, and plentiful island: He thinks no more of Providence;
his mind is entirely taken up with his voyage: But disappointment, which often
attends the greatest probabilities, snatches success out of his hand before he
could grasp it, and intercepts his supposed infallible retreat: The boat could
not approach him, by reason of the rocks running a great way into the ^ea under
water; nor could he come at the boat for sharp points, and deep holes, which
made it unfordable, as well as unnavigable; so that after several hours
striving in vain on both sides, to come at one another; the men, after they had
strove all they could but to no purpose, said something to him in a rage, which
he understood not, and went without him, more wretched now, than he was when he
was first cast away: His full dependence upon a retreat made him abandon all
further reliance on Providence, whom then he could implore; but now, having
ungratefully despised Heaven's bounties, which had been so largely bestowed on
him, he has forfeited all hopes of assistance from thence, and expects none
from the world: Thus destitute, and in the greatest perplexity, he (...) out,
whither shall I now fly for help! The world can give me none, and I dare not
crave any more from heaven. O cursed delusion! but rather cursed weakness! Why
did I give way to it! Had I not enough of the world, or was I grown weary of
being happy? So saying, he falls a weeping: Could I shed a flood of tears,
sufficient to wash away my fault or ease me of the remorse it does create! but
why does my distracted fancy propose impossibilities? Is not the ocean
sufficient to rid me of this wretched life? Then adieu, infectious world, thou
magician of iniquity! The thoughts of which are now more offensive, than the
most nauseous odor of an old sepulcher. Here he was going to cast himself into
the sea; but a vast large monster, rising out of the water* with its terrible
jaws wide open, looking at him, in a most dreadful manner, stopped the
execution of his desperate design: Thus, death appearing in a different shape
than he had proposed to meet him in, frightens away his resolution of dying: I
may, said he, cond^mn myself; but vengeance belongs to God alone, who rejects
not tears of repentance, but always extends his mercies toward the penitent;
and since St. Peter, after thrice denying his Lord and Master, was, by
repenting and weeping over his sin, received again into favor, I hope these my
weak, but sincere tokens of repentance will be accepted of, for ever divorcing
myself from the world, and never thinking of its alluring pleasures, but to
despise them. And, for the better performance of that pious resolution, he sets
that woeful day apart (in which he was about to commit that fatal deed) for
prayer and fasting: Thus he went home, and spent the remainder of that in
fasting and praying, singing penitential psalms till dark night, when nature
urged him to repose. The pains and labor he had been at in the day, climbing
up and down the rock, dragging himself to and fro, to come at the boat, having
very much racked his limbs; and the disappointment of his full dependence on
the late promising success, as also the tormenting remorse, and heavy grief,
for his sinful reliance thereon, much fatiguing his mind, rendered sleep, which
is ordained for the refreshment of nature, of no manner of help to him: His
thoughts are continually disturbed with frightful visions; all his past dangers
gla^^ at him, as if threatening their return; but that which terrified him most
was, the frightful idea of the terrible monster which rose out of the sea at
that instant he was going to plunge himself in it.

Being a waked out of his restless sleep, rather more fatigued than when he lay
down, having still the terrible aspect of a sea monster in his mind, he made
several reflections on the execrable nature of his intended sin; admiring the
immense goodness of Providence, who, to deter him, from the committing of the
enormous act, had ordered that (beyond imagination) terrible object, as the
most suitable to the barbarity of his design, to strike into him that terror
which the species of death he had fixed on could not. Thus having with tears
acknowledged the enormity of his resolution, he returns Providence thanks for
its inestimable goodness, who (notwithstanding his late most ungrateful
elopement) preserved him from eternal, as well as temporal ruin: Having paid
his devotion, and sung a thanksgiving psalm, he takes a little nourishment, his
spirits being low with his past fatigue and fasting; and as he could not put
out of his eyes the terrible aspect of the monster, which was beyond chimerical
conception, he resolves to draw it according to the idea he had in his mind:
Perhaps, said he, having often the representation before mine eyes, it will
make the object more familiar and less frightful. -- Taking therefore pen, ink,
and as sheet of parchment, now, said he, how shall I represent what is past
imagination to conceive? A form without likeness, and yet comparable to the
most terrible part of every frightful creature; a large head resembling that of
a lion, bearing three pair of horns; one pair upright, like that of an
antelope; another pair like a goat's; two more bending backwards; its face
armed all round with darts, like a porcupine; vast great eyes, sparkling like a
flint struck with a steel; its nose like a wild horse, always snarling; the
mouth of a lion, and teeth of a panther; the fences of an elephant, and the
tusks of a wild boar; shouldered like a giant, with claws like an eagle, bodied
and covered with shells like a rhinoceros, and the color of a crocodile.

Having likened every different part, he proceeds in the representation
thereof; which being finished, put him in the greatest admiration! Sure, said
he, if nature had a hand in thy making, it was to assemble in one creature, all
the fiercest and dreadfulest animals that are most frightful and terrible! Now,
perhaps, this being constantly before me, may come l^ss in my mind. Then fixing
it against his wall, this, said he, will be always a memorandum of my late vow,
never to endeavor to wish to go from hence, whatever opportunity offers,
though attended with ever so great a probability of success, and prospect of
gain; fully settling his whole mind and affection on the state and condition
Heaven has been pleased to place him in; resolving to let nothing enter into
his thoughts, but his most grateful duty to so great a benefactor, who has so
often and miraculously rescued him from death.

Thus having entirely banished the world out of his mind, which before often
disturbed it, he limits his thoughts within the bounds of his blessed
possession, which affords him more than is sufficient to make his life happy;
where plenty flows on him, and pleasure attends his desires; abounding in all
things that can gratify his appetite, or delight his fancy: A herd of
delightful antelopes, bounding and playing about his habitation, divert him at
home; and in his walks he is entertained with the harmony of diverse kinds of
singing birds; every place he comes at offers him new objects of pleasure; thus
all seems to concur in completing his happiness.

In this most blessed state he thinks himself as Adam before his fall, having
no room for wishes, only that every thing may continue in its present
condition; but it cannot be expected, that fair weather, which smiles on his
beauty, will not change. The sun must go its course, and the seasons take their
turn; which considerations must, for the present admit some small care: He is
naked, and his tender constitution susceptible of the cold; therefore the
clothes he was cast away in being worn out, he is obliged to think of providing
something to defend his limbs from the hardness of the approaching winter,
whilst it was yet warm. Having considered what to make a wrapper of, he
concludes upon using some of the grass he made his mats of, on which he lay,
being soft and warm, very fit for that purpose: Of this he cuts down a
sufficient quantity, which, when ready to work, he makes a small twine with,
and plaits it in narrow braids, which he sews together with some of the same,
and shapes a long loose gown, that covered him to his heels, and a cap of the
same.

By that time he had finished his winter-garb, the weather was grown cold
enough for him to put it on. The frosty season came on^ apace, in which there
fell such a quantity of snow, that he was forced to make a broom, and sweep it
away from about his habitation twice a day; as also the same he made to the
places he had occasion to go to, tossing the snow on each side, which, before
the winter was over, met at top, and covered it all the way; which obliged him
to keep within doors for a considerable time, and melt snow instead of water;
le^t, going for some, he might chance to be buried among the snow.

The winter being over and the snow dissolved, the gay spring advances apace,
offering nature its usual assistance* repairing the damages the late frost had
done* which joyful tidings made every thing smile. Quaril, also, finding
himself revived, took his former walks, which the preceding bad weather had
kept him from, though there had been no considerable storm the winter before.

He having a mind to view the sea, and being come to the out side of the
north-west end of the rock, sees at the foot thereof, something like part of
the body of a large hollow tree, the ends whereof were stopped with its own
pitch; and the middle, which was slit open from end to end, and kept gaping by
a stick laid across. This put him in mind of canoes, with which Indians paddle
up and down their lakes and rivers; and being on that side of the rock next to
the island of California, he fancied* some of them were come to visit this
island, though not many in number; their canoes holding at the most but two
men; and for the generality, only one: Yet, as some of these are accounted
great thieves, daily robbing one another, he hastens home to secure what he
had; but it was too late: They had been there already, and had taken away the
clothes he found in the chest; which being, by far, too little for him, hung
carelessly on a pin behind his door. Had they been contented with that, he
would not have regarded it; but they carried away some of his curious shells,
and, what grieved him most, the fine bird he had taken so much pains to dress
and stuff, and care to preserve; as also his bow and arrows.

Having missed these things, which he much valued, he hastens to the outside of
the rock, with his long staff in his hand, in hopes to overtake them before
they could get into their canoe; but happened to go too late, they being
already got half a league from the rock: Yet they did no carry away their
theft: for these arising some wind, it made the sea somewhat rough, and overset
their canoe; so that what was in it was all lost but the two Indians, who most
dexterously turned it on its bottom again, and with surprising activity leaped
into it, one at the one side, and the other at the opposite; so that the canoe
being trimmed at once, they paddled out of sight.

Having seen as much of them as he could, he walks to the north east side, in
order to discover the effects of the high wind, which happened the night before.

Being come to the outside of the rock, he perceives something at a distance
like a large chest, but having no lid on it. Taking that to be the product of
some late shipwreck, he grieved at the fatal accident: How long, reflected he,
will covetousness decoy men to pursue wealth, at the cost of their precious
lives? Has not nature provided every nation and country a sufficiency for its
inhabitants! that they will rove on this most dangerous and boisterous sea^
which may be titled Death's Dominions; many perishing* therein, and not one on
it being safe.

As he was bewailing their ^ate, who he imagined had been cast away, he sees
two men come down the rock, with each a bundle in his arm, who went to that
which he had taken to be a chest; and having put their l^ad in it, pushed it
away till come to deeper water; then, having got in it, with a long staff
shoved it off, till they could row to a long boat that lay at some distance
behind a jetting part of the rock, which screened it from his sight, as also
the ship it belonged to.

The sight of this much amazed him, and made him cease condoling others'
supposed loss, to run home and examine his own; well knowing those bundles he
saw carried away, must needs belong to him; there being no other movables in
the island but what were in his lodge.

Being come home, he finds indeed what he suspected: Those villains had most
sacrilegiously rifled and ransacked his habitation, not leaving him so much as
one of the mats to keep his poor body from the ground. His winter garb also is
gone, and what else they could find for their use.

The loss of those things, which he could not do without, filled him with
sorrow:* Now, said he, I am in any* first state of being* naked I came into the
world, and naked shall I go out of it; at which he fell a weeping.

Having grieved a while, why, said he, should I thus cast myself down? Is not*
Providence, who gave me them, able to give me more? Thus, having resolved
before winter to replenish his loss, he rests himself con^ented, and gives the
ruffians' evil action the best construction he could. Now, I think on it, said
he* these surely are the men, who, about twelve months since, would charitably
have carried me hence, but could not, for want of necessary implements; and
now* being better provided, came to accomplish their hospitable design; but not
finding me, supposing I was either dead or gone, took away what was here of no
use: Much good may what they have got do them* and may it be of as much use to
them as it was to me. Thus walks out, in order to cut grass to dry, and make
himself new bedding, and a winter garb.

Having walked about half a mile, he perceives the same men coming toward the
pond: Heaven be praised! said he, here they be still. Now when they see I am
not gone, nor willing to go, they will return my things, which they are
sensible I cannot do without* with which words he goes up to them. By this time
they had caught the two old ducks, which* being pinioned, could not fly away as
the rest did. He was much vexed to see the best of his stock thus taken away;
yet as he thought they were come to do him service, he could grudge them
nothing, that would any wise gratify so good an intent. But having returned
them thanks for their good will, he told them he was very happy in the island,
and had made a vow never to go out of it.

These being Frenchmen, and of an employment where politeness is of little use,
being fishermen, and not understanding what he said, only laughed in his face,
and went on to the purpose they came about: Then having as many of the ducks as
they could get, they proceeded toward the house where they had seen the
antelopes; some of which not running a way at their approach, they proposed to
catch hold of them.

Being come to the place where they used to feed, which was near the dwelling,
the young ones, not being used to see any men in clothes, nor any body but
their master, presently fled; but the two old ones, which he had bred up, were
so tame, that they stood still; only when the men came to them, they kept close
to him, which gave the men opportunity to lay hold of them; when,
notwithstanding Quarll's repeated entreaties, they tied a halter about their
horns, and barbarously led them away.

Quarll was grieved to the heart to see his darlings, which he had taken such
care to breed up, and which were become the principal part of his delight,
following him up and down; and which, by their jumping and playing before him,
often dispersed melancholy thoughts; notwithstanding all these endearing
qualifications, thus hawled away, he weeps, and on his knees begs they may be
left; and though they understood not his words, his actions were so expressive
and moving, that had they had the humanity of cannibals, who eat one another,
they would have yielded to so melting an object as the poor broken hearted
Quarll was; but the inflexible boors went on, cruelly hawling and dragging the
poor creatures; which, as if sensible of the barbarity of the act, looked back
to their afflicted master, as craving his assistance; which, at last, so
exasperated him, that he was several times tempted to lay on the ravishers with
his long staff; as often was stopped by the following consideration: Shall I,
said he, be the destruction of my fellow creatures, to rescue out of their
hands, animals of which I have an improving store left, and deprive them of
their healths, and perhaps of their lives, to recover what cost me naught? Let
them go with what they have, and the merit of their deed be their reward. Thus
he walks about melancholy, bemoaning his poor antelopes fate, and his own
misfortune: They were used to liberty, said he, which they are now deprived of,
and for which they will pine and die, which, for their sake, I cannot but wish;
for life without liberty is a continual death.

As he was walking, thinking (as it is usual, after the loss of any thing one
loves) of the pleasure he had during the enjoyment, the ruffians, having
secured the poor animals, came back with ropes in their hands. What do they
want next? said he, have they not all they desire; would they carry away my
habitation also? Sure they have no design on my person: If so, they will not
take it so easily as they did my dear antelopes. Thus he resolved to exercise
his quarter-staff, if they offered to lay hands on him. The villains, whose
design was to bind him, and so carry him away, seeing him armed and resolute,
did not judge it safe for them to advance within the reach of his weapon, but
keep at some distance, divining how to seize him.

Quarll, who, by their consulting* guessed at their design, not thinking proper
to let them come to a resolution, makes at the nearest, who immediately takes
to his heels; and then to the next, who immediately does the same: Thus he
follows them about for a considerable time; but they divided, in order to tire
him with running, till the night approaching, and the wind rising, made them
fear their retreat might be dangerous, if they deferred it; so that they went
clear away: which being all he desired, he returned as soon as he saw them in
the long boat, which they rowed to their ship, that lay at anchor some distance
from the rocks.

These wretches being gone, he returns Heaven thanks for his deliverance; and
as his bridge had favored their coming, he pulls it off, and only laid it over
when he had a mind to view the sea, and goes home to eat a bit, having not as
yet, broken his fast. Having, therefore, eaten some of his roots and cheese,
and being wearied with hunting those boors, he consults how to lie, his bed and
bedding being gone, as also his winter gown, and the nights being as yet cold:
However, after a small time of consideration, he concludes to lie in the lodge,
which was left vacant by the stolen antelopes' absence; whose litter being made
of the same grass that his mats were, he lay both soft and warm.

When laid down, being sorely fatigued, he soon fell asleep; and as the
plunderers had the preceding day took up his cares, they filled his mind in the
night; he has them continually before his eyes, sometimes with his beloved
antelopes in their pilfering hands; at other times barbarously hawling them by
the horns with a halter, which they ought to have about their own necks. These
acts of austerity provoking his anger, and urging him on to revenge, he lifts
his staff, which on a sudden is turned to Hercules' club: Startled to see that
wonderful change, he stops from laying on the intended blow: Rescuing said he,
my darling animals, I shall lose my precious and inestimable peace of mind:
What can atone for the life of a man? -- Whilst he was making these
reflections, the men got clear away with the fowls and antelopes, leaving him
in a deep melancholy: Thus, as he was be wailing his loss, calling to mind the
agreeable pastimes they had often been to him, and the many anxious hours he
had dispersed with their diversions, a gentlewomen appeared before him, of a
most agreeable, yet grave countenance, dressed in plain dove colored clothes,
in most places threadbare, and in others patched with different kinds of
stuffs, yet genteel and becoming. He starts at her appearing, wondering what
she could come for, having nothing more to lose: I come not, said she, to seek
ought from thee, but to restore what thou have lost. He being overjoyed at the
words, looks about, expecting his beloved antelopes, and what else the men had
taken away; but, seeing nothing, he thought that vision proceeded from vapors,
which the great grief for his late loss had occasioned; and falls a thinking,
till he was a second time interrupted by her bidding him look her in the face.
Be satisfied, be satisfied, woman, said he: Why, I neither know thee, nor what
thou meanest. Well, then, replied she, I will inform thee of both: I am
Patience, whom all the world strive to grieve, and whom none can provoke* and
what I promise* to restore thee, is Content, which thou throwest away after
worthless things. So she vanishes. At which he awakes.

Having made reflections upon the latter part of his dream, the first part
thereof being but a repetition of what happened the day before, he makes this
application: This, said he, is a check for my discomposing that peace upon such
a frivolous account, which by Providence was intended I should enjoy, having
supplied me with all necessaries to maintain it: He therefore makes a
resolution never to be vexed, let what will happen; but with patience submit to
the will of God, who has the direction of all things. Then, having paid his
usual devotion, he goes into the kitchen, in order to breakfast, and afterward
to take his customary walk. Whilst he was eating, there arose a noise in the
air, as proceeding from a quantity of rooks, jackdaws, crows, and such like
birds, whose common notes he was acquainted with; and as the noise approached,
he had the curiosity to go and see what was the matter, but was prevented by
the coming of a large fowl, which flew over his head, as he was going out: He
turned back to gaze at the bird, whose beauty seized him with admiration; the
pleasure of seeing so charming a creature, quite put out of his mind the
curiosity of looking from whence proceeded the disagreeable noise without;
which ceasing as soon as the bird was sheltered, made him imagine those carrion
birds had been chasing that beautiful fowl, which, seeing itself out of danger,
stood still, very calm and composed; which gave him the opportunity of making a
discussion of every individual agreement which composed so delightful an
object: It was about the bigness and form of a swan, almost headed like it,
only the bill was not so long, nor so broad, and red like coral; his eyes like
those of a hawk, his head of a mazarine blue, and on the top of it a tuft of
shining gold-coloured feathers, which spread over it, hanging near three inches
beyond all round; its breast, face, and part of its neck, milkwhite, curiously
speckled with small black spots, a gold-coloured circle about it; its back and
neck behind of a fine crimson, speckled with purple; its legs and feet the same
color as its bill; its tail long and round, spreading like that of a peacock,
composed of six rows of feathers, all of different colors, which made a most
delightful mixture.

Having spent several minutes in admiring the bird, he lays peace, and crumbled
roots, both roasted and boiled, before it; as also, water in a shell,
withdrawing, to give it liberty to eat and drink; and stood out peeping to see
what it would do; which, being alone, having looked about, picks a few peace,
and drinks heartily; then walks toward the door, in a composed and easy
manner, much like that of a cock.

Quarll, being at the outside was dubious whether he should detain him, or let
him go; his affection for that admirable creature equally prompts him to both:
He cannot bear the thoughts of parting with so lovely an object, nor harbor
that of depriving it of liberty, which it so implicitly entrusted him withal.
Thus, after a small pause, generosity prevails over self-pleasure: Why should
I, said he, make the place of its refuge its prison: He therefore makes room
for it to go, which, with a slow pace, walks out; and having looked about a
small time, mounts up a considerable height; and then takes its course north
west.

There happening nothing the remainder of the year, worthy of record, he
employs it in his customary occupations; as pruning and watering his lodge and
dairy, making his mats to lie on, as also his winter garb; every day milking
his antelopes and g^ats; making now and then butter and cheese, attending his
nets, and such like necessary employments.

In the mean time, the French mariners, who, probably, got money by what they
had taken from him the year before, returned, it being much about the same
season: and being resolved to take him away, and all they could make any thing
of, out of the island, were provided with hands and implements to accomplish
their design; as ropes to bind what they could get alive, and guns to shoot
what they could not come at, saws and hatchets to cut down logwood and brasil,
pick-axes and shovels to dig up orris-root, and others of worth, which they
imagined the island produced; likewise flat-bottomed boats to tow in shallow
water, where others could not come; and thus by degrees to load their ship with
booty: But ever watchful Providence blasted their evil projects, and confounded
their devices, at the very instant they thought themselves sure of success: The
implements in a flat bottomed boat were towed to the very foot of the rock, by
a young fellow, who being lighter than a man, was thought fittest to go with
the tools, which pretty well loaded the boat.

Their materials being landed to their great satisfaction, the men on board
embarked in two more of the same sort of boats; but were no sooner in them but
a storm arose, which dashed their slender bottoms to pieces, and washed them
into the sea, in which they perished, oversetting also the flat-bottomed boat
on shore, with the load and the lad underneath it.

The storm being over, which lasted from about eight in the morning till almost
twelve at noon, Quarll, according to his custom, went to see if he could
perceive any damage done by the late tempest, and if any, distressed by it,
stood in want of help.

Being at that side of the rock he used to visit, he could see nothing but a
few fishes and shells the sea had left in the clifts: If this said he, be all
the damage that has been done, make me thankful; it will recruit me with fresh
fish and utensils. Going to the north-west part, where he sees a battered boat,
floating with the keel upwards, this, said he, bodes some mischief; but thought
it not to be of any consequence. Having gone about fifty yards further, he
espies a small barrel at the foot of the rock, with several planks and
fragments of a ship, floating with the tide; Alas! said he, these are too
evident proofs of a shipwreck, to hope (...) wise. -- As he was looking about,
he hears a voice cry out, much like that of a man, at some distance, behind a
part of the rock: Being advanced a small matter beyond where he was, Heaven be
praised! says he, there is somebody, whom I am luckily come to save, and he is
most fortunately come to be my companion: I cannot but rejoice at the event,
though I heartily grieve for the accident. Hastening to the place where he
thought the cries came from, which, as he advanced, he could discern to be too
shrill for a man's voice, certainly, said he, this must be some woman by the
noise. This sets his blood a glowing; his heart alters its motion: Now, said
he, joyfully, Providence has completed my happiness: I shall have a companion,
and a help* mate; and goes on with fresh vigor, as though he had recovered his
strength, and got new limbs; the rough and savage rock, which was before, in a
manner, inaccessible, is now made easy to walk on: He climbs the highest places
with activity, and goes down the steep as nimbly; and soon arrived where he
judged the person to be: Yet, seeing nothing, but what he took to be a chest,
began to be disheartened; Sure, said he, this is not a second illusion, to
decoy my fancy after what is not to be had! Thus his joy on a sudden turned
into a deep melancholy; but the creature underneath, who, having heard some
noise near at hand, ceased crying to listen; yet finding nobody come, cries out
again somewhat louder than before. This revived him quite, and recalls his
hopes: It is a woman, said he, and in that chest; when, going to break it open,
he stops* on a sudden: What am I going to do? How do I know the cause of her
being thus locked up? -- Tho^^ (...) women are in a manner become a merchan^
(...) yet they are never packed up or chested: She must be in there for a
punishment, which in some countries is inflicted on witches. The boy, who heard
a voice, calls out in French, which Quarll not understanding, he was afraid to
let it out; but his mentioning Christ being intelligible to him, made him
change his opinion: For Christ's sake, does she say? That holy name witches
seldom make use of: however* in that name I will let her out. -- If she be
under condemnation, was not I so? Had she by Heaven been decreed to die, she
would not have been here. At which words, with his staff he endeavored to
break that which he took to be the lid of the chest, but proved the bottom; and
as he was striking* the boy underneath, calling to him to turn it up, thrust
his hand under the side, which he perceiving, though he understood him not,
stood still: Finding his mistake, this, said he, is a flatbottomed boat, such
as the Frenchmen used the year before, when they plundered me: Now, am I safe
if I turn it up? Doubtless they are come ingreat numbers. Pausing a while, and
the lad (whom he took to be a woman) still continuing his moan, he was moved to
compassion; and, having considered the boat could not hold any great number, he
ventures: Let what will come on it, or who will be under, for the poor woman's
sake I will relieve them, there cannot be many men. However, I will let but one
out at a time: If he be mischievous, I am able to deal with him. At this, he
puts the end of the staff where he had seen the hand, and lifts it up about a
foot from the ground: Out of the opening immediately creeps the boy, who, on
his knees, falls a begging and weeping, expecting death every moment, as being
the merited punishment for the evil purpose they came about.

Quarll, who expected there was a wom^^ ^esides, fearing the gap the youth came
out at should be too uneasy for her to come through, made motions for the boy
to help him, in order to set the boat on its bottom; which he did. Quarll,
seeing the implements, instead of a woman, was as much vexed* as disappointed:
His countenance changes; sometimes he looks at the things, and then at the boy;
who seeing him appear angry, thought of nothing but present death, and again
falls on his knees, holding up his hands, almost drowned in tears, begging for
mercy in such a moving manner that Quarll could not forbear shedding some
tears; and though the late disappointment of his proposed happiness, and the
^ight of the preparations made for his intended ruin had moved him to anger
against that mercenary nation; he helps the young fellow up by the hand; and
the night coming on apace, he takes one of the hatchets that lay by, and gave
another to the boy, then falls a knocking the boat to pieces, and directed him
to do the same; which he accordingly did.

The boat being demolished, they carried the boards up higher on the rock, as
also the rest of the things; lest, in the night, some storm should rise, which
might wash them back into the sea; it being then too late to bring them away.
Having done, they each of them took up what they could carry, and so went home.
The young Frenchman finding a kinder treatment than either he deserved or
expected, was extraordinary submissive and tractable; which made Quarll the
more kind and mild; and instead of condemning his evil attempt, he commiserated
his misfortune, and instead of resentment showed him kindness: Thus, having
given him of what (...) to eat, he puts him to bed in his lodge, wherein (...),
till he had got his mats made up; then went to bed himself, but could not sleep
for thinking of his late disappointment, which intercepted those pleasures he
so much depended on, thinking himself sure of a female partner, who in sharing
happiness with him, would have added much to his bliss.

Getting up sooner than ordinary, and having walked about till he thought it
time for the boy to rise, he calls him up, and takes him to the place that he
usually went every morning and evening to sing psalms; where the youth being
come, and hearing so many different voices, and seeing nobody, was scared out
of his wits, and took to his heels, making toward the rock as fast as he
could; but as he was not acquainted with the easiest and most practicable parts
thereof, Quarll had made an end of his psalm, and overtook him before he could
get to the seaside, into which he certainly would have cast himself at the
fright; but Quarll, who, by the boy's staring, guessed his disorder, not having
the benefit of the language, endeavored to calm him by his pleasing
countenance, and prevented his drowning himself; but could not keep off a
violent fit the fright had occasioned, which held him several minutes.

The fit being over, he and the boy took away at diverse times, the remains of
the boat, and of what was in it, which they could not carry home the day
before: Then taking up two guns, Now, said he, these unlucky instruments, which
were intended for destruction, shall be employed for the preservation of that
they were to destroy, taking them to his lodge, he sets them at each side of
the door; then* being dinner time, he strikes a light, and sets the boy to make
a fire, (...) (...) made some of the fish fit to fry, which (...) (...) up upon
the rock the evening before; then takes dripping, he saved when he roasted any
flesh, to fry them with. The boy, who had lived sometime in Holland, where they
used much butter, seeing dripping employed in room thereof, thought to please
his* master in making some; and as he had seen milk and cream in the dairy
arbor, wanting a churn only, there being a small rundlet lying by empty, he
takes out one of the ends of it, in which, the next day, he beat butter.

Quarll, seeing this youth industrious, begins to fancy him, notwithstanding
the aversion he had conceived for his nation ever since the ill treatment he
had received from his countrymen; and as speech is one of the most necessary
faculties to breed and maintain fellowship, he took pains to teach him English.

The lad, being acute and ingenious* was soon made to understand it, and in six
months capable to speak it sufficiently, so as to give his master a relation of
his late coming, and to what intent. The men, said he, who about one year since
carried away from hence some antelopes, with extraordinary ducks, and several
rarities, which they said belonged to a monstrous English Hermit, whose hair
and beard covered his whole body, having got a great deal of money by showing
them, encouraged others to come: whereupon several, joining together, hired a
ship to fetch away the hermit, and what else they could find; therefore brought
with them tools, and guns, to shoot what they could not take alive. Barbarous
wretches! replied he, to kill my dear antelopes and ducks! Pray, what did they
intend to do with me! Why, said the boy, to make a show of you. To make a show
of me! Sordid wretches! Is a Christian then such a rarity amongst them? Well,
an^ what were the saws and hatchets for? To cut down your house, which they
intended to make a drinking booth of. Oh, monstrous: What time and nature has
been fifteen years in completing, they would have ruined in a moment. Well,
thanks to Providence, their evil design is averted. Pray, what is become of
those sacrilegious persons? They are all drowned, said the boy. Then, replies
he, the heavens are satisfied, and I avenged: But how came thou to escape?
for thou wast with them. No, replied the youth, I was upon the rock when their
boat was dashed against it, and was overset with the same sea, under the
flat-bottomed boat, where you found me. That was a happy overset for thee.
Well, is there no gratitude due to Providence for thy escape? Due to
Providence! said he, why, I thought you had saved me: I am sure you let me out.
Yes, replied Quarll; but I was sent by Providence for that purpose. That was
kindly done too, said the boy: Well, when I see him, I will thank him: Does he
live hereabout? Poor ignorant creature! replied Quarll; why Providence is every
where: What did thou never hear of Providence? What religion art thou of!
Religion? answered the youth: I don't know what you mean: I am a fisherman by
trade, which my father lived by. Well, said Quarll, did he teach thee nothing
else? no prayers? Prayers! replied the lad; why fishermen have no time to pray;
that is for them who have nothing else to do: Poor folks must work, and get
money; that is the way of our town. Covetous wretches! Well, said he, I grudge
them not what they possess, since it is all the happiness they aspire at; but
thou shall learn to pray, which will be of far more advantage to thee than
work, both here and hereafter: From which time he begins to teach him the
Lord's prayer, and the ten commandments; as also the principles of the
Christian religion, all which instructions the youth taking readily, won his
affection the more: He likewise taught him to sing psalms, which farther
qualified him to be his companion in spiritual exercises, as well as in
temporal occupations.

Now, having company, he is obliged* to enlarge his bed, the lodge being wanted
for his antelopes against breeding-time: He adds, therefore, to his mats. His
other provisions also wanting to be augmented, and he having both tools and
boards, out of the flat* boat which he had taken to pieces! he and the lad went
about making large boxes to salt flesh and fish in; then, with the boats that
were left, they made a table for his dwelling that he had before, and one for
his kitchen; as also shelves in the room of those that were made of wicker:
Then, having recruited his shell utensils, that were stolen the year before, he
was completely furnished with all manner of conveniences: and Providence
supplying him daily with other necessaries, there was no room left him for
wishes, but for thanksgiving, which they daily most religiously paid.

In this most happy state they lived in peace and concord the space of ten
years, unanimously doing what was to be done, as it lay in each of their ways,
without relying on one another.

Quarll, who before, though alone and deprived of society (the principal
comfort of life) thought himself blessed, now cannot express his happiness,
there being none in the world to be compared to it, heartily praying he may
find no alteration until death: But the young man, not having met with so many
disappointments in the world as he, had not quite withdrawn his affections from
it; his mind sometimes will run upon his native country, where he has left his
relations, and where he cannot help wishing to be himself: Thus; an opportunity
offering itself one day, as he went to get oysters* to make sauce for some
fresh cod-fish which Quarll was ^ressing, he saw, at a distance, a ship; at
which his heart fell a panting; his pulses double their motion; his blood grows
warmer and warmer, till at last, inflamed with a desire of getting at it, he
lays down (...) bag he brought to put the oysters in, as also the instrument to
dredge them up with, and takes to swimming. The men on board, having espied him
out, sent their boat to take him up; so he went away without taking his leave
of him he had received so much good from; who, having waited a considerable
time, fearing some accident would befall him, leaves his cooking, and goes to
seek for him; and, being come at the place where he was to get oysters, he sees
the bag and instrument lie, and nobody with them. Having ^^^ed several times
without being answered, various tacking fears tortured his mind: Sometimes he
doubts he is fallen in some hole in the rock, there being many near that place
where the oysters were: He therefore with his staff, which he always carried
with him when he went abroad, at the other side of the rock grabbled in every
one round the place; and, feeling nothing, he concludes some sea monster had
stolen him away, and, weeping, condemns himself as the cause of this fatal
accident; resolving, for the future, to punish himself by denying his appetite;
and only eat to support nature, and not to please his palate.

Having given over hopes of getting him again, he returns home in the greatest
afflictions, resolving to fast till that time the next day; but, happening to
look westward, in which was the point the wind stood, he perceives something
like a boat at a great distance: Wiping the tears off his eyes, and looking
steadfastly, he discovers a ^ail beyond it, which quite altered the motive of
his former fear: No monster, said he, has devoured him; it is too plain a
case, that he has villainously left me: But what could I expect of one who had
projected such evil against me? So saying he went home, and made an end of
dressing his dinner! and afterward hangs up the picture which he had taken
down upon his count, being the true emblem of what he deserved; resting himself
contented, being but as he was before, and rather better; since he had more
conveniences, and tools to till his ground, and dig up his roots with. Having
recommended himself to Providence, he resumes his usual works and recreations,
resolving that no cares shall man his happiness for the future, being out of
the way of all those irresistible temptations with which the world abounds, and
daily lays the best men's hopes in the dust.

Being again alone, the whole business of the house lies upon his hands* he
must now prune and trim his habitation, that daily harbors him, being made of
fine-growing plants, which yearly shoot out young branches: This makes them
grow out of shape. He must also till the ground; set and gather his peace and
beans in their season; milk and feed his antelopes daily; make butter and
cheese at proper times; dig up his roots; fetch in fuel and water, when wanted;
attend his nets; go eagle nesting; and every day dress his own* victuals: All
which necessary occupations, besides the time dedicated for morning and evening
devotions, kept him wholly employed; which made his renewed solitude less
irksome. And having walked all that afternoon to divert his tho'ts, admiring
all the way* the wonderful works of nature, both in the surprising rocks which
surrounded the island, and in the delightful creatures, and admirable plants,
that are in it; being weary with walking, he returns home, thanking kind
Providence, for settling him in* so blessed a place, and in his way calls at
his invisible choir; where, having sung a thanksgiving psalm, and his usual
evening hymn, he goes to supper, and then went to bed, with a thoroughly
contented mind, which occasions pleasant dreams to entertain his thoughts.

During his sleep his fancy is delighted with being in nature's garden of
pleasure, where none but her friends are permitted to enter.

The place appeared very spacious, and of an admirable form; full of all sorts
of nature's works, both animals, vegetables, and minerals every individual
thing in perfection: And though some were distant, yet all appeared as at hand.

The lofty trees, which stood on a level ground, covered with curious grass,
enamelled with many different colored flowers, exceeding in beauty any carpet
that the most expert artist could make, spread their branchy arms over
creatures of all kinds, which lay beneath their delightful shades: There the
bold lion lies by the innocent lamb; the fierce panther near the harmless
sheep; the ravenous wolf with the wild goat, leopard and deer, tiger and hare,
reposed together in peace; on the trees, eagles, vultures, falcons, and hawks,
quietly perched with the turtle and the dove.

These most agreeable objects, joined with the delightful noise of the
fountains falling into their basins, and the purling streams running their
course, together with the various harmonious notes of diverse kinds of singing
birds, put him into a^ ecstasy: Sure, said he, this is the garden of Eden, out
of which unfortunate Adam was cast after his fall, as being a dwelling only for
innocence.

Having walked a little way, there being on every side curious lanes, every one
affording new objects of admiration, he comes to a walk edged with orange and
lemon trees, full of fruit and blossoms, at the foot of which was a narrow bank
bordered with jonquils, tuberoses, hyacinths, and other delightful flowers,
both for sight and smell: At the end of it there was an arbor of the same, but
so beautiful, that at first sight he took it for a tapestry the most expert
artist had exerted himself in making, to show the curiosity of trade, and
greatness of his skill: In it there sat three ladies of uncommon beauty; the
middlemost, who was the lustiest, appeared to be the eldest, being of a most
sedate countenance, a moderate number of years having both established her
judgment, and settled her features: She, at her right hand, seemed to be of a
weaker constitution; she had in her hand an olive branch bearing fruit, which,
when gathered was immediately succeeded with blossoms; so that it never was
without the one or the other: The lady who sat on the left side, was more jolly
and gay, yet looked somewhat careful: She had in her hand a long vessel, broad
at one end, and sharp at the other, like a horn, bending toward the point,
full of all sorts of fruits.

Having stood still a short space of time, looking at those ladies, thinking it
ill manners to interrupt their conversation; they, perceiving his modesty would
not permit him to advance, rose up, and went another way, to give him the
opportunity of viewing the garden: He accordingly went quite round, till come
to the place where he had begun his walk; where he saw a stately cock, of an
extraordinary size, strutting from animal to animal, taking from most of them
something, whilst they were asleep; which having secured, he falls a crowing in
such a loud manner, that he startled all the other creatures; which, being
awake, and every one missing something, challenged him with it: But he, having
crowed a second time, in an insulting and daring manner strutted most haughtily
away; at which the losers being much offended, consulted together on means to
retake by force, what he had in so clandestine a manner, taken from them;
choosing the ^ion for their director: But the watchful cock, which, whilst they
were indulging themselves, carefully made provision to maintain what he had
done, bid them all defiance. There happening a great noise of squ^eling, it
waked him out of his dream; and his mind being pressed with notions of (...),
it at first seized him with terror: But being somewhat settled, and the noise
still continuing, he perceived it proceeded from the two different kinds of
monkies in the island, which were fighting for the wild pomegranates that the
high wind had s^ook off the trees the preceding night, which was very
boisterous.

Having guessed the occasion of their debate, he gets up, in order to go and
quell their difference, by dividing amongst them the cause thereof. Getting up,
he opens the door, at the outside of which, an old monkey of each sort were
quietly waiting his levee, to entice him to come, as he once before did, and
put an end to their bloody war. He was not a little surprised to see two such
inveterate enemies, who at other times never meet without fighting, at that
juncture agree so well. That most surprising sign of reason in those brutes,
which, knowing his decision would compose their comrades difference, came to
implore it, put him upon these reflections: Would princes, said he, be but
reasonable, as those which by Nature are irrational, how much blood and money
would be saved! Having admired the uneasiness of those poor creatures, who
still went a few steps forward, and then backward to him; he was in hopes to
decoy one or both into his lodge, by throwing meat to them: But those exemplary
animals, hearing their fellows in trouble, had no regard to their separate
interest, taking no notice of what he gave them; but kept moving to and again
with all the tokens of uneasiness they could express: Which so moved him that
he hastened to the place; where his presence caused immediately a cessation of
arms, and each party moved a considerable distance off each other, waiting his
sharing the wind falls; which being done, they quietly took that heap which lay
next each kind, and went to their different quarters.

Fourteen years more being past, every thing keeping its natural course, there
happened nothing extraordinary, each succeeding year renewing the pleasures the
preceding had produced: Thunders and high winds being frequent, though not
equally violent, he thought it not material to record them, or their effects,
as blowing and throwing fishes, shells, empty vessels, battered chests, etc.
upon the rock; only transactions and events wonderful and uncommon: And there
happened a most surprising one a few days after, which though of no great
moment, is as worthy of record as any of far greater concern; being a wonderful
effect of Providence, manifested in a miraculous manner, though not to be said
supernatural.

One morning, when he had roasted a parcel of those roots which he used to eat
instead of bread, and this he commonly did once a week, it eating best when
stale; having spread them on his table and chest to cool, he went out to walk,
leaving his door open to let the air in. His walk, though graced with all the
agreeableness nature could adorn it with, to make it delightful; a grass
carpet, embroidered with beautiful flowers, of many different colors and
smells, under his feet, to tread on, before, and on each side of him fine lofty
trees, of various forms and heights, clothed with pleasant green leaves,
trimmed with rich blossoms of many colors, to divert his eye; a number of
various sorts of melodious singing birds perching in their most lovely shades,
as though nature had studied to excel man's brightest imagination, and
exquisiteness of art: -- Yet all these profusenesses of nature's wonders are
not sufficient to keep away or expel anxious tho'ts from his mind. It runs upon
his two dear antelopes, the darling heads of his present stock, which he took
such care to bring up, and were become so engaging, always attending him in
those fine walks; adding, by their swift races, active leapings, and other
uncommon diversions, to the natural pleasantness of the place; which now, by
their most lamented absence is become a dull memorandum of the barbarous manner
in which they were ravished away from him. In these melancholy thoughts which
his lonesomeness every now and then created, he returns home, where Providence
had left a remedy for his grievance: A companion, far exceeding any he ever
had, waits his return; which was, a beautiful monkey of the finest kind, and
the most complete of the sort, as though made to manifest the unparalleled
skill of nature, is sent him by Providence, to dissipate his melancholy.

Being come to his lodge, and beholding that wonderful creature and in his own
possession, at the farthest end of it, and him at the entrance thereof to
oppose its slight, if offered, he is at once filled with joy and admiration:
Long, said he, I have endeavored in vain to get one, and would have been glad
of any, though of the worst kind, and even of the meanest of the sort; and here
kind Providence has sent me one of an unparalleled beauty.

Having a considerable time admired the beast, which all the while stood
unconcerned, now and then eating of the roots that lay before him, he shuts the
door, and goes in, with a resolution of staying within all day, in order to
tame him, which he hoped would be no difficult matter, his disposition being
already pretty familiar, little thinking that Providence, who sent him thither,
had already qualified him for the commission he bore; which having found out by
the creature's surprising docility, he returns his benefactor his most hearty
thanks for that miraculous gift.

This most wonderful animal having, by its surprising tractability, and
goodnature, joined to its matchless handsomeness, gained its master's love
beyond what is usual to place on any sort of beasts; he thought himself doubly
recompensed for all his former losses, especially for that of his late
ungrateful companion, who, notwithstanding all the obligations he held from
him, basely left him, at a time he might be most helpful: And, as he fancied
his dear Beaufidelle (for so he called that admirable creature) had some sort
of resemblance to the picture he framed of him, he takes it down, thinking it
unjust to bear in his sight that vile object which could not in any wise claim
a likeness to so worthy a creature as his beloved monkey.

One day, as this lovely animal was officiating the charge it had of its own
accord taken, being gone for wood, as wont to do when wanted, he finds in his
way a wild pomegranate, whose extraordinary size and weight had caused it to
fall off the tree; he takes it home, and then returns for his faggot; in which
time Quarll, wishing the goodness of the inside might answer its outward
beauty, cuts it open; and, finding it of a dull luciousness, too flat for
eating, imagined it might be used with things of an acid and sharp taste:
Having therefore boiled some water, he puts it into a vessel, with a sort of an
herb which is of the taste and nature of cresses, and some of the pomegranate,
letting them infuse some time, now and then stirring it; which the monkey
having taken notice of, did the same: But one very hot day, happening to lay
the vessel in the sun, made it turn sour.

Quarll, who very much wanted vinegar, in his sauces, was well pleased with the
accident, and so continued the souring of the liquor, which proving excellent,
he made a five gallon vessel of it; having several, which at times he found
upon the rock.

Having now store of vinegar, and being a great lover of pickles, which he had
learnt to make by seeing his last wife, who was an extraordinary cook, and made
of all sorts every year; calling to mind he had often in his walks seen
something like mushrooms, he makes it his business to look for some: Thus he
picked up a few, of which Beaufidelle (who followed him up and down) having
taken notice, immediately ranges about; and being nimblerfooted than his
master, and not obliged to stoop so low, picked double the quantity in the same
space of time; so that he soon had enough to serve him till the next season.

His good success in making that sort of pickle; encourages him to try another;
and, having taken notice of a plant in the wood that bears a small green
flower, which, before it is blown, looks like a caper, he gathers a few; and,
their taste and flavor being no way disagreeable, judging that, when pickled
they would be pleasant, he tries them, which according to his mind, were full
as good as the real ones, and gathers a sufficient quantity, with the help of
his attendant; stocking himself with two pleasant pickles of different sorts:
but there is another which he admires above all: None, to his mind, like a
cucumber; and the island producing none, left him no room to hope for any; yet
(as likeness is a vast help to imagination) if he could but find any thing,
which ever so little resembles them in make, nature, or taste, it will please
his fancy: He therefore examines every kind of buds, blossoms, and seeds;
having at last found that of a wild parsnip, which being long and narrow,
almost the bigness and make of a pickling cucumber, green and crisp withal,
full of small flat seeds, not unlike that of the thing he would have it to be,
he pickles some of them; which being of a color, and near upon the make he
fancies them quite of the taste.

His beans being at that time large enough for the first crop, he gathers some
for his dinner: The shells being tender and of a delicate green, it came into
his mind, they might be made to imitate French beans: They are, said he, near
the nature, I can make them quite of the shape, so be they have the same
flavor. Accordingly, he cuts them in long narrow slips, and pickles some; the
other part he boils; and there being none to contradict their taste, they
passed current, for as good French beans as any that ever grew.

The disappointment of having something more comfortable than water to drink
being retrieved by producing, in the room thereof, wherewithal to make his
eatables more delicious, he proceeds in his first project; and, taking
necessary care to prevent that accident which intercepted success in his first
undertaking, he accomplishes his design, and makes a liquor no ways inferior to
the best cider: So that now he has both to revive and keep up his spirits, as
well as to please his palate, and suit his appetite.

Having now nothing to crave or wish for, but rather all motives for content,
he lies down with a peaceable mind, no care or fear disturbing his thoughts:
His sleep is not interrupted with frightful fancies, but rather diverted with
pleasant and diverting dreams; he is not startled at thunder or storms, though
ever so terrible, his trust being on Providence, who at sundry times, and in
various manners, has rescued him from death, though apparently unavoidable;
being for above thirty years miraculously protected and maintained in a place
so remote from all human help and assistance.

Yet, notwithstanding, his firmness, and whole trust on Providence, he is
obliged to give way to the weakness of his nature; a strange and shocking noise
is heard at a distance in the air, which, having reached the place where he
stood, covers it with darkness for several minutes; at which he is so alarmed
that he thinks himself past all hopes; till the noise being ceased, and that
which intercepted the light dispersed, his scared senses returning to their
proper seat, and his strayed reason recalled, he is ashamed of the weakness of
his faith, and begs pardon for his late mistrust of the continuation of
Providence's protection, who had all along given him all imaginable reason to
depend on it at all times: Thus, having opened his door, he steps out to see if
he could discover the cause of the late most surprising and sudden darkness, in
a bright sun shining day, which having found out by the vast numbers of dead
birds of several kinds, lying up and down the ground, he was seized with to
small amazement, though with less fear.

From that most surprising aspect he infers, there had been a battle of those
creatures in the air, the great number of which had occasioned the late
decrease.

Having made reflections upon that astonishing transaction, he can draw from
thence no other inference, but a prognostication of dreadful wars in Europe,
from which he begs Heaven to protect his native country: And lest the dead
birds, that lay in great numbers, should (with lying) infect the island, he and
his monkey carried them to the other side of the rock, throwing them into the
sea; only as many of them as had soft feathers on their breast and bellies, he
plucked away, to stuff a pillow for the beast, being a little too hot at night
for it to lie upon the bed. So having cleared the place and being tired with
often going up and down the rugged rock, he stayed at home the remainder of the
day, and at night goes to bed; but, as the late omen of approaching evil had
pre-occupied his thoughts in the day with cares concerning his country, his
mind ran upon it in the night; dreaming he sees wives weeping, and melting into
tears, taking their leaves of their indulgent husbands! hanging destitute of
strength, about their necks, whose grief weighed them to the ground. Turning
from that afflicting object, he sees another as shocking; the old father,
bathed in tears, embracing his only son, bidding him farewell, and, with him,
all the comforts of this life, and support of his age. Moving his eyes from
that, they light on full as bad a sight; the tender mother swooning in her dear
child's arms, whom an inexorable press-gang is hawling away. Thus every face
expressing grief for a relation, or a friend, nor being able any longer to
behold those terrifying objects, with which the town abounded, he betakes
himself to the country that, by keeping from the afflicted, he may avoid grief.

Having quitted the town he finds himself, on a sudden, in a place as full of
terrors, where he saw streams of re^king blood here and there; loose horses
kicking and prancing about; some dragging their late riders by the stirrups;
others wounded, and their guts hanging about: at a distance, crowds of men in
flame and smoke, confusedly moving like heaps of dust in a whirlwind, leaving
behind them, as they moved, vast numbers of men and horses, both dead and
dying; some without legs, others without arms, and abundance with but one of
each.

At a distance from them, some in pursuit of their enemies, hacking and cutting
them down all the way before them, like wood for fuel; others, flying from
being slain cast themselves into rapid rivers, where they perish by thousands.

As he was looking at those terrible objects, he finds himself on a sudden
surrounded by rustical soldiers, holding their swords and bayonets to his
breast, and asking him, in a surly manner, who he was for? at which being very
much started, not knowing what to answer, nor, indeed, what they meant; he told
them, he was an Englishman; which they appearing to be also, made him hope for
better usage: But they seized him in a violent manner, said, he might be
English, and yet an enemy to the country. Then he awaked, in a wonderful
fright; but, being come to himself, he concludes, that his dream proceeded from
his late surprise at the preceding days astonishing transactions: Therefore,
having again recommended his country to Heaven's protection, he goes about
making the bed for his monkey, as he had concluded on before, and with some
sail cloth makes a case, stuffing it with the feathers he had saved for that
purpose.

The night being come, he lays the couching, which he made for the beast, by
his own bed; which very readily went to it, being very soft and easy.

And, as cares for his country had in the day occupied his thoughts, his mind
in the night is impressed with the subject though not with so dismal an idea as
the preceding; having since been diverted with such objects as removed the
terrifying aspects, which before offered themselves to his imagination; which
now is taken up with being in St. James' Park, where he had formerly taken
pleasure, and which he fancies had since lost many of its former agreeableness.

As he was walking, a report was raised, that a certan great person (who, by
his late great services to the nation had gained a title to the palace) was
just deceased: having before his death, intailed the same upon a foreign prince
of great renown: This surprising piece of news occasioned a sudden alteration
in every body's countenance: Some looked pale with grief, others red with
wrath; but every thing in nature seemed to express a feeling for the loss; the
trees shed half their virtues, and the grass withered.

This dull scene having lasted some small time, the trees and grass recover
their former verdure, brighter than before; the lofty oaks, which he fancied
bordered the mall, bore fine roses in vast number.

This additional beauty in those noble plants, already so famed abroad for
their toughness and strength, prompts people of all nations to come and refresh
themselves under their lofty and fragrant shades.

Having with great satisfaction admired the surprising improvement of the oaks,
which to his imagination, prognosticated prosperity to the nation, he walks on
northward, where he saw abundance of thistles, which made him wonder they were
permitted to grow in a place where every thing ought to contribute to its
agreeableness and pleasantness; but having considered the stoutness of the
plants, which denoted their being well rooted, he judged it impossible to clear
the ground: Besides, the bees loving to settle on them, and probably sucking
more honey from their blossoms than any more agreeable or sweet scented flower;
for that reason, he imagined they were not gathered.

Walking back again, he meets with several noblemen, some with a blue cardoon,
others with green, each with a gardening tool in his hand going to turn up and
till the ground, between that where the thistles grew, and that where the oaks
stood: He was startled to see those great persons, who hardly will concern
themselves with their own lands and possessions, labor to improve that wherein
every private person had a share. He stood some time admiring their dexterity,
and readiness at their work; then walks on to the mall, which he found thronged
with a multitude of people of all nations, every one having a rose in his hand,
wherewith they diverted themselves as they walked.

Having gazed about him a considerable time, he had a fancy to go and see how
the noble gardeners went on with their work; where, being come, he finds, to
his great admiration, the ground had been so wonderfully well manured, that the
oaks and thistles had struck their roots through it, and met; so growing
together, had produced a plant which bore both roses and thistles, to every
body's wonder; which made the thistles so valued ever since, that there are but
few great or sine gardens, which have not more or less of them.

His monkey, being startled out of his sleep in a mighty fright, ran behind his
back squeaking, and awaked him in the midst of his amazement; being exceedingly
pleased with his late dream, of which he conceived a mighty good omen to Old
England, differing so very much from the preceding both in nature and
signification.

Thus, though earlier than he usually rose, he gets up to set it down, whilst
fresh in his mind, and also the year; then takes a walk before breakfast, and
the beast with him; which being not yet recovered of its late fright, keeps
close to his master, every now and then looking behind, as though still afraid;
at which Quarll concludes the creature must needs have been disturbed in its
sleep the night before, with some frightful dream; which made him wonder, that
an animal voi^ of reason, and incapable of reflection, should be susceptible of
imagination.

The day being passed without any extraordinary occurrence, he made no farther
remark, but followed his usual occupation, and then went to his rest; and the
monkey to his new bed, as the night before, which he took care to draw as close
to his master as he could; then having been twice or thrice about the room,
examining every corner, he lies down, and sleeps quietly till the dawning of
the morning: at which time he starts up again, as the night before.

Quarll, being a second time awaked in the same manner, and much about the same
hour, concludes the cause much proceed from the pillow, and resolves to try it
himself the next night; at which time crowds of terrifying aspects appear in
his imagination, which allure his whole faculties, and set all his senses in an
uproar; his eyes are taken up with frightful objects, and his ears filled with
a terrible noise; at which the rest of his senses have lost their offices, and
are become useless.

Being awaked the next morning, he finds himself inclined to believe, that the
pillow had really some influence on his imagination; but as one night's
experience was not a sufficient solution to his inquiry into that supernatural
operation, having often dreamed before he used the pillow; he resolves to try
it several rights successively; during which, his monkey slept very quiet, and
he much disturbed. This works a great (...) toward the persuasion of what he
had a strong fancy to believe. -- Yet, to be better satisfied of the reality of
it, he lays by the pillow for three or four nights together; during which time,
both he and the beast slept very quietly.

This added much to his opinion, that evil effluvia issued out of those
feathers the pillow was stuffed with; but as he formerly dreamed, and had many
nights intermission between those that were entertained with dreams, he will
once more try it, before he concludes that it is so; thus puts it again under
his head that night; and, as it was the last experiment, it proved also the
most troublesome, he being at that time terrified with more shocking objects
than the preceding; which, though they represent fierce and bloody battles to
his imagination, yet were less terrible to him; having not, as yet, discerned
his native country engaged therein, whom now he finds to be the principal party
concerned, on which all success depends, and which cannot be strove for without
vast expenses, and irretrievable loss of his dear countrymen; for which his
heart bled as plentifully as for those whom he dreamed he saw in their gore.

Having with terror and grief fatigued his eyes with the most shocking and
afflicting effects of war, men and horses lying as thick upon the ground as
grass in a meadow, and streams of blood running like so many brooks supplied by
a strong spring; he lists up his eyes to heaven, imploring an end to that
execrable devourer of mankind.

And whilst his eyes were still fixed to the heavens, he sees victory rushing
through thick clouds of obstacles approaching to her; which having overcome,
she settled over the army his countrymen belonged to, over whose head she shook
and flourished her colors, pointing at approaching peace, attended with
plenty; but on a sudden there arose an infectious mist out of the ground, which
cramping the Englishmens hands, that they could no more use their conquering
arms; this fatal accident having both encouraged and strengthened the enemy,
they sell on the unfortunate remains of the army, with unmerciful fury; who,
now having lost all their support and dependence, were most cruelly cut to
pieces; at which most dismal and afflicting object he awaked: And though this
dream was a sufficient proof of the feathers influence, yet he cannot be
satisfied but it must be ominous, having so much relation to the preceding;
therefore sets it down with them; and, for a more certain conviction of what he
had all cause imaginable to believe, he is resolved to try his monkey once
more, the night following: But the beast, who had not yet forgot the uneasiness
that the bed had caused him, chose to lie on the ground; which entirely
convinced Quarll, that there was a malignant quality in those feathers:
Wherefore he throws them into the sea, and fills the case with a sort of a soft
moss, which grew at the bottom of a particular tree, on which the creature lay
very quiet ever after.

And as yearly stripping the eagles of their eggs, had prevented their
increase, it also favored and advanced that of the creatures in the island, on
whose young they fed; so that the number of the wild monkies being considerably
augmented, made their food scant, which caused them now and then to come and
steal somewhat out of Quarll's ground. Beaufidelle, whose good keeping and warm
lying had made him thrive in bigness and strength exceeding his kind, finding
some of them stealing his master's roots, beat them away; which obliged those
subtle creatures to come several together, the better to be able to encounter
him; which Quarll having taken notice of and being willing to add a new sport
to his usual diversions, cuts a stick of the length and bigness that the
creature could manage, which he gave him; and, taking his own staff, exercises
it before him, which he did the same with his; and, apprehending what use it
was given him for, he had it often in his hands, and with it drove away the
others, when they came, though ten or a dozen together; so that the roots were
very well gun^^ed, by his continual watching; which made those (...) and
spiteful creatures watch an opportunity (...) take him at a disadvantage: Thus
finding him one morning, as he was going for water by himself, as he was w^nt
to do, and being then without his staff, of which they stood in great fear, a
considerable number fell upon him, and so bit and beat him, that he lay as
dead; but his master appearing, who, being uneasy at his extraordinary stay,
was gone to see what was the occasion thereof, put them to the flight; and they
left the poor creature with just breath enough to keep its life in, and scarce
strength sufficient to draw it.

Quarll, being come to the place where his beloved Beaufidelle lay in a most
dismal bloody condition, could not forbear shedding tears to see him thus
miserably dying; but finding still breath in him, it gave him hopes of his
recovery: And taking him up in his arms with all the care he could, he hastens
home, and gives him a little of the liquor he had made, which by that time had
got both body and spirit; then having laid him upon his bed, and covered him
with his winter wrapper, he makes a fire and warms some of the said liquor, and
fresh butter, wherewith he washes his sores; so lays him down again, giving him
all the careful attendance he could, during his illness, which held but one
week; at the end of which he died, to his unspeakable grief; who, from that
time, grew so melancholy, that he had not courage to go on with his memorial;
till having a most remarkable dream about twelve months after, be changed his
resolution, and proceeded in his memoirs: And as he set down his dream, he also
did the death of his beloved beast, it happening near the same time.

Having spent the year but dully, for want of his diverting company at home; to
put this as much out of his mind as he could, he walked the spare hours he had
left from his usual occupation. Thus being one day somewhat fatigued, having
lost his wonted alacrity, he sat down under the next cluster of trees he came
at; and being in a dull disposition, was soon lulled to sleep by the lonesome
note of a certain sort of melancholy bird, which shuns others company (though
of its own kind) at all times but in breeding time; which, having placed itself
in the thickest and shadiest part of the grove, where Quarll had made choice to
lie, falls a singing his melancholy notes; which being suitable to his
disposition of both body and mind, soon lulled him to sleep; during which he
dreamed, that he saw an old man sitting in a large circle, around which all the
signs of the zodiac were, and the old gentleman appeared extremely busy,
stringing of small beads, some white and some black, and, when he had strung a
certain number, he began another string, and so on. He had the curiosity to
tell how many he put on a string, so keeps an account of the next he did begin,
and tells just sixty: Having made as many of those strings as there were beads
in each, he puts them together, and begins again to string, mixing white and
black as they came to his hand, twisting every sixtieth string in parcels, till
he had made sixty of them, which he neatly plaits together, proceeding as from
the beginning, and makes twenty four of those plaits, which he weaves together,
making a slat piece of bead work, changeable upon black, which, when looked
upon one way, seemed pleasant; and, being seen from another, as disagreeable.
He worked on till he had made, three hundred and sixty-five such pieces, then
lays them up in a bundle, and goes to work again, beginning to string as at
first.

Having looked himself weary with seeing still the same, of which he could make
nothing he goes away leaving the old gentleman stringing his beads; who seeing
him go, (...) by his work and follows him, and having overtaken him, asked him,
what he had been looking at all that time? He, being surprised at the surly
question, modestly replies, he had been admiring his work; in doing which he
hoped there was no offense. No said the old man, provided thou learnest
something by what thou have seen. To which he answered, it was impossible for
him to learn such a mysterious business, with once seeing it done; so much
less, being entirely a stranger to it. A stranger to it art thou? replied the
old man, in a surly manner: and have wasted so much of my work! I am Time; whom
thou have often ill used; and those white and black beads that thou have seen
me string a^^ good and bad moments, I crowd into minutes, which I link into
hours; thus weave days, wherewith years are composed. Thou have seen me
complete the present year. I tell thee before the ensuing is ended, I will
grace the British throne with an illustrious race to the end of reigns; so
vanished. Then he awaked in a great surprise, and goes home, pondering on his
dream; of which he inferred, that if there be any signification in the roving
conceptions of the mind, this must prognosticate the speedy accession of some
great monarch upon the English throne: So sets down in his memorial his dream,
heartily wishing the accomplishment thereof, for the quiet and prosperity of
his dear country.

There happening nothing after, for the space of four years, but great thunders
and lightnings in the summer, and abundance of hail and snow in the winter,
with now and then storms, which left several sorts of fishes in the clists and
holes of the rocks, and sometimes fragments of staved ships, and battered
casks, or broken chests, with a plank, and such like products of shipwrecks,
not worth recording: By which means, for want of employment, he has several
idle and sul^en hours in the daytime, which his late beloved animal's
diverting company made him slip away with pleasure, and for want of which they
now creep slowly on; being loaded with dull and heavy thoughts, which made
those walks irksome, he at that time took for ease; that by the diversity of
objects abroad, his mind might be withdrawn from his a^xious solitude.

Having one day perused his memorial as he commonly did once a year, the dream
he had, wherein Time predicted such great happiness to his country, made such
an impression on his mind, that he always thought of it. Accordingly, being
walking, and the day proving extraordinary hot, he goes to shelter himself in
one of his natural groves; where, having laid himself down on the grass, he was
soon lulled asleep: during which the idea he had conceived of his former dream
represented to his imagination a most majestic and graceful monarch, sitting on
a magnificent throne, round which stood many delightful olive plants which much
added to his luster.

Having, with a great deal of pleasure, gazed at the most graceful countenance
of the king, which denoted justice, equity, love, and clemency; he gave Heaven
thanks for the mighty blessing bestowed on his country. Coming away, in order
to return to this island, with this additional happiness to the many he already
enjoyed.

Being come from court, on his journey he meets the same old gentleman of whom
he dreamed the year before; who, taking him by the hand, said, I find thou have
been to see the accomplishment of my prediction: Now I will tell thee more.

Ere one thousand, eight hundred and twenty is written,
All divisions, remember, will cease in Great Britain.
Next, I will show thee what I have done to secure the accomplishment of my
prophecy: Then takes him to a high place, from whence he could see into all the
cabinets of all the princes in Europe; in several of which, he took notice, lay
a vast heap of rich and costly things, but confused, shapeless, and fit for no
use: Now, said the old man to him, these are disappointments, and defeated
projects, made to intercept what I determined; then vanished; At which he
awaked, exceeding glad to find himself safe in his blessed island, and
wonderfully pleased with his dream, which betokens so much good to his dear
country. This was the conclusion of his record.

ED. DORRINGTON.

FINIS

