THE POLITICAL PROGRESS OF BRITAIN; OR, AN IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF ABUSES in the
GOVERNMENT OF THE British Empire, IN EUROPE, ASIA, AND AMERICA, FROM THE
REVOLUTION IN 1688, TO THE PRESENT TIME.

The whole tending to prove the ruinous Consequences of the popular System Or
TAXATION, WAR, AND CONQUEST.

"THE WORLD'S MAD BUSINESS."

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR J. T. CALLENDER.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE First Edition of The Political Progress of Britain was published at
Edinburgh and London, in Autumn, 1792. The sale was lively, and the prospect of
future success flattering. The plan was, to give an impartial history of the
abuses in government, in a series of pamphlets. But while the author was
preparing for the press, a second number, along with a new edition of the
first, he was, on the 2d of January, 1793, apprehended, and with some
difficulty made his escape. Two booksellers, who acted as his editors, were
prosecuted; and after a very arbitrary trial, they were condemned, the one to
three months, and the other to six months of imprisonment. A revolution will
take place in Scotland before the lapse of ten years at farthest, and most
likely much sooner. The Scots nation will then certainly think itself bound, by
every tie of wisdom, of gratitude, and of justice, to make reparation to these
two honest men, for the tyranny which they have encountered in the cause of
truth. In Britain, authors and editors of pamphlets have long conducted the van
of every revolution. They compose a kind of forlorn hope on the skirts of
battle: and though they may often want experience, or influence, to marshal the
main body, they yet enjoy the honor and the danger of the first rank, in
storming the ramparts of oppression.

A copy of the first edition was handed to Mr. Jefferson, late American
Secretary of State. He spoke of it, on different occasions, in respectful
terms. He said that it contained the most astonishing concentration of abuses
that he had ever heard of in any government. He inquired, why it was not
printed in America? and said, that he, for one, would gladly become a
purchaser. Other gentlemen have delivered their opinions to the same effect;
and their encouragement was one cause for the appearance of this American
edition.

The work is intended for that class of people who has not much time to spend
in reading, and who wants a plain but substantial meal of political
information. The facts are, therefore, crowded together as closely as possible.
All the coquetry of authorship has been avoided. The ambition of the writer was
to be candid, unaffected, and intelligible; because truth is the basis of sound
argument, simplicity the soul of elegance, and perspicuity the supreme
touchstone of accurate composition.

A report was circulated, and believed, in Scotland, that this production came,
in reality, from the pen of one of the judges of the court of session. The
charge was unjust. His lordship did not write a single page of it; but he said
openly, that its contents were authentic, and unanswerable; and that the public
were welcome to call it his.

For the extreme rashness of his plan, the writer cannot offer an apology that
prudence will accept. A short story may, perhaps, convey the motives of his
conduct. In 1758, the Duke of Marlborough, with eighteen thousand men landed on
the coast of France. The troops, when disembarking, were opposed by a French
battery, which was immediately silenced, for it consisted only of an old man,
armed with two muskets; he was slightly wounded in the leg, and made prisoner.
The English asked him, whether he expected that his two muskets were to silence
the fire of their fleet? "Gentlemen," he replied, I have done only my duty, and
if all my countrymen here had acted like me, you would not this day have landed
a Concale.

JAMES THOMSON CALLENDER, An Exile for writing this Pamphlet.
Philadelphia, March 31, 1795.
INTRODUCTION.
WITHIN the last hundred years of our history, Britain has been five times at
war with France, and six times at war with Spain. During the same period, she
has been engaged in two rebellions at home, besides an endless catalogue of
massacres in Asia and America. In Europe, the common price which we advance for
a war, has extended from one to three hundred thousand lives, and from sixty to
an hundred and fifty millions sterling. From Africa, we import annually between
thirty and forty thousand slaves, which rises in the course of a century to at
least three millions of murders. In Bengal only, we destroyed or expelled,
within the short period of six years, no less than five millions of industrious
and harmless people Infra, chap. 1.
; and as we have been sovereigns in that country, for above thirty-five years,
it may be reasonably computed that we have strewed the plains of Indostan with
fifteen or twenty millions of carcases. If we combine the diversified ravages
of famine, pestilence, and the sword, it can hardly be supposed, that in these
transactions less than fifteen hundred thousand of our countrymen have
perished; a number equal to that of the whole inhabitants of Britain who are at
present able to bear arms. In Europe, the havoc of our antagonists has been at
least not inferior to our own, so that this quarter of the world alone has lost
by our quarrels, three millions of men in the flower of life; whose
descendants, in the progress of domestic society, would have swelled into
multitudes beyond calculation. The persons positively destroyed must, in the
whole, have exceeded twenty millions, or two hundred thousand acts of homicide
per annum. These victims have been sacrificed to the balance of power, and the
balance of trade, the honor of the British flag, the universal supremacy of
parliament, and the security of the Protestant succession. If we are to proceed
at this rate for another century, we may, which is natural to mankind, admire
ourselves, and our achievements, but every other nation in the world must have
a right to wish that an earthquake or a volcano may first bury both islands
together in the center of the globe; that a single, but decisive exortion of
Almighty vengeance may terminate the progress and the remembrance of our crimes.

In the scale of just calculation, the most valuable commodity, next to human
blood, is money. Having made a gross estimate of the destruction of the former,
let us endeavor to compute the consumption of the latter. The war of 1689 cost
sixty millions of public money, and at the end of it, the public debts amounted
to twenty millions, or by another account Memoirs of Britain and Ireland, vol.
ii.
, to be seventeen millions and a half; so that not more than one third part of
the expenses were borrowed. In Queen Anne's war, forty or fifty millions
sterling were also sunk in the same manner, besides about thirty millions,
which were added to the former public debt. Very large sums have since been
absorbed in other wars, over and above those which were placed to the national
credit. In 1783, by the report of the commissioners of public accounts, the
total debts of Britain extended to two hundred and seventy-nine millions, six
hundred and ninety-eight thousand pounds, though many millions have been paid
off in time of peace, by what is called the sinking fund. Hence we see, that
this sum of two hundred and seventy-nine millions is much inferior to the
actual charges of these wars. The total amount may be fixed somewhere perhaps
between four and six hundred millions. To this we must subjoin the value of
sixteen or twenty thousand merchant ships taken by the enemy. This diminutive
article of sixty or an hundred millions would have been sufficient for
transporting and settling eight or twelve hundred thousand farmers, with their
families, on the banks of the Potowmack or the Mississipi. By the report above
quoted, we learn, that in 1789, the interest of our public debts extended to
nine millions, and five hundred thousand pounds, which is equivalent to an
annual tax of twenty shillings per head, on every inhabitant of Britain. The
friends of our intelligent and respectable minister, Mr. Pit, make an infinite
bustle about the nine millions of debt which his ingenuity has discharged. They
ought to arrange, in an opposite column, a list of the additional taxes which
have been imposed, and of the myriads of families, whom such taxes have ruined.
At best, we are but as a person transferring his money from the right pocket to
the left. Perhaps a Chancellor of the Exchequer might as well propose to empty
the Baltic with a tobacco-pipe. Had the war with America lasted for two years
longer, Britain would not at this day have owed a shilling; and if we shall
persist in rushing into carnage, with our former contempt of all feeling and
reflection, it may still be expected that, according to the practice of other
nations, a sponge or a bonfire will finish the game of funding.

What advantage has resulted to Britain from such incessant scenes of
prodigality and of bloodshed? In the wars of 1689, and 1702, this country was
neither more nor less than an hobby horse for the Emperor and the Dutch. The
rebellion in 1715 was excited by the despotic insolence of the Whigs. The
purchase of Bremen and Verden produced the Spanish war of 1718, and a squadron
dispatched for six different years to the Baltic. Such exertions cost us an
hundred times more than those quagmire Dutchies are worth, even to the Elector
of Hanover; a distinction which on this business becomes necessary, for as to
Britain, it was never pretended, that we could gain a farthing by such an
acquisition. In 1727, the nation forced George the First into a war with Spain,
which ended as usual with much mischief on both sides. The Spanish war of the
people in 1739, and the Austrian subsidy war of the crown, which commenced in
1741, were absurd in their principles, and ruinous in their consequences. At
sea, we met with nothing but hard blows. On the continent, we began by hiring
the Queen of Hungary to fight her own battles against the King of Prussia; and
ten years after the war ended, we hired the King of Prussia with six hundred
and seventy-one thousand pounds per annum, to fight his own battles against
her. If this be not folly, what are we to call it? As to the quarrel of 1754,
It was remarked by all Europe, says Frederick, that in her dispute with France,
every wrong step was on the side of England. By nine years of butchery, and an
additional debt of seventy millions sterling, we secured Canada; but had Wolf
and his army been driven from the heights of Abraham, our grandsons might have
come too early to hear of an American revolution. As to this event, the
circumstances are too shocking for reflection. At that time an English woman
had discovered a remedy for the canine madness, and Frederick advises a French
correspondent to recommend this medicine to the use of the Parliament of
England, as they must certainly have been bitten by a mad dog.

In the quarrels of the Continent we should concern ourselves but little; for
in a defensive war, we may safely defy all the nations of Europe. When the
whole civilized world was embodied under the banners of Rome, her Dictator, at
the head of thirty thousand veterans, disembarked for a second time on the
coast of Britain. The face of the country was covered with a forest, and the
solitary tribes were divided upon the old question, Who shall be king? The
island could hardly have attained to a twentieth part of its present
population, yet by his own account, the invader found a retreat prudent, or
perhaps necessary. South Britain was afterward subjected, but this acquisition
was the task of centuries. Every village was bought with the blood of the
legions. We may confide in the moderation of a Roman Historian, when he is to
describe the disasters of his countrymen. In a single revolt, eighty thousand
of the usurpers were extirpated; and fifty, or, as others affirm, seventy
thousand soldiers perished in the course of a Caledonian campaign. Do the
masters of modern Europe understand the art of war better than Severus, and
Agricola, and Julius Caesar? Is any combination of human power to be compared
with the talents and resources of the Roman empire? If our naked ancestors
resisted and vanquished the conquerors of the species, what have we to fear
from any antagonist of this day? On six months warning we could muster ten or
twelve hundred thousand militia. Yet, while the despots of Germany were
fighting about a suburb, the nation has condescended to tremble for its
existence, and the blossoms of domestic happiness have been blasted by
subsidies, and tide-waiters, and press-gangs, and excisemen. Our political and
commercial systems are evidently nonsense. We possess within this single
island, every production, both of art and nature, which is necessary for the
most comfortable enjoyment of life; yet for the sake of tea, and sugar, and
tobacco, and a few other despicable luxuries, we have rushed into an abyss of
blood and taxes. The boasted extent of our trade, and the quarrels and public
debts which attend it, have raised the price of bread, and even of grass, at
least three hundred per cent.

This pamphlet consists not of fluent declamation, but of curious authenticated
and important facts, with a few short observations interspersed, which seemed
necessary to explain them. The reader will meet with no mournful periods to the
memory of annual or triennial parliaments; for while the members are men such
as their predecessors have almost always been, it is but of small concern
whether they hold their places for life, or but for a single day. Some of our
projectors are of opinion, that to shorten the duration of parliament would be
an ample remedy for all our grievances. The advantages of a popular election
have likewise been much extolled. Yet an acquaintance with Thucydides, or
Plutarch, or Guicciardini, or Machiavel, may tend to calm the raptures of a
republican apostle. The plan of universal suffrages has been loudly recommended
by the Duke of Richmond; and, on the 16th of May 1782, that nobleman, seconded
by Mr. Horn Took, and Mr. Pit, was sitting in a tavern, composing
advertisements of reformation for the newspapers. MUTANTUR TEMPORA. But had his
plan been adopted, it is possible that we should at this day, have looked back
with regret, on the humiliating yet tranquil despotism of a Scots, or a Cornish
borough.

The style of this work is concise and plain; and it is hoped that it will be
found sufficiently respectful to all parties. The question to be decided is,
are we to proceed with the war system? Are we, in the progress of the
nineteenth century, to embrace five thousand fresh taxes, to squander a second
five hundred millions sterling, and to extirpate twenty millions of people?

THE POLITICAL PROGRESS OF BRITAIN.
CHAPTER I.
Dutch prowess, Danish wit, and British policy,
Great NOTHING! mainly tend to thee.
ROCHESTER.
THE people of Scotland are, on all occasions, foolish enough to interest
themselves in the good or bad fortune of an English minister; though it does
not appear that we have more influence with such a minister, than with the
cabinet of Japan. To England we were for many centuries a hostile, and we are
still considered by them as a foreign, and in effect a conquered nation. It is
true, that we elect very near a twel^^^ part of the British House of Commons;
but our representatives have no title to vote, or act in a separate body. Every
statute proceeds upon the majority of the voices of the whole compound
assembly: What, therefore, can forty-five persons accomplish, when opposed to
five hundred and thirteen? They feel the total insignificance of their
situation, and behave accordingly. An equal number of elbow chairs, placed once
for all on the ministerial benches, would be less expensive to government, and
just about as manageable. I call these, and every ministerial tool of the same
kind, expensive, because those who are obliged to buy, must be understood to
sell Damn you and your instructions too, I have BOUGHT you, and I will SELL
you, said a worthy representative to his constituents, when they requested him
to attend to their interest in parliament. Political Disquisitions, vol. i. p.
280.
; and those who (...) themselves under the banners of opposition, can only be
considered, as having rated their voices too high for a purchaser in the
parliamentary auction To this general censure we can produce a few exceptions,
but the individuals are so well known, that it would be needless to name them.
.

There is a fashionable phrase, the politics of the county, which I can never
hear pronounced without a glow of indignation; compared with such politics,
even pimping is respectable. Our supreme court have, indeed, with infinite
propriety, interposed to extirpate what are called in Scotland, parchment
barons, and have thus prevented a crowd of unhappy wretches from plunging into
an abyss of perjury. But, in other respects, their decision is of no
consequence, since it most certainly cannot be of the smallest concern to this
country, who are our electors, and representatives; or, indeed, whether we are
represented at all. Our members are, most of them, the mere satellites of the
minister of the day; and forward to serve his most oppressive and criminal
purposes.

It seems to have been long a maxim of the monopolizing directors of our
southern masters, to extirpate, as quickly as possible, every manufacture in
this country, that interferes with their own. Has any body forgotten the
scandalous breach of national faith, by which the Scottish distilleries have
been brought to destruction? Has not the manufacture of starch also been
driven, by every engine of judicial torture, to the last pang of its existence?
Have not the manufacturers of paper, printed callicoes, malt liquors and glass,
been harrassed by the most vexatious methods of exacting the revenue? methods
equivalent to an addition of ten, or sometimes an hundred per cent. of the duty
payable. Let us look around this insulted country, and say, on what
manufacture, except the linen, government has not fastened its bloody fangs.

In the Excise annals of Scotland, that year which expired on the 5th of July
1790, produced for the duties on soap, sixty-five thousand pounds. On the 5th
of July 1791, the annual amount of these duties was only forty-five thousand
pounds; and by the same hopeful progress in three years more at farthest, our
ministers will enjoy the pleasure of extirpating a branch of trade, once
flourishing and extensive. Two men were some years ago executed at Edinburgh
for robbing the Excise Office of twenty-seven pounds, but offenders may be
named, who ten thousand times better deserve the gibbet. We have seen that
oppressive statutes, and a method of enforcing them, the most tyrannical, have,
in a single year, deprived the revenue of twenty thousand pounds, in one line
only, and have driven a crowd of industrious families out of the country; and
then our legislators, to borrow the honest language of George Ro^^ Esquire "have
the insolence to call this GOVERNMENT."

By an oriental monopoly, we have obtained the unexampled privilege of buying a
pound of the same tea, for six or eight shillings, with which other nations
would eagerly supply us for twenty-pence; nay, we have to thank our present
illustrious minister, that this trifling vegetable has been reduced from a
price still more extravagant. His popularity began by the commutation act.
Wonders were promised, wonders were expected, and wonders have happened! A
nation, consisting of men who call themselves enlightened, have consented to
build up their windows, that they might enjoy the permission of sipping in the
dark a cup of tea, ten per cent. cheaper than formerly; though not less than
three hundred per cent. dearer than its intrinsic price.

Such are the glorious consequences of our stupid veneration for a minister,
and our absurd submission to his capricious dictates!

At home Englishmen admire liberty; but abroad, they have always been harsh
masters. Edward the First conquered Wales and Scotland; and at the distance of
five hundred years, his name is yet remembered in both countries with
traditionary horror. His actions are shaded by a degree of infamy uncommon even
in the ruffian catalogue of English kings.

The rapacity of the BLACK Prince, as he has been emphatically termed, drove
him out of France. At this day, there are English writers who pretend to be
proud of the unprovoked massacres committed by his father and himself in that
country; but on the other hand, Philip de Comines ascribes the civil wars of
York and Lancaster, which followed the death of Henry the Fifth, to the
indignation of divine justice.

Ireland, for many centuries, groaned under the most oppressive and absurd
despotism; till, in defiance of all consequences, the immortal Swift, like
another Ajax, "Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light." He ^^^ght his
country to understand her importance. At last she resolved to assert it, and,
as a necessary circumstance, she arose in arms. England saw the hazard of
contending with a brave, an injured, and an indignant nation. The fabric of
tyranny fell without a blow; and a short time will extinguish the last vestige
of a supremacy, dishonorable and pernicious to both kingdoms.

In the East and West Indies, the conduct of Britain may be fairly contrasted
with the murder of Atabaliba, and will prove equally ruinous to the detested
conquerors The civil wars to which our violent desire of creating Nabobs gave
rise, were attended with tragical events. Bengal was depopulated by every
species of public distress. In the space of six years, half the great cities of
this opulent kingdom were rendered desolate; the most fertile fields in the
world lay waste; and FIVE MILLIONS of harmless and industrious people were
either expelled or destroyed. Want of foresight became more fatal than innate
barbarism; and men found themselves wading through blood and ruin, when their
only object was spoil. Dow's History of Indostan, vol. iii. p. 70. This book
was published in 1772, and the present quotation refers to our conduct at that
period.

In this dreadful scene, the most distinguished actor was Lord Clive. But
neither four millions sterling, nor even immense quantities of opium could
stifle in his bosom the agonies of reflection. In 1774, he cut his own throat.


.

When our sublime politicians exult in the victory of Seringapat^m, and the
butchery of the subjects of a prince, at the distance of six thousand leagues,
I am convinced from the bottom of my heart, and so will the majority of my
countrymen be, long before this century has elapsed, that it would be an event,
the most auspicious both for Bengal and for Britain, if Cornwallis and all his
myrmidons could be at once driven out of India.

But what quarter of the globe has not been convulsed by our ambition, our
avarice, and our baseness? The tribes of the Pacific ocean are polluted by the
most loathsome of diseases; our brandy has brutalized or extirpated the Indians
of the western continent; and we have hired by thousands the wretched survivors
to the task of bloodshed. On the shores of Africa, we bribe whole nations by
drunkenness, to robbery and murder; while in the face of earth and heaven, our
senators assemble to sanctify the practice.

Our North American colonies were established, defended, and lost, by a
succession of long and bloody wars, and at a recorded expense of at least two
or three hundred millions sterling In the war of 1775, British officers
pilfered books from a public library, which had been founded at Philadelphia by
an individual more truly estimable than many of the whole profession put
together; I need hardly subjoin the name of Franklin.
. We still retain Canada, at an annual charge of six or seven hundred thousand
pounds. This sum is wrested from us by an excise, which revels in the
destruction of manufactures, and the beggary of ten thousand honest families
Look into Ke^rsely's or Robertson's tax-tables: What concise! what tremenduous
volumes! When our political writers boast of British liberty, they remind us of
Smollet's cobbler in Bedlam bombarding Constantinople. If the victims who groan
under our yoke, were acquainted with the confusion and slavery which our
avarice or mad ambition have inflicted on ourselves, a very considerable share
of their abhorrence would be converted into contempt or pity.
. From the province itself we never raised, nor hope to raise, a shilling of
revenue; and the sole reason why its inhabitants endure our dominion for a
month longer is, to secure the money we spend among them.

CHAP II.
It Is time to take enormity by the forehead and brand it.

BEN JOHNSON.
DURING the reigns of Charles and James the Second, above sixty thousand
Nonconformists suffered, of whom five thousand DIED IN PRISON. On a moderate
computation, these persons were pillaged of FOURTEEN MILLIONS of property. Such
was the tolerating, liberal, candid spirit of the Church of England Vide Flower
on the French Constitution, p. 437, and his Authorities.
. This estimate cannot be intended to include Scotland, for it is likely that
here alone, Episcopacy sacrificed sixty thousand victims. Of all sorts of
follies, the records of the Church from the most outrageous burlesque on the
human understanding. As to Charles the Second, it is full time that we should
be spared from the hereditary insult of a holiday, for what Lord Gardenstone
has justly termed "his BANEFUL RESTORATION."

It is vulgarly understood that our political millenium commenced with "the
glorious Revolution." Let the reader judge from what follows.

Two hundred thousand pounds a year bestowed upon the parliament, have already
(1693) drawn out of the pockets of the subjects MORE MONEY than all our kings
since the Conquest have had from the nation! -- The King (William) has about
six score members, whom I can reckon, who are in places, and are thereby so
entirely at his devotion, that though they have mortal feuds, when out of the
House, and though they are violently of opposite parties, in their notions of
government, yet they vote as lumpingly as the lawn sleeves. The House is so
officered by those who have places and pensions, that the King can baffle any
bill, quash all grievances, and stifle all accounts Burgh's Political
Disquisitions, vol. 1, p. 405.
.

A pawnbroker descending from the pillory would not be suffered to resume his
profession. A porter convicted of theft, would be deprived of his ticket. We
might be tempted to imagine, that a solicitude to embrace pollution, can hardly
exist even in the meanest and most worthless rank of mankind. It seems
incredible, that an assembly consisting of Gentlemen, shall first by a solemn
vote discharge one of their members as a rascal, and in a short time after,
place him at their head. That such a case has actually happened, appears upon
record.

In the year 1711, the House of Commons resolved, That Robert Walpole, Esquire,
having been this session of parlialiament committed a prisoner to the Tower,
and expelled this House for a breach of trust in the execution of his office,
and NOTORIOUS CORRUPTION, when Secretary at War, was, and is incapable of being
elected a member to serve in this present parliament. Such an expulsion would
for ever have bolted him out of any society but a British senate. In 1715, when
a new parliament was called, he resumed his seat. He rose superior to
competition; and the end of his career was worthy of his outset. Yet his
character can lose nothing by a comparison with that of his constituents, the
burgesses of Lynn, who attempted instantly upon his expulsion, to return him a
second time as their representative, but their choice was rejected. Nor was it
because Walpole had pilfered five hundred guineas that he was expelled and sent
to the Tower. He was a Whig, and at that time the majority in the House of
Commons were Tories. This was regarded as the true cause of his sentence George
the Second, on his accession, had resolved to dismiss Walpole. The minister
offered on condition of keeping his place, to obtain an addition of an hundred
thousand pounds per annum to the civil list, and a jointure of an hundred
thousand pounds to Queen Caroline. His terms were accepted. It is impossible
for the human mind to conceive a more sordid transaction. Edmund Burke, in what
he calls an appeal to the old whigs, has gravely assured us, that Walpole was
an honorable man, and a sound WHIG. He was not a prodigal and corrupt
minister. He was far from governing by corruption.
.

The Earl of Wharton, another WHIG, was fined in a thousand pounds for an
outrage too gross to be repeated. This did not deprive him of his seat in the
House of Peers, nor impede his progress to the government of Ireland, where his
conduct rivalled that of Rumbold in Bengal, or Verres in Sicily. -- About the
year 1770, General Burgoyne was fined in a thousand pounds for bribery at an
election for Preston. He enjoys a seat in the present parliament.

On the subject of parliamentary corruption, no writer has spoken with more
frankness and perspicuity, than Mr. Doddington, in his celebrated Diary. In a
conversation with the Duke of Newcastle, in 1753, about an election for
Bridgewater, there is the following curious passage: I recommended my two
parsons, Buroughs and Franklin. The Duke entered into it very cordially, and
answered me, that they should have the first crown livings that should be
vacant in their parts, if we would look out and send him the first
intelligence. And again, Mr. Pelham declared, that I had a good deal of
marketable ware, PARLIAMENTARY INTEREST, and that if I would empower him to
offer it all to the King, without conditions, he would be answerable to bring
the affair to a good account. -- The Duke of Newcastle said, that what I did
was very great, that he often thought with surprise, at the ease and cheapness
of the election at Weymouth, that they had NOTHING like it. I said, I believed
there were few who could give his Majesty SIX members for nothing. -- The
election cost me three thousand four hundred pounds. I was fairly chosen, nor
would the returning officer have dared not to return me, had he not been
encouraged by the servants of administration. The borough was lost, and lost
solely by a Lord of the Bedchamber, and the Custom-house Officers. (Par nobile
fratrum!) Lord Bute had told Anson, that room must be made for Lord Parker; who
replied, that all was engaged. Bute said, What, my Lord, the King's Admirally
boroughs full, and the King not acquainted with it! Anson seemed quite
disconcerted, and knew not what to say Doddington's Diary, 3d ed. p. 256, 283,
293, 309, et seq.
. This agrees exactly with the account given by Mr. Courtney, in a late debate
in the House of Commons, where he observed, that members came into parliament
with a label at their mouths, inscribed, Yes, or No. The state of British
representation has been often examined and censured. A few particulars may
serve as a specimen of the rest.

England is said to contain eight millions of inhabitants, who send to the
House of Commons five hundred and thirteen members. At this rate, every million
ought, upon an average, to choose sixty-four representatives. The cities of
London and Westminster contain between them, about a million of people, who
elect not sixty-four, but six members for parliament. The borough of Old Sarum,
which contains only one inhabitant, sends two members.

On this topic, a short extract from Mr. Burgh's Political Disquisitions, may
entertain the reader. -- Two hundred and fifty-four members are elected by five
thousand seven hundred and twenty-three votes; now, the most numerous meeting
of the Commons ever known, was on occasion of the debate about Walpole, A. D.
1741. There were then five hundred and two in the House. Therefore, two hundred
and fifty-four comes very near a majority of the House, or the whole acting and
efficient number. And the greatest part of these illustrious five thousand
seven hundred and twenty-three, who have the power of constituting lawgivers
over the property of the nation, are themselves persons of no property
Political Disquisitions, vol. 1, p. 45.
.

The writer has here committed a slight inaccuracy; for, in the debate about
Walpole, these two hundred and fifty-four members, who are not, in fact,
elected by a two hundredth part of the nation, would have seemed an actual
majority of six votes against the whole other representatives in the House. In
the year 1770, the English nation became jealous that their liberties were in
danger, because Government had interfered in the election of Mr. Wilkes, as a
member for the county of Middlesex. The letters of Junius are chiefly employed
upon this topic. Junius, with all his merit, resembled a barber, who plucks out
a single hair, when he ought to be shaving your beard. It could not be of the
least consequence to the county of Middlesex, nor is it of any concern to any
other county in England, who are their representatives, since the two hundred
and fifty-four members who are elected by A TWO HUNDREDTH PART of the nation,
and the forty-five make-weight Scotch members, are alone sufficient to insure a
majority. The subject is too absurd to admit of an argument, and too detestable
for declamation. If Government were heartily to send two hundred and fifty-four
excisemen, or clerks from the Bank of England, into parliament, in place of
these two hundred and fifty-four members, it would save the expense of
election, and a great part of the necessary expense of corruption. It is true,
that the masters of rotten boroughs are often enrolled in the ranks of
opposition; and among others, the Earl of Chatham began his progress as a
member for Old Sarum. But an opposition always consists, in part, of
adventures, who, as Dr. Johnson observes, having estimated themselves at two
high a price, are only angry that they are not bought Vide False Alarm.
. There is a cant expression in this country, that our Government is deservedly
the wonder and envy of the world. With better reason it may be said, that
Parliament is a mere outwork of the court, a phalanx of mercenaries embattled
against the reason, the happiness, and the liberty of mankind. The game laws,
the dog act, the shop tax, the window tax, the pedlars tax, the attorney tax,
and a thousand others, give us a right to wish that their authors had been
hanged.

CHAP. III.
-- Felicior essem
Angustis opibus: mallem tolerare Sabinos,
Et Vejos: brevior duxi securius aevum.
Ipsa nocet moles.
CLAUDIAN.
IT is now eighty-eight years since In 1704.
we surprised Gibraltar. We have retained this barren, useless rock, under the
pretense of protecting our trade in the Mediterranean; and it is even a sorry
conceit in Britain that we are thus masters of a kind of toll-bar to the
entrance of that sea. Had the passage been only five hundred yards wide, this
fancy would have had some foundation. But, unfortunately, the Strait, as we
call it, is twenty miles in breadth; so that all the ships in the world may
pass it every day, in contempt of all our batteries. As to the protection of
our merchants, it is equally superfluous, for our commerce to that part of
Europe was far more extensive, long before we possessed Gibraltar, than it is
at this moment This circumstance has been fully explained by Dr. Adam Smith, in
his Inquiry, book 4, chap. 7.
; and this unquestionable fact proves the absolute impertinence of the whole
scheme. A plain comparison from domestic life will illustrate what I say. Let
us put the case, that a private gentleman is like Britain, overwhelmed with
debt. He builds and furnishes a handsome inn on the road to his country seat,
and he gives the premises to his butler, with a pension of five hundred pounds,
on condition, that in dirty weather, he shall be suffered to pull off his boots
in the kitchen. But were even the port of Gibraltar sunk to the center of the
earth, we can have no want of shelter at the shortest distance. There are three
ports on the opposite side of the Strait. Besides, we cannot retain this
fortress, unless we preserve a superiority at sea, and as long as we preserve
that superiority, Gibraltar is of no consequence. For the memorable progress of
Admiral Blake on the coast of Barbary proves, that while we can launch a
victorious navy, manned as it is by a race of veterans beyond all praise, we
can always command a free navigation in every harbor of the globe. So much for
the importance of this boasted acquisition. Let us now consider its expense;
and on this head the reader may, if he thinks proper, prepare himself for
astonishment. The fortress, for a long period past, has cost us five hundred
thousand pounds a year, besides the extraordinary advances in time of war, and
the sums which the garrison, by sober industry, might have earned at home in
time of peace. For the sake of moderation, let us compute that Gibraltar,
during the whole space of our possession, has required, upon an average, only
two hundred thousand pounds per annum; on multiplying this sum by eighty-eight,
we are presented with an amount of seventeen millions and six hundred thousand
pounds sterling. Could the premises be disputed, the total expense would exceed
credibility; for at the rate of five per cent. of compound interest, a sum
doubles itself in fourteen years; and, consequently, in the course of
eighty-four years, from 1704, to 1788, the first payment of two hundred
thousand pounds will increase to twelve millions and eight hundred thousand.
The simple interest of this sum, for the four additional years, from 1788 to
1792 inclusive, amounts to two millions five hundred and sixty thousand pounds,
and the whole arises to fifteen millions three hundred and sixty thousand
pounds. This, however, concerns only one year of our conquest. The first four
years extend in the whole to fifty-seven millions and six hundred thousand
pounds sterling. Another loss also must be taken into this unfathomable
account. The garrison of this fortress consists always of at least four
thousand men, and sometimes of more than twice that number. An ordinary workman
can earn ten shillings a week, and the labor of four thousand such workmen is
worth to the public above an hundred thousand pounds per annum. This adds one
third part more of additional loss. The total expense therefore, which this
acquisition exhausted in the first four years only, including the legal
interest of our money down to this day, cannot have been less than eighty-six
millions four hundred thousand pounds. We are likewise entitled to compute not
only what we have positively lost, but what we might with equal certainty have
gained. Britain and Ireland contain about an hundred and four thousand square
miles, and if this sum of eighty-six millions four hundred thousand pounds had
been expended on the purposes of agriculture, it would have supplied a fund of
eight hundred and thirty pounds sterling for every square mile. Hence, instead
of an interest of five per cent. the funds thus employed would have returned a
profit of ten or twenty, or perhaps of fifty per cent.

The reader may prosecute, and contemplate the sequel of this calculation. All
the current cash in Europe, or in the world, would come infinitely short of
discharging such a reckoning. Britain may be supposed at this time to contain
about fifteen hundred thousand families, besides those who are supported upon
charity. Now, dividing the present annual expense of five hundred thousand
pounds equally among them, it amounts to a share of six shillings and eight
pence per family. The money ought to be raised under a distinct title, such as
the Gibraltar additional shilling of land tax, the Gibraltar malt tax, the
Gibraltar excise on tobacco, the Gibraltar game license, the Gibraltar horse
license, the Gibraltar attorney license, or the Gibraltar stamp duty on
legacies. In that case, the nation would instantly consider what they are
about, and cast off such a preposterous burden. The payment of six shillings
and eight pence is frequently the smallest part of the grievance. By the
expense of excisemen, of prosecutions, and of penalties, five shillings of
revenue may often cost a British freeman ten times as many pounds sterling I
shall mention an example in point, which occurs while I am now writing. An old
woman had been in the practice of supplying her neighbors with halfpennyworths
of snuff. She was ordered, under a penalty of fifty pounds, to pay five
shillings for a license, and she did so. Had she been able to buy from the
manufacturer four pounds of snuff at a time, the business might have rested
there; but as this was beyond her power, it was required by the terriers of
taxation, that she should make oath, once a year, to the quantity she sold. Her
memory failed, and she is now, with a crowd of other victims, in an excise
court, which will very possibly bring her to beggary. This is like a drop in
the ocean of excise. The very sound of the word announces utter destruction;
for it is derived from a Latin verb, which signifies to cut up by the roots.

What "our most excellent constitution" may be in theory, I neither know nor
care. In practice, it is altogether a CONSPIRACY OF THE RICH AGAINST THE POOR.


.

Before the acquisition of Gibraltar, England, in the whole course of her
history, had only three wars with Spain. The first in 1588, was produced by the
piracies of Drake and others, and by the assistance which Elizabeth afforded to
the Dutch revolters. The second war was likewise unprovoked on the part of
Spain. Cromwell found it necessary to vent the turbulence of his subjects in a
foreign quarrel, and Jamaica was invaded and seized without even a pretense of
justice. On this conquest chiefly has England founded that hopeful branch of
her commerce, the Slave Trade, while the climate has annually extirpated, by
thousands, the vagrants from Europe. The third Spanish war had an origin worthy
of its predecessors. The King of Spain, by his will, transferred his dominions
to a Prince of the house of Bourbon. His subjects consented or submitted to the
choice, and England, with a degree of insolence unmatched in history,
interfered in favor of an Austrian candidate. The contest ended with our
acquisition of Minorca, and Gibraltar; an injury to Spain of the most offensive
nature. Since that period her court has always been forward to contend with us;
and five wars Viz. in 1718, in 1727, in 1739, in 1762, and in 1779.
, begun and terminated in the short space of sixty-five years, assures us of
their indelible indignation. Nor can we be surprised at their animosity; for
what would an Englishman say or feel, were Plymouth and Dover fortified by a
French garrison? Happily for the species, our countrymen at Gibraltar have been
but seldom attacked. Hence, in a time of war, they have commonly inflicted and
suffered far less mischief than must have been committed on both sides in a
piratical expedition to the coast of Peru, in desolating the plains of
Hindostan, in burning the shipping at St. Maloes, or in storming the
pestilential ramparts of the Havannah The Major of a British regiment who
served at that siege, had in his company, on his arrival at Cuba, an hundred
and nine healthy men. Of these, as he himself told me, five only returned to
Europe.
.

In 1708, we captured Minorca, and after what has been said as to Gibraltar, it
is unnecessary to expatiate on the monsterous expenses which it must have cost
us during half a century, till it was in 1756 surrendered to the French. On
this event the whole English nation seemed to have run out of their senses. Yet
to the loss of this fortress, we may in some measure attribute our success, as
it was called, in that war; for the charge of supporting Minorca must have been
felt as a dead weight upon our other operations. It was restored in 1763, and
in 1781, it was a second time, and I hope for ever, separated from the British
dominions. By the loss of this fortress we save an incessant and extravagant
expense. With me it is an object of regret, that the brave Elliot and his
garrison had not been forced to capitulate by the first bomb discharged against
them. The individuals, acting as they did, from the most generous and
honorable principles, have acquired and deserved our warmest gratitude; and,
as it may be expected that such events will hereafter become less frequent,
their glory will descend with increasing luster to the last generations of
mankind. But their efforts were fatal to this country; for it is self-evident
that we had much better have wanted this mock appendage of empire. The siege
itself produced scenes of such stupenduous destruction, that they cannot be
perused without horror. Nine years of peace have since elapsed, and, in that
time, including the endless expense of fortifications, it is probable that
Gibraltar has cost us at least five millions sterling; besides, we have been
again on the verge of a war with Spain, which has added a comfortable item of
four millions to the debts of the nation. If the annual expense of Gibraltar
amounts to five hundred thousand pounds, this is about one thirty-second part
of our public revenue. Nothing but the power of its disposal can obtain for a
British minister a majority in the House of Commons. Three hundred and twenty
members are about the usual number under his influence When the whole strength
of each party is called forth, a minority are commonly within an hundred voices
of the minister, which corresponds with tolerable accuracy to the computation
in the text. In the regency question, Mr. Pit, with the whole nation at his
back, mustered only two hundred and sixty-nine members.
; and therefore the patronage of Gibraltar may be conjectured to purchase ten
votes in the market of St. Stephen's chapel In the Spanish negotiation in 1757,
the Earl of Chatham (then Mr. Pit) proposed to cede Gibraltar to Spain, and
again, in 1761, he offered it as the price of the Family Compact. Vide His
Life, in two large volumes just published. This proposal evinces, that the
fortress was not, in Mr. Pitt's opinion, of much importance to Britain.
.

Though writers have presumed to specify the annual charge of Gibraltar, an
exact estimate cannot possibly be obtained. The public accounts are presented
to parliament in a state of inextricable confusion. Indeed, their immense bulk
would alone be sufficient to place them far beyond the reach of any human
comprehension. A single circumstance may serve to show the way in which
parliamentary business is commonly performed. A statute was passed and printed
some years ago, containing three successive references to the thirty-FIRST day
of November.

For a foreign contest, our government is most wretchedly adapted. In the war
of 1756, Frederick, that Shakespeare of kings, fought and conquered five
different nations. In the course of his miraculous campaigns, he neither added
a single impost, nor attempted to borrow a single shilling. At the same time
our boasted Earl of Chatham was overwhelming this country with taxes, and
contracting an annual debt of fifteen or twenty millions sterling. With a more
destructive minister no nation was ever cursed. Yet this man we prefer to Sir
Robert Walpole, a statesman, whose maxim it was to keep us, if possible, at
peace with all the world.

In 1662, Dunkirk, then possessed by England, cost an annual expense of an
hundred and twenty thousand pounds. At the same period the whole revenues of
the nation did not amount to eleven hundred thousand pounds. The retention of
the town must have proved a hot-bed of future wars with France. Charles the
Second, at this time sold it to Lewis the Fourteenth, for the sum of four
hundred thousand pounds. This was, I believe, the only wise, laudable, or even
innocent action of his reign. It had almost produced a rebellion; and, as Mr.
Hume observes, has not had the good fortune, to be justified by any party.

Domestic improvement is, in all cases, more advantageous than military
acquisition. Yet in the great outlines of our history, we have incessantly
forsaken the former, to pursue the latter. James the First, though in private,
and even in public life, universally despised, was one of the best sovereigns
that ever sat on the British throne. Without a single quality which could
recommend him to our esteem, he preserved the English nation, though much
against their will, in peace, during his entire reign of twenty-two years.
Hence both islands made rapid advances in wealth and prosperity. "Never," says
Stowe, was there any people, less considerate, and less thankful than at this
time, being not willing to endure the memory of their present happiness. On the
same principles of rapine, which dictated the retention of Dunkirk, James has
been severely blamed for delivering back to the Dutch three of their fortified
towns, which had been put into the possession of Elizabeth. Mr. Hume has, with
much propriety, vindicated his conduct. Had it been possible that the life of
such a prince, and the tranquillity of this country, could have been prolonged
to the present day, it is beyond the power of British vanity to conceive the
accumulated progress of British opulence. Both islands would, long before this
time, have advanced to a state of cultivation, not inferior to that of China.
The productions of the soil, and the number of inhabitants, might have
exceeded, by tenfold, their present amount. Public roads, canals, bridges, and
buildings of every description, must have multiplied far beyond what our most
sanguine wishes are capable of conceiving. A short review of the destruction
committed by foreign wars within the last hundred years of our history, can
hardly fail to amuse, and may perhaps instruct the reader.

CHAP. IV.
Facilis est descensus Averni. VIRG.
It Is easy into hell to fall;
But to get out again is all.

THE ground of the first war, says Dr. Swift, after the Revolution, as to the
part we had in it, was to make France acknowledge the late king, and to recover
Hudson's Bay. But during that whole war the sea was almost entirely neglected,
and the greatest part of six millions annually, employed to enlarge the
frontier of the Dutch. For the king was a general, but not an admiral; and
although king of England, was a native of Holland.

After ten years of fighting, to little purpose, after the loss of above an
hundred thousand men, and a debt remaining of twenty millions, we at length
hearkened to the terms of Peace, which was concluded with great advantages to
the Empire and Holland, but none at all to us The Conduct of the Allies.
.

This account does not give us much encouragement to send for a second
sovereign from Holland. Dutch generosity appears to have proved a very
miserable bargain. It is hardly possible that James, with all his priests and
dragoons, could have committed one hundredth part of this havoc. So much for a
Protestant hero, and a glorious Revolution.

William ascended and supported his throne by a series of the meanest and most
disgraceful expedients. He excited Argyle and Monmouth to rebellion. He bribed
the servants of James to betray to himself the secrets of their master. He
instructed these ministers to drive the King of England into those very
measures which forced a Revolution. He was base enough to deny the ligitimacy
of the Prince of Wales; he taught two thankless daughters to forsake, and ruin,
and insult their father. When embarking for this country, he took Heaven to
witness, that he had not the least intention to invade or subdue the kingdom of
England, much less to make himself master thereof, or to invert or prejudice
the lawful succession Macpherson's History of Britain, vol. 1, chap. 3.
. James had quarrelled with the Church of England, and this was one of the
chief causes of his destruction. Yet all the bishops, except eight, as well as
many temporal peers, refused to take the oaths to the new government; and
Sancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been at the head of the opposition
to James, was, along with five other bishops, deposed for his refusal. The
convention parliament who made William King of England, were elected by
himself, and contained, besides other extraordinary materials, fifty members of
the Common Council of London. With this very parliament he was immediately on
the worst terms; and Sutherland, Marlborough, and Admiral Russel, with many
other chiefs of his party, entered into a conspiracy for his expulsion. The
Irish rebels had forfeited lands to the value of three millions three hundred
and twenty thousand pounds. This immense property William divided almost
altogether among his Dutch favorites, and the Countess of Orkney, an English
concubine, whose services were rewarded with an estate of twenty-six thousand
pounds a year; while, at the same time, with the most sordid ingratitude, he
turned his back on the family of Monmouth, who had been his tool and his
victim. These acts of robbery were reversed by parliament. I pass over the
tragedies of Glencoe and Darien, for on such a character, they reflect no
peculiar reproach. William was the father of our public debt, which he
multiplied as much as possible, that besides other mean purposes, he might
attach to his personal safety the creditors of the nation. As to parliament, in
1690, the Speaker promised to the king to manage his own party, provided he
might be furnished with money to purchase votes Macpherson's History of Great
Britain, vol. 1, chap. 10.
. His majesty consented. In the progress of this conspiracy, his agent was
expelled from the House of Commons, for accepting from the City of London a
bribe of a thousand guineas. A bribe of ten thousand pounds, from the
East India Company, "was traced to the king Ibid. vol. 2, chap. 2.
;" a magistrate, whose office it was to sign the warrant for executing a
pickpocket. William extinguished this inquiry by a prorogation. Thus ended,
says the historian, a wretched force, in which the feeble efforts for obtaining
justice were scarce less disgraceful than venality itself. On the 20th December
1697, the Commons granted William seven hundred thousand pounds a year for the
support of the civil list. This comprehended fifty thousand pounds a year,
which he promised to pay to King James's queen as her jointure, and fifty
thousand pounds a year, which he demanded as necessary to establish the
household of the Duke of Gloucester. To the queen he never paid a farthing, and
to the Duke only fifteen thousand pounds a year. This prince died on the 24th
of July 1700, and in 1701 the Commons, after a violent debate with the
adherents of the court, compelled William to refund the fifty thousand pounds,
which he had engaged to pay to the exiled queen; and above twenty thousand
pounds, which the Duke of Gloucester had left behind him Macpherson, vol. ii.
chap. 3 and 4. The historian has related this anecdote in such a manner, that
we cannot learn what sums the exiled queen ought to have received. When her
jointure is twice mentioned in chapter 3, he calls it fifty thousand pounds a
year. But after four years, in chapter 4, he contradicts this statement, by
informing us, that William had retained the fifty thousand pounds due to her,
which, with the reversion by the death of the Duke of Gloucester, amounted to
near an hundred thousand pounds. By the account in chapter 3, the whole sums,
including interest, should have been about two hundred and fifty thousand
pounds.

This mistake is hardly worth notice here, but is mentioned merely to show that
one may sometimes be forced to seek a way through very discordant materials.


. Mr. Pit complains of authors who publish libels on the Revolution. To forbid
a person from publishing his sentiments on a historical event which happened
above an hundred years ago, is in itself an example of the utmost insolence of
despotism. To depose one tyrant was highly proper; but it was not less foolish
to exalt another Smoliet's character of William is a curious jumble.

He was religious, temperate, generally just and sincere. -- He involved these
kingdoms in foreign connections, which, in all probability, will be productive
of their ruin. He scrupled not to employ all the engines of corruption. He
entailed upon the nation a growing debt, and a system of politics big with
misery, despair, and destruction. The rest of this passage is too long for
insertion; but the author's inference appears to be, that William was the most
ruinous sovereign who ever sat on the throne of England.


.

More cost more honor, says the proverb; and by this rule the Revolution was
certainly a more splendid transaction than the nation had ever seen. The
expenses of England, from the landing of the Prince of Orange on the 5th of
November 1688, to the 29th of September 1691, had amounted to near EIGHTEEN
MILLIONS. Besides, great arrears were owing to the army in Ireland, the navy
was destitute of stores, and the ships were out of repair Macpherson, vol. ii.
chap. 1. All our continental wars and subsidies, from 1688, to this day, must
be ascribed to the Revolution.
. In 1693, a bill passed both Houses, providing for annual sessions of
parliament, and a new election once in three years. To this bill, the FOUNDER
OF ENGLISH FREEDOM refused his assent, which in 1694 was obtained by
compulsion. After having told all the world for ten years, that James had
imposed a spurious prince upon the nation, he engaged in 1697, to obtain that
prince to be declared his successor Ibid. vol. ii. chap. 3. The author adds,
The successors provided by the act of settlement, he either despised or
abhorred. These were the illustrious House of Brunswick.
. A man of common spirit would rather have been a chimney sweeper than such a
sovereign.

As for the inferior actors in the Revolution, we may inquire what have they
done? They did not transfer the load of taxes from the poor to the rich. They
did not extirpate entails, and rotten boroughs. They did not establish an
universal right of conscience, and an universal right of citizenship. They did
not advance even a single step toward exalting the motely parliament of
England into the actual representatives of a free people. They did not avoid a
most destructive and endless quarrel on the continent. They did not reduce the
civil list even to the prodigal establishment of Charles the Second Viz. Four
hundred and sixty thousand pounds. The settlement of seven hundred thousand
pounds is no doubt one of those wise and wholesome PROVISIONS so gratefully
referred to in Mr. Pitt's late proclamation. There can be no question, that in
the course of an hundred years, the civil list has reduced many hundred
thousands of his Majesty's faithful and loving subjects to beggary. That the
weakest come always to the worst, is a trite observation. The principal
hardships of every tax must in the last resort fall upon the poor. At this day
the civil list, with all its abyss of appendages, absorbes above eleven hundred
thousand pounds per annum of English money. This expense would, at least in
Scotland, be more than sufficient to maintain two hundred and fifty thousand
paupers, for those in the poor's house of the parish of St. Cuthbert's, near
Edinburgh, cost but about four pounds each per annum.

Hence it follows, that the royal establishment is in fact equal to an
establishment of many myriads of beggars. As to the ELECTORAL HOARD, we have
curious and authentic information, but this subject deserves a chapter by
itself.


. They did not extirpate the most absurd and extravagant prerogatives of the
sovereign, to adjourn or dissolve a parliament at pleasure, to bastardize a
peerage with the puppers of despotism, to interpose a refusal to the most
necessary laws, and to plunge at his will three nations into blood and
bankruptcy. What then did they do? They obtained for their countrymen a right
to petition THE CROWN They might as well have spoke about the right of blowing
one's nose. Yet this miserable stipulation, extracted from the very dregs of
slavery, has been thought of infinite consequence.
. They settled the succession on a family whom their hero, for what reason he
best knew, despised and abhorred. The whole work was a change, not of measures,
but of masters. Where then stands the difference between the trimmer Halifax,
and the trimmer Thurlow; between Sutherland the traitor to all parties, and our
Hibernian panegyrist of the Bastile? The Duke of Marlborough gave a just
account both of the Whigs and Tories. I do not believe, said he, that either
party is swayed by any true principles of conscience or honesty. Their
professions are always different; their views precisely the same. They both
grasp at the possession of power; and the Prince who gives them the most is
their greatest favorite Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 8.
. Were farther evidence wanting, Burnet, himself both a whig and a courtier,
tells us that the whigs set every thing to sale. He complained of the practice
of bribing parliament to the king, and William assured him, that it was not
possible to help it.

As a partial defense of our ancestors it may be urged, that in the end of the
last century, the nation was unripe for a rational constitution. But since we
know this to be true, why are we disturbed with rhapsodies on one of the most
questionable combinations that ever deformed history? Does any body compare the
packed convention parliaments of the two kingdoms, in 1689, with the
democratical members of the first national assembly of France? As well might we
parallel Charles Jenkinson with the Duke of Sully, or the assassin of Culloden
with the conqueror at Bannockburn. Did the philosophical and concise decrees of
the French patriots grovel in the feudal jargon of subjecting a people and
their posterity forever to the assignees of a Dutchman who was universally
detested? As well might we fancy a resemblance between the daubing of a
sign-post, and the pencil of Reynolds, or the exercise of a schoolboy and the
stanzas of Buchanan.

Upon the whole, as William betrayed James into several of those crimes by
which a revolution became necessary, his memory is an object not of respect but
abhorrence. His conduct was like that of an incendiary who first sets fire to
your house, and then claims ten times the worth of the whole building for his
service in quenching it. To praise him and his revolution, discovers an
ignorance of history, or a contempt of common honesty. It is as much a
burlesque upon reason, as when a King of England calls himself King of France;
or as when a person, like Henry the Eighth, whose word is trusted by nobody,
assumes for his title Defender of the Faith.

But since the authors of the revolution did not surpass the diminutive
standard of Court integrity, why has our temple of venality In the Anecdotes of
Lord Chatham, we are told that Mr. Pelham was entrusted with what is usally
called THE POCKET LIST OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS; and Mr. Pit sometimes said to
his friends, "I was obliged to BORROW the Duke of Newcastle's " majority, to
carry on the public business."
for so long a time resounded with the wretched laram of whig families and whig
virtues? Why should common men wander from their natural and just progress to
obscurity, and ^^^ck the attention of future ages? Had Archimedes been only the
best archer at the siege of Syracuse, had Columbus lived and died but the most
expert pilot in the port of Genoa, had the eloquence of Shakespeare shrunk to a
level with the dramatick mushrooms of this day, these memorable benefactors of
mankind had vanished into instant oblivion. Had Thomas Pain been nothing
superior to a vagabond seamen, a bankrupt staymaker, a discarded exciseman, a
porter in the streets of Philadelphi, or whatever else the insanity of
Grub-street chooses to call him, an hundred thousand copies of his writings had
never announced his name in every village on the globe, where the English
language is spoken, nor would the rays of royal indignation have illuminated
that character which they cannot scorch.

CHAP. V.
Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est.
No delay as to the death of a man is ever too long.
JUVENAL.
IN the war which ended by the peace of Ryswick, seven hundred millions
sterling were spent, and eight hundred thousand men perished, yet none of the
parties gained one penny of money, of almost one foot of territory. In 1693,
Lewis made very ample offers for peace which William refused. Had William
accepted these offers of Lewis, the war of the first grand alliance would have
ended four years sooner than it did, and the war of the second grand alliance
might have been prevented Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, part iii. book
10.
. During some years previous to the peace of Ryswick, the price of corn in
England was double, and in Scotland quadruple its ordinary rate; and in one of
those years, it was believed that in Scotland eighty thousand people died of
want Ibid. part iii. book 5.
.

The war which followed the Revolution cost England sixty millions sterling
Ibid. Part iv. book 1.
. Let us suppose that an equal share of this sum was spent in each of the nine
years, during which it lasted, and at six per cent. the compound interest of
the sums advanced annually up to the peace of Ryswick in 1697, amounts to
fifteen millions sterling. Four thousand merchantmen were taken by the enemy
Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 7.
; and De-Foe, in one of his pamplets, tells us, that the damage in this way had
been computed at twenty millions. The interest of this sum, estimated in the
same manner with that of the public expenses up to the peace, will produce five
millions. But that our calculations may be perfectly safe, let us bring down
both principal and interest to fifteen millions, and we shall pass over the
expense of at least four thousand bankruptcies, and ten times that number of
lawsuits. The different sums above specified extend to ninety millions
sterling. Let us next put the case that this money had been placed at a
compound interest of five per cent. The legal interest of money was not reduced
from six per cent. to five, till the twelfth year of Queen Anne. The writer of
the Memoirs of Great Britain observes, that in those days, parliament found
more difficulty in borrowing at eight per cent. than we do now in getting money
at four. Lord North paid, and we have still the satisfaction of paying six or
seven per cent. for the money that supported his American war; and this is
known to all mankind, with it seems a single exception. At four per cent. we
could not raise a single shilling.
At the end of ninety-eight years from the peace of Ryswick, that is to say in
1795, these ninety millions would have doubled themselves exactly seven times,
and the final produce would have been ELEVEN THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
MILLIONS STERLING, or a dividend of eleven hundred and fifty-two pounds to
every individual inhabitant of Britain. This sum is equal to the discharge of
our national debts forty-eight times over, and is five hundred and seventy-five
times greater than the whole gold and silver coin at present in the three
kingdoms. Such has been the price of a Dutch frontier, and of Hudson's Bay. As
Britain and Ireland are said to contain an hundred and four thousand square
miles, if the money had been employed in the improvements of agriculture, it
would have supplied a fund of an hundred and one thousand one hundred and
fifty-three pounds fifteen shillings and eleven pence, and seven thirteenth
parts of a penny for each square mile. This sum is much more than upon an
average the whole landed property of both islands is worth In the Memoirs of
Great Britian and Ireland, the author estimates the mere loss of labor to the
contending nations during the nine years of war, at ninety millions Sterling,
exclusive of the additional loss of labor for life, by the mutual slaughter.
.

An objection may be advanced to this statement, that a great part of the sixty
millions thus expended by government was embezzled among ourselves, and that as
it never actually went out of the country, we are not at this day a farthing
poorer than if the money had never been raised. If we might oppose the language
of common sense to the jargon of political sophistry, I would answer, that when
a grazier in Yorkshire has been knocked down and robbed, he cares but little
whether his guineas are to be staked at the gaming tables of Paris or of
London. But we shall admit that the Dutch administration like all those which
have come after it, was a scene of inexpressible infamy; that thirty millions
out of the sixty were pilfered in their road to the service of the public; and
that the peers and others who stole this money applied their plunder to ends as
honest as could have been devised by the farmers and tradesmen who were
stripped of it. This is not very feasible, for what is won in a bad way is
commonly spent in a worse one; but let us proceed. In estimating the expenses
of the war, there was omitted an article of loss at least equivalent to these
thirty millions. It has been observed, that a workman can, upon an average,
earn about ten shillings a-week, which in London is at present about half the
common wages of a journeyman tailor. Reduce this to twenty-five pounds per
annum, and his life may be estimated at twelve years purchase, or three hundred
pounds in value to the public. In the war in question, we lost an hundred
thousand men, and by this moderate and simple computation, the price of their
blood to Britain was not worth less than thirty millions Sterling. Even this
number of an hundred thousand lives is most likely far less than the actual
destruction. Four thousand merchant ships were taken by the French privateers,
and these alone must have required, one with another, twelve or thirteen
mariners, which gives us an amount of fifty thousand prisoners; of whom,
besides the numbers killed, at least ten or fifteen thousand would perish of
jail distempers, of their wounds, of cold or hunger, and above all, of a broken
heart.

As the pillage of public money is one of the worst consequences of war, I
shall here say something farther on that subject. In 1695, Knight and Duncombe,
two members of the House of Commons, were expelled for having forged
indorsements on Exchequer bills. Duncombe confessed the charge, and his share
of the booty had extended to four hundred thousand pounds. I am not informed
what was the amount of Knight's plunder; or that of several others who were
concerned. The Commons, in a fit of purity, passed a bill to fine Duncombe in
half his estate. By the statute laws of England, he should have suffered death.
The bill for his fine was rejected in the house of Lords Memoirs of Great
Britain and Ireland, part iii. book 4.
, by the casting vote of the Duke of Leeds, who was himself a swindler of the
first distinction. The Earl of Chesterfield had some reason for terming that
house an hospital of Incurables. Salmon tells us, that the ministry gave
whatever interest and premiums were demanded for the loan of money, and that
provisions and naval stores were taken up at an advance of thirty, forty, and
sometimes fifty per cent. above their proper price. But, indeed, after the
dimission of Mr. Duncombe, with his four hundred thousand pounds in his pocket,
every charge of this kind becomes perfectly credible.

Whether in the present age, matters have been much mended, there was nobody
better able to inform us than the late Earl of Chatham. There is a set of men,
says he, in the city of London, who are known to live in riot and luxury, upon
the plunder of the ignorant, the innocent, and the helpless, upon that part of
the community, which stands most in need of, and best deserves the care and
protection of the legislature. To me, my Lords, whether they be miserable
jobbers of Change Alley, or the lofty Asiatic plunderers of Leadenhall Street,
they are all equally detestable. I care but little whether a man walks on foot,
or is drawn by eight horses, or by six horses; if his luxury be supported by
the plunder of his country, I despise and abhor him. My Lords, while I had the
honor of serving his Majesty, I never ventured to look at THE TREASURY, but
from a distance; it is a business I am unfit for, and to which I never could
have submitted. The little I know of it, has not served to raise my opinion of
what is vulgarly called the monied interest; I mean that BLOODSUCKER, that
MUCKWORM, which calls itself the friend of Government, which pretends to serve
this or that administration, and may be purchased on the same terms by any
administration. Under this description I include the whole race of
commissioners, jobbers, contractors, clothiers, and remitters Vide his speech
in the debate on Falkland's Islands, which has been reprinted in the Anecdotes.

This quarrel ended like others, in our disappointment, and perhaps disgrace.
Besides much expense and trouble to individuals, the nation squandered between
three and four millions sterling. Quid vis insane?


.

The war of 1689 is at this day almost forgotten, in the blaze of more recent
and stupendous follies. Yet the present short sketch of those calamities which
it produced, cannot fail of leading us into some melancholy reflections on the
general tendency of the military system. War may produce advantage to a race of
barbarians, who have nothing to do, and nothing to lose; but for a commercial
nation, it can be no better than an alderman deserting his ledger, to bet in a
cockpit. Of this system there is no part more injurious than that which
enjoins the capture of merchant ships. An honest mariner has by the labor of
half his life earned a thousand pounds, and embarks his whole property in a
vessel freighted from Leith or Dunkirk. He is boarded by an enemy's privateer;
his effects are forfeited; and he himself is to rot for six, or twelve, or
eighteen months in a French or English jail; while his wife, his children, or
perhaps his father -- but this part of the picture becomes too shocking for the
contemplation of humanity. Of these matters, kings or courtiers almost never
think. At a certain elevation, the human heart seems to contract a frost more
impenetrable than the summit of the Alps or the Andes. It would be an auspicous
event for mankind, if all the ships of war in the world could be reduced to
ashes in one day.

We have adopted a fancy, that frequent hostilities are unavoidable. Yet the
Swiss, a nation of soldiers, and placed in the midst of contending tyrants,
have hardly been thrice at war in the course of three centuries. The reason is,
that their governments are founded on wisdom, benevolence, and integrity; while
ours breathe only maxims of a less amiable nature The republics of Europe are
all, and we may say always in peace. Holland and Switzerland are without wars,
foreign or domestic; monarchial governments, it is true, are never long at
rest; the crown itself is a temptation to enterprising ruffians at home; and
that degree of pride and insolence, ever attendant on regal authority, swells
into a rupture with foreign powers, in instances where a republican government,
by being formed on more natural principles, would negociate the mistake. Common
Sense.
. Other instances from the history of our own island may be adduced to the same
purpose. For more than a century after the memorable year 1189, there was no
national quarrel, nor national war between the two kingdoms Annals of Scotland,
by Lord Hailes, vol. i. p. 133.
. This circumstance becomes the more remarkable, because, at that time our
ancestors were fit for almost nothing else but fighting. The fatal contest that
began in the end of the thirteenth century, sprung from the ambition of Edward
the First. The respective nations lived in a profound peace, and were alike
solicitous to preserve it.

From the year 1403, to the battle of Flodden, in 1513, being a space of an
hundred and ten years, peace was maintained between the two kingdoms, with very
little interruption; though sometimes there was a war which hardly lasted above
a single campaign. During the long and bloody struggle between the houses of
York and Lancaster, the Scots interfered only once or twice at most, and that
was at the earnest desire of the English exiles; but they formed no ungenerous
and impracticable plans of conquest. Even to Flodden they were driven by the
temerity of their sovereign; and his fortunate death put an instant end to
hostilities. Our ancestors, whom we consider as barbarians, were unacquainted
with the deliberate systematic thirst of blood which marks a modern politician;
and what quarrels they had, arose from the folly of their several monarchs. We
have not enjoyed ten years of peace together since the Revolution. Even when we
cease to fight in Europe, a war must immediately commence in Asia, or Africa,
or America, and in the face of all this work, we call ourselves the happiest
people in the world.

Peace may be considered as the universal parent of human happiness. Industry
cannot long thrive without it, and to this we are indebted for a great part of
our comforts, our enjoyments, and our resources. Spain has long been envied for
her gold and silver mines, which, by Dr. Robertson's account, have in two
centuries and a half, produced above two thousand millions sterling. But sober
industry is vastly more valuable than all the mines in the world. If we can
forbear butchery, we need not despair of discharging every penny of our public
debt, with ease, in less than a century; or if we should not, still the
property of the nation would increase with such rapidity, that the debt itself
must be hardly felt. To make this truth evident, let us attend to what follows.
As a counterpart to the bubble of Falkland's Islands, four millions sterling
have lately been expended on a Spanish convention. Had they been placed out at
five per cent. of compound interest, they would in ninety-eight years have
produced five hundred and twelve millions sterling, and at present one half of
this latter sum would be more than sufficient to discharge all our
encumbrances, and make us as free of debts as our grandfathers were when the
Prince of Orange landed. It is true, that the job government of Britain cannot,
like that of a Swiss canton, place money at interest, but from calculations of
this sort, we may form a conjecture, as to what we are capable of saving, by
considering what we have spent. The American war alone added about one hundred
and fifty millions to our public debt, and yet we are in reality a richer
nation than when that war began On the subject of national improvement, the
reader may consult with advantage Dr. Campbell's Political Survey of Britain;
an Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain, during the present and two
preceding reigns, by George Chalmers, Esquire. and a continuation of this latter
work, by the same elegant and profound writer, published about six months ago.
Our presses are groaning under controversial divinity, heraldy, blank verse,
commentaries on Shakespeare, and every other imaginable species of nonsense,
while the books here referred to, have not in this country been honored, as I
am informed, with even a second edition.
. Our funds, as we call them, have not hitherto recovered the shock, but that
is, in spite of common prejudice, a happy circumstance. Had THE YOUNG MAN been
able to borrow money with equal facility as his father, we should certainly
have been scourged into a Spanish war. Now, though the country has recovered,
and though our commerce is greatly superior to what it had ever before been, it
is evident, that if we had not possessed an almost inexhaustible vital
principle of reproduction and accumulation, so great a havoc of property as an
hundred and fifty, or even an hundred millions sterling, must have reduced
whole provinces of this island to a desert. Such a complete recovery from the
loss of more than an hundred millions in less than ten years, presents us with
a regular annual overplus of at least six or eight millions. But that we may
not overshoot the mark, let us rate the clear annual profits of British
commerce and agriculture at only five millions. We shall find that this yearly
accumulation of stocks with the legal compound interest only, amounts, in
twenty-eight years, to three hundred millions. So that by a peace of
twenty-eight years, we shall become a more opulent nation, than we would be at
this moment were all our debts paid off to the last farthing.

Before we call this prospect extravagant, let us consider what has actually
happened. The most sanguine projector, thirty years ago, would not have
presumed to believe that four millions sterling were by this time to be
employed in extending and adorning a single city in Scotland. Yet this progress
of elegance continues to rise upon us like enchantment. Who in the last century
would have suspected that by this time our North American colonies were to
contain four millions of inhabitants? It must be owned, that besides other
evils, Gibraltar, Canada, Nova Scotia, Botany Bay, the East India Company, and
the civil list, are a sort of political millstones hanging at the neck of
British prosperity. Yet such are our resources, that if we choose to desist from
the war system, our wealth must in the course of fifty years extend beyond all
calculation. Mr. Fox, if providence shall continue to bless us with his
abilities till that period, will not then have the smallest difficulty in
obtaining a pension of forty thousand pounds a year for every descendant of the
royal family. Three ungrateful nations will then cease to affirm, that for his
conduct in a certain debate Vide his speeches in parliament on the settlement
of the Duke of York. (...) the clerk of a counting house were to lose at the
gaming-table a thousand pounds of his master's money, or even of his own, he
would be discharged as unworthy of trust. There is a man, who is said to have
lost five hundred thousand pounds in that way, and when he had thus reduced
himself to bankruptcy, we have seen him preserved to the management of an
annual revenue of sixteen millions sterling. It is difficult to conceive a more
gigantic instance of stupidity and depravity than such a choice. That a House
of Commons should adopt a minister of this sort, is quite in character; but
that individuals, who have the happiness of their country at heart, should
applaud such a selection, must fill every sober man with astonishment. To sweep
off large sums at the gaming-table, is a dishonorable dirty practice. Mr. Fox,
in the boundless diversity of his adventures, must have ruined many a family,
and sent many a helpless woman with sorrow to the grave.

In the manuscript of a tour in Switzerland, which I have seen, the following
passage deserves peculiar attention. At Bern, a heavy penalty is imposed upon
any person, who in one day shall lose more than two pounds five shillings
sterling by gaming; and every member of government, and officer in public
service, is obliged to take an oath, not only that he shall faithfully and
honorably observe this law, but that he shall zealously maintain it, and that
he shall freely and impartially give information against all persons who to his
knowledge shall offend against it. The presence of some of those distinguished
persons in all good companies, proves in fact an invincible bar to immoderate
play. With what contemptuous pity would a Swiss hear us prattling, that our
government is the envy of the world!


, any other man would have deserved a flogging at every whipping-post in
England. At that happy period, we shall support, without winching, an hundred
Lords of the Bedchamber, and as many Lords of the Necessary House. With these
crumbs of comfort, I proceed to the war of the Spanish succession, a legacy
from our Dutch benefactor.

CHAP. VI.
England has been the prey of jobs ever since the Revolution.

PAIN.
CHARLES the Second King of Spain had no children; he was of declining years,
and a feeble constitution. There were three candidates for the inheritance of
his dominions, the Emperor, the Dauphin of France, and the Electoral Prince of
Bavaria. The Emperor claimed right as male representative to the family of
Austria. Philip the Fourth, predecessor and father to Charles, had left behind
him two daughters by different marriages. The eldest was mother to the Dauphin;
the youngest had espoused the Emperor, and their daughter, an only surviving
child, had been married to the Elector of Bavaria, to whom she had born that
Prince who was at present a candidate. It seems that the Dauphin of France, as
descending from the eldest daughter of Phillip the Fourth, had the nearest
right; but as the other nations of Europe were extremly jealous of France, it
was early foreseen that the Dauphin's claim would meet with a dangerous
opposition. On the 1st of October School, the King of France, the King of
England, and the Republic of Holland, engaged in a contract as to this
succession. Their bargain was, that the Dauphin should succeed to the kingdoms
of Naples and Sicilly, and a certain portion of the provinces of Spain itself.
The other two candidates were to share the rest of the dominions, and this
agreement has since been called the first treaty of partition. So vast an
accession of territory would have rendered France a most formidable neighbor
to the Dutch, and on their part the treaty seems to have been an act of
imprudence. The secret of this combination having come to light, Charles in a
rage instantly made a testament, by which he transferred the whole dominions of
Spain, to the young Prince of Bavaria. But as the latter died soon after, he
made a second will, by which he bequeathed the succession, also entire, to the
Archduke Charles, the Emperor's second son, by a marriage which he had entered
into after the death of his Spanish empress. The former parties, on the 14th
March 1700, engaged in a second treaty of partition, by which the Dauphin was
to receive a large addition to his share, and the remainder was reserved for
the Emperor. This transaction also reached Charles, before it was closed; and
in August 1699, his ambassador at London delivered to the English ministry an
interesting appeal on the conduct of William. He remarked, that if such
proceedings were allowed, no people, no dominion could be safe against the
ambition of the strongest, and the deceits of the most malicious; that should
strangers be suffered to put their hands into the lines of succession of kings,
no statutes, no municipal laws would be observed; that no crown could be free
from the attempts of aliens; and the crown of England less than any crown; and
that were men to lie watching for the sickness of sovereigns, no health could
be constant, and no life secure. He also reminded them, that the expenses of a
war, and the destruction of commerce, must be the certain consequence of such
adventures.

For this honest production, the ambassador was forced to leave England. On the
2d of October 1700, the King of Spain, by the advice of the Pope, made a third
testament. To put an end to all projects of a partition, he left the whole
empire, undivided, to the Duke of Anjou, the second son of the Dauphin of
France, and grandson to Lewis the Fourteenth. By this choice, he attempted to
avert the calamities of a disputed succession. For as the Duke of Anjou was not
heir to the crown of France, that circumstance removed the objection of making
a hazardous augmentation to the French dominions. This measure was more simble,
just, and practicable, than that adopted by William and the Dutch. On the 25th
November 1700, Charles died; and though he bequeathed such a splendid legacy to
the house of Bourbon, he had been one of William's allies in his last long and
bloody war against France; a fact which evinces the mutability of the political
world.

On the death of their sovereign, the Spanish nation determined that a
conspiracy of foreigners should not be suffered to partition their provinces.
They dispatched a courier to the court of France with the testament of their
late sovereign, and if Lewis should refuse to accept the monarchy for his
grandson, they gave him orders to proceed to Vienna, and make an offer of the
universal succession to the Archduke. Thus Lewis had his choice of two
measures. If he accepted the testament of Charles, his grandson was at once,
and without opposition, put into possession of the Spanish dominions, at the
hazard of a quarrel with the Dutch and England. If he refused this offer, the
Austrian Archduke was with equal certainty to ascend the throne, and Lewis was
to depend on the very doubtful friendship of his old enemies, the Dutch and
England, for their assistance (...) conquer a share of Spain, in opposition to
the Emperor and that nation. But as Lewis himself was feared and hated both in
Holland and England, there is not the least probability, that he would have
obtained any serious aid in his pretensions, from these two countries. We
cannot therefore with reason condemn him, when he accepted for the Duke of
Anjou the offer of the Spanish crown. The reader is requested to pay particular
attention to this concise and candid state of the case; for even at present, it
is the vulgar opinion that Lewis acted upon this occasion with treachery. It
would be more proper to say, that William engaged in an enterprise far above
his power, and that he showed an utter indifference to the interest of his
kingdoms. The preference which the Spanish nation bestowed upon the Duke of
Anjou, was in the moral sense an ample vindication of the acceptance of Lewis.
If there be such a thing as equity upon earth, it must begin with this maxim,
that a people are at all times entitled to their choice of a master.

On the 17th of April 1701, William acknowledged the Duke of Anjou, as the
lawful sovereign of Spain, by a letter under his own hand. The Dutch also
recognized his right. On the 7th of September thereafter, William, with his
wonted consistency, entered into an alliance with the Emperor and Holland to
attack the young monarch. The design avowed in the articles was, to obtain the
Duchy of Milan from the crown of Spain, as a compensation to the Emperor; and
Flanders, or part of it, as a barrier for Holland. What England was to obtain,
we are not informed. On the 6th of September 1701, James the Second expired,
and Lewis, on his death, acknowledged his son as King of England. Though this
was but an empty form, William employed it as a pretense to seduce the nation
into a second war. His project was embraced with exultation by all parties.

Yet though Lewis was to blame, we ourselves had behaved but little better. Our
assumed title as King of France, is not only a dishonorable untruth, but a
wanton insult to a respectable people. William prepared for a campaign, but
happily both for others and himself, a fall from his horse put an end to his
battles and his treaties, on the 8th of March 1702 In drawing up this
statement, Mr. Macpherson has been chiefly followed, with some additions from
the Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, printed in 1788. In this last work,
William is every where represented as a virtuous and sublime character. The
story of the Countess of Orkney, and the trite catastrophe of Darien, with many
others of the same sort, are completely explained away. The partition treaties
are defended, as pregnant with future blessings to England; for the historian
seems to fancy that the Allies could have divided the provinces of Spain, with
the exactness and tranquillity of a grocer cutting a pound of cheese. The
sequel sufficiently proved the absurdity of such a supposition,

This writer has assigned a remarkable reason for sending into the world his
second volume. But seeing England lately, as I thought, on the brink of ruin,
because she was on the brink of a continental war, I thought that the pictures
of misery, even amid success, which the continental wars of the two grand
alliances present, might make the public attend to the prospect before them.

It is impossible to publish from more honorable motives, or to attest a more
important truth.


.

Before we enter into the events of this war, it may not be improper to
illustrate, by an exact and interesting parallel, what Dr. Swift calls "our
infamous treaty of partition." Let us suppose, that for some years before the
death of Queen Elizabeth, all Europe had foreseen that she was to die
childless, that James the Sixth of Scotland was to be her successor, and that
by such an increase of dominion, England was to ensure a decisive addition of
power and importance. "No," exclaimed the Dutch, the French, and the Austrians,
WE cannot, Elizabeth, permit you and your people to choose a sovereign for
England. We all know that Master Henry the Fourth of France used to call him so.
James is a fool. He has married a daughter of the King of Denmark; and hence
the British Empire would become but a province to the court of Copenhagen. We
have formed a much better plan, and you must adopt it. Jersey, Guernsey, and
Plymouth, Dover castle, and the county of Kent, are to compose a frontier in
the hands of his Most Christian Majesty. The isles of Wight, Anglesea, and Man,
must be delivered up to their High Mightinesses for the convenience of
importing gin; and you must likewise permit them to catch and cure pilchards on
the coast of Cornwall. To Ireland you never had any title but that of a robber,
and as you are detested by the whole nation, to the very last man, it is
necessary, for preserving the balance of power, to declare them independent. As
for the rest of your dominions, we have brought you a GERMAN master, born at
the distance of a thousand miles, a stranger to your country, your laws, your
manners, and your language. In defense of his RIGHT, we have disembarked on the
coast of Yorkshire two hundred thousand armed russians; and unless you
instantly acknowledge him as successor, we shall spread desolation from
Caithness to the land's end. If his Danish majesty declines to assist us in
overwhelming his son-in-law, our admirals have orders to beat Copenhagen about
his ears. We are perfectly determined; and before we give up the point, we
shall spend the last drop of our blood, and the last farthing of our money;
besides diving into more debt than our posterity can pay off in an hundred
generations.

On the 4th of May 1702, hostilities were declared against Spain. "We hastily
engaged in a war," says Swift, which has cost us SIXTY MILLIONS, and after
repeated, as well as unexpected success in arms, has put us and our posterity
in a worse condition, not only than any of our allies, but than even our
conquered enemies themselves The Conduct of the Allies. This is the case at the
end of almost every war, and reminds me of a remark made by Lord Monboddo.
Somebody once asked him, Whether Europe or America had profited most by the
discoveries of Columbus? "The balance," replied his Lordship, is pretty equal.
We gave them brandy and the smallpox; and they gave us rum and the great pox.
. The two first campaigns escaped without any decisive event. On the 25th of
November 1702, the Commons, in consequence of a mendicant message from the
Court, assigned the yearly sum of an hundred thousand pounds to the Prince of
Denmark, her Majesty's husband, in case he should survive her. So extravagant a
pension confirms the remark of Milton, that the trappings of a monarchy would
set up an ordinary commonwealth. On the 28th of October 1708, the Prince died,
and as he was a person of the most innocent character, it sounds harshly to
say, that his exit was desirable. Yet had he outlived Anne, twenty thousand
necessitous families must each have paid five pounds a year of their pittance
to support him. And this single imposition would, while it lasted, have
comprehended more substantial injustice and oppression than all the other
thefts and robberies in the country.

In September 1703, Charles, the second son of the Emperor Leopold, was
declared King of Spain, and as such, was acknowledged by all the Allies,
including the Dutch and England, who had both formerly recognized the title of
the French Prince. It is needless to expatiate on the justice or decency of
such a measure. In August 1704, Marlborough won the battle of Blenheim. In
October 1706 Lewis offered better terms of pacification than were afterward
excepted. With what propriety then are we to blame his ambition? "The Whigs,"
says Mr. Macpherson, who were now possessed of the whole power of government in
England, insulted common sense, in the reason which they gave for rejecting the
proposed peace. They said, that the terms offered by France were TOO GOOD, to
be the foundation for a lasting tranquillity, and therefore they ought not be
admitted. -- Had Lewis engaged to restore Normandy to England, that, upon Whig
principles, would have been a still better reason for refusing an agreement.
Such were the political heroes whose virtues we vaunt of adopting, and by whom
Europe was condemned to remain for six years and five months longer, a scene of
confusion, distress, and carnage! This insolence very soon met with its reward.
On the 25th of April 1707, an entire Whig army was dispersed, taken, or
extirpated, at Almanza, by the Duke of Berwick. Sixteen thousand of the
vanquished were killed or made prisoners. In this campaign, the Duke of
Marlborough achieved nothing worthy of his former fame. Prince Eugene, with
forty thousand men, invaded Provence, and invested Toulon. His forces were in
danger of being surrounded, and his escape or flight was marked with the usual
and heroic circumstances of slaughter and devastation. Four English men of war,
with Admiral Shovel, a person whose abilities had raised him from the rank of a
common sailor, foundered on the rocks of Scilly. In short, the disasters of the
Allies were so numerous and severe, that Lewis might at this time have turned
the chase, if his counsels had not been governed by an old woman. The Scots, by
a bargain sufficiently questionable had been united with England. The whole
nation were inflamed into a degree of madness. The Pretender's birth day was
publicly celebrated at Edinburgh; and a memorial was transmitted to France by a
number of nobility and gentry, who promised to embody in his favor five
thousand horse and twenty-five thousand foot. The proposal was rejected. In
1708, the Allies were more successful, and among other blessed events, they
gained Lisle, with the loss of eighteen or twenty thousand men. For what
notable purposes have we dragged the smith from his anvil, and the farmer from
his plow! In 1709, the Government borrowed from the Bank of England four
hundred thousand pounds, at six per cent. besides granting them several
advantages, which may have raised the real interest to ten or twelve per cent.
and all this for the pleasure of making a German King of Spain. The practice of
advancing money to the public was at that time, and has been ever since, a very
profitable traffic to those gentlemen of whom Lord Chatham has made such
honorable mention. Lewis, in the beginning of this year, had renewed his
offers of peace. He attempted, as Torcy relates, to bribe the Duke of
Marlborough, by a conditional present of four millions of livres; but his
Grace, after due consideration, declined the proposal. The aged and unfortunate
King promised to yield the whole Spanish monarchy to the House of Austria
without any equivalent Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 7.
. He consented to a series of the most degrading demands which his enemies
could invent, but they left him no choice between resistance and destruction.
France was in the mean time ravaged by a terrible famine, which served to fill
up the measure of universal wretchedness. Whatever we may think of Lewis
himself, and even a despot may deserve our pity, one must have the nerves of a
Dutchman or a Whig, if he does not feel for the miseries of twenty millions of
people. On the 10th of September 1709, these conferences were succeeded by the
victory of Malplaquet, which Marlborough purchased with the lives of twenty
thousand men, while the French, though defeated; left but eight thousand dead
on the field.

In 1710, Lewis made fresh offers of submission. He promised even a subsidy of
a million of livres monthly to the Allies, till King Philip should be driven
out of Spain Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 7.
. But mark what follows: -- They required that Lewis should assist them with
all his forces, to expel his grandson from the throne of that kingdom. We need
not enlarge upon the baseness of trampling a fallen adversary, since our
illustrious ancestors might have improved their morality from a boxing stage. A
ring of chairmen would be ashamed of such consummate barbarity. Whether Lewis
would have submitted to this last act of degradation is doubtful, for Eugene
and Marlborough obstructed the progress of explanation, and commenced the
campaign. -- They gained three places of importance, and conquered twelve
leagues of a fine country. But they lost twenty-six thousand men by the sword.
Half their infantry was ruined by wounds, diseases, and fatigue Ibid.
. In Spain, we obtained during this year two victories. Stanhope, the English
general, entered Madrid. The army lived at large upon the people, without
order, without moderation, and without discipline. They raised contributions on
private persons. They pillaged the churches, and sold publicly the utensils of
the altar Ibid.
. Nobody can be sorry to hear that on the 8th of December 1710, these russians
were defeated. Stanhope himself was taken prisoner, with five thousand British
troops.

By this time the nation were almost tired with the expense of this war, and
had begun to suspect the absurdity of its first principles. But as the Cabinet
was comletely garrisoned by the partisans of Marlborough, to reverse the
system, required both a strong and dexterous hand. A circumstance in itself
trifling contributed to this event; and the friends of mankind must
acknowledge, that for once at least, public happiness has been promoted by
public superstition. On the 3d of November 1709, Henry Sacheverell, a Tory
parson, preached at St. Paul's a sermon, in which he enforced, with much
virulence, the nonsense about passive obedience and non-resistance. In this
performance, the Earl of Godolphin. Lord High Treasurer of England, and one of
the chief leaders of the Whigs, was personally attacked, and the whole party
were eager to punish the man who had thus contested their darling doctrines.
They brought him to a trial before the House of Peers; and this measure gave
the Tories an opportunity for asserting that the Church was in danger. The
great body of the people broke into a transport of rage. The current, which had
been long changing, ran down with a force, that levelled every thing before it
Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 8.
. During the trial, the pews of five dissenting meeting houses were burnt in
the streets. The outrages of the rabble were directed by persons of higher
rank, who attended at their heels in hackney coaches; the watch word was -- The
Church and Sacheverell. Those who joined not in the shout were insulted and
knocked down; and Burnet tells us, that at his door one man got his skull cleft
with a spade, for his refusal. The sermon was ordered to be burnt by the
hangman, but the public flame was kept up with much address by the Tories.
Sacheverell made a journey into Wales, and was every where received with
raptures of admiration. The Queen, by degrees, embraced this opportunity to
free herself from the tyranny of an insolent faction. On the 8th of August
1710, Godolphin was dismissed. A new parliament was summoned to meet on the
25th of November thereafter. The frenzy of the mob was supported by the
substantial logic of the Treasury; and a majority was returned of Tory members.
Harley, the new minister, and his associates, had too much sense to discover
abruptly their designs to the people. The sum of fourteen millions five hundred
and seventy-three thousand, three hundred and nineteen pounds, nineteen
shillings and eight pence halfpenny, was voted to discharge the arrears in the
navy and other offices, and the services of the current year. At this critical
moment, a second stroke of fortune advanced the pacific views of the Tories. On
the 1st of May 1705, the Emperor Leopold had d^^^: and on the 6th of April
1711, his eldest son and successor, Joseph, died also; and without regarding
his own two daughters, left his brother Charles, our intended, King of Spain,
his universal heir. His death suddenly changed the whole state of affairs. The
war undertaken by the grand alliance for preserving the balance of Europe, was
now likely to destroy it for ever; and men who judged of the future by the
past, began to dread the irresistible power of the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
in the person of a prince of his family Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 8.
. Hence, even upon our own mad principles, it became just as necessary to
oppose the succession of our candidate Charles, as that of the Duke of Anjou.
Yet with the most astonishing impudence, the Whigs and our Allies, Charles and
the Dutch, were anxious to continue the war. The German princes, and among
others, the Elector of Hanover In a Memorial printed by his envoy, and a letter
from himself to Harley, dated November 7, 1711.
, expressed their highest disapprobation of the projected peace. The arguments
of George, if such they may be called, are too frivolous for confutation or
insertion here. Portugal and Savoy seconded the German chorus. The emoluments
derived from war were greater than their expectations from peace. -- The money
of the maritime powers, and chiefly that of England, more than the territories
of the House of Bourbon, was the grand object of those petty tyrants, who fed
on the blood of subjects whom they let out for slaughter Macpherson, vol. ii.
chap. 8. Seventeen thousand of these miserable victims were at one time
furnished by the Court of Hanover. Macpherson's State Papers, vol. ii. p. 497.
. Compared with merchants of this description, an ordinary offender is a
paragon of innocence. When a nation sends for sovereigns from such a school,
there appears but a melancholy presage of the prospect before it.

The campaign of 1711, elapsed without effort on either side. The surrender of
Bouchain on the 13th of September, closed the military exploits of the Duke of
Marlborough. The new minister of England had been engaged in attempting to
reconcile the demands of the contending powers. But the States of Holland were
so much exasperated by the conduct of Queen Anne, that they were at no pains in
concealing their design to treat her as they had treated her father. They
proposed to fit out a fleet to assist the Elector of Hanover to strike the
scepter from her hand Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 8.
. On the 7th of December, parliament met. Harley had secured a Tory majority in
the House of Commons; but his party was somewhat inferior in the House of
Peers. Affairs had now come to a crisis. The leaders of the Whigs were
suspected of intending an immediate appeal to arms. It became therefore
necessary to dismiss the Duke of Marlborough from his military command; and on
the last day of December, Harley produced what is now called a batch of peers.
Twelve gentlemen devoted to the court were created members of the Upper House.
Anne had the very same right to have created twelve thousand. The constitution
of Britain, like the sword of Dionysius, hangs by a single hair.

On the 17th of January 1712, Mr. Walpole was committed to the Tower. He had
received five hundred guineas, and a note for five hundred more, for two
contracts when secretary at war, for supplying the forces in Scotland with
forage. A member, says Burnet, who was a Whig, was expelled the House; and a
prosecution was ordered against him: -- but the abuse goes on still, as
avowedly as ever. The Duke of Marlborough's conduct underwent a severe censure,
and Cardonnel, his secretary, was expelled by the Commons. The campaign of 1712
was unfortunate on the part of the Allies. The British forces under the command
of the Duke of Ormond remained inactive; and even the absence of the abilities
of Marlborough seems to have been severely felt. The peace was not finally
settled till March 1713. The Whig faction, to their eternal infamy, strained
every nerve to prevent it. By this peace, besides the islands of Minorca and
St. Christopher's, and the fortress of Gibraltar, for ourselves, we obtained
the island of Sicily for the Duke of Savoy, which produced the Spanish war in
1718, a partial right for our merchants of trading to South America, which
began the Spanish war of 1739, and Nova Scotia, which gave rise to the French
war in 1756. This war was more destructive than that of 1689, as it lasted for
eleven campaigns. Dr. Swift computes that each of them cost us six or seven
millions sterling. The loss of lives and of shipping could be hardly, if at all
inferior to that of the former war, as our battles were numerous, and as the
protection of our commerce was altogether neglected. In a word, the nation
squandered seventy or eighty millions, that Marlborough might pilfer one.

To Dr. Swift we are much indebted for the termination of this war. His
pamphlet on The Conduct of the Allies, excited a sort of political earthquake,
and more than all his admirable verses must endear him to distant posterity. A
few passages may serve as a specimen of the rest. "It will appear," says he, by
plain matters of fact, that no nation was ever so long, or so scandalously
abused, by the folly, the temerity, the corruption, and the ambition of its
domestic enemies; or treated with so much insolence, injustice, and
ingratitude, by its foreign friends. -- We are destroying many thousand lives,
and exhausting our substance, not for our own interest, which would be but
common prudence; not for a thing indifferent, which would be sufficient folly;
but perhaps to our own destruction, which is perfect madness. -- The common
question is, if we must now surrender Spain, what have we been fighting for all
this while? The answer is ready. We have been fighting for the ruin of the
public interest, and the advancement of a private. We have been fighting to
raise the wealth and grandeur of a particular family; (that of Marlborough,) to
enrich usurers and stockjobbers, and to cultivate the pernicious designs of a
faction, by destroying the landed interest. -- Since the monied men are so fond
of war, I should be glad if they would furnish out one campaign at their own
charge. It is not above six or seven millions; and I dare engage to make it
out, that, when they have done this, instead of contributing equal to the
landed men, they will have their full principal and interest at six per cent.
remaining of all the money they ever lent to the government.

Even at this day, we are deafened about the glorious victories of the Duke of
Marlborough, and though by the death of the Emperor Joseph, the object of
dispute was utterly extinguished, a crowd of authors persist in lamenting that
our commander was checked in the career of pillage and butchery. Happy might it
have been for this country, had Marlborough, with all his forces, perished on
the field of Blenheim; since it may be supposed, that such a stroke would at
once have blasted our crusades upon the continent. As if his Grace had not
enjoyed sufficient opportunities of plundering the treasury of the nation, as
if the manor of Woodstock, the palace of Blenheim Dr. Swift estimates Woodstock
at forty thousand pounds, and adds, that Blenheim House had cost two hundred
thousand pounds, and was at the time of his writing unfinished. There can be no
wonder, that we must now pay nine-pence per pound of importation duty for
Peruvian bark, and three guineas for leave to shoot a partriage worth twopence.
, and an hundred thousand pounds a year The sum has been stated higher, but
such computations are always in part random.
, had not been adequate to the services of himself and his Duchess, we are
saddled with as annual payment of five thousand pounds to his family for ever.
When a constitution, deserving that name, shall succeed our present political
anarchy, it is not difficult to foresee some of the first objects of
reformation. The Earl of Chatham enjoys four thousand pounds a year, because
his father added seventy millions to the national debt. The Duke of Richmond
raises from the city of London an annual revenue, said to be twenty thousand
pounds, because he is descended from the son of a criminal Charles II.
, who deserved an hundred times over to have been stogged out of human society.

As a commentary on the preceding narrative, we may consult a quotation from
Dr. Johnson's pamphlet on Falkland's islands. The reflections which it contains
have more than once extorted, in my hearing, the admiration of the late Dr.
Adam Smith, who was far from being a general advocate for this Author.

It is wonderful, with what coolness and indifference the greater part of
mankind see war commenced. Those who hear of it at a distance, or read of it in
books, but have never presented its evils to their minds, consider it as little
more than a splendid gain, a proclamation, an army, a battle, and a triumph.
Some indeed must perish in the most successful field, but they die upon the bed
of honor, resign their lives amidst the joys of conquest, and, filled with
England's glory, smile in death.

The life of a modern soldier is ill represented by heroic fiction. War has
means of destruction more formidable than the cannon and the sword. Of the
thousands and ten thousands who perished in our late contests with France and
Spain, a very small part ever felt the stroke of an enemy; the rest languished
in tents and ships, amidst damps and putrefaction; pale, torpid, spiritless,
and helpless; gasping and groaning, unpitied among men, made obdurate by a long
continuance of hopeless misery; and were at last whelmed in pits, or heaved
into the ocean, without notice, and without remembrance. By incommodious
encampments, and unwholesome stations, where courage is useless, and enterprise
impracticable, fleets are silently dispeopled The manning of a fleet has often
produced almost as much mischief as its depopulation. On this subject there is
here subjoined a short but shocking story, which happened about the time when
Dr. Johnson's pamphlet was first printed, and which can harbly be regarded as a
digression, since it reflects additional horror on the war system.

A workman, in London, was apprehended by a press gang. His wife and child were
turned to the door by their landlord. Within a few days after she was delivered
of a second child in a garret. On her recovery, she was driven to the streets
as a common beggar. She went into a shop, and attempted to carry off a small
piece of linen. She was seized, tried, and condemned to be hanged. In her
defense she said, that she had lived creditably and happy, till a press gang
robbed her of her husband, and in him, of all means to support herself and her
family; and that in attempting to clothe her new born infant, she perhaps did
wrong, as she did not, at that time, know what she did. The parish officers,
and other witnesses, bore testimony to the truth of her averment, but all to no
purpose. she was ordered for Tyburn. The hangman dragged her sucking infant
from her breast, when he strained the cord about her neck. On the 13th May
1777, Sir William Meredith mentioned this assassination in the House of
Commons. Never, said he, was there a fouler murder committed against the law,
than that of this woman by the law. -- Such were the fruits of what Englishmen
call their inestimable privilege of a trial by jury.

It would not be difficult to fill a large volume with decisions of this stamp,
though there is not perhaps any single case, which is in all its circumstances
so absolutely infernal. The reader may compare the guilt, as it was termed, of
Mary Jones, with the progress of those noble patriots, whose history is
recorded in the next chapter, and who are at this day held up as the saviors
of Britain, and then say which of the two parties best deserved a halter.

General Gunning, a man who is not worth a shilling, was lately fined in five
thousand pounds for seducing a doxy who was as forward as himself; and Mr.
Tattersal, the editor of a London newspaper his just now been fined in four
thousand pounds for a paragraph which asserted, that a lady had an amor with
her footman. It was proved that Mr. Tattersal was at a great distance from
London, when this story was printed; and consequently, that had it been even a
forgery on the Bank of England, the law could not have touched a hair of his
head. There can be no doubt that the lady will accept the last farthing
assigned by this verdict, and such an acceptance can leave no striking
impression of female generosity. Another splendid specimen of an English jury
shall conclude this long note.

Some years ago, Mr. Cooper, of London, was accused of being the printer and
publisher of a performance deemed a libel. Upon strict inquiry, it was found,
that it had been printed at his office; but it was proved, that at the time
when this was done, he was in so dangerous a state of health, as to be given up
by the physician who attended him, and that for several months before the
publication, as well as at that period, he had been entirely disabled by
sickness from either attending his office, or knowing what was doing in it.
Notwithstanding these circumstances, a Middlesex jury found him guilty; and, as
soon as he had recovered from his sickness, he was placed on the pillory, and,
no doubt, would have been pelted by ministerial hirlings, had not a number of
respectable gentlemen prevented it by their personal attendance. -- So much for
the liberty of the press, when protected by a Middlesex jury.


, and armies sluggishly melted away.

Thus is a people gradually exhausted, for the most part with little effect.
The wars of civilized nations make very slow changes in the system of empire.
The public perceives scarcely any alteration but an increase of debt; and the
few individuals who are benefited, are not supposed to have the clearest right
to their advantages. If he who shared the danger enjoyed the profit, and after
bleeding in the battle grew rich by the victory, he might show his gains
without envy. But at the conclusion of a ten year's war, how are we recompensed
for the death of multitudes, and the expense of millions, but by contemplating
the sudden glories of paymasters and agents, contractors and commissaries,
whose equipages shine like meteors, and whose palaces rise like exhalations.

The are the men who, without virtue, labor, or hazard, are growing rich as
their country is impoverished; they rejoice when obstinacy or ambition adds
another year to slaughter and devastation; and laugh from their desks at
bravery and science, while they are adding figure to figure, and cipher to
cipher, hoping for a new contract from a new armament, and computing the
profits of a siege or a tempest.

CHAP. VII.
Where I have treated high life with freedom, I hope I shall not be understood
to propagate the doctrine of levellers. -- I have no such intention. -- I mean
to give a just picture of human life* according to my own knowledge of it, and
according to my sense of truth, without ceremony or disguise. -- I do not wish,
in any degree, to diminish the respect which is justly due to persons and
families of distinction.

Letter to the People of Laurencekirk.
THERE is not in history a more signal example of ingratitude, than the conduct
of the Emperor, the Dutch, and Marlborough, to the Queen of England. She had
fought for ten years the battles of her Allies. She had advanced her general to
be the first subject in Europe. When she refused to complete the ruin of her
country for the caprice of the former, when the insolence of the latter
compelled her to dismiss him, loaded with the plunder of nations, from her
presence, these worthy associates conspired for the destruction of their
benefactress. It is not certain that William himself had ever proceeded into
such a climax of baseness. Though his partition treaties were absurd in a
British sovereign, we may forgive, in his hostilities with Lewis, the
resentment of a Dutchman. When we peruse the plan of Eugene for setting fire to
the streets of London, and the palace of St. James's Macpherson, vol. 2, chap.
9.
, even his transcendant behavior at the Revolution almost fades before it.

By the prudence and firmness of Harley, the plots of Eugene were discovered
and disappointed; and on the 17th of March 1712, he was obliged to embark with
some precipitation for the Continent. The neutrality of the English forces in
the next campaign, with the final termination of the war, has already been
mentioned. It does not appear that the Elector of Hanover was engaged in the
scheme of dethroning Anne. His beggarly condition may have contributed to the
moderation of his sentiments. In 1713, he solicited from the English Crown a
pension for his mother the Princess Sophia. In the present situation of his
affairs, a fresh supply of revenue was much wanted. His agents every where
complained of their too scanty allowance. The Whigs, with all their patriotism,
were soliciting for pensions. Some Lords, who were zealous for the Protestant
succession, were, it seems, too poor to follow their consciences. They had sold
their votes to the Ministry. But -- they would take smaller sums from HIS
ELECTORAL HIGHNESS. The Earl of Sunderland, in his attachment to the family of
Brunswick, had advanced three hundred pounds to one of these poor conscientious
Lords. The Earl wished to see this sum repaid. Though the Elector might be
willing to gratify such faithful friends, he had reason to expect that they
would help to serve themselves. They were, therefore desired to promote, with
all their influence, the pension demanded for the Princess. His Highness was no
stranger, upon the present occasion, either to the abilities or poverty of the
Duke of Argyle. The whole world knew his love of money, He desired that
nobleman, and his brother the Earl of Ilay, to promote the allowance to the
Electress, as they might expect good pensions to themselves from that fund
Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 9. and Hanover Papers, January 27, 1713.
. This pension was never obtained; and the Electress herself died about sixteen
months after, on the 28th of May 1714. The Elector himself seems to have become
indifferent concerning the succession of his family to the throne. Teazed by
the unmeaning professions of the Tories, and harassed by the demands of the
Whigs, he dropped all correspondence with both parties. He suffered his
servants to continue their intrigues in London. He listened to their
intelligence. But to the requisitions of his Whiggish friends for money, he
turned a deaf ear. He was however persuaded at length, to order six hundred
pounds to the Lord Fitzwalter, to enable that NEEDY PEER to pay a debt of three
hundred pounds to Sunderland. He allowed forty pounds to the author of a
newspaper, for conveying to the public, paragraphs favorable to THE PROTESTANT
SUCCESSION. He added ten pounds to that (immense) sum, after various
representations from his council and servants Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 9.
." -- "The excluded party in Britain harassed, at the same time, the Elector,
with proposals for his invading the kingdom with a body of troops. They
suggested, that should the Dutch refuse a squadron of men of war, some ships of
force might be obtained from Denmark. But the Elector rejected the scheme, as
utterly improper and impracticable Ibid. This was about the 21st of March 1713,
a full year after the departure of Prince Eugene. Their objects were to prevent
the peace, which was signed about this time, to recover their places, and ruin
the Ministry.
.

On the 9th of April 1713, the Queen opened a session of parliament. The stream
of popularity had now turned against the Whigs. In this distressful situation,
they implored Kreyenbeg to lay their humble solicitations at the feet of the
Elector. They entreated his Highness, for the sake of Heaven, to send over the
Electoral Prince. Without the presence of one of the family, they solemnly
averred, that the succession must inevitably be defeated Macpherson, vol. ii.
chap. 10.
. All this canting had very little foundation in fact. The bulk of the nation
were determined in favor of the Protestant succession. But these sycophants
wished to make themselves of importance with George the First. The following
passage will set the nature and motives of their conduct in a proper light.

The Whigs had, in the beginning of the year (1713) harassed the Elector with
demands of pensions for POOR LORDS. They had perpetually teazed his Highness
for money to political writers, and for spies planted round the Pretender.
Though their solicitations on these subjects had been attended with little
success, they continued to make applications of the same disagreeable kind.
When the session was drawing to a conclusion, and a dissolution was foreseen,
they demanded one hundred thousand pounds from the Elector, to corrupt
boroughs, to influence elections, and to return men of constitutional and
WHIGGISH principles to the ensuing parliament. The magnitude of the sum left no
room for hesitation in rejecting their request. One repulse, however, was not
sufficient either to intimidate or discourage a party so eager in the pursuit
of their designs. They diminished their demand to fifty thousand pounds. The
Elector plainly told them, that he could not spare the money. That he had done
the greatest service consistent with his own particular situation, and the
state of Europe in general, to the well affected in Britain. That he had
engaged the Emperor and Empire to continue the war against France. That he had
employed seventeen thousand of his troops against that kingdom. That this
circumstance had deprived the French King of the power of sending an army into
Britain with the Pretender. That could he even advance the money, which was far
from being the case, the secret could never be kept; and that a discovery might
be dangerous, from the offense that the measure was likely to give to the
British nations Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 10.
.

Within a few pages, we meet with fresh applications of the same kind. The
Whigs again urged the Elector to invade the kingdom. They promised to furnish
him with sums, upon his credit, to save their country, and to execute his own
designs; but with an inconsistence repugnant to these large promises, they
reverted to their former demands of money from his Highness. They asked
pensions for poor conscientious Lords who were in want of subsistence. They
demanded, with the most vehement entreaties, two thousand pounds, to carry the
elections for the Common Council of London. They represented, that, with that
sum, they could choose their own creatures, and terrify the Queen and parliament
with remonstrances and addresses throughout the winter Ibid.
. It is not surprising that Mr. Macpherson is a most unpopular historian. But
the facts which he has advanced are unquestionably true. The original
correspondence of the parties is still extant in their own hand writing. Let us
proceed, therefore, with a few farther extracts from this authentic and
instructive author. A proposal made by the Baron de Bernstorff, President of
the Elector's Council, was received by Marlborough and Cadogan with eagerness
and joy. He insinuated, that his Electoral Highness might be induced to borrow
to the extent of twenty thousand pounds from his friends in Britain. This sum
was to be laid out on the poor Lords, and the Common Council of London, during
the three years the parliament was to sit. The first would be thus enabled to
vote according to their principles; the latter might ply the Government, and
harass the Queen and her ministers with remonstrances in favor of civil
liberty and the Protestant succession. Marlborough and Cadogan undertook to
furnish the money on the obligation of his Electoral Highness, provided the
interest of five per cent. should be regularly paid. But his Highness would
give no obligation either for the principal or interest. He however signified
to his agents, that his friends should advance the money, as they might be
certain of being reimbursed as soon as his Highness, or the Electress his
mother, should come to the throne Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 10.
." It does not appear that his friends chose to advance their money on this
promise. On the 20th of March 1714, George made answer to some fresh demands of
money for poor Lords, Common Councils, bribery of members, and private
pensions, that he would hear NO MORE OF THAT AFFAIR. That, from the narrowness
of his own income, he could not enter upon these heads, into any competition
with his antagonist, the Lord Treasurer. But that, except in the article of
expenses, he was willing to support, to the utmost, their party Ibid.
. It would be idle to suppose that one part of the island was less corrupted
than another. In July 1713, the Duke of Argyle told Halifax, that with twenty
thousand pounds, he would answer for all the elections in Scotland Macpherson's
State Papers, vol. ii. p. 498.
. The reason assigned for refusing these applications, was clear and
satisfactory. A letter from the Court of Hanover contains these words: -- The
Elector cannot give the money demanded for the elections. Besides, he should
fail infallibly, as the Court would always have the heaviest purse Ibid. p. 497.
.

Nothing is more surprising, than the inaccuracy which abounds in many, even of
our best historians. There cannot be stronger proofs imagined of the corruption
of both Houses of Parliament, than what have been just now produced. Yet, with
this blaze of evidence before his eyes, the writer of the Memoirs of Britain
has advanced a very strange assertion. -- When speaking of Mr. Duncombe's
acquittal in the House of Peers, in 1695, he adds, For the honor of the House
of Lords, this is the only instance in English history, in which the
distribution of private money was suspected to have had influence with a number
of Peers Memoirs of Britain, vol. ii. part 3d, Book iv.
.

After such a specimen of the honesty of the Whigs it would be unnecessary to
enumerate all the other methods which they fell upon to embarass their
unfortunate Queen. One of their schemes was, to bring over the Elector Prince,
under the title of the Duke of Cambridge, as a head to their party. But
unluckily this project was equally disagreeable to the Elector of Hanover and
to the Queen. In a letter to George, dated 30th May 1714, I am determined,"
says Anne, "to oppose a project so contrary to my royal authority, however
fatal the consequences may be State Papers, vol. ii. p. 621.
. And George himself absolutely refused every proposal of this kind. His
refusal was so peremptory, that the Whigs, and even his servants, made no
scruple of ascribing his conduct to a jealousy of his own son Macpherson, vol.
ii. chap. 10.
. It has been said, a thousand times over, that George the First entertained
the most violent suspicion as to the legitimacy of his son; and that his
jealousy was fatal to the life of a Swedish nobleman. His wife, the Princess of
Zell, was at this very time in confinement for her amors; and in this
situation the unhappy woman died, after a melancholy captivity of thirty-six
years.

Another modest contrivance to harass the Queen, deserves peculiar notice. On
the 8th of April 1714, it was proposed to request her Majesty to issue a
proclamation, setting a price on her brother's head. The Tory Lords
represented, that the motion was as inconsistent with common humanity, as it
was repugnant to the Christian religion; that to set a price on any man's head,
was to encourage assassination by public authority; and that should ever the
case come before them, as peers and judges, they would think themselves bound,
in justice, honor, and conscience, to condemn such an action as murder. The
Whigs argued upon the ground of EXPEDIENCY Macpherson, vol. ii. chap. 10.
. The motion was rejected.

The Whigs did not always confine their operations to bribery. We may
comprehend from what follows, the genuine character of some of their principal
leaders. In 1694, William planned an expedition against Breast. The particulars
were betrayed to James the Second, in a letter from Marlborough, where he
complains that Admiral Russel was not sufficiently hearty in the cause of the
exiled. In consequence of this act of treachery, the English forces were
repulsed on their landing at Breast. Six hundred were slain, and many wounded;
one Dutch frigate was sunk after losing almost her whole crew. Another example
may serve to show the character of there leaders in a proper light. In 1695,
Sir John Fenwick, a Major General, had been engaged with Penn, the founder of
Philadelphia, and others, in a project for a rebellion in England, and had, on
its discovery, fled. Some time after he returned, was found out, and arrested.
To save his life, he transmitted to the King an account of the treasonable
correspondence of Godolphin, Marlborough, Russel, and many other Whigs of
distinction with James. His accusation is now known to have been in all points
true; and as there was only one evidence against him, he could not be convicted
in a court of law, which required two." But the persons whom he had accused,
"believed that they could not be safe as long as he lived. A bill of attainder
was therefore brought in against him, and Russel appeared at the head of the
prosecution. The sequel produced a crowd of proceedings which exceeded the
injustice of the worst precedents in the worst times of Charles the Second and
his successor; and the whole were vindicated by Burnet, in a long speech. The
bill passed both houses by a narrow majority; and on the 28th of January 1696,
Fenwick was beheaded on Tower Hill, "without evidence or law." Lady Fenwick
attempted to bribe a person whose testimony she dreaded, to fly the kingdom.
The accusers prevailed on this wretch to place people behind a curtain to
overhear the offer; and this attempt of a wife to save her husband's life from
danger, was turned into an evidence of his guilt Memoirs of Britain, vol. ii.
part 3. book 7.
. These are the words of a historian, who is himself a professed Whig, who has
been a lawer, and is now a Judge. It is difficult to say, whether the conduct
of the parliament, who passed such a sentence, or of his Majesty who signed it,
was most completely indesencible.

On the 1st of August 1714, Queen Anne died; and as much has been said in
praise of her virtues, a short account of a transaction conducted by her Tory
parliament is here inserted, which in part is abridged from the Anecdotes of
the Earl of Chatham.

It has been told by many historians, that for four years, Queen Anne gave an
hundred thousand pounds per annum out of her civil list, to support the war
against France; and hence they deduce an argument of the economy and
patriotism of that Princess. -- But, on the 25th of june 1713, her Majesty
acquainted the Commons that she had contracted a very large debt upon the
revenues of the civil list; and she specified that this deficiency amounted in
August 1710, to four hundred thousand pounds. -- Mr. Smith, one of the tellers
in the Exchequer, who seems to have been too honest a man for his office, arose
and informed the House, that the estimate of this debt was to him astonishing;
as at the time pointed out, he could affirm, that the debt amounted to little
more than an hundred thousand pounds. Other members undertook to prove, that
the funds assigned to her Majesty for seven hundred thousand pounds per annum,
had produced eight hundred thousand pounds, so that in the course of eleven
years, her Majesty had received eleven hundred thousand pounds of an overplus,
and after deducing the pretended gift of four hundred thousand pounds, she had
still seven hundred thousand pounds sterling of the public money in her pocket.
Though this was the same virtuous assembly which had expelled Walpole from
bribery, these observations could not obtain attention; since the very next day
the House voted five hundred and ten thousand pounds for payment of this debt.
This, adds the historian, is the truth, and the whole truth of that generous
exploit of the daughter of James the Second. It was a mean trick, by which the
nation was cheated of four hundred thousand pounds Anecdotes of the Earl of
Chatham, vol. ii. p. 50.
. He should have said, five hundred and ten thousand pounds, for that was the
exact sum granted.

It is entertaining to remark the style in which a courtier sometimes talks of
his sovereign. When William, in a fit of despondency, had once threatened to
resign the crown of England, Does he so?" said Sunderland, "there is Tom of
Pembroke, (meaning Lord Pembroke) who is as good a block of wood as a king can
be cut out of. We will send for him, and make him our KING Memoire of Great
Britain, vol. ii. part 3. book 7.
. To the same purpose the Princess of Wales, in 1753, expressed herself as to
George the Second, in a conversation with Mr. Dodington. She said, with great
warmth, that when they talked to her of the King, she lost all patience, for
she knew it was nothing: that in these great points she reckoned the King no
more than one of the trees we walked by, or something more inconsiderable which
she named, but that it was their pusillanimity which would make an end of
them." -- "She said, that if they talked of the King, she was out of patience;
it was as if they should tell her, that her little Harry below would not do
what was proper for him; that just so the King would sputter and make a bustle,
but when they told him that it must be done from the necessity of his service,
he must do it, as little Harry must, when she came down Dodington's Diary, p.
205, and 213.
.

CHAP. VIII.
I am no orator as Brutus is,
To stir men's blood; I only speak right on.
I tell you that which you yourselves do know.
SHAKESPEARE.
THE history of England has been continued in the last chapter, to the
beginning of the disastrous but memorable reign of George the First. We shall
close this part of the work with some general observations on the civil list.

There we find places piled on places, to the height of the tower of Babel.
There we find a master of the household, treasurer of the household,
comptroller of the household, cofferer of the household, deputy-cofferer of the
household, clerks of the household, clerks comptrollers of the household,
clerks comptrollers deputy-clerks of the household, office keepers,
chamber-keepers, necessary-house-keepers, purveyors of bread, purveyors of
wine, purveyors of fish, purveyors of butter and eggs, purveyors of
confectionary, deliverers of greens, coffee-women, spicery-men, spicery men's
assistant-clerks, ewry-men, ewry-men's assistant-clerks,
kitchen-clerks-comptrollers, kitchen-clerk-comptroller's first clerks, kitchen
clerk-comptroller's junior clerks, yeomen of the mouth, under yeomen of the
mouth, grooms, grooms children, pastry-yeomen, harbingers, harbingers yeomen,
keepers of ice houses, cart-takers, cart-takers grooms, bell-ringers, cock and
crier, table-deckers, water engine turners, cistern cleaners, keeper of fire
buckets, and a thousand or two more of the same kind, which if I were to set
down, I know not who would take the trouble of reading them over. Will any man
say, and keep his countenance, that one in one hundred of these hangers on is
of any real use? -- Cannot our King have a poached egg for his supper, unless
he keeps a purveyer of eggs, and his clerks, and his clerk's deputy-clerks, at
an expense of 500 l. a year? while the nation is sinking in a bottomless ocean
of debt? Again, who are they, the yeomen of the mouth? and who are the
under-yeomen of the mouth? What is their business? What is it to yeoman a
King's mouth? What is the necessity for a cofferer, where there is a treasurer?
And, where there is a cofferer, what occasion for a deputy-cofferer? Why a
necessary-house keeper? cannot a King have a water-closet, and keep the key of
it in his own pocket? And my little cock and crier, what can be his post? Does
he come under the King's chamber window, and call the hour, mimicking the
crowing of the cock! This might be of use before clocks and watches, especially
repeaters, were invented; but seems as superfluous now, as the deliverer of
greens, the coffee-women, spicery men's assistant-clerks, the
kitchen-comptroller's first clerks and junior clerks, the groom's children, the
harbinger's yeomen, etc. Does the maintaining such a multitude of idlers suit
the present state of our finances? When will frugality be necessary, if not
now? Queen Anne gave an hundred thousand pounds a year to the public service
The reader is already acquainted with the progress and termination of this act
of royal munificence.
. We pay debts on the civil list of six hundred thousand pounds in one article,
without asking how there comes to be a deficiency Political Disquisitions, vol.
ii. p. 128.
.

The following conversations on the same subject, between the late Princess of
Wales and Mr. Dodington, cannot fail to excite the attention and surprise of
every reader. "She," the Princess, said, that notwithstanding what I had
mentioned of the King's kindness to the children and civility to her, those
things did not impose upon her -- that there were other things which she could
not get over, she wished the King was less civil, and that he put less of their
money into his own pocket: that he got full thirty thousand pounds per annum,
by the poor Prince's death. -- If he would but have given them the Duchy of
Cornwall to have paid his debts, it would have been something. Sold
resentments be carried beyond the grave? Should the innocent suffer? Was it
becoming so great a King to leave his sons debts unpaid? and such
inconsiderable debts? I asked her, what she thought they might amount to? She
answered, she had endeavored to know as near as a person could properly
inquire, who, not having it in her power, could not pretend to pay them, She
thought, that to the tradesmen and servants they did not amount to ninety
thousand pounds; that there was some money owing to the Earl of Scarborough,
and that there was, abroad, a debt of about seventy thousand pounds. That this
hurt her exceedingly, though she did not show it. I said that it was impossible
to new-make people; the King could not, now, be altered --.

We talked of the King's accumulation of treasure, which she reckoned at four
millions. I told her, that what was become of it, how employed, where and what
was left, I did not pretend to guess; but that I computed the accumulation to
be from twelve to fifteen millions. That these things, within a moderate
degree, perhaps less than a fourth part could be proved beyond all possibility
of a denial; and, when the case should exist, would be published in
controversial pamphlets Dodington's Memoirs, p. 167 and 290. These debts of the
Prince of Wales are still unpaid.
.

In 1755, Mr. Pit had a conference with the Duke of New Castle, which has been
recorded by Mr. Dodington. A short specimen may serve to show how the British
nation has been bubbled by Government. The Duke mumbled that the Saxon and
Bavarian subsidies were offered and pressed, but there was nothing done in
them: that the Hessian was perfected, but the Russian was not concluded. --
Whether the Duke meant unsigned, or unratified, we cannot tell, but we
understand it is signed. When his Grace dwelt so much upon the King's honor,
Mr. Pit asked him -- what, if out of the FIFTEEN MILLIONS which the King had
saved, he should give his kinsman of Hesse one hundred thousand pounds, and the
Czarina one hundred and fifty thousand pounds to be off from these bad
bargains, and not suffer the suggestions, so dangerous to his own quiet and
safety of his family, to be thrown out, which would, and must be, insisted upon
in a debate of this nature? Where would be the harm of it? The Duke had nothing
to say, but desired they might talk it over again with the Chancellor. Mr. Pit
replied, he was at their command, though nothing could alter his opinion
Dodington's Memoirs, p. 373.
.

The reader will here observe, that thirty-seven years have elapsed since
George the Second had saved FIFTEEN MILLIONS from the civil list. It has been
said above, that a sum at five per cent. of compound interest doubles itself in
fourteen years. This is not perfectly exact, but as my former calculations did
not require strict minuteness, the conclusions remain unshaken. Where a topic
so delicate as the civil list is concerned, the utmost accuracy may be
expected, and therefore it must here be premised, that in fourteen years, an
hundred pounds produce about a fiftieth part less than a second hundred pounds,
that is to say, ninety-seven pounds nineteen shillings and eight pence, or in
decimal fractions.9799316 parts of an integer. Now, at this rate, these fifteen
millions would, in thirty-seven years, have multiplied to more than ninety-one
millions and an half. It is indeed true, as Mr. Dodington, says, that we cannot
tell what has become of it, or how it has been employed, but we know that no
part of it has been applied to the service of the nation. We have since paid
several large arrears into which the civil list had fallen, and an hundred
thousand pounds per annum, have been added to the royal salary. At the same
time, the nation has been borrowing money to pay that salary, the expenses of
Gibraltar and Canada, for the support of the war-system, and other matters,
nominally at three and a half, or four per cent. but in reality, as shall be
explained hereafter, at six or eight per cent. Hence, by the way, the
calculations as to Gibraltar are one third part lower in point of compound
interest than they should have been, and the fifteen millions of George the
Second, instead of increasing to ninety-one millions and a half, would, at
seven and an half per cent. have extended to about an hundred and thirty
millions, seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds; which would a present buy
out more than one half of our national debt, and save the country from an
annual burden of perhaps four millions and an half sterling.

The most miserable part of the story still remains to be told; but the
particulars must be deferred to some future opportunity. The civil list is a
gulf yawing to absorb the whole property of the British empire. We look back
without satisfaction, and forward without hope.

Lord Chesterfield informs us, that George the First was exceedingly hurt even
by the weak opposition which he met in parliament, on account of subsidies; and
could not help complaining to his most intimate friends, that he had come over
to England to be a begging King. His vexation was, that he could not command
money without the farce of asking it; for in his reign, as at present, the
debates of parliament were but a farce. Such were the liberal sentiments of the
first sovereign of the Protestant succession.

FINIS.

